1. RAJKOT
The struggle in Rajkot has a personal touch about it for me. It
was the place where I received all my education up to the matriculation examination and where my father was Dewan for many years.
My wife feels so much about the sufferings of the people that though
she is as old as I am and much less able than myself to brave
such hardships as may be attendant upon jail life, she feels she
must go to Rajkot. And before this is in print she might have gone
there.1
But I want to take a detached view of the struggle. Sardar’s
statement 2 , reproduced elsewhere, is a legal document in the sense that
it has not a superfluous word in it and contains nothing that cannot be
supported by unimpeachable evidence most of which is based on
written records which are attached to it as appendices.
It furnishes evidence of a cold-blooded breach of a solemn
covenant entered into between the Rajkot Ruler and his people.3 And
the breach has been committed at the instance and bidding of the
British Resident 4 who is directly linked with the Viceroy.
To the covenant a British Dewan5 was party. His boast was that
he represented British authority. He had expected to rule the Ruler.
He was therefore no fool to fall into the Sardar’s trap. Therefore, the
covenant was not an extortion from an imbecile ruler. The British
Resident detested the Congress and the Sardar for the crime of saving
the Thakore Saheb from bankruptcy and, probably, loss of his gadi.
The Congress influence he could not brook. And so before the
Thakore Saheb could possibly redeem his promise to his people, he
made him break it. If the news the Sardar is receiving from Rajkot is
to be believed, the Resident is showing the red claws of the British lion
and says in effect to the people: ‘Your ruler is my creature. I have put
him on the gadi and I can depose him. He knew well enough that he
1

Kasturba Gandhi was arrested at Rajkot on February 3 on entering the State to
offer satyagraha.
2
Vide Cold-Blooded Breach of A Solemn Covenant
3
Vide “Letter to Lord Linlithgow”, 26-1-1939, and also “The States”,
4
E. C. Gibson
5
Sir Patrick R. Cadell
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

1

had acted against my wishes. I have therefore undone his action in
coming to terms with his people. For your dealings with the Congress
and the Sardar I shall teach you a lesson that you will not forget for a
generation.’
Having made the Ruler a virtual prisoner, he has begun a reign
of terrorism in Rajkot. Here is what the latest telegram received by the
Sardar says:
Becharbhai Jasani and other volunteers arrested. Twenty-six volunteers
taken at night to a distant place in the Agency limits and brutally beaten.
Volunteers in villages are similarly treated. Agency police controlling State
agency and searching private houses in civil limits.

The British Resident is repeating the performances of the British
officials in ‘British India’ during the civil disobedience days.
I know that if the people of Rajkot can stand all this madness
without themselves becoming mad, and meekly but resolutely and
bravely suffer the inhumanities heaped upon them, they will come out
victorious and, what is more, they will set free the Thakore Saheb.
They will prove that they are the real rulers of Rajkot under the
paramountcy of the Congress. If, however, they go mad and think of
impotent retaliation and resort to acts of violence, their state will be
worse than before and the paramountcy of the Congress will be of no
effect. The Congress paramountcy avails only those who accept the
banner of non-violence, even as the paramountcy of Britain avails
only those who subscribe to the doctrine of ‘might is right.’
What then is the duty of the Congress when the people of Rajkot
have to face not the Ruler and his tiny police but the disciplined
hordes of the British Empire?
The first and natural step is for the Congress ministry to make
themselves responsible for the safety and honour of the people of
Rajkot. It is true that the Government of India Act gives the ministers
no power over the States. But they are governors of a mighty province
in which Rajkot is but a speck. As such they have rights and duties
outside the Government of India Act. And these are much the most
important. Supposing that Rajkot became the place of refuge for all
the goondas that India could produce, supposing further that from
there they carried on operations throughout India, the ministers
would clearly have the right and it would be their duty to ask the
Paramount Power through the British Representative in Bombay to set
2

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

things right in Rajkot. And it will be the duty of the Paramount Power
to do so or to lose the ministers. Every minister in his province is
affected by everything that happens in territories within his geographical limit though outside his legal jurisdiction, especially if that thing
hurts his sense of decency. Responsible government in those parts
may not be the ministers’ concern, but if there is plague in those parts
or butchery going on, it is very much their concern; or else their rule
is a sham and a delusion. Thus the ministers in Orissa may not sit
comfortably in their chairs, if they do not succeed in sending 26,000
refugees of Talcher to their home with an absolute assurance of safety
and freedom of speech and social and political intercourse. It is
insufferable that the Congress, which is today in alliance with the
British Government, should be treated as an enemy and an outsider in
the States which are vassals of the British.
This wanton breach, instigated by the British Resident in Rajkot,
of the charter of the liberty of its people is a wrong which must be set
right at the earliest possible moment. It is like a poison corroding the
whole body. Will H. E. the Viceroy realize the significance of Rajkot
and remove the poison?
BARDOLI , January 30, 1939
Harijan, 4-2-1939

2. THE MODERN GIRL
I have received a letter written on behalf of eleven girls whose
names and addresses have been sent to me. I give it below with
changes that make it more readable without in any way altering the
meaning:
Your comments on the letter of a lady student captioned ‘Students’
Shame’ and published in Harijan on the 31st December, 1938 1 deserve special
attention. The modern girl, it seems, has provoked you to the extent that you
have disposed of her finally as one playing Juliet to half a dozen Romeos.
This remark which betrays your idea about women in general is not very
inspiring.
In these days when women are coming out of closed doors to help men
and take an equal share of the burden of life, it is indeed strange that they are
still blamed even when they are maltreated by men. It cannotbe denied that
1

Vide “Letter to Akbar Hydari”, 26-12-1938

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

3

instances can be cited where the fault is equally divided. There may be a few
girls playing Juliets to half a dozen Romeos. But such cases presuppose the
existence of half a dozen Romeos, moving about the streets in quest of a
Juliet. And it cannot or should never be taken that modern girls are
categorically all Juliets or modern youths all Romeos. You yourself have come
in contact with quite a number of modern girls and may have been struck by
their resolution, sacrifice and other sterling womanly virtues.
As for forming public opinion against such misdemeanours as pointed
out by your correspondent, it is not for girls to do it, not so much out of false
shame as from its ineffectiveness.
But a statement like this from one revered all over the world seems to
hold a brief once more for that worn out and unbecoming saying ‘woman is the
gate of Hell.’
From the foregoing remarks, however, please do not conclude that
modern girls have no respect for you. They hold you in as much respect as
every young man does. To be hated or pitied is what they resent much. They
are ready to mend their ways if they are really guilty. Their guilt, if any, must
be conclusively proved before they are anathematized. In this respect they
would neither desire to take shelter under the covering of ‘ladies, please’, nor
would they silently stand and allow the judge to condemn them in his own
way. Truth must be faced; the modern girl or ‘Juliet’, as you have called her,
has courage enough to face it.

My correspondents do not perhaps know that I began service of
India’s women in South Africa more than forty years ago when
perhaps none of them was born. I hold myself to be incapable of
writing anything derogatory to womanhood. My regard for the fair
sex is too great to permit me to think ill of them. She is, what she has
been described to be in English, the better half of mankind. And my
article was written to expose students’ shame, not to advertise the
frailties of girls. But in giving the diagnosis of the disease, I was
bound, if I was to prescribe the right remedy, to mention all the
factors which induced the disease.
The ‘modern girl’ has a special meaning. Therefore there was
no question of my restricting the scope of my remark to some. But all
the girls who receive English education are not modern girls. I know
many who are not at all touched by the ‘modern girl’ spirit. But there
are some who have become modern girls. My remark was meant to
warn India’s girl students against copying the ‘modern girl’ and
complicating a problem that has become a serious menace. For, at the
4

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

time I received the letter referred to, I received also a letter from an
Andhra girl student bitterly complaining of the behaviour of Andhra
students which from the description given is worse than what was
described by the Lahore girl. This daughter of Andhra tells me the
simple dress of her girl friends gives them no protection, but they lack
the courage to expose the barbarism of the boys who are a disgrace to
the institution they belong to. I commend this complaint to the
authorities of the Andhra University.
The eleven girls I invite to initiate a crusade against the rude
behaviour of students. God helps only those who help themselves. The
girls must learn the art of protecting themselves against the ruffianly
behaviour of man.
BARDOLI , January 30, 1939

Harijan, 4-2-1939

3. JAIPUR
The reader should know the distinction between the Jaipur
struggle and the Rajkot one.
The Rajkot struggle is frankly for responsible government
within the State and is now for redeeming the Ruler’s promise to his
people. Every man and woman of Rajkot, if they have any stuff in
them, will be reduced to dust in resisting the dishonourable conduct of
the British Resident.
The Jaipur struggle is on a very small and narrow issue. The one
political association of Jaipur has been virtually declared illegal for
the offence of pleading for responsible government, and its President,
himself a resident of Jaipur, has been put under a ban. The civil
disobedience struggle will cease the moment the bans are lifted and
the right of free association, holding public meetings, etc., is
conceded. But here again the British lion has opened out his big
claws. The British Prime Minister of Jaipur had a chat with Barrister
Chudgar, legal adviser of the Rao Rana of Sikar. He reported to Seth
Jamnalalji the following purport of the talk:
I understand it my duty to inform you that during my interview with Sir
Beauchamp St. John, Prime Minister of Jaipur, in connection with Sikar
affairs on the 9th inst. (January), at about 11 a. m. at his bungalow Natanika
Bagh, I had some discussion with him regarding the Jaipur situation. The
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

5

following is the substance of the discussion:
I told Sir Beauchamp that the ban against your entry into Jaipur State
territories came as a painful surprise to millions of people all over India,
particularly because you are well-known to be a man of peace andyour mission
was to supervise and direct famine relief activities in the famine-stricken parts
of Jaipur State. To this Sir Beauchamp replied that he agreed that you are a man
of peace, but you and your men’s visit, he thought, would bring you and your
men in contact with the masses in the famine-stricken areas, and this he did
not like for obvious political reasons. I told him that you cannot be expected
to submit to the order for an indefinite period, and that it would be better in the
interests of the State and the people, in view of the statement you have
published in the Press after you had been served with the order, if the order
were recalled so that unnecessary trouble may be avoided. He was adamant, and
he said that he was prepared to meet any situation that might arise if you
disobeyed the order. He said that the Congressmen are out for a revolution by
means of a non-violent struggle. But non-violence, he said, was a force as
powerful or perhaps more powerful than violence. He further said Indians were
playing upon the humane instincts in the English race, but if there was Japan
or Herr Hitler instead of the English in India we could not have succeeded so
well with our non-violence.
He then said that it was his considered opinion that non-violence,
however strict, must be met by violence, and his reply to the non-violent
movement in Jaipur would be the ‘machine-gun’. I pointed out to him that all
Englishmen were not of his way of thinking and even the English race as such
would not agree with him. He said, “That may or may not be so,” but
personally he was of the opinion that there was no difference between
non-violence and violence, and that there would be nothing wrong in using
violence against non-violence.
If you or Mahatmaji desire to make use of this statement, I have no
objection.

I considered this to be so startling that I referred it to the Prime
Minister in the following letter (18-1-1939): 1 The Prime Minister
replied as follows (20-1-1939):
I write to acknowledge your kind letter of the 18th instant, enclosing a
copy of a letter from Mr. Chudgar to Seth Jamnalal Bajaj. Your hesitation in
publishing it before you had ascertained the correctness of its contents was a
wise step, which I personally much appreciate, as I am now able to inform
1

6

For the text of the letter, vide ”Note to Amritlal V. Thakkar St. John”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you that its description of my views is completely erroneous. I am unable to
understand how Mr. Chudgar so misunderstood me, as I may say that this
incident confirms me in my hesitation to grant any such interviews in future.
Now that you are aware of the facts, I am sure your reluctance
to publish such a letter will be confirmed. Should, however, you
decideotherwise, I shall be glad if you can inform me as soon as practicable
so that I can take suitable action.
With renewed thanks for your consideration.

I replied as under (22-1-1939):1
To this there came the following reply (25-1-1939):
Many thanks for your letter of the 22nd instant.
I am sure you will sympathize with me in my natural hesitation to make
a record of an interview which was understood to be private and personal when
the other party to the interview has already threatened to publish an erroneous
version. Such a procedure can, as I am sure you will agree, only lead to
acrimony, and so far as I can see, serve no useful purpose.
Should, however, Mr. Chudgar see fit to publish his erroneous version,
I am sure you will give me due warning so that, as I have already said, I may
take suitable action.

To this I replied again as follows (27-1-1939):2
I referred the correspondence to Shri Chudgar and he has sent
me the copy of the following letter he has addressed to Shri Jamnalal
(28-1-1939):
I have read the correspondence between Mahatmaji and Sir W.
Beauchamp St. John ending with Mahatmaji’s letter to him dated the 27th
inst. I have carefully read my letter to you dated the 15th inst. again, and I say
that what I have stated in that letter is a substantially correct reproduction of
the conversation between me and Sir Beauchamp.

The Prime Minister’s letters have made strange reading. I had
asked for bread, he has sent me a stone. He will pardon me if I believe
Shri Chudgar’s version, unless he can give his own. His mere denial
accompanied by a threat carries no weight;
The Congress cannot wait and watch whilst it has the power, and
allow the people of Jaipur to die of mental and moral starvation,
especially when this denial of a natural right is backed by British
1
2

For the text of the letter, vide “ Letter to Sir W. Beauchamp”
For the text of the letter, vide “Letter to Amtussalaam”, 27-1-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

7

might. If the Prime Minister has no authority to do what he is doing,
let him at least be recalled.
BARDOLI , January 30, 1939
Harijan, 11-2-1939. Also C.W. 7809. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

4. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
BARDOLI ,

January 30, 1939
CHI. KANTI,

I had messages sent to you. Ba, I and others were worried
because there was no letter from you. It was received today. I am all
right. You should not miss sending at least one postcard every week.
I have had a long talk with Ramachandran. I have just received
his letter. He is now convinced. I am of course still trying to persuade
him to send Saraswati. S.’s help is essential in this matter.
It is time for prayer and so I stop now.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I am leaving for Segaon on the 1st.
From Gujarati: G. W. 7357. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

5. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
January 30, 1939
CHI. KANTI,

I do not make any suggestions of my own these days. P.’s name
was mentioned to me and that was the only name. I had expressed my
objection to re-election.
You must have received my letter of yesterday.
8

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Saraswati writes to me occasionally.
Take care of your health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7356. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

6. ‘KICKS AND KISSES’
The reader will read with painful interest the following account,
said to be authentic, of the meeting recently held in Bombay of the
Chamber of Princes:
H. H. the Maharaja of Bikaner opened the discussions by narrating the
events at Rajkot where, he said, the trouble was due to the absence of
influential jagirdars, the want of demarcation between the Privy Purse and the
State Expenditure, and the smallness of the Kathiawar States. It was regarded as
a test case by the Congress, and they had selected Rajkot for various reasons,
the principal ones being that Rajkot, small and with limited resources, would
not be able to withstand for long the onslaughts of the Congress, that the
ground was ready for the delivery of such an attack, that the Congress was
virile and active in Kathiawar and Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel was near at hand to
direct operations and conduct the campaign. H. H. the Maharaja of Bikaner
then mooted the suggestion of a common Police force for a group of States, as
the resources of individual States, particularly of small ones, are not extensive
and, therefore, totally inadequate to face the common danger. Such also was
the indication of the Paramount Power and of its representatives. No great
reliance, he said, could now be placed on co-operation and help from adjoining
British territories as Congress was supreme there and they naturally would not
like to help Indian States. On the other hand their sympathies either tacitly or
actively are on the side of Indian State subjects or foreign agitators. This was
actually evidenced by the attitude of the Orissa Government when help was
demanded by the States in Orissa which had to face this trouble.
Continuing, he stated that the Congress would devote increasingly
greater attention to Indian States. Up to now its policy, as embodied in the
resolution of the Haripura session and before, was of non-intervention and the
Indian States people were directed to be self reliant. The reason is manifest.
The Congress was actively busy with British Indian problems, and it wanted to
generate strength in Indian States subjects and foster self-help in them. Now
the Congress had practically established its sway in British India and would
naturally mobilize its energy and influence towards Indian States.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

9

There was another point. In order to distract attention from the
differences that are creeping into Congress ranks, it is necessary to unfold the
plans of a campaign. This is a subtle but short dictum of statecraft. This is one
of the reasons of the Italian conquest of Abyssinia and the Austrian and
Sudeten campaigns of Germany. It enables the powers to draw attention away
from cleavages in the party and creates enthusiasm amongst its followers. We
have also to bear in mind the attitude of the Paramount Power. In this
connection reference must be made to the recent utterances of Mr. Gandhi on
this subject. In my opinion greater reliance should be placed on our own
strength than on any outside agency whose support is, at best, precarious and
inadequate.
After a survey of Rajkot affairs, His Highness discussed the problems
of the Rajputana States and outlined for the benefit of the Princes the policy he
pursued with regard to his own State, Bikaner. He stated that he started the
State Assembly in 1913, and it discussed the State expenditure. Bikaner had a
Raj-patra—State Gazette. He discriminated between the agitators from outside
and from amongst his own subjects. This, he said, was important and the
distinction must ever be borne in mind. Foreign agitators, who have no stake
in the State and who assume this role merely to be dubbed leaders and to be in
the public eye, deserve short shrift. No consideration should be shown to
them. Their continued activities are a menace to the State; their presence
constitutes a danger. The remedy is deportation from the State and their entry
should be banned. The agitators in the State, though equally obnoxious to the
State and its ordered peace and progress, however, stand on a slightly different
footing. They have an interest in the land; they probably sometimes advocate
grievances which are to a certain extent legitimate, and such should be
redressed as far as possible so that the wind may be taken away from the sails
of their agitation which they advocate and foster. Legitimate grievances so far
as possible should be redressed and agitation should be silenced. If the
agitators are genuine and come from the ranks of the educated unemployed, an
effort should be made to give them suitable State employment and to close
their mouths, acting on the adage “it is better to sew the mouth with a morsel.”
The question of Praja Mandals was then discussed. In this connection
H. H. the Maharaja of Bikaner, Sir Kailashnarain Haksar, R. B. Pandit Amar
Nath Atal of Jaipur, Pt. Dharmanarain of Udaipur and Major Harvey of Alwar
made valuable contributions to the discussions. Mr. Robertson of Bundi and
Mr. McGregor of Sirohi also asked a few questions. Mr. Atal narrated at great
length the origin and growth of the Praja Mandal at Jaipur. It was evident that
the founders and promoters of these Praja Mandals were disgruntled subjects

10

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and dismissed petty officials of the State. A note of caution and warning was
sounded. It was agreed that they should be watched very carefully and their
activities, however slight or extensive, should be fully reported. It was stated
that these Praja Mandals should be crushed immediately and that they should
not be allowed to gather strength or to attain the status of an influential body.
If they had gained any, an effort should be made to direct adroitly their
activities into social channels such as the Sarda Act, etc. On the other hand it
was urged that the formation of genuine and healthy advisory bodies of the
States people should be encouraged. which should form the nucleus for the
training of the people for so-called responsible government in the States. The
Praja Mandals located outside the States should be ignored.
As regards responsible government in the States advocated by
Congress leaders like Messrs Gandhi and Patel, it was felt that the States
people are not at all ready for it, and to concede it, therefore, would be
detrimental to the States and the people and fatal to ordered progress and
peace. The position was summed up in the dictum, ‘Be responsive, but no
responsible government.’ H. H. the Maharaja of Bikaner was emphatic in his
policy towards the Congress, and his words can be crystallized in the
following mottos: Be just, but be firm; follow the policy of repression and
reconciliation as stated in the famous letter of Lord Minto in 1908, ‘the policy
of kicks and kisses’. It will require all the tact and discretion possible to adjust
when to be gentle and when to be firm and how to mix the two. The decision
must depend on the situation which confronts the State and the merits of the
individual problem. It was, however, very clear in their discussions that the
Praja Mandals, as such and as political bodies, should never be allowed to be
formed in the States, and if in existence, should be crushed and banned and
their activities very carefully and closely watched. No hard and fast rules could
be laid down as to how they should be repressed. Individual States will devise
and evolve their own plans and lay down the modus operandi.
The tentative conclusions arrived at were: 1. Group Police for States; 2.
Praja Mandals to be crushed immediately; 3. Legitimate grievances to be
redressed; 4. Foreign agitators to be severely dealt with and deported; 5.
Encourage social activities but not political; 6. Encourage genuine States
People’s Advisory Bodies; 7. Policy of ‘Reconciliation and Repression’; ‘Be
just, but be firm’.

If the report is an accurate summary of the speeches delivered at
the Conference, it shows that there is a nefarious plot to crush the
movement for liberty which at long last has commenced in some of
the States. Kisses are to go hand in hand with kicks. This reminds me
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

11

of the Latin proverb which means: “I fear the Greeks especially when
they bring gifts!” Henceforth Rulers’ favours are to be suspected.
Reforms when they are made are to be made not for the sake of
making the people happy, but in order to sew the mouth with a
morsel. But man’s proposals are often confounded even though his
may be a crowned head. God has been found often to have disposed
of his proposals in a way contrary to his expectations. If the people
have shed fear and learnt the art of self-sacrifice, they need no
favours. Kicks can never cow them. They will take what they need and
assimilate it.
BARDOLI , January 31, 1939

Harijan, 4-2-1939

7. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
January 31, 1939
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,

Shri K. M. Munshi, Sir Purshottamdas and now Shri G. D. Birla
tell me that my writings in Harijan about the States have been causing
you embarrassment—more especially about Jaipur. I have, therefore,
suspended publication of the accompanying article 1 which I had
already sent to the Manager of Harijan at Poona.
I need hardly say that I have no desire whatsoever to do
anything that would cause you embarrassment, if I could avoid it. My
purpose is to secure justice for the people concerned.
How I wish it were possible for you to take effective action in
the three cases mentioned by me in my previous letter2 !
May I expect a line as to what you would have me do about the
article under suspension?
I am,
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C.W. 7806. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

1
2

12

Vide “Jaipur”
Vide “Letter to Lord Linlithgow”, 26-1-1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

8. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM GANDHI
BARDOLI ,

January 31, 1939
CHI. PURUSHOTTAM,

Here are a few words1 about Panditji.
I hope you are keeping good health.
Do write sometimes about Kusum, Manju and others.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

9. IN MEMORY OF NARAYAN M. KHARE2
BARDOLI ,

January 31, 1939
I like to write about Panditji. I have many sweet memories of
him. But I do not have the time to record them. The essence of all
those memories is that I have seen very few persons combining purity
and music. It was found in a great measure in Panditji. It was Panditji
who created a taste for good music in Gujarat. For this, Gujarat will
remain ever indebted to him.
M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

10. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS3
BARDOLI ,

January 31, 1939
Shri Subhas Bose has achieved a decisive victory over his
opponent, Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya. I must confess that from the very
1

Vide the following item.
He had died on February 6, 1938, at Haripura.
3
This appeared in the source under the title “I Rejoice in This Defeat” and was
also published in The Bombay Chronicle, 1-2-1939, The Hindu, 31-1-1939, The
Hindustan Times, 1-2-1939, and various other papers.
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

13

beginning I was decidedly against his re-election for reasons into
which I need not go. I do not subscribe to his facts or the arguments
in his manifestos. I think that his references to his colleagues were
unjustified and unworthy. Nevertheless, I am glad of his victory. And
since I was instrumental in inducing Dr. Pattabhi not to withdraw his
name as a candidate when Maulana Saheb withdrew, the defeat is more
mine than his. I am nothing if I do not represent definite principles
and policy. Therefore, it is plain to me that the delegates do not
approve of the principles and policy for which I stand.
I rejoice in this defeat. It gives me an opportunity of putting
into practice what I preached in my article 1 on the walk-out of the
minority at the last A. I. C. C. meeting in Delhi. Subhas Babu, instead
of being President on the sufferance of those whom he calls rightists,
is now President elected in a contested election. This enables him to
choose a homogeneous cabinet and enforce his programme without
let or hindrance.
There is one thing common between majority and minority, viz.,
insistence on internal purity of the Congress organization. My
writings in the Harijan have shown that the Congress is fast becoming
a corrupt organization in the sense that its registers contain a very
large number of bogus members.2 I have been suggesting for the past
many months the overhauling of these registers. I have no doubt that
many of the delegates who have been elected on the strength of these
bogus voters would be unseated on scrutiny. But I suggest no such
drastic step. It will be enough if the registers are purged of all bogus
voters and are made fool-proof for the future.
The minority has no cause for being disheartened. If they
believe in the current programme of the Congress, they will find that it
can be worked, whether they are in a minority or a majority and even
whether they are in the Congress or outside it.
The only thing that may possibly be affected by the changes is
the parliamentary programme. The ministers have been chosen and
the programme shaped by the erstwhile majority. But parliamentary
work is but a minor item of the Congress programme. Congress
ministers have after all to live from day to day. It matters little to them
whether they are recalled on an issue in which they are in agreement
1
2

14

Vide “That Unfortunate Walk-Out”
Vide “Internal Decay”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

with the Congress policy or whether they resign because they are in
disagreement with the Congress.
After all Subhas Babu is not an enemy of his country. He has
suffered for it. In his opinion his is the most forward and boldest
policy and programme. The minority can only wish it all success. If
they cannot keep pace with it, they must come out of the Congress. If
they can, they will add strength to the majority.
The minority may not obstruct on any account. They must
abstain when they cannot co-operate. I must remind all Congressmen
that those who, being Congress-minded, remain outside it by design,
represent it most. Those, therefore, who feel uncomfortable in being
in the Congress may come out, not in a spirit of ill will, but with the
deliberate purpose of rendering more effective service.
Harijan, 4-2-1939

11. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1
BARDOLI ,

January 31, 1939
Appeals are being made to me not to precipitate matters in the
States. These appeals are unnecessary. After three months of
non-violent struggle by the people of Rajkot an honourable understanding was arrived at between the Thakore Saheb-in-Council and
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel representing the people, and the struggle was
closed amid general rejoicings. But the noble work done by the
Thakore Saheb and the people has been undone by the British
Resident. 2
Honour demanded that the people should fight unto death for
the restoration of the covenant between the Thakore Saheb and his
people. The struggle now is not between the Ruler and his people, but
in reality it is between the Congress and the British Government
represented by the Resident, who is reported to be resorting to
organized goondaism. He is trying thereby to break the spirit of
innocent men and women, who rightly resent the breach of faith.
It is a misrepresentation to suggest that Rajkot has been made a
1

This appeared under the title “Rajkot and Jaipur”, and was also published in
The Hindu, The Hindustan Times and The Bombay Chronicle.
2
For the Government of India communique in reply to this, vide Government of
India’s Statement on Rajkot”, 1-2-1939.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

15

test case.1 There is no planned action with reference to Kathiawar
States. What is happening is that those who feel that they are ready for
suffering come to the Sardar for advice and he guides them. Rajkot
seemed ready and the fight commenced there.
Jaipur’s case is incredibly simple and different from that of
Rajkot. If my information is correct, the British Prime Minister there is
determined to prevent even the movement for popularizing the ideal
for responsible government. 2 Civil disobedience in Jaipur is being,
therefore, offered not for responsible government but for the removal
of the bans on the Praja Mandal and its president Seth Jamnalal Bajaj.3
In my opinion it is the duty of the Viceroy to ask the Resident
in Rajkot to restore the pact and to ask the British Prime Minister of
Jaipur to lift the bans. Such action by the Viceroy can in no sense be
interpreted to mean unwarranted interference in the affairs of States.
Harijan, 4-2-1939

12. TELEGRAM TO G. D. BIRLA
WARDHAGANJ,

February 2, 1939
GHANSHYAMDAS BIRLA
NEW DELHI
QUITE

WELL.

TAKING

NEEDED

REST.

NO

ANXIETY.

BAPU
From the original: C. W. 7802. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

13. LETTER TO J. C. KUAMARAPPA
S EGAON,

February 2, 1939
MY DEAR KU,

I came in today. I should not have taken such a long time to
produce the accompanying.4 I wanted to go through the whole book
but it was impossible. And now I am laid up. That is to say the doctors
1

Vide “Kicks and Kisses”
Vide “Jaipur”
3
ibid
4
Vide the following item.
2

16

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

say unless I want to commit suicide, I must be on bed and do as little
work as possible. Complete silence is enjoined. I shall break it
therefore only when I must. In these circumstances I thought I must
give you a few lines at once. Here they are with a thousand apologies.
I hope your committee is flourishing and Sita 1 is proving her
worth.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 10148

14. FOREWORD
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 2, 1939
It is a good sign that Why the Village Movement is required to
go through the third edition. It supplies a felt want. Prof. J. C.
Ku[marappa] answers almost all the doubts that have been expressed
about the necessity and feasibility of the movement. No lover of
villages can afford to be without the booklet. No doubter can fail to
have his doubts dispelled. It is of no use to those who have made up
their minds that the only movement worth the name is to destroy the
villages and dot India with a number of big cities where highly
centralized industries will be carried out and everyone will have plenty
and to spare. Fortunately as yet there are not many who belong to that
school of destruction. I wonder if the village movement has come just
in time to prevent the spread of the movement of despair! This
booklet is an attempt to answer the question.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 10149

15. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 2, 1939
CHI. MIRA,

I have neglected you for many days but Sushila has instructions
1

Wife of Bharatan Kumarappa, younger brother of the addressee

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

17

to write to you daily. I have to take complete rest from physical toil
but also as much as possible from mental. You won’t worry. Bury
yourself in your work.
Ba going to Rajkot. So she stayed behind1 .
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6426. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 10021

16. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
S EGAON,

February 2, 1939
BA,

Why are you uneasy? Do not worry about me. Improve your
health. Recite Ramanama. Rest assured we shall win the battle by dint
of the devotion of many. That includes yours too.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, p. 31

17. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
S EGAON,

February 2, 1939
CHI. MAHADEV,

I am writing this letter from Madalasa’s place. I have come here
directly from the station. I rested a lot during the journey. Lilavati
cried constantly. All her frailties are now becoming apparent.
I have received your letter. You are definitely coming to Segaon
if you do not feel well there. You have gone there because of the letter
that came. It is well that you have gone. But you are certainly coming
when the occasion arises. Work has already piled up.
I shall look after the rest and write later.
1

18

At Bardoli
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You should not worry about me at all. Tell this to Ghanshyamdas also. I am definitely going to have rest.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

18. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
S EGAON, WARDHA ,

February 2, 1939
CHI. MAHADEV,

I have your wire. How is it you have gone there? I take it to
mean that from there you will be going to Delhi. You will have
received my reply.
I spoke to him today. He says that there is some misunderstanding. I shall not discuss the matter further. We shall meet if there
is time.
I have initiated the changes. Nobody will sleep beside me. I shall
have enough distance for my hand not to reach anyone sleeping
there. I am giving up taking personal service involving touch.1 Lilavati
decided this morning to go either to Nadiad or Wardha. This evening
she said that for about six months she would study only here. So that
is how it is.
You will be getting on well. My swelling has considerably
subsided. Walking is discontinued, I sleep a lot. Do not worry. I am
observing silence. It gets disturbed of course.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

Vide the following item; also “Letter to Lilavati Asar”, 9-12-1938

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

19

19. LETTER TO H. L. SHARMA
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 2, 1939
CHI. SHARMA,

The work at Bardoli was so much that I fell ill and returned only
today. Hence the delay in answering your letter. There is no cause for
anxiety. I shall be all right.
February 3, 1939
But I could have asked someone to send you a line saying that
the reply would be delayed. I did not do it, because I was hopeful of
being able to write soon.
Destruction and construction are simultaneous processes. Your
destruction seems to be of a kind which may become unbearable for
you. It should not turn out that you do one thing today and another
tomorrow.
I cannot write the pamphlet. You have rightly said that
everything is useless until construction has commenced. The pamphlet
probably has no place in what is going on.
An earlier letter from you mentioned a principle: namely, that
society and family are distinct entities and should be so. However, if
you think they are identical but cannot reach the ideal today, why talk
about it? Once you show in practice that there is no difference
between you and those living with me I shall consider my job done.
The comparison with the dog is harsh but quite apt. We are all in
a way like dogs in that we lack tolerance, but living in society and
being intolerant are incompatible things.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsh,
between pp. 177 and 178

20

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

20. LETTER TO SAMPURNANAND
[After February 2, 1939] 1
BHAI SAMPURNANANDJI,

I received your letter but could not acknowledge it promptly.
I hope you have also written to Dr. Zakir Husain what you wrote to
me.
Your letter regarding the flag and Bande Mataram was received
at a time when I was travelling. What you have said in it is correct. I
am working on the same lines.
The problem of those who have entered Councils is becoming
difficult day by day. But after all it is nothing but a symptom of the
malaise. I see clearly that the Congress is going downward each day.
Selfishness, infighting, untruth and violence have crept into the
Congress and are on the increase. I fear we are destroying ourselves
because of our inner failures. Let us see what God wills.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From the Hindi original: Sampurnanand Papers. Courtesy: National Archives
of India

21. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS2
S EGAON,

February 3, 1939
The communiques3 issued by the Government of India and the
Jaipur Government on my statements 4 on Rajkot and Jaipur are
remarkable for sins of omission and commission and suppression.
It was no part of the Sardar’s duty to publish the Thakore
Saheb’s letter about the composition of the Committee. It was for the
Thakore Saheb’s convenience that a condition as to the composition
1
This letter seems to be connected with that written to the addressee on
1-1-1939. Gandhiji returned to Segaon on this date.
2
This appeared under the title “Not a War of Words”, and was also published in
The Hindu, The Bombay Chronicle, and The Hindustan Times, all of 4-2-1939.
3
For the Government of India communique, vide Government of India’s
Statement on Rajkot”, 1-2-1939.
4
Vide “Rajkot”, 2-1-1939 and 30-1-1939, “Jaipur”, 16-1-1939 & 30-1-1939.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

21

of the Committee was embodied in a separate letter. This is a
well-known procedure adopted in delicate negotiations. Surely the
Thakore Saheb’s understanding of his note, which admits of no
double interpretation, is wholly irrelevant.
I aver that this understanding is an afterthought, discovered to
placate the Resident, who was angered that the Thakore Saheb should
have dared to deal with a Congressman and give him a note of which
he had no advice. Those who know anything of these Residents and
States know in what dread the Princes stand of even their secretaries
and peons. I write from personal knowledge.
There is sufficient in the appendices to the Sardar’s statement 1
on the recrudescence of the struggle to show how the whole trouble is
due to the Resident’s displeasure. It is wrong to suggest that the
Sardar did not give reasons for his refusal to alter the names of the
Committee. A translation of his letter is one of the appendices.
When the Thakore Saheb agreed to nominate those whom the
Sardar recommended, Mussalmans and Bhayats were before his
mind’s eye. But it was common cause that all rights would be
guaranteed under the reforms. The proper procedure would have
been to lead evidence before the Committee. I suggest that, as happens
everywhere in India, the Mussalman and Bhayat objection to the
personnel of the Committee was engineered after the event.
I have not asked that the Thakore Saheb should be asked to do
this or that. He has no will. His will is pledged to the Resident. The
Thakore Saheb once dared to act against his suspected wishes. He was
on the brink of losing his gadi. What I have asked is that the Resident
should restore the pact and help to honour it. If it is a matter purely of
names to placate interests, I undertake to persuade the Sardar to make
the accommodation provided that its other parts are carried out to the
full.
But the communique adroitly omits the most relevant fact that
the terms of reference too have been altered out of shape. These were
agreed to by the Thakore Saheb-in-Council, of which the British
Dewan was a member. I have never known such a dishonourable
breach of a pact signed on behalf of a Chief. I do suggest that the
Resident, who should be the custodian of the honour of the Chiefs
within his jurisdiction, has, in this case, dragged the Thakore Saheb’s
1

22

Vide “Cold-Blooded Breach of a Soleman Covenant”, 15-1-1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

name in the dust.
I repeat the charge of organized goondaism. The Agency police
are operating in Rajkot. Wires received by the Sardar show that civil
resisters are taken to distant places, there stripped naked, beaten and
left to their own resources. They show further that Red Cross doctors
and ambulance parties have been prevented from rendering help to
those who were injured by lathi-charges in Halenda. I call this
organized goondaism. If the charges are denied, there should be an
impartial enquiry.
Let me state the issue clearly. I seek no interference in the
affairs of the State. I seek non-interference by the Resident in Rajkot.
The Resident is directly responsible for the strained relations between
the State and the people. It is the duty of the Paramount Power to see
that the solemn pact is fulfilled to the letter and in spirit.
If the objection about Muslim and Bhayat representation has
any honesty about it, it can be removed. I once more appeal to His
Excellency the Viceroy to study the question more deeply than he has
done. Let not a grave tragedy be enacted while whitewashing
communiques are being forged in the Delhi Secretariat. This is not a
war of words. It is a war in which the people who have hitherto never
been to jail nor suffered lathi blows are exposing themselves to all
risk.
As for Jaipur, I have only one word. I do know that the British
Prime Minister 1 is one member of the Jaipur State Council. My
submission is that he is all in all. He has vowed vengeance against the
Praja Mandal and Seth Jamnalalji. And in spite of the forest of words
about action in respect of the Praja Mandal, I claim that virtually it is
declared illegal. If not, let the authorities leave Seth Jamnalalji free to
enter Jaipur and let him and his Mandal educate unmolested the
people in the art of responsible government. Let them be punished if
they inculcate violence, directly or indirectly.
Harijan, 11-2-1939

1

Sir W. Beauchamp St. John

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

23

22. TELEGRAM TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ1
[On or before February 3, 1939] 2
STICK

TO

AND SUCCESS

YOUR
IS

PLANS.

MY

BLESSING

IS

WITH

YOU

YOURS.

The Hindu, 5-2-1939

23. TELEGRAM TO G. D. BIRLA
WARDHA ,

February 3, 1939
GHANSHYAMDAS
BIRLA HOUSE
ALBUQUERQUE R OAD
NEW DELHI
SWELLING

MUCH

REDUCED.

REST.

BLOODPRESSURE

MUST

NOT

WAIT

AUTHORITIES.3

HAVE

GOVERNMENT

COMMUNIQUE

156/98
WITHOUT
MADE
WHOLLY

TAKING
LAST

PRACTICALLY
NIGHT.

WRITTEN
STATEMENT

JAMNALALJI

REQUEST
ABOUT

FULL
FROM
JAIPUR

UNSATISFACTORY.4

BAPU
From a copy: C.W. 7803. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

24. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 3, 1939
CHI. MIRA,

Your letter from Peshawar is crowded with news. You are in the
thick of it now. You must keep your health at any cost. Cover your
1

This was evidently in reply to the addressee’s telegram of February 3, saying:
“Ghanshyamdas pressing delay re-entry” into Jaipur State, which Bajaj intended to
effect in defiance of the ban imposed by the State.
2
In his diary Bajaj mentions under the date February 3, having received a
telegram from Gandhiji. Presumably this was the telegram.
3
This was in answer to the addressee’s telegram suggesting that Jamnalal
Bajaj might wait another fortnight before returning to Jaipur.
4
Vide the preceding item.

24

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

feet well. Insist on the food you need. Do not overdo it. And do not
go beyond your depth. Then all will be well.
Have no worry on my account. God will keep me on earth so
long as He needs me. It is well whether I am here or elsewhere. His
will, not ours, be done.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6427. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 10022

25. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 3, 1939
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

After the election and the manner in which it was fought, I feel
that I shall serve the country by absenting myself from the Congress
at the forthcoming session. Moreover, my health is none too good. I
would like you to help me. Please do not press me to attend.
I hope the rest at Khali has done you and Indu good. Indu
ought to write to me.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1939. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Also A Bunch of Old Letters, p. 307

26. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
February 3, 1939
CHI. KAKA,

The necessary arrangements have been made for the poet
Khabardar1 . Ambalalbhai will pay or collect for him Rs. 200 every
month.
Booke asks for more information about him. He needs an
1

Ardeshar F. Khabardar

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

25

X-Ray of his chest. There is little hope of his being able to help
much. Have you written to Parvati?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10919

27. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
February 3, 1939
CHI. KAKA,

I am feeling thoroughly washed out at present. You may come.
But I do not know what I shall be able to do. The trainees are here up
to the 3rd or 4th. I hope to write about the Roman script. 1 Do the
needful about Hindi pracharak. I do not see my way clearly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10920

28. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA ,
February 3, 1939
MY DEAR VALLABHBHAI,

Whatever changes I am making are dictated by your abundant
love. I am doing it against my own inclination. This is to tell you that
as from today I have been compelled to stop taking service from girls.
Lilavati, A. S., etc., have certainly not liked it. Sharada and Vijaya
have not liked it either. The last two are sensible and so they are not
feeling sad. Prabhavati came yesterday. She may be doing something
or the other but even she is looking on in silence. Sushila is
continuing to serve me. She has not the heart to stop doing it while I
am ill. But I feel that I should stop it when I get well. As from
yesterday I have stopped sleeping close to them. That is, the girls sleep
far enough to be out of reach of my arms. Sushila hardly slept near
me. Now no girl or man sleeps close to me. Sushila spreads her bed
1

26

Vide “Roman Script v . Devanagari”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

perpendicularly at my head. So does Rajkumari near my feet. I am
not at all sorry about these changes. Maybe I am unhappy on account
of the girls. I say ‘maybe’ because that is not the impression I get. It
is my way to abandon things for the sake of my colleagues. I like to
make such sacrifices, because thereby I can know myself better. I
know that you have made your suggestion in order to protect me. You
have of course considered the interests of the girls. It remains to be
seen if their interest will be served by this sacrifice. Lilavati is lying
utterly exhausted right now. She is planning to study. I am
encouraging her.
If you send this letter to Mahadev, Devdas will also see it.
I have replied to the Viceroy’s statement.1 It is a harsh reply but
there was no other alternative. It seems it is going to be a terrible
battle. It cannot be predicted how far it will take us. It has to be seen
how long my body can take the strain. The swelling is of course
reduced. There is silence most of the time. Ba will have left.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original. Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

29. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
S EGAON,

[After February 3, 1939] 2
BA,

I have your letter. You have now become a State guest. Take
care of your health. I am not worried since Mani3 is with you. I must
have letters. I shall bear your point in mind.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, p. 32

1

For Gandhiji’s statement regarding the struggle in Rajkot and the breach by
the ruler of the covenant entered into with his people; vide “Statement to the Press”,
3-2-1939
2
Kasturba Gandhi was arrested on entering Rajkot on February 3, 1939.
3
Manibehn Patel
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

27

30. DISCUSSION WITH TEACHER TRAINEES1
February 3/4, 1939
It is the fashion these days to talk of the rights of minorities.
Therefore, although those who understand English only are here in a
hopeless minority, I shall speak today in English.2 But I warn you that
I shall not do so at the next meeting. You must go back with a firm
resolve to learn Hindustani. It is impossible to put into practice the
idea of basic education—an idea which is calculated to answer the
educational requirements of our millions—if the mind works only
through the English medium.
A number of questions were put to him by the delegates. The first question
expressed a doubt as to whether the Wardha scheme was likely to stand the test of
time, or if it merely was a measure of temporary expediency. Many prominent
educationists were of opinion that sooner or later the handicrafts would have to give
place to whole-hog industrialization. Would a society educated on the lines of the
Wardha scheme and based on justice, truth and non-violence, be able to survive the
severe strain of the process of industrialization?
GANDHIJI:

This is not a practical question. It does not affect our
immediate programme. The issue before us is not as to what is going
to happen generations hence, but whether this basic scheme of
education answers the real need of the millions that live in our
villages. I do not think that India is ever going to be industrialized to
the extent that there will be no villages left. The bulk of India will
always consist of villages.
“What will happen to the scheme of basic education if the Congress policy
changes as a result of the recent presidential election ?” he was asked next.
Gandhiji replied that it was misplaced fear. A change in the Congress policy
was not going to touch the Wardha scheme.

It will affect, if it at all does, higher politics only. You have come
here to undergo three weeks’ training course, so that you may be able
to teach your students along the Wardha method on your return. You
1

Extracted from Pyarelal’s “Wardha Scheme under Fire”. About seventy-five
delegates from all over India had attended a three weeks’ course at the Teacher
Training Centre at Wardha. Before leaving for their respective provinces they met
Gandhiji.
2
Gandhiji, at the suggestion of Asha Devi, had started to speak in Hindi and
some of the delegates had not been able to follow.

28

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

should have faith that the method will answer the purpose intended.
Although schemes for industrialization of the country might be
put forth, the goal that the Congress has set before it today is not
industrialization of the country. Its goal is, according to a resolution1
passed by the National Congress at Bombay, revival of village
industries. You cannot have mass awakening through any elaborate
scheme of industrialization that you may put before the kisans.
It would not add a farthing to their income. But the A. I. S. A. and
A. I. V. I. A. will put lakhs into their pockets within the course of a
year. Whatever happens to the Working Committee or the ministries,
personally I do not sense any danger to the constructive activities of
the Congress. Although started by the Congress, they have been
having an autonomous existence for a long time, and have fully
proved their worth. Basic education is an offshoot of these. Education
Ministers may change but this will remain. Therefore, those interested
in basic education should not worry themselves about Congress
politics. The new scheme of education will live or die by its own
merits or want of them.
But these questions do not satisfy me. They are not directly
connected with the scheme of basic education. They do not take us
any further. I would like you to ask me questions directly pertaining
to the scheme, so that I may give you my expert advice.
Before going to the meeting, a friend had asked him if the central idea behind
the scheme was that teachers should not speak a word to the pupils that could not be
correlated to the takli. Gandhiji, answering this question in the general meeting,
remarked:

This is a libel on me. It is true I have said that all instruction
must be linked with some basic craft. When you are imparting
knowledge to a child of 7 or 10 through the medium of an industry,
you should, to begin with, exclude all those subjects which cannot be
linked with the craft. By doing so from day to day you will discover
ways and means of linking with the craft many things which you had
excluded in the beginning. You will save your own energy and the
pupils’ if you follow this process of exclusion to begin with. We have
today no books to go by, no precedents to guide us. Therefore we
have to go slow. The main thing is that the teacher should retain his
1

Vide “Notes”, sub-title “Hindustani Only”

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

29

freshness of mind. If you come across something that you cannot
correlate with the craft, do not fret over it and get disheartened. Leave
it and go ahead with the subjects that you can correlate. Maybe
another teacher will hit upon the right way and show how it can be
correlated. And when you have pooled the experience of many, you
will have books to guide you, so that the work of those who follow
you will become easier.
How long, you will ask, are we to go on with this process of
exclusion? My reply is, for the whole lifetime. At the end you will
find that you have included many things that you had excluded at
first, that practically all that was worth including has been included,
and whatever you have been obliged to exclude till the end was
something very superficial that deserved exclusion. This has been my
experience of life. I would not have been able to do many things that
I have done if I had not excluded an equal number.
Our education has got to be revolutionized. The brain must be
educated through the hand. If I were a poet, I could write poetry on
the possibilities of the five fingers. Why should you think that the
mind is everything and the hands and feet nothing? Those who do not
train their hands, who go through the ordinary rut of education, lack
‘music’ in their life. All their faculties are not trained. Mere book
knowledge does not interest the child so as to hold his attention fully.
The brain gets weary of mere words, and the child’s mind begins to
wander. The hand does the things it ought not to do, the eye sees the
things it ought not to see, the ear hears the things it ought not to hear,
and they do not do, see, or hear, respectively, what they ought to.
They are not taught to make the right choice and so their education
often proves their ruin. An education which does not teach us to
discriminate between good and bad, to assimilate the one and eschew
the other is a misnomer.
Shrimati Asha Devi asked Gandhiji to explain to them how the mind could be
trained through the hands.
G. The old idea was to add a handicraft to the ordinary
curriculum of education followed in the schools. That is to say, the
craft was to be taken in hand wholly separately from education. To
me that seems a fatal mistake. The teacher must learn the craft and
correlate his knowledge to the craft, so that he will impart all that
knowledge to his pupils through the medium of the particular craft
that he chooses.

30

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Take the instance of spinning. Unless I know arithmetic I cannot
report how many yards of yarn I have produced on the takli, or how
many standard rounds it will make, or what is the count of the yarn
that I have spun. I must learn figures to be able to do so, and I also
must learn addition and subtraction and multiplication and division.
In dealing with complicated sums I shall have to use symbols and so I
get my algebra. Even here, I would insist on the use of Hindustani
letters instead of Roman.
Take geometry next. What can be a better demonstration of a
circle than the disc of the takli? I can teach all about circles in this
way, without even mentioning the name of Euclid.
Again, you may ask how I can teach my child geography and
history through spinning. Some time ago I came across a book called
Cotton—The Story of Mankind. It thrilled me. It read like a romance.
It began with the history of ancient times, how and when cotton was
first grown, the stages of its development, the cotton trade between the
different countries, and so on. As I mention the different countries to
the child, I shall naturally tell him something about the history and
geography of these countries. Under whose reign the different
commercial treaties were signed during the different periods? Why has
cotton to be imported by some countries and cloth by others? Why
can every country not grow the cotton it requires? That will lead me
into economics and elements of agriculture. I shall teach him to know
the different varieties of cotton, in what kind of soil they grow, how to
grow them, from where to get them, and so on. Thus takli-spinning
leads me into the whole history of the East India Company, what
brought them here, how they destroyed our spinning industry, how
the economic motive that brought them to India led them later to
entertain political aspirations, how it became a causative factor in the
downfall of the Moguls and the Marathas, in the establishment of the
English Raj, and then again in the awakening of the masses in our
times. There is thus no end to the educative possibilities of this new
scheme. And how much quicker the child will learn all that, without
putting an unnecessary tax on his mind and memory.
Let me further elaborate the idea. .Just as a biologist, in order to
become a good biologist, must learn many other sciences besides
biology, the basic education, if it is treated as a science, takes us into
interminable channels of learning. To extend the example of the takli,
a pupil teacher, who rivets his attention not merely on the mechanical
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

31

process of spinning, which of course he must master, but on the spirit
of the thing, will concentrate on the takli and its various aspects. He
will ask himself why the takli is made out of a brass disc and has a
steel spindle. The original takli had its disc made anyhow. The still
more primitive takli consisted of a wooden spindle with a disc of slate
or clay. The takli has been developed scientifically, and there is a
reason for making the disc out of brass and the spindle out of steel.
He must find out that reason. Then, the teacher must ask himself why
the disc has that particular diameter, no more and no less. When he
has solved these questions satisfactorily and has gone into the
mathematics of the thing, your pupil becomes a good engineer. The
takli becomes his Kamadhenu—the ‘Cow of plenty’. There is no limit
to the possibilities of knowledge that can be imparted through this
medium. It will be limited only by the energy and conviction with
which you work. You have been here for three weeks. You will have
spent them usefully if it has enabled you to take to this scheme
seriously, so that you will say to yourself, ‘I shall either do or die.’
I am elaborating the instance of spinning because I know it. If I
were a carpenter, I would teach my child all these things through
carpentry, or through cardboard work if I were a worker in cardboard.
What we need is educationists with originality, fired with true
zeal, who will think out from day to day what they are going to teach
their pupils. The teacher cannot get this knowledge through musty
volumes. He has to use his own faculties of observation and thinking
and impart his knowledge to the children through his lips, with the
help of a craft. This means a revolution in the method of teaching, a
revolution in the teacher’s outlook. Up till now you have been guided
by inspectors’ reports. You wanted to do what the inspector might
like, so that you might get more money yet for your institutions or
higher salaries for yourselves. But the new teacher will not care for all
that. He will say, ‘I have done my duty by my pupil if I have made
him a better man and in doing so I have used all my resources. That is
enough for me.
Q. In training pupil teachers, would it not be better if they are first taught a
craft separately and then given a sound exposition of the method of teaching through
the medium of that craft? As it is, they are advised to imagine themselves to be of the
age of 7 and relearn everything through a craft. In this way it will take them years
before they can master the new technique and become competent teachers.

G.

32

No, it would not take them years. Let us imagine that the
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

teacher when he comes to me has a working knowledge of
mathematics and history and other subjects. I teach him to make
cardboard boxes or to spin. While he is at it I show him how he could
have derived his knowledge of mathematics, history and geography
through the particular craft. He thus learns how to link his knowledge
to the craft. It should not take him long to do so. Take another
instance. Suppose I go with my boy of 7 to a basic school. We both
learn spinning and I get all my previous knowledge linked with
spinning. To the boy it is all new. For the 70-year-old father it is all
repetition but he will have his old knowledge in a new setting. He
should not take more than a few weeks for the process. Thus, unless
the teacher develops the receptivity and eagerness of the child of 7, he
will end up by becoming a mere mechanical spinner, which would not
fit him for the new method.
Q. A boy who has passed his matriculation can go to college if he
wishes to. Will a child who has gone through the basic education syllabus too be
able to do so?

G. Between the boy who has passed his matriculation and the
boy who has gone through basic education, the latter will give a better
account of himself because his faculties have been developed. He
would not feel helpless when he goes to college as matriculates often
do.
Q. Seven has been put down as the minimum age for admission of children to a
basic education school. Is it to be a chronological or mental age?

G. Seven should be the average minimum age, but there will be
some children of a higher and some of a lower age as well. There is
physical as well as mental age to be considered. One child at the age
of 7 may have attained sufficient physical development to handle a
craft. Another one may not be able to do so even at 7. One cannot
therefore lay down any hard and fast rules. All the factors have to be
taken into consideration.
Many questions show that many of you are filled with doubts.
This is the wrong way of going about the work. You should have
robust faith. If you have the conviction that I have, that Wardha
education is the thing required to give training for life to millions of
our children, your work will flourish. If you have not that faith, there
is something wrong with those in charge of your training. They
should be able to imbue you with this faith, whatever else they may or
may not give you.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

33

Q. The basic education scheme is supposed to be for the villages. Is there no
way out for the city-dwellers? Are they to go along the old rut?

G. This is a pertinent question and a good one, but I have
answered it already in the columns of Herijan. Sufficient for the day
is the good thereof. As it is, we have a big enough morsel to bite. If we
can solve the educational problem of seven lakhs of villages, it will be
enough for the present. No doubt educationists are thinking of the
cities too. But if we take up the question of the cities along with that of
the villages, we will fritter away our energies.
Q. Supposing in a village there were three schools with a different craft in
each, the scope for learning may be wider in one than in the other. To which school
out of these should the child go?

G. Such overlapping should not occur. For the majority of our
villages are too small to have more than one school. But a big village
may have more. Here the craft taught in both should be the same. But
I should lay down no hard and fast rule. Experience in such matters
would be the best guide. The capacity of various crafts to become
popular, their ability to draw out the faculties of the student, should be
studied. The idea is that whatever craft you choose, it should draw out
the faculties of the child fully and equally. It should be a village craft
and it should be useful.
Q. Why should a child waste 7 years on learning a craft when his real
profession is going to be something else, e.g., why should a banker’s son, who is
expected to take to banking later on, learn spinning for 7 years?

G. The question betrays gross ignorance of the new scheme of
education. The boy under the scheme of basic education does not go
to school merely to learn a craft. He goes there to receive his primary
education, to train his mind through the craft. I claim that the boy
who has gone through the new course of primary education for seven
years, will make a better banker than the one who has gone through
the seven years of ordinary schooling. The latter when he goes to a
banking school will be ill at ease because all his faculties will not have
been trained. Prejudices die hard. I will have done a good day’s work
if I have made you realize this one central fact that the new education
scheme is not a little of literary education and a little of craft. It is full
education up to the primary stage through the medium of a craft.
Q. Would it not be better to teach more than one craft in every school? The
children might begin to feel bored of doing the same thing from month to month and
year to year.

34

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

G. If I find a teacher who becomes dull to his students after a
month’s spinning, I should dismiss him. There will be newness in
every lesson such as there can be new music on the same instrument.
By changing over from one craft to another a child tends to become
like a monkey jumping from branch to branch with abode nowhere.
But I have shown already in the course of our discussion that teaching
spinning in a scientific spirit involves learning many things besides
spinning. The child will be taught to make his own takli and his own
winder soon. Therefore, to go back to what I began with, if the teacher
takes up the craft in a scientific spirit, he will speak to his pupils
through many channels, all of which will contribute to the development of all his faculties.

S EGAON, February 9, 1939

Harijan, 18-2-1939 and 4-3-1939

31. TELEGRAM TO MAHADEV DESAI1
WARDHA ,

[February 4, 1939] 2
MAHADEV DESAI
BIRLA HOUSE
NEW DELHI
THOUGH
FULLY
TIONS.

DO
AM
HEALTH

NOT

LIKE

ADVISING

YOUR

SUGGESTION

JAMNALAL

FOLLOW

NOT

KNOWING

YOUR

INSTRUC-

GOOD.

BAPU
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 212

1
The addressee in his telegram of February 4 from New Delhi had said
“Inasmuch as police officer in charge Jamnalalji verbally requested him give
authorities time reconsider may I ask Jamnalalji address letter to authorities
mentioning police officer’s request absurdity of communique and giving them time
until eighth? Am sending him draft suitable letter. If you agree advise him send
letter.”
2
Vide the following item.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

35

32. TELEGRAM TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
[February 4, 1939] 1
JAMNALAL
C ARE LAKINSURE
AGRA
YOUR

WIRE.

SUGGESTIONS.
MANIBEHN

MAHADEV
CARRY

DETAINED

THEM
STATE

HAS
OUT.

WIRED

YOU

HEALTH

CERTAIN
GOOD.

BA

GUESTS.

BAPU
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 404

33. LETTER TO INDIRA NEHRU
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 4, 1939
CHI. INDU,

How can you think of me now? I was happy to learn
that Almora had benefited you. I pray to God that you may soon be
well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: C.W. 9801. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library

34. LETTER TO GENERAL SHINDE
S EGAON,

February 4, 1939
DEAR GENERAL SHINDE,

Many thanks for your letter and enclosures.2
I see nothing objectionable in the excerpts you have sent
me.
1
2

36

As given in the source
Vide “Letter to General Shinde”, 29-1-1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

As to the printed circular, if what is stated therein is true it is
evidence of a tragic situation. It is up to the wise heads in Baroda to
find out the truth.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

35. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
February 4, 1939
CHI. BABUDI,

If you cannot stay away, you can stay here even after your
marriage. I made haste because you wished it. There is nothing certain
about me. I am moreover weak of health. Therefore, I thought it
better to pay off this debt with my own hands. You can return after
staying for only a few days at your husband’s place. You may, of
course, come if you are in bad health. You can do as you like. I do
wish you to join the work at Bardoli.
Where is the cloth? But would it not be better if you took a new
piece out of what I keep for my wear for a petticoat or upper garment
where white will pass? What about the charkha ? All the books will be
available. I have already prepared the maxims. Staying away, you will
serve me by doing my work.
Reply to yesterday’s letter could not be covered in the letter to
Sardar. I advise you to convey your views in this matter to Sardar.
Ask me again about religious reading.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 10003. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

36. ROMAN SCRIPT v. DEVANAGARI 1
I understand that some of the tribes in Assam are being taught
to read and write through the Roman script instead of Devanagari. I
have already expressed my opinion that the only script that is ever
likely to be universal in India is Devanagari, either reformed or as it is.
1

This appeared under “Notes”.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

37

Urdu or Persian will go hand in hand unless Muslims, of their own
free will, acknowledge the superiority of Devanagari from a purely
scientific and national standpoint. But this is irrelevant to the present
problem. The Roman cannot go hand in hand with the other two
scripts. Protagonists of the Roman script would displace both. But
sentiment and science alike are against the Roman script. Its sole merit
is its convenience for printing and typing purposes. But that is
nothing compared to the strain its learning would put upon millions.
It can be of no help to the millions who have to read their own
literature either in their own provincial scripts or in Devanagari.
Devanagari is easier for the millions of Hindus and even Muslims to
learn, because the provincial scripts are mostly derived from
Devanagari. I have included Muslims advisedly. The mother tongue
of Bengali Muslims, for instance, is Bengali as is Tamil of Tamil
Muslims. The present movement for the propagation of Urdu will, as
it should, result in Muslims all over India learning Urdu in addition to
their mother tongue. They must, in any case, know Arabic for the
purpose of learning the Holy Koran. But the millions whether Hindus
or Muslims will never need the Roman script except when they wish to
learn English. Similarly, Hindus who want to read their scriptures in
the original have to and do learn the Devanagari script. The
movement for universalizing the Devanagari script has thus a sound
basis. The introduction of the Roman script is a superimposition
which can never become popular. And all superimpositions will be
swept out of existence when the true mass awakening comes, as it is
coming, much sooner than anyone of us can expect from known
causes. Yet the awakening of millions does take time. It cannot be
manufactured. It comes or seems to come mysteriously. National
workers can merely hasten the process by anticipating the mass mind.
S EGAON, February 5, 1939

Harijan, 11-2-1939

37. NO APOLOGY
I have two letters from Jewish friends protesting against a
remark of mine in a dialogue reported in Harijan over the Jewish
question. Here is one of the letters:

38

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

My attention has been called to a paragraph 1 in Harijan of December
24th, 1938, in which you are reported to have said that “The
Jews called down upon the Germans the curses of mankind, and
they wanted America and England to fight Germany on their behalf.”
I can hardly doubt that you have been misreported, for there is nothing that
could possibly justify such a statement. But as the paragraph muchdistressed
me, I should be glad to receive from you a word of reassurance

I am sorry to say that I cannot give the reassurance required.
For I did make the remark put into my mouth by Shri Pyarelal.
Hardly a paper comes to me from the West which does not describe
the agony of the Jews who demand retribution by the democratic
Powers for German atrocities. Nor do I see anything wrong in the
attitude. The Jews are not angels. My point was they were not
non-violent in the sense meant by me. Their non-violence had and has
no love in it. It is passive. They do not resist because they know that
they cannot resist with any degree of success. In their place, unless
there were active non-violence in me, I should certainly call down
upon my persecutors the curses of Heaven. It is not contended by my
correspondents that the German Jews do not want the big Powers like
England, America and France to prevent the atrocities, if need be, even
by war against Germany. I happen to have a Jewish friend living with
me. He has an intellectual belief in non-violence. But he says he
cannot pray for Hitler. He is so full of anger over the German
atrocities that he cannot speak of them with restraint. I do not quarrel
with him over his anger. He wants to be non-violent, but the sufferings
of fellow Jews are too much for him to bear. What is true of him is
true of thousands of Jews who have no thought even of ‘loving the
enemy’. With them as with millions ‘revenge is sweet, to forgive is
divine.’
S EGAON, February 5, 1939
Harijan, 18-2-1939

38. LETTER TO RAMDAS AND NIRMALA GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 8, 1939
CHI. RAMDAS AND NIMU,

I got your letter. You need not worry about Ba. Since Ba went2
1

Vide”Discussion With Christian Missionaries”, 12-12-1938
To Rajkot, to take part in the satyagraha there against the Thakore who had
broken the agreement he had made with Vallabhbhai to appoint a committee to draft a
constitution for a form of responsible Government for the State.
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

39

of her own accord, I felt no hesitation in letting her go in spite of her
indifferent health. You should be pleased. You too, will do the same
when you are faced with a similar duty. Just now, your duty lies in
improving your health and earning something. When you achieve
satisfaction in that field, you will certainly plunge into the field of
public service, I am quite sure of that.
Kanam is enjoying himself. He has gone to visit uncle Nanavati.
Teaching work is looked after by Lilavati, Kanchan, etc. He does
sometimes think of Ba during the night. I have him sit before me at
meals. A.S.1 bathes him and washes his clothes.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy : Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

39. LETTER TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
S EGAON,

February 5, 1939
MY DEAR SUBHAS,

I hope you had my personal letter as also yesterday’s.2
I had a wire from Maulana Saheb suggesting his and others’
withdrawal from Working Committee.3 I replied saying it might be
embarrassing to you. Now comes a letter from Rajen Babu making the
same suggestion supporting it by the argument that you would be
helped if you had the resignations in your hands now so that you
could choose a temporary cabinet to help you to frame your future
programme. Rajen Babu’s argument commends itself to me. So far as
I can judge the old colleagues whom you consider as rightists will not
serve on your cabinet. You can have their resignations now, if that
would be more convenient for you. Their presence would be unfair to
you and to them. You should be left free to frame your own
programme and expect the rightists (I wish you would choose better
and indigenous terms to designate the parties of your imagination) to
support where they can and abstain without obstructing where they
1
2
3

40

Amtussalaam
These letters are not available.
For the resignation letter of members of the Working Committee, vide
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

cannot see eye to eye with you.
I have just read your statement1 in answer to mine 2 . Though it
demands a reply, I must refrain. I do not want to enter into a public
controversy with you so long as I can avoid it.
This letter you may show to friends, if you find it necessary. I
am sending copies to Maulana Saheb, etc.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1939. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

40. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
February 5, 1939
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

This copy3 for your information.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1939. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

41. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
S EGAON, WARDHA ,
February 5, 1939
CHI. MAHADEV,

There is no letter from you today. Acting on your telegram, I
have sent a telegram to J.4 that he should follow your advice. But he
does not seem to like the advice. Let him enter the field then. I
consider the Viceroy’s statement pretty bad. You will have seen my
reply. Things will take their own course. Do not worry. You must
regain your health.
Both Vijaya and Sharada will be married here at 3 o’clock
1

Vide “Statement of Subhas Chandra Bose”
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 31-1-1939
3
Vide the preceding item.
4
Jamnalal Bajaj
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

41

(by my watch) on the 7th. 1 Nanabhai 2 will conduct the ceremony.
Nanabhai will be coming here tomorrow with Manubhai. Gordhandas
will arrive on the 7th morning. No guests have been invited. We do
not want to invite any. The poor people of Segaon will witness the
wedding. The altar will be built under a mango tree.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

42. LETTER TO JANAKIDEVI BAJAJ
[February 5, 1939] 3
CHI. JANAKIBEHN,

Nanabhai and Manubhai will be arriving tomorrow. It would be
better to let them come to Segaon. We are not so crowded here these
days. And why should I trouble you unnecessarily when Munnalal
will be going to receive them? Probably five more persons will be
coming on Tuesday and I want them too to come to Segaon. If
changes are to be made, I shall see. It is good that Jamnalalji has been
arrested.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
The marriage rites will be performed by Nanabhai but Vyasji
may certainly come.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 3002

1

Vijaya Patel had been betrothed to Manubhai Pancholi and Sharada Shah to
Gordhandas Chokhawala.
2
Nrisinhaprasad Kalidas Bhatt
3
From the reference to Jamnalalji’s arrest and the weddings of Vijaya Patel
and Sharda Shah which took place on Tuesday, February 7, 1939

42

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

43. NOTE TO AMRIT KAUR
[On or after February 5, 1939] 1
Contradictory is wholly inapplicable. I mean that there is
nothing wrong in an ordinary man wanting God to punish the
wrongdoer. Non-violence is a new thing. It would be wrong for a
non-violent man to call down the wrath of God or man. But a
non-violent man must not see anything wrong in a persecuted man
retaliating and seeking the assistance of others. You should try to
understand the argument.
From the original: C.W. 4209. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7845

44. INTERVIEW TO SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN
STUDENTS 2
BARDOLI ,

[Before February 6, 1939] 3
“What should we, South Africa-borns, do to preserve our Indian culture in our
country of adoption?” they asked Gandhiji. “What other languages would you ask us
to learn besides English ?”
Gandhiji answered by first twitting them for giving the first place to English.
He advised them instead to learn Hindustani, which should contain all words of
Sanskritic as well as Persian or Arabic origin, that are used by the man in the street.
The Hindus dared not neglect the study of Sanskrit, nor the Muslims of Arabic, not
only because the study of these languages was necessary to give them access to their
scriptures in the original, but also because these two tongues contained the grandest
poetry that the world has ever produced. He concluded:

But above all you should jealously retain the essential simplicity
and spirituality which is the hallmark of Indian culture.
Their other question was whether they should carry on the struggle for their
rights in South Africa through satyagraha or through constitutional agitation.
1

The note is written on the back of a telegram from Damodar to Bachhraj,
Wardha, dated 5-2-1939.
2
Extracted from Pyarelal’s “A World in Agony-II”, 6-2-1939. The students
were in India to pursue medical studies and wanted Gandhiji to help them gain
admission in medical college.
3
Ibid
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

43

GANDHIJI: If the South African Indian community had guts in
them, I would say satyagraha, and they are bound to win. I am hoping
that some day from among Indian youths born in South Africa a
person will arise who will stand up for the rights of his countrymen
domiciled there, and make the vindication of those rights his life’s
mission. He will be so pure, so cultured, so truthful and so dignified in
his bearing that he will disarm all opposition. The whites will then say,
‘If all Indians were like him, we should have no objection to giving
them an equal status with us.’ But he will answer, ‘It is not enough
that there is one representative of the Indian community whom you
are ready to recognize as your equal. What I am, other countrymen of
mine too can be, if instead of calling them names and putting them
under all sorts of disabilities you give them a sporting chance in the
matter of educational and other facilities which are today denied
them.’ Such a one, when he appears, will not need to be coached by
me. He will assert himself by his sheer genius.

Harijan, 18-2-1939

45. MAHATMA’S STATUE1
Correspondence has been pouring in upon me protesting
against the Mahatma’s statue said to be in course of construction on
the Congress ground at a cost of Rs. 25,000. I know nothing of this
statue. I have enquired about it. But I must not wait for confirmation.
Assuming that such a statue is in course of construction, I reinforce
the protest of my correspondents and I agree with them that it will be
waste of good money to spend Rs. 25,000 on erecting a clay or
metallic statue of the figure of a man who is himself made of clay and
is more fragile than a bangle which can keep by preservation for a
thousand years, whereas the human body disintegrates daily and
undergoes final disintegration after the usual span of life. I have learnt
from my Muslim friends, among whom I have passed the best part of
my life, my dislike of statues and photographs of my figure. And I
should like the Reception Committee, if the report is true, to desist
from the unfortunate enterprise. Let them save what money they can.
If it is a mere rumour, let these lines serve as a warning to those who
want to honour me by erecting statues and having portraits of my
figure, that I heartily dislike these exhibitions. I shall deem it ample
1

44

This was published under the heading “Notes”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

honour if those who believe in me will be good enough to promote
the activities I stand for and at least divert the money they would use
for statues and portraits to the work of the Harijan Sevak Sangh, A. I.
S. A., A. I. V. I. A., or Hindustani Talimi Sangh.
S EGAON, February 6, 1939
Harijan, 11-2-1939

46. WHY KASTURBA GANDHI? 1
I had not intended to say anything about my wife having joined
the Rajkot struggle. But some cruel criticism I have seen about her
intervention prompts an explanation. It had never occurred to me that
she should join it. For one thing she is too old for such hardships as
are involved in being in civil disobedience struggles. But strange as it
may appear to critics, they must believe me when I say that though she
is illiterate, she is and has been for years absolutely free to do what she
likes. When she joined the struggle in South Africa or in India, it was
of her own inner prompting. And so it was this time. When she heard
of Manibehn’s arrest, she could not restrain herself and asked me to
let her go. I said she was too weak. She had just then fainted in her
bathroom in Delhi and might have died but for Devdas’s presence of
mind. She said she did not mind. I then referred her to Sardar. He
would not hear of it either.
But this time he melted. He had seen my grief over the breach
of faith by the Thakore Saheb induced by the Resident. The reader
must realize my ancestral connection with Rajkot and the intimate
personal relations I had with the present Ruler’s father. Kasturba is a
daughter of Rajkot. She felt a personal call. She could not sit still
whilst the other daughters of Rajkot were suffering for the freedom of
the men and women of the State. Rajkot is no doubt an insignificant
place on the map of India. But it is not insignificant for me and my
wife. As a child she was brought up in Rajkot though born in
Porbandar. And, after all, neither she nor I can be unconcerned in a
struggle which is based on non-violence and in which so many
reliable co-workers are involved.
The success of the struggle in Rajkot will be a stage forward in
the fight for freedom. And when it ends in success, as it must sooner
1

This was published under the heading “Notes”.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

45

or later, I hope that Kasturba’s share will count as a humble
contribution towards it. Satyagraha is a struggle in which the oldest
and the weakest in body may take part, if they have stout hearts.
S EGAON, February 6, 1939
Harijan, 11-2-1939

47. WORKING OF NON-VIOLENCE
I have been very much interested in reading the recent numbers of
Harijan and your observations on the European crisis and the N. W. F.
Province. But there is one aspect of the non-violence problem, which I should
have discussed with you at Segaon 1 if there had been time, to which you
seldom or never refer. You say that non-violent non-co-operation, as you have
developed it, is the answer to the violence which is now threatening the whole
world with ruin. There is no doubt as to the immense effect such spirit and
action could produce. But must not the non-violent spirit of selfless love for
all, enemies and friends alike, express itself, if it is to succeed, in a liberal,
democratic and constitutional form of government? Society cannot exist
without law and government. International peace cannot exist unless the
nations accept a system of constitutional government which will give them
unity and law and end anarchy among them. No doubt some day the law of God
will be so “written on the hearts and minds” of men that they become
individually the expression of it, and will need no human law or government,
But that is the end. The beginning of progress towards that heavenly goal
must take the form at first of a willingness among races, religions and nations
to unite under a single constitution, through which their unity and
membership one of another is established, the laws under which they live are
promulgated after public discussion and by some form of majority decision and
are enforced, where it is not voluntarily obeyed, not by war but by police
force, where persuasion and example have not sufficed. As between sovereign
nations the operation of a constructive non-violence spirit must lead to some
form of federation. It cannot succeed until it has done so. The proof that it
exists effectively will be the appearance of a federal system. Thus the only real
solution for the European problem is the federation of its 25 peoples and
nations under a single democratic constitution which will create a government
which can look at and legislate for the problems of Europe, not as a set of rival
and conflicting nations but as a single whole with autonomous parts. In the
1

Lord Lothian was at Segaon from January 18 to 20, 1938; vide “Discussion
with Lord Lothain”, 20-1-1938

46

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

same way the only solution to the Indian problem is the substitution of a
democratic constitution for the control of Great Britain. And what is true for
Europe and India is true, in the long run, for the whole world and is the only
final method of ending war.
Non-violent non-co-operation may be the best, perhaps the only,
method of bringing about the change of mind and heart which will make
acceptance of a federal democratic constitution by the nation possible. But
attainment to democratic federation is the necessary attainment whereby its
success is assured and without which it cannot succeed. It is always a matter of
interest and indeed of surprise to me that you appear to think that non-violent
non-co-operation is enough in itself, and that you never proclaim that a
democratic system of government unifying men, races, religions and nations
is the goal to which it must lead, though that attainment is only possible as
the result of a spiritual change of heart and cannot be reached by force or
violence or chicanery.
I do not write this as a kind of indirect argument for the Indian
constitution, though it obviously has a bearing on that problem also. The
Government of India Act is clearly a very imperfect application of the
principle of democratic federation and must necessarily evolve rapidly if it is
to work. The main argument I have always urged for it is that in present
conditions it represents the only constitutional compromise uniting
Provinces, States, Muslims and Hindus which can be made to work and that it
has far more seeds of evolution within it than is generally recognized. If your
spiritual gospel informed the people, it would rapidly and easily evolve. My
object is not to elicit any opinion from you about the constitutional problem
but an answer to the larger question set forth in the early part of the letter.

Thus writes Lord Lothian. The letter was received early in
January, but urgent matters prevented my dealing earlier with the
important question raised in it.
I have purposely refrained from dealing with the nature of
government in a society based deliberately on non-violence. All
society is held together by non-violence, even as the earth is held in
her position by gravitation. But when the law of gravitation was
discovered the discovery yielded results of which our ancestors had no
knowledge. Even so when society is deliberately constructed in
accordance with the law of non-violence, its structure will be different
in material particulars from what it is today. But I cannot say in advance what the government based wholly on non-violence will be like.
What is happening today is disregard of the law of non-violence
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

47

and enthronement of violence as if it were an eternal law. The
democracies, therefore, that we see at work in England, America and
France are only so called, because they are no less based on violence
than Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy or even Soviet Russia. The only
difference is that the violence of the last three is much better
organized than that of the three democratic powers. Nevertheless we
see today a mad race for outdoing one another in the matter of
armaments. And if when the clash comes, as it is bound to come one
day, the democracies win, they will do so only because they will have
the backing of their peoples who imagine that they have a voice in
their own government whereas in the other three cases the peoples
might rebel against their own dictatorships.
Holding the view that without the recognition of non-violence
on a national scale there is no such thing as a constitutional or
democratic government, I devote my energy to the propagation of
non-violence as the law of our life—individual, social, political,
national and international. I fancy that I have seen the light, though
dimly. I write cautiously, for I do not profess to know the whole of the
Law. If I know the successes of my experiments, I know also my
failures. But the successes are enough to fill me with undying hope.
I have often said that if one takes care of the means, the end will
take care of itself. Non-violence is the means, the end for every nation
is complete independence. There will be an international League only
when all the nations, big or small, composing it are fully independent.
The nature of that independence will correspond to the extent of
non-violence assimilated by the nations concerned. One thing is
certain. In a society based on non-violence, the smallest nation will
feel as tall as the tallest. The idea of superiority and inferiority will be
wholly obliterated.
It follows from this that the Government of India Act is merely a
makeshift and has to give way to an Act coined by the nation itself. So
far as Provincial Autonomy is concerned, it has been found possible
to handle it somewhat. My own experience of its working is by no
means happy. The Congress Governments have not that non-violent
hold over the people that I had expected they would have.
But the Federal structure is inconceivable to me because it
contemplates a partnership, however loose, among dissimilars. How
dissimilar the States are is being demonstrated in an ugliness for which
I was unprepared. Therefore the Federal structure, as conceived by the
48

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Government of India Act, I hold to be an utter impossibility.
Thus the conclusion is irresistible that for one like me, wedded
to non-violence, constitutional or democratic government is a distant
dream so long as non-violence is not recognized as a living force, an
inviolable creed, not a mere policy. While I prate about universal
non-violence, my experiment is confined to India. If it succeeds the
world will accept it without effort. There is, however, a big BUT. The
pause does not worry me. My faith is brightest in the midst of
impenetrable darkness.
S EGAON, February 6, 1939
Harijan, 11-2-1939

48. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
S EGAON,

February 6, 1939
BA,

Herewith are letters from Akola. I hope you are well. The
marriages of both the girls1 will take place tomorrow. We all feel your
absence. I have to do the giving away and that too in your absence.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, p. 31

49. LETTER TO JANAKIDEVI BAJAJ
February 7, 1939
CHI. JANAKIBEHN,

You must not worry. Those who worry are not warriors. There is
no point in going to Jaipur. Therefore, you have to stay here and do
your duty. Let it be as God wills.
I am keeping the telephonic message with me.2 I wish to make
some statement. I am not detaining the car.
1
On February 7, Vijaya Patel was married to Manubhai Pancholi and Sharda
Shah to Gordhandas Chokhawala.
2
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 8-2-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

49

Why do you want to come here in your present condition?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3000

50. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 7, 1939
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

I have your letter. What is happening in Limdi is terrible, but it
does not surprise us. More, and worse, will happen. That will test the
people. Our path is straight. I intend to write about this. Since I
arrange my work with due care for my health, I am not able to attend
to everything as I would wish to. I very much like what Subhas Babu
is doing. We have had a narrow escape. See about Rajendra Babu.
I am ready for a meeting whenever you desire it.
I have received a letter from Mani, which is enclosed. I am
writing this after performing the marriages of both the girls. The
simplicity was absolute. Nobody was invited. The village Harijans and
others were present. I was very much pleased.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 232-3

51. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 7, 1939
CHI. MAHADEV,

I have your letter as also the wire. If you ate not allowed to have
the needed rest there, rush down here. You will definitely get rest here.
There is at least some peace of mind. The changes I introduced have
not been received well. But the student of the Gita must find peace of
mind wherever he goes.
50

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am getting along. I am trying to reduce as much as possible
the burden on Vallabhbhai. But he has a worrying temperament. Let
us see what happens. The Statesman cannot write anything else.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Now it is almost time to go to the marriage mandap.
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

52. TELEGRAM TO CHANDRABHAL JOHRI1
[On or after February 7, 1939]
JAMNALALJI

IS

STATEMENT.

KEEP

SAFE
ME

WHEREVER

IS.2

HE

TRYING

ISSUE

INFORMED.

Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 213

53. TELEGRAM TO RAJENDRA PRASAD
[On or after February 7,1939] 3
R[AJENDRA P RASAD]
S ADAQAT ASHRAM
P ATNA
HAVE
BEFORE

NOT
ME.

CONVENED
DO

YOU

CONFERENCE.
WANT

NO

SUCH

SUGGESTION

CONFERENCE ?

From a copy: Jamnalal .Bajaj Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

1
This was in reply to the addressee’s telegram of February 6, 1939, received
on February 7, expressing his anxiety about Jamnalal’s whereabouts after the latter’s
arrest on February 5, 1939.
2
Jamnalal had been taken to Bharatpur State and released there on
February 7.
3
This along with the preceding item was drafted on the reverse of the telegram
from Chandrabhal Johri; vide the preceding item.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

51

54. LETTER TO SHARDABEHN G. CHOKHAWALA
[After February 7, 1939] 1
CHI. BABUDI,

I have your two letters. If you write ‘Private’, etc., at the top, no
one will read your letters. I will tear them up after reading.
Do not get frightened. Obtain permission and come away to me
immediately. We shall talk about everything at length. Your
experience is no unusual story.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
You may use the accompanying letter2 if you wish.
From the
Chokhawala

Gujarati original: C.W.

10021.

Courtesy: Shardabehn G.

55. LETTER TO GORDHANDAS CHOKHAWALA
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

[After February 7, 1939] 3
CHI. GORDHANDAS,

If Sharda feels ill at ease there, send her away here to me for
some days. She has never been away from home and so it is likely that
she may feel a stranger there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the
Chokhawala

Gujarati original: C.W.

10084.

Courtesy: Shardabehn G.

1

This was obviously written some time after the addressee’s marriage, which
took place on February 7.
2
Vide the following item.
3
Vide the preceding item.

52

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

56. TELEGRAM TO THE LIMDI PRAJA MANDAL
[Before February 8, 1939] 1
IN

THE

VIOLENT
PROPERTY

HAPPENINGS
AND

IF

BRAVE

LIMBS

AND

THE
SUFFERING

LIFE,

VICTORY

PEOPLE

REMAIN

TORTURES
IS

NON-

LOSS

THEIRS.

KEEP

OF
ME

INFORMED .

The Hindustan Times, 10-2-1939

57. TELEGRAM TO JETHANAND
WARDHA ,

February 8, 1939
R AIBAHADUR JETHANAND
DERAISMAILKHAN
DEEPLY

REGRET

PREMIER.

HAVE

RIOTS.

AM

MAHOMEDANS

HELPLESS
BEEN

THOUGH

KILLED

AS

WIRING2
REPORTED

PAPERS.

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

58. TELEGRAM TO DR. KHAN SAHEB
WARDHA ,

February 8, 1939
DR. K HANSAHEB
P ESHAWAR
ARE

YOU

DOING

ANYTHING

EFFECTIVE

ABOUT

DERA

RIOTS.

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
2

The news report carrying this item is dated February 8.
Vide the following item.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

53

59. LETTER TO MOTILAL ROY
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 8, 1939
DEAR MOTI BABU,

Better to send instalment directly to A. I. S. A.
The convocation address not yet received.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: G.N. 11053

60. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
S EGAON,

February 8, 1939
BA,

You are being put to a severe test. You must let me know about
the difficulties you face. You are born to suffer and hence your
discomforts cause me no surprise. I have sent a telegram to the
Government. I do not wish to publish anything about your difficulties
in the Press. God is certainly even there by your side. He will do as He
wills.
Kanam is well. He remembers you at night. Do not worry in the
least. Amtul Salaam is here. She takes care of Kanam.
Chi. Mani, how nice that you are there!
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, p. 31

61. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
S EGAON, WARDHA ,

February 8, 1939
CHI. MAHADEV,

I have your letter. Let me compliment you on keeping good
health.
Your dialogue is good. Your suggestion is correct. I am sending
54

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the telegram. I may issue my statement tomorrow. I shall not write
anything more because there is a lot to do.
I have got the point about Hameed Ali. Subhas wants to meet
me. I am not keen. He is getting good publicity.
Lilavati seems to be at ease today.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum arid
Library. Courtesy:. Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

62. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
February 8, 1939
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

You should not expect a long letter from me. Only he is a
brahmachari who can remain unmoved even while conducting a
wedding. One who feels disturbed watching a wedding need not do so.
I did not invite anyone.
You should salute A. B. from a distance and forget the rest.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4310; also S.G. 73

63. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1
WARDHA ,

February 8, 1939
The following telephone report 2 has been received about Seth
1
The statement was also published in The Hindu and The Bombay Chronicle
of February 9 and in a slightly modified form in Harijan of February 11 under the
heading “Barbarous Behaviour”. It turned out, however, that the report used by
Gandhiji in the statement was not wholly accurate; vide “Statement to the Press”,
12-2-1939
2
The report was in Hindi, which Gandhiji translated; vide “Statement to the
Press”,12-2-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

55

Jamnalalji who, when he was arrested a second time, was accompanied
by his son, his secretary and a servant:
Seth Jamnalalji was detained at Ajmer Road station, 50
miles from Jaipur, and kept in the dak bungalow there. Mr.
Young went to Sethji in person and asked him to enter his car.
Sethji declined saying, “You wish to put me out side the border
of Jaipur State. I wish to enter Jaipur. I will not accompany
you.” Mr. Young thereupon said, “We are taking you to Jaipur.
Come with us.” Sethji replied, “I cannot rely on your word.”
Mr. Young then said, “I have orders. You will have to come
with me.” Sethji asked to be shown the order, but it appears that
there was no order in Mr. Young’s possession. At length, Mr.
Young again told Sethji that he would be taken to Jaipur. “If we
do not take you there, you can have it printed in the newspapers
that after promising to take you to Jaipur, we took you
elsewhere.” Sethji was not inclined to believe anything that was
said to him. He said, “I will not accompany you willingly. You
can take me by force, if you so desire.”
This conversation took nearly an hour. In the end, five
men forcibly put Sethji in a car and took him away. In this
process of using force, Sethji was injured on his left cheek below
the eye. He was taken to Alwar State. Sethji here said, “You
cannot act like this. You are not at liberty to deposit me in
another State. If you do so I will run a case against you.” On
this Mr. Young brought Sethji back again into Jaipur State. But
we do not know his present whereabouts.
The only remark I have to offer is that this is barbarous
behaviour. The sacredness of person, legal procedure and liberty are
thrown to the winds. That a British Inspector-General of Police should
resort to deception and then to personal injury to one who was his
prisoner is what I call organized goondaism. But I know that nothing
will break Jamnalalji’s spirit. He will enter Jaipur either as a free man
or prisoner.
The Hindustan Times, 9-2-1939

56

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

64. TELEGRAM TO G. D. BIRLA
WARDHAGANJ,

February 9, 1939
GHANSHYAMDAS BIRLA
LUCKY
C ALCUTTA
I

THINK

INSTINCT.
HIM

BEST
I

DO

SUFFER

IF

LEAVE
NOT

HE

JAMNALALJI
APPRECIATE

DO

ACCORDING

HIS

NOTICE.

LET

SENDING

MUST.

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 7804. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

65. TELEGRAM TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
WARDHAGANJ,

February 9, 1939
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
ANAND BHAWAN
ALLAHABAD
ALL

THINGS

POSTPONE
PRINCIPAL
VARIOUS

CONSIDERED

I

THINK

LUDHIANA

CONFERENCE

WORK[ER]S

ENGAGED

IN

IT

WOULD

TILL

AFTER

STRUGGLE

BE

WISE

CONGRESS.
GOING

ON

STATES.

BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1939. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

66. LETTER TO N. R. MALKANI
S EVAGRAM , W ARDHA ,

February 9, 1939
MY DEAR MALKANI,

I understand your letter. 1 It satisfies me. I shall send you
1

Vide also letters to the addressee, “Letter to N. R. Malkani”, 20-1-1939 and
“Letter to N. R. Malkani”, 22-1-1939
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

57

Rs. 200 as soon as Kishorelal returns. You will operate on Rs. 300
cheque.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N, 932

67. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 9, 1939
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I have your letter. I understand your analysis. Subhas wired
saying he wants to come to Wardha. Let us see what happens. Of
course I shall take no hasty decision. I am glad Sarup1 is coming
soon. I am hoping that the quiet of Segaon will suit her.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1939. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

68. LETTER TO HAREKRUSHNA MAHTAB
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 9, 1939
MY DEAR MAHTAB,

Your letter. You can come on 16th inst.2
Yours,

BAPU
From the original: H. K. Mahtab Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library

69. LETTER TO SHARDABEHN G. CHOKHAWALA
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 9, 1939
CHI. BABUDI,

Marriage is a sacrament. It should, therefore, lead not to
indulgence but to restraint. We have four stages of life.
1

Vijayalakshmi Pandit
The addressee had wanted to meet Gandhiji to discuss the affairs of the
Princely States in Orissa.
2

58

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Grihasthashrama1 is the second stage. In family life enjoyment has no
place but service has an important place. Service and begetting of
progeny cannot go hand in hand. Progeny, however, has a place in
married life. If there is an intense desire for progeny sexual union is
permitted. This union should result from deliberation, not passion. If
this principle is accepted, husband and wife should not share the same
bed. There should be no love play. Nothing should be done which
would turn their minds to the sexual act. In these days it is a difficult
dharma. May God grant you both the strength to perform it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 10004. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

70. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
S EGAON,

February 9, 1939
BA,

I have your letter. I do not like your being constantly ill. But be
brave now. You will get the facilities. But what does it matter even if
you don’t? Mani should read aloud the Ramayana, even if she cannot
sing well. What are our troubles as compared to those of Rama and
Sita? For the time being I have given up taking help from the girls.
Do not feel uneasy. Do not worry. I shall see what to do. Sushila of
course continues to look after me.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, pp. 31-2

71. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 9, 1939
CHI. MAHADEV,

I hope you have the wire I sent yesterday. It was meant
1

Householder’s state

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

59

especially to be shown to Laithwaite1 . Of course, it could be
interpreted as you suggest. So it may be as well if you have not shown
it to him. Besides, since Devdas has brought out the facts in the Press,
there is no need for that.
I do not think it right to send for Jamnalal. It is better to let him
do as he wishes. If there is coercion then Jamnalalji should certainly
protest. I am not very clear about the matter but I approve of
Jamnalalji’s opposition. What else could he do? When there is one
against many he can only protest in this way. I have done it. I
remember how, when the driver of the coach had tried to put me
down. I had held on to the perch. I had received many blows. Had not
the other passengers felt ashamed and checked the driver I would have
lost my grip and my life too. I still do not consider this act of mine as
having been violent. Jamnalalji has acted similarly. I have sent him a
wire that he should act as he thinks right.
You will have seen my statement.2 Agatha is sitting beside me.
She brings news from Orissa. Nothing unusual. She is indeed working
hard.
Jawahar’s letter has come, he is neutral.
I understand what you write about Maulana. I do not think it
proper to say anything at the moment, even if falsehood goes round.
Subhas wants to come here. If he does, we shall see.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

72. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS3
WARDHA ,

February 9, 1939
Critics of my recent writings on Rajkot and Jaipur have accused
me of being guilty of untruth and violence. I owe them an answer.
Such accusations have been made against me before now, indeed since
1

Sir J. G. Laithwaite, Private Secretary to the Viceroy
Vide “Letter to the Press”, 9-2-1939
3
This was also published in The Bombay Chronicle and The Hindu of February
10 and in Harijan of February 18 under the heading “Not Guilty”.
2

60

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

my entry into public life. I am happy to be able to say that most of
my critics have later been obliged to acknowledge that I had not been
guilty of either untruthful or violent language and that my statements
were based on my belief in them and made without malice.
Even so is the case in the present instance. I am fully aware of
my responsibility. I know that many of my countrymen put implicit
faith in my statements. I have been asked for proofs in support of my
statements I have given them.
Sardar Patel has reproduced in his statement 1 on Rajkot the
remarks of the Resident reported to have been made by him about the
Congress and himself. The memorandum of the conversation between
the Resident, the Thakore Saheb and councillors, including Sir Patrick
Cadell, is in my possession. It is too long to be published, but it will
be, if occasion requires it.
As for organized goondaism, the facts have been published. 2 I
connect the Resident with it, because he has sent the Agency police to
the State and must be held responsible for the acts of his agents.
Similarly, the British Prime Minister is responsible for everything that is happening in Jaipur. The making of Seth Jamnalalji a
football to be kicked out of Jaipur every time he dares to exercise the
right of entering his birth-place is surely worse than unseemly.
I am not guilty of violence of language when I correctly
characterize action. I would be guilty of violence if I harboured any
ill-feeling against the Kathiawar Resident or the Jaipur Prime Minister.
For ought I know, they may be most estimable men to meet, but their
being estimable does not help the people of Rajkot or Jaipur. As a
votary of truth and ahimsa, my business is to state the naked truth
without fear but without ill will against the wrongdoers. My
non-violence does not require any gilding of a bitter pill. I must,
therefore, plead not guilty to the charge of racial animosity.
I cannot succeed in weaning people from the path of violence
by hiding or dressing the naked truth; I hope to wean them by telling
them and, what is more, showing by my conduct that it is not only
right but profitable to wish well to the wrongdoer in spite of his
wrongs, however grievous these may be.
Protection of the Princes is a duty the Paramount Power owes to
1
2

Vide “Cold-Blooded Breach of a Solemn Covenant”
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 3-2-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

61

them, but surely it is equally its duty to protect the people living in
their jurisdiction. It seems to me that it is also their duty to withhold
support from Princes when it is proved that a ruler is guilty of breach
of faith with his people as in Rajkot or when it is proved that his
people are denied ordinary civil liberty and one of his citizens is
driven from pillar to post and practically denied access to courts of
justice as in the case of Jaipur.
The more I think of what is happening in the States in India, I
see nothing but a dark future for this unhappy land, if the Paramount
Power remains a helpless witness to the tragedy that is being enacted
in the Princes’ India. For what is happening in Rajkot and Jaipur is
but a sample of what is going to happen presently in the other States.
The Maharaja of Bikaner was right when he advised concerted action
among the Princes.1 Only His Highness gave the wrong lead.
The doctrine of kicks and kisses will lead the Princes nowhere. It
has sown bitterness and strife. The people of States may not be able to
take concerted action as the Princes can, but the latter will not be able
to treat the people from States other than their own or those from
British India as foreigners. There is sufficient awakening among the
people of the States to withstand the pressure even from a concert
among the Princes.
The Hindustan Times, 10-2-1939

73. TELEGRAM TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
[On or after February 9, 1939] 2
JAMNALALJI
S AINIK, A GRA
YOUR

TELEGRAM.

VERSION.

WILL

YOU

SHOULD

WITH

SMALL

MUST

NOT

AND

CROSS
PARTY

FOR

DEFINITE

PUBLISH
BORDER
WITHOUT

LEAVE

KAMALA’S

DANGEROUS

SEND
THEN

WARDHA.
APPROACHING
HER

LEAVE

CORRECTIONS

REVISION.
IF

POSSIBLE

GIVING
SHE

QUITE

IS

NOTICE.
UNFIT

DELIVERY
WARDHA.

ON

FOOT

JANAKIDEVI
PHYSICALLY
MAKES

IF

MY
CLEAR

SHE

IT
WENT

1

Vide “Kicks and Kisses’s
This was in reply to the addressee’s telegram of February 9, for the text of
which, vide “Statement to the Press”, 12-2-1939
2

62

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

SHE

MUST

NEVER

THROW

COME

VINCED

BACK

TIME

SO.

EVEN

TO

LEAVE

LEAVING
STRUGGLE

HAS
IF

HERSELF

INTO

BEFORE

STRUGGLE

NOT

SHE

WAS

WELL

I

SHOULD

WARDHA
BUT

IN

WOULD
FULL

ARRIVED

RESERVE

STRUGGLE
OVER.
FOR
AND

AND

CAN

AM

CON-

HER

TO

OTHERWISE

DO
FREE

DISCOUNTENANCE
HER

FUTURE

HER
WHEN

SWING.

Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 214

74. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 10, 1939
CHI. MAHADEV,

You will be keeping good health. Today’s letter from Mirabehn
will greatly delight you. I am enclosing it. Send it back to me. I keep
receiving Ba’s letters.
I am getting on quite well. There is still a little swelling.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

75. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
S EGAON,

February 11, 1939
CHI. MARY,

You are considerate always. But if you had come you would
have caused me no worry. Yes, you will stay with me if I go to the
Congress.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 6075. Also C.W. 3405. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

63

76. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 11, 1939
I have your wire and letter. I understand your position about the
conference and the W. C. I cannot think of causes without the persons
who handle them. I wrote about postponement on the strength of what
I had heard from Balwantrai Mehta. He is engrossed in the Kathiawar
struggle. Achintram could not do without him. So I wired to you. I
know nothing about the situation in Ludhiana.
I am sorry about Sarup. I was looking forward to her passing a
few days with me.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1939. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

77. LETTER TO L. M. PATIL
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 11, 1939
DEAR PATIL,

I have your letter. Where the Directors are Indians having an
effective voice in the management of the concern and the concern
itself is wholly in the interests of India I would call it swadeshi even
though the whole of the capital may be foreign. Thus if I had full
control of, say, a hand-spinning concern but I employed skilled white
men under me and employed also European capital with or without
interest I would claim that concern to be wholly swadeshi.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

78. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 11, 1939
MY DEAR C. R.,

I would have you to continue what you are doing about
employment in spite of adverse comment. We do not need to copy
64

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

anybody.
Who is this lady at the back of the anti-Hindi propaganda?
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 2073

79. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 11, 1939
CHI. KANTI,

I may be said to be quite ill. Prabha will write. If I cannot show
Saraswati’s letter to Ramachandran it will be difficult to send for her
here. How can we help one who hides her misery ? I have, however,
written to Ramachandran to send Saraswati here. But to send for her is
one thing and to do so in order to save her from abuses and beatings
is another. So you should give me full freedom. You should not lose
your peace of mind.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7358. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

80. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
S EGAON,

February 11, 1939
BA,

I read about your transfer in the newspapers. Stay free of care
wherever you are placed. Do not worry. God is certainly with you
wherever you go. The doctors have come to examine me. They advise
rest. I do take rest. A letter has gone to you from here every day.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, p. 32

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

65

81. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 11, 1939
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

I got the papers sent by you.
I cannot believe the report about Mani having been separated
from Ba.
If the meeting of the Working Committee on the 22nd is
arranged here, what about Bardoli? Jamnalal writes to say that the
meeting on the 22nd will be held here. Why not stay here for the
present?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Forward the enclosed.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 233

82. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 11, 1939
CHI. MAHADEV,

I have your letter. Quite a few of us have gathered in the room:
Gilsler1 , Jivaraj2 , Agatha 3 , . . . 4 , Pattabhi5 , Kishorelal6 , Frydman 7 , etc.
Others are sitting outside. The doctors have warned me that I should
take care of my health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1

Dr. M. D. D. Gilder
Dr. Jivaraj Mehta
3
Agatha Harrison
4
The name is not decipherable
5
Pattabhi Sitaramayya
6
Kishorelal Mashruwala
7
Maurice Frydman, a Polish engineer, who bad become Gandhiji’s follower
and come to be known as Bharatanand
2

66

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

83. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
February 11, 1939
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

So long as you have not acquired equimindedness it is best to
observe the restraint I have suggested. But it does not at all mean that
you are not to render even the necessary services to her or speak to
her when the occasion demands it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4311; also S.G. 74

84. HYDERABAD
Hyderabad State Congress people are getting restive. As they
have been acting under my advice some of them came to me and said,
“We have suspended civil disobedience at your and other leaders’
instance. You had held out the hope that, if we suspended civil
disobedience, most probably the prisoners would be released and the
State Congress recognized. Neither the one nor the other has
happened. How long are we to remain out and vegetate while our
co-workers are rotting in the State jails where life is none too easy?
What will you have us do?”
As these friends have to deal with a large number of colleagues I
had better give a summary of my answer to them. I said:
I sympathize with you. In your place I should feel like you. But
satyagraha is not a simple affair. It is a way of life. It requires
discipline. It demands infinite patience and capacity for uttermost
suffering. Civil disobedience, which is but a phase of satyagraha, has
to be suspended even though colleagues may have to suffer
imprisonment, hardships attendant upon jail life, and even worse. And
they have to do all this with good grace, joyfully and without malice
towards those who are responsible for subjecting them to such
suffering. Remember, too, that a true satyagrahi, being outside, goes
through greater mental suffering than the one who has gone behind
prison bars. The latter has done his task for the time being. His mind
is free. He fulfils his immediate mission if he behaves like a model

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

67

prisoner and cheerfully submits to the sufferings he might have to go
through. Whereas the former has to bear the brunt of managing the
struggle, thinking out plans, and responding to the programme as it
may be given from day to day.
I have to ask you to prolong your suspension if only for the
simple and decisive reason that two bodies are offering civil
disobedience for purposes wholly different from yours, however
worthy their purpose may be. The Arya Samaj civil disobedience is
purely religious in the sense that it is being offered for the vindication
of the exercise of their religion. The Hindu Mahasabha is, I suppose,
supporting the Arya Samaj. And, therefore, the struggle has assumed a
communal colour. If you resume civil disobedience, it will be very
difficult for you to retain your nationalistic character. You will expose
yourselves to needless suspicion. Your methods too may not be
identical with theirs. You will create an embarrassing situation without
advancing your cause.
Thus the situation demands delicate handling. It is my
conviction that your restraint will largely disarm suspicion, and to that
extent you will be making a definite advance towards your goal.
Meanwhile I can give you the assurance that whatever friendly offices
can do is being and will continue to be done. Having heard my
argument, you will act as may seem best to you. You must reject my
advice if it does not appeal to your head and heart. If you accept it,
remember that every member will be expected to devote himself
whole-heartedly to the constructive programme as I have explained it
to you.
S EGAON, February 12, 1939
Harijan, 18-2-1939

85. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
S EGAON, W ARDHA , C. P.,

February 12, 1939
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,

I duly received your letter of the 5th inst. redirected from
Bardoli.
I am grateful for the pains you have taken to explain your
position so fully, frankly and fairly. After much consideration I felt
68

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

that it was a duty to publish the article returned by you. Even if Shri
Chudgar has been guilty, consciously or unconsciously, of having
misreported1 Sir Beauchamp St. John, the truth could only be
ascertained by publication of the correspondence. As I have the moral
conviction about the accuracy of Shri Chudgar’s report I felt that it
would be wrong to withhold it from the public. I note in passing that
although I asked the Prime Minister of Jaipur, if he denied Shri
Chudgar’s version, to give me his own, he would not do so.2 But the
question of wisdom or otherwise of publishing the correspondence
pales into insignificance in the presence of the tragedy that is going
on in Jaipur, Rajkot and Orissa.
In spite of your letter suggesting the possibility of it being
erroneous, what is happening in these places has deepened the belief
expressed by me in my letter to you of the 26th ult.
If you think that by a meeting you could clear my mind of the
disquiet and show me that my belief is erroneous, I would be glad to
run up to Delhi even though medical friends have enjoined complete
rest for some time if I am not to collapse altogether. But I would
gladly risk my health if I can be shown my error or if I could
convince you that delay in action on your part is dangerous.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C.W. 10388. Courtesy: Pyarelal

86. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
S EGAON,

February 12, 1939
BA,

I have your letter. You are kept informed of all the news. Stop
worrying. I learn that you have duly received the enema can. What
medicine would you want sent from here? The doctor now visits you
there. If you feel the need you may take the medicine he prescribes. I
will of course continue to write to you every day. Be brave.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, p. 32
1

Vide “Jaipur”
Vide “Letter to Sir W. Beauchamp St. John”, 22-1-1939 and “Letter to Sir W.
Beauchamp St. John”., 27-1-1939
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

69

87. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 12, 1939
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

What happened about the article that Chudgar was to write for
me? I want it soon. I have received a long letter from the Viceroy. I
will send you a copy of the reply1 I have sent.
Send me a copy of the Princes Protection Act referred to in the
accompanying notification.
Mani was first removed and then again brought back to Ba.
What is all this? I don’t understand at all. Who is the doctor, and the
nurse?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 234

88. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
S EGAON, WARDHA ,

February 12, 1939
CHI. MAHADEV,

There should be no mistakes of proportion in such experiments.
You will have been on the right track by now. There is no cause for
worry if you have to cut down on walking. Why worry if you are able
to sleep well and work?
I shall see about sending the money to Anand. I am enclosing a
copy of my letter to the Viceroy.2
Subhas will come on the 15th. You will have seen the newspaper
reports about Ba.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1
2

70

Vide “Letter to Lord Linlithgow”, 12-1-1939
Vide “Letter to Lord Linlithgow”, 12-2-1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

89. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1
WARDHA ,

February 12, 1939
On reading my Press statement regarding his second expulsion
from Jaipur State, Seth Jamnalalji telegraphed to me as follows:
On the 9th instant I saw that your statement on my version regarding
Mr. Young was incorrect owing to confusion in the telephonic message. The
correct version appeared in The Hindustan Times of the 8th and 9th. 2 I hope
you will do the needful.

I had not then seen The Hindustan Times referred to by Sethji. I
have now seen both issues and I find that I have unconsciously done
injustice to Mr. Young, whom, in my Press statement, I accused of
having practised deception upon Sethji. I made the accusation on the
strength of the telephone message received by his son in Wardha, of
which I gave a literal translation in my statement. Sethji’s son had no
doubt whatsoever as to what he received through the telephone. But
neither his accuracy nor my faithful translation can excuse the error
into which I was betrayed. I, therefore, tender my unqualified apology
to Mr. Young and I shall be extra careful henceforth in making use of
telephone messages.
I see that not only was Mr. Young not guilty of any deception,
but that he was careful to say that he was performing a painful duty in
obedience to the orders of a superior authority. And in the execution
thereof he was as courteous and as careful as it was possible for him to
be in the circumstances.
Having made these amends, I must say that The Hindustan Times
report, confirmed by Sethji, shows that his ill-treatment was much
worse than was conveyed in the telephone message. All that night
journey in the cold of Rajputana winter was a cruel and unnecessary
torture. Even if expulsion was necessary for the preservation of peace
in Jaipur, the night journey could surely have been avoided, as also
the use of force.
The Hindu, 12-2-1939
1

Published in Harijan, 18-2-1939, under the title “My Apology”; this also
appeared in The Bombay Chronicle, 13-2-1939, and other newspapers.
2
It also appeared in The Tribune, 8-2-1939, in the form of a statement by
Damodar Das and showed that Young had never given any assurance to Jamnalal Bajaj
that he would not be taken outside Jaipur State.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

71

90. UNTRUTH IN NEWSPAPERS
A State official writes:
I have read your several articles in the Harijan about Congress
activities in general and those in the States in particular. One1 of these deals
with corruption in the Congress ranks and at least, by implication, with other
undesirable activities quite inconsistent with the spirit which you have tried to
infuse into the mass of Congress workers.
It has occurred to me to draw your attention to the fact that much
violence to truth and, therefore, harm to the cause you have at heart is being
done by certain newspapers which live by abuse and which depend upon
so-called ‘Congress workers’ for the unmitigated falsehoods they publish.
So far as the States are the targets of attack, legitimate criticism which
rests on incontrovertible facts must be wholesome and should be helpful. You
would, however, agree that nothing but the truth should be published.
What is happening, in fact, is that some people who nurse a sense of
injury against the State to which they belonged or where they lived in the
past, finding themselves driven away as a result of their activities to which the
Government of the State took objection, are trying to pay off old scores and
for such a purpose they imagine their position greatly fortified by their
having joined the Congress fold. The papers they feed, in their turn, live by
their diatribes, while for them those papers are the needed medium for the
discharge of stored-up venom. The unfortunate result is that however these
vernacular papers may succeed in inflaming the uninformed public,
responsible people remain unaffected by their denunciations.
It is a pity that things that may be usefully brought to light in the
honest spirit of awakening the administrations of the States to their
responsibilities are, for want of knowledge, never published. What is
published is either in the nature of a gross exaggeration of facts of no vital
importance or, as is more often the case, some pure inventions and, therefore,
an utter lie.
Your present policy seems to me to be that where the people desire to
manage their own affairs, it is the duty of the Congress to help them in the
attainment of that aim. I venture to think that it is not your policy to replace
the contentment of the people with discontent, in pursuit of the ideal of
responsible government throughout India.
Above all, I take your policy to be to disseminate and propagate the
1

72

Vide “Internal Decay”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

truth, and to wage a ceaseless war against untruth. In that belief, I venture to
suggest that an article or two in the Harijan on the responsibility of
newspapers that depend for what they publish upon ‘Congress workers’ and
that of those workers might help to purge the Congress movement of some
destructive germs and thereby make it more effective alike for the uplift of the
downtrodden masses and for serving the highest cause of the country.

I have no difficulty in agreeing with the correspondent that
newspapers which indulge in untruth or exaggeration harm the cause
they profess to espouse. I admit, too, that there is enough untruth in
enough newspapers to warrant action. But my experience is that no
amount of public criticism will affect the policy of newspapers which
make their livelihood by such policy.
I would like, however, to point out to my correspondent and
others like him who are connected with States that the public must not
be blamed for believing untruths if the State officials, under a false
sense of security, will not deign to correct untruths or render
explanations. And sometimes when they condescend to give
explanations they are more untruthful than the untruths of the
newspapers. The latest instance is that of Talcher. The Chief denied
even the truth of a telling photograph in The Statesman of the
refugees and has received a well-deserved snub from its Editor. I have
a Talcher bulletin sent to me by Thakkar Bapa for me to laugh or
weep over. Its denial is a shameful perversion of truth. I am
publishing in this issue startling news about Mewar.1
I would like an authentic contradiction of the news or strong
action against the police if they acted in disregard of instructions. But
I write this in no way to condone untruths in newspapers. I am quite
clear that if newspapers weighed every word that is printed therein, we
should have a speedier removal of abuses whether in the States or
elsewhere.
S EGAON, February 13, 1939
Harijan, 18-2-1939

1

Vide “Mewar”

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

73

91. TARVANCORE
Though I have been apparently silent about Travancore, the
workers may rest assured that I have not been neglectful. Sometimes
silence is more telling than speech. All I am free to say is that I have
been usefully silent. I am sorry that all has not gone well. I had hoped
that when the State Congress withdrew the allegations against the
Dewan things would run smoothly and the movement for responsible
government would be allowed full play.1 But the bulletin2 reproduced
elsewhere shows that there is no such luck for the Travancoreans. The
unseating of 19 prominent members of the Travancore Assembly
seems to be vindictive.3 Have they done anything dishonourable? Not
that I know of.
I have before me a letter describing the ill-treatment of Shrimati
Akkamma Cherian, a political prisoner. If what she declared in court
is true, her treatment was surely disgraceful. She is a cultured woman.
She gave up the headmistress-ship of a school in order to join the
struggle for liberty. It hurts one to think that in an advanced State like
Travancore, which boasts of an enlightened Prince, an equally
enlightened Maharani, his mother, and an experienced Dewan, liberty
is being choked by rude repression.
But another letter tells me that this repression is taking place in
the name of Hinduism and for the sake of saving a Hindu State ! It has
been suggested that the idea is to repress the Christians who are
playing a prominent part in the struggle for freedom.
It is surely late in the day to talk of Hindu States and Muslim
States. And what is the test? Is Kashmir a Hindu State because a Hindu
Prince happens to rule a territory which has an overwhelming majority
of Muslims as its inhabitants? Or is Hyderabad with its overwhelming
Hindu population a Muslim State because a Muslim Prince rules their
destiny? I regard this kind of talk as a libel on nationalism. Is India a
Christian State because a Christian king rules over her destiny? But if
India is Indian no matter who rules, the States are also Indian no
matter who happens to be the ruler. And the present Rulers and their
1

Vide “Talk to Travancore State Congress Deputation”, 15-11-1938, and
“Travancore”
2
“Travancore Bulletin” by G. Ramachandran
3
These members, all belonging to the State Congress, had been disqualified
on the ground of their having been convicted under the Criminal Law Amendment
Regulation.

74

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

successors will rule only by the grace of an awakened people. The
awakening that has taken place has come to stay. Every day quickens
the pace. The Rulers and their advisers may succeed for the time
being in suppressing the spirit of the people. They will never succeed
in killing it. To succeed would be to kill the spirit of the people of
India. Is anyone in India so shortsighted as to feel that independence
is not coming soon? And is it possible to conceive that an independent
India will for one moment tolerate repression in any single spot, be it
ever so big or ever so small? There is room, in my conception of an
independent India, for States with Princes as constitutional trustees, as
in Aundh. 1 There is room for Englishmen as fellow-servants of the
people, never as masters. Therefore, the only way in which the Princes
can live in a free India is for them now to recognize the time spirit,
bow to it and act accordingly. Let it be the boast of the Hindu Prince,
his Hindu mother and their Hindu Dewan that they were not afraid of
their Christian citizens. Supposing there was responsible government
in Travancore, what could the Christians or the Hindus or the Muslims
do? Whoever the legislators, they will be responsible to the voters.
There is no room for fear, there is no hitch in the process. But in the
present repression, there is much to fear and there are many hitches.
S EGAON, February 13, 1939
Harijan, 18-2-1939

92. THE ETHICS OF IT
A friend suggests that I have perhaps departed from correct
conduct in publishing the confidential correspondence2 between
Thakore Saheb and Sir Patrick Cadell and extracts from the interview
between Thakore Saheb-in-Council and the Resident. I have no such
feeling at all. I claim to be very sensitive to points of honour. My
worst critics have credited me with the capacity to respect confidence
and bury secrets entrusted to me. But I have never regarded it any part
of my duty to protect breaches of promises against disclosure or to
cover crimes of which I have notice in due course. I do protect
confessions made to me in confidence as I did when I was asked, on
pain of being punished by a court of law, to disclose the names of
criminals during the unfortunate riots in Ahmedabad at the time of
the Rowlatt Act agitation. In the case in question there is no such point
1
2

Vide “Notes”, sub-title “Aundh Reforms”
Vide “Cold-Blooded Breach of A Solemn Covenant”

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

75

of honour. Regard for truth and the popular cause demanded
publication of the correspondence and the extracts. The documents
were received by the Sardar in ordinary course. They were handed by
those who were in legal possession. There was, therefore, so far as I
can see nothing dishonourable about getting possession of the
documents and, as I have said, nothing incorrect, much less dishonourable, about their publication. Without such publication the popular
case could not be proved.
S EGAON, February 13, 1939

Harijan, 18-2-1939

93. MEWAR
A correspondent sends the following business-like note1 :
First incident: Date of happening: 14th December, 1938. Place of
happening: A wayside bridge in the British territory of town Deoli. Mewar
territory: At a distance of about 12 yards.
. . . Shri Mathura Prasad Vaidya, a worker of the Mewar Praja Mandal, . .
while distributing Praja Mandal literature . . . was all of a sudden attacked by
two constables of Uncha Police in Mewar. One of them snatched away the
literature . . . The other knocked him down on the ground and then both of
them forcibly dragged him in a semi-conscious state to the nearby territory of
Mewar only at a distance of about 12 yards . . . Vaidya Mathura Prasad was
severely beaten by those policemen on the way to Uncha police station. He
has now been sentenced for nine months.
Second incident: Date of happening: 2nd February, 1939. Place of
happening: On the outskirts of Deoli, British territory.
. . . Shri Maniklal Varma, secretary of the Mewar Praja Mandal, had
gone to Deoli . . . In the evening at about 6.30 p.m., he with four other
colleagues of his was all of a sudden attacked on the outskirts of the town by
15 men of Mewar police with lathis. All the five persons were badly wounded,
and Maniklalji was then forcibly dragged through bushes and thorns in a most
inhuman way to the Mewar territory which was at a distance of at least a few
hundred yards. The Deoli police was informed during the mishap but no notice
was taken, and the Dewan of the police station could not be found even after a
good search, as if the whole thing was prearranged. Maniklalji was arrested
1

76

Of which only extracts are reproduced here
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and taken to the Uncha police station in Mewar.

The correspondent adds:
Shri Maniklalji belongs to Bijolia. He has been devoting himself to
the service of the peasantry for the past 20 years. He founded the Praja Mandal
a year ago. But it was declared illegal within a few days. Therefore he started
civil disobedience some months ago. I send you these incidents as you have
begun to write publicly about States’ affairs. Will you kindly guide us workers
also what should be done in such circumstances?

This news is strange, if it is true. It is difficult to understand why
the police did not arrest these workers within the Mewar border. Or
was it that the workers’ friends were avoiding the Mewar territory? In
any event the arrests seem to me to have been illegal. The dragging
amounted to an assault. The only advice I can give is that this is essentially a case for legal proceedings. The Praja Mandal should take itup.
But civil resisters of the States should remember that the real
battle has yet to come. The States, big or small, seem to be taking
concerted action. They are copying the methods adopted by the
British in British India during the satyagraha struggle and are likely to
improve upon them in frightfulness. They fancy that they have no
fear of public opinion, for there is none in the States except in rare
cases. But civil resisters who are worth their salt will not be deterred by
any frightfulness.
S EGAON, February 13, 1939
Harijan, 18-2-1939

94. TELEGRAM TO G. D. BIRLA
WARDHA ,

February 13, 1939
GHANSHYAMDASJI
LUCEKY
C ALCUTTA
GILDER
HAS

JIVARAJ

RIGHT

COME

EXAMINED
WHEN

HE

YESTERDAY

BUT

DR.

ROY1

LIKES.

BAPU
From a copy: C.W. 7805. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
1

Dr. Bidhan Chandra Roy

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

77

95. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
[February 13, 1939] 1
CHI. MIRA,

All your letters are good and works of art. Your report of the
interview is graphic. Let us hope it will bear fruit.
The money I hope you received in good time.
I shall try to come as soon as I can.
The rest from Sushila.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6428. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 10023

96. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
February 13, 1939
BA,

You have now had good experience of Staying alone also. But I
forget. When were you alone? Rama has always been with you. And
when He is there, it does not matter whether others are or not. But
now there are two, Mridu and Mani. Be cheerful. They may also write.
Blessings to you all from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, p. 32

97. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 13, 1939
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

I got your letters. The Garasias are not likely to forgo readily
what they regard as their garas 2 . If we go on suffering silently
everything will end well.
The problem about Ba was quickly solved. Mani is a resourceful
1
2

78

From the postmark
Share in State lands
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

girl. She has mastered the art of doing the right thing at the right
time. 1 She is living up to her name.2
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 234

98. LETTER TO H. L. SHARMA
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 13, 1939
CHI. SHARMA,

Did you get the wire I sent? The reply received here was:
“Many Sharmas, wire undelivered.”
There is only one point you want answered. We need not give
such a deep meaning to nature cure. Only he is entitled to it who has
put it into practice in its popular meaning. We cannot all say: “I am
the Brahman.” When it is time for you to go to jail God will open a
way. Anyway, what I am envisaging for you is not jail-going. So keep
yourself immersed in your work.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapaki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsh,
between pp. 278 and 279

99. DISCUSSION WITH DR. CHESTERMAN3
S EGAON,

February 13, 1939
. . . He said he had been overwhelmed with the perplexity of Indian problems
and naturally the medical ones had taken first place in his mind. When he heard that 2
1
On being separated from Kasturba, Manibehn had refused to take food till she
was taken back to her.
2
‘Mani’ means a jewel.
3
Extracted from Amrit Kaur’s “A Good Samaritan”. Dr. Chesterman was the
medical secretary of the English Baptist Mission and had come to India to attend the
International Missionary Conference at Tambaram and to visit various mission
hospitals.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

79

lakhs of women die yearly from child-birth, 1 lakh from smallpox, 36 lakhs from
indiscriminate fevers, that there are 10 lakhs of lepers and 6 lakhs of blind persons,
he confessed he was appalled with the immensity of the task of both preventive and
curative medicine. He was not sure whether Gandhiji was aware of the fact that there
were 266 mission hospitals and 500 dispensaries in India, 254 European and 350
Indian doctors, 300 European and 800 Indian nurses, 2 million patients seen and 5
million treated per annum in these hospitals, that half of the T. B. work and almost
the entire work of lepers was in the hands of missions. While, of course, the work of
conversion was there, and he knew Gandhiji’s opinion on this subject, he wanted to
draw attention to the fact that three quarters of their medical work lay in areas where
there was no response to religious teaching . . . He would, therefore, much like to
have Gandhiji’s opinion on how the work could be most fruitfully developed and how
far they could count on support and co-operation.
In reply Gandhiji said that the answer was difficult and yet simple at the same
time.

I hold peculiar views on the function of medicine. I expressed
these very forcibly years ago, and nothing in all the course of my
long experience since has made me change them in essence. But there
is no need for me to expound these to you now. I have visited many
mission hospitals, seen the wonderful work of the missionaries among
lepers. This work may be called their monopoly and speciality, for
practically no one else has come in to take it up. I know the Leper
Home in Cuttack. I have spent quite a long time in the Purulia Leper
Asylum and been very struck with the work there. Then I have seen
Mrs. Higginbotham’s work in Allahabad and several other places, too,
for I love to visit leper homes. But in spite of all this admiration of
mine for the work of medical missionaries there has always been
mental reservation and criticism within me. I have felt that these good
and weh-intentioned missionaries have not touched the fringe of the
question. Certainly good work has been done for lepers, for the blind,
for sufferers from T. B. and other ailments, but the help has not really
touched the suffering millions of this great land. Medical aid has been
made available in the main to those who live in or near the cities—
whereas the bulk of India’s population in our villages has been
untouched. Provincial Governments, even Congress Governments, are
appalled at the need of the villager. They do not know what to do and
nothing great has yet been done in spite of various experiments.
Therefore, if I were asked to advise missionaries or Mission Boards, I
would ask them not to try to transplant the entire system of Western
80

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

medicine into India. We cannot afford it. There is ever so much to be
gleaned and had from the study of indigenous drugs and medicines,
but practically very little work has been done in this department. No
one has made it his business to go out into our fields and search and
much of the indigenous talent, simply because it is not considered
original or scientific, is running to waste. I will give you an incident
which happened only today. As you may know, I have had a little
swelling on one foot for some days now which has alarmed the
doctors because they feel that it is a sign denotative of commencing
disintegration of the heart and kidneys. One of my co-workers here—
you may call him almost an illiterate man—was very troubled, as all
are, about me and tells me he could not sleep last night. This morning
he brought me a green leaf and told me that it had cured his father of
the same trouble and begged of me to try it also. I had no hesitation
in acceding to his proposal—whereas if I had had a bewildering
prescription given me by a highly qualified doctor my reaction would
not have been the same. I feel, therefore, that in these simple ways lies
relief for the villager. I do not say that the leaf will answer the
purpose. But there should be an agency that can say with certainty
what these herbs are and what is their quality.
Gandhiji then went on to explain that he had no prejudice against Western
medicine or doctors. He had today sent for glucose for Mr. Kallenbach, a South
African friend of his who was lying ill with malaria and who was refusing to take
quinine, a drug in which Gandhiji himself had implicit faith.
Here, Dr. Chesterman interposed and said that quinine was an indigenous drug
to which Gandhiji replied that though that was so it was a monopoly and therefore
very expensive and utterly beyond the reach of the villager.

I should, therefore, like to see missionaries as medicine vendors
for the villages, confining themselves, as far as they can, to indigenous
medicines. There will certainly not be gold medals or knighthoods
from Government forthcoming for them for this valuable research
work. But, in my opinion, they will obtain what is of far greater value,
a knighthood from Jesus Christ.
Proceeding, Gandhiji said that he had felt for a long time that the medical
faculty in India should manufacture a short course of training for village workers, and
had told Surgeon General Hooten of Bombay so, many years ago. Village
school-teachers should be utilized for this purpose. They should look upon the entire
village as under their jurisdiction from the point of view of health and teach the
simple laws of hygiene and prevention of disease to the inhabitants. Their schools

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

81

could be used as dispensaries for the distribution of ordinary medicines for simple
ailments. He gave the analogy of the useful six weeks first-aid training which he
himself had had to undergo before he could form and lead the ambulance corps which
he did during the Boer War.
. . . Dr. Chesterman then asked Gandhiji his opinion on expenditure on
buildings and elaborate equipment for hospitals. Gandhiji replied saying that he had
always been opposed to this and was invariably trying to wean people from spending
on what was unnecessary when for so much that was urgently needed money was
lacking. Big hospitals did not help the poor man in the long run for they did not
educate him to understand how he ought to look after his health once he left the
hospital.
DR . CHESTERMAN: What contribution can medical missionaries make towards
the raising of ethical standards in professional life?

GANDHIJI:

They can help, but I do not feel they can do much
according to my measurement. You may think me uncharitable, but
so long as the mental reservation is there that medical missionaries
would like all their patients and co-workers to become converts to
Christianity, so long will there remain a bar to real brotherhood. Then
there is the additional handicap that they belong to the ruling race and
that is responsible for their aloofness. Missionaries have not learnt the
maxim ‘When you go to Rome do as Rome does’. They retain
everything of the West in their daily lives forgetting that clothes and
food and modes of life are in response to climate and to surroundings
and adjustment, therefore, becomes necessary. They have not stooped
to conquer. The gulf of mutual distrust exists and there is, therefore,
no easy passage between the medical missionary and the medical
profession in India.
Dr. Chesterman disputed this statement. He maintained that there was any
amount of goodwill also. He had met a Hindu friend in Bombay who had definitely
assured him that there was need for mission hospitals because Indians got greater
consideration and greater compassion there than in Government institutions.
Asked whether mission hospitals were justified in taking fees from those able
to afford them, unlike Government institutions where money was generally extracted
by the subordinate staff in undesirable ways, Gandhiji said he saw no reason against
it.
The last question Dr. Chesterman asked was whether Gandhiji’s objection to
conversion applied to areas like the Kond Hills where the aboriginal races were
animists. The unhesitating reply was:

Yes. It does apply, because I know that in spite of being
82

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

described as animists these tribes have from time immemorial been
absorbed in Hinduism. They are, like the indigenous medicine, of the
soil, and their roots lie deep there. But you can only endorse this if
you feel that Hinduism is as true as Christianity. I hold that all
religions are true but imperfect inasmuch as they are presented
through human agency and bear the impress of the imperfections and
frailties of the human being. My quarrel with missionaries is that they
think no religion other than Christianity is true.
In parting from Gandhiji, while thanking him for the time he had given and
hoping the conversation had not unduly tired him, Dr. Chesterman implored Gandhiji
to continue to appeal to the best that was in them. The feeling answer that greatly
touched Dr. Chesterman was:

I am making that appeal incessantly from the innermost recesses
of my heart. That is of far more value than the written word although
I have indulged in that also.
Harijan, 25-2-1939

100. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
S EGAON,

February 14, 1939
CHI. NARANDAS,

Is your work going on well? How did you manage to fall ill ?
A letter for Shaikh Chandbhai is enclosed.
If there is anything which you think might interest me, write to
me.
I am not quite well, but there is no cause for worry just now.
Can you or Gokibehn get permission to see Ba?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8555. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

83

101. LETTER TO GULAM RASOOL QURESHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 14, 1939
CHI. QURESHI,

Amtul Salaam had a talk with me but I completely forgot to
write to you. There is no need to feel hesitant about accepting money
for social service. I have already talked about it. You can start drawing
money the moment you are relieved from the perfumery business.
You have to bear in mind that you are not to incur debts.
I have already explained to you about the children, haven’t I?
You can give them religious education at home and general education
along with other children. Sultana might perhaps study in the Harijan
Ashram as the other girls do. I could not ask Narahari whether you
could get a place in the Ashram and later forgot about it. I am now
having him consulted.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 10765. Courtesy: Gulam Rasool
Qureshi

102. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
February 14, 1939
CHI. MAHADEV,

I have your letter. The President is coming today. On the 16th
Swarup 1 and Appa2 (Aundh) are also coming. Kallenbach is on
death-bed. I am just watching God’s greatness. Chesterman 3 arrived
yesterday. He is an efficient doctor. Now he has started on his routine.
1

Vijayalakshmi Pandit
Appasaheb Pant
3
Dr. Chesterman was the medical secretary of the English Baptist Mission and
had come to India to attend the International Missionary Conference at Tambaram and
to visit various mission hospitals.
2

84

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

For the sake of Kallenbach he has postponed his departure. Otherwise
we had decided to call a specialist from Bombay.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

103. LETTER TO SURESH SINGH
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 14, 1939
BHAI SURESH,

I have not so far considered civil disobedience nor do I find an
atmosphere for it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 8691. Also C.W. 2893. Courtesy: Suresh
Singh

104. LETTER TO SHARDABEHN G. CHOKHAWALA
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 15, 1939
CHI. BABUDI,

I had your second letter. Time will put everything right. Have
patience. Everything, since it is new to you, must appear strange.
Ultimately you will get used to things. Have courage. You must have
received my letter.
Mr. Kallenbach was seriously ill but is better now. Your absence
is often felt here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 10009. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

85

105. LETTER TO VIJAYABEHN M. PANCHOLI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 15, 1939
CHI. VIJAYA,

We have already begun feeling lonely without you. One misses
your voice at the prayer. But that is the way of the world. Meeting,
parting, again meeting, and again parting will go on and we should
remain unaffected by them.
You should now understand your dharma. Conjugal dharma is
easy as well as difficult. It is easy for one who understands it. You
should become one with Manubhai and Manubhai should become
one with you. But there is no scope for bargaining. There can be no
bargaining in dharma. Dharma has to be performed by oneself. So it
is certain that you have to become one with Manubhai who may or
may not become one with you. This means that your entire spiritual
riches should be surrendered to him. And so you both should lift each
other higher and higher but never bring each other down. Brighten up
the atmosphere there as you filled the house with joy here. If you
have understood the Gita you will be cheerful in whatever condition
you may be placed.
Absorb yourself in the school work. There can hardly be any
news to give, seeing that it is not quite two hours since you left. But
Prabha will come tomorrow. This will also be despatched tomorrow.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4599. Courtesy: Vijayabehn M.
Pancholi

106. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
[Before February 16, 1939] 1
BA,

I have your letter and Mani’s. You must go through all the tests.
1

Vide “Letter to Kasturba Gandhi”, 16-2-1939, in which Gandhiji says,
“Kallenbach is better.”

86

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Letters have already gone from here. Enquire from the officer there.
Mr. Kallenbach has fallen ill. It is a severe illness. Lilavati observes
fast on Mondays. I am not writing separately to Mani.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, p. 33

107. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 16, 1939
MY DEAR C.R.,

If you can, you should give him notice about the passages
marked by me and ask him to apologize and promise not to repeat the
performance. But you will be right in prosecuting him straightway.
Do read the enclosed from Tatachar. You can’t govern by mere
cold reason. But you are the man on the spot. You must act according
to your lights not mine.
Pray don’t ask me to cover the spinning prices. Do listen to
those who ask you to take care of your health.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 2174

108. LETTER TO SHARDABEHN G. CHOKHAWALA
February 16, 1939
CHI. BABUDI,

Is it my fault that you do not receive the letters I write
you? I hope you have become calm now. Vijaya left yesterday,
crying. Many others have come. Among them are Yashoda and
Sarup.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 10005. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

87

109. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
February 16, 1939
BA,

I write to you every day. What can I do if you do not get my
letters? Just as there is now no cause for worry about you, there was
never any cause for worry about me. Subhas Babu has already
arrived. Others keep coming and going. Mr. Kallenbach is better.
Kanam is well. He not only eats with me but also sleeps with me.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, p. 33

110. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 16, 1939
CHI. MANI,

I have received your long letter and other letters. I have been
impressed by all your actions. I can find no fault. I see that you have
understood the principle of satyagraha very well. I am therefore
completely at ease.
I don’t get a telegram from Government every day. I have had
two or three. From here letters have gone every day. In the beginning
I wrote at the address you gave. Then I wrote to the Government as to
why my letters were not reaching you. They sent me a telegram
advising me to route my letters through the First Member. I now act
accordingly.
I do receive a letter from your end every day. I am therefore
content.
I do not write separately to Mridu. She should not worry. Is the
burden of work there so little that she should take up that of the
Congress, too?
Blessings from

BAPU
S MT. M ANIBEHN P ATEL
S TATE P RISONER
C/ O F IRST MEMBER OF THE C OUNCIL
R AJKOT (KATHIAWAR)

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro- 4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 124

88

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

111. LETTER TO SHARDABEHN G. CHOKHAWALA
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 17, 1939
CHI. BABUDI

If you do not receive my letters Sent to you at the Bombay
address given by you, is it my fault or yours? I have even the dates
with me. It will be better if you come here now. It is not good to fall
ill. My going to Bardoli has been cancelled.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I myself open your letters.
From Gujarati: C.W. 10006. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

112. TELEGRAM TO G. D. BIRLA
WARDHA ,

February 18, 1939
GHANSHYAMDAS BIRLA
LUCKY
C ALCUTTA
TELL

BIDHAN

BARDOLI

CANCELLED.

NO

ANXIETY.

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 7808. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

113. LETTER TO SHARDABEHN G. CHOKHAWALA
S EGAON,

February 18, 1939
CHI. BABUDI,

I have your letters. I have written or asked somebody to
write to you almost every day. It is difficult to forget you. My eye
always turns towards where you used to sleep, but to what good? It
won’t do your having a chronic fever. If it persists, you had better
come to me in good time. If you do not use a mosquito-net, start

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

89

using one now. I am quite well. But do not keep me worried about
you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati. C.W. 10007. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

114. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
S EGAON,

February 18, 1939
BA,

Letters have been sent to you every day. But if you do not get
them what can one do? You need not worry about me. Even if I am in
a really bad way I shall expect you to say: ‘If it is willed that he
should die during separation, he will. I on my part will stay where my
children are being tortured. I shall be even more happy if I am sent to
jail. All of you should help me in making Thakore Saheb fulfil his
promise. I would prefer to die in Rajkot, if you do not make use of
my services.’ Since you have gone there of your own accord, you
may voice these sentiments if they arise in your heart. You should
think on these lines.
You are always telling me to take service from the girls. But I
have altogether given that up now. Sushila does the massage. That also
will have to be abandoned, won’t it? I have not been able to give it up
because of my present bad health. Do not worry about me even in this
respect. Is not God my ultimate support?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, p. 33

115. LETTER TO VIJAYABEHN M. PANCHOLI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 18, 1939
CHI. VIJAYA,

I hope you are completely at ease and happy there. I would not
like your being the least bit unhappy; it will be a blot on my training.
There should not be the slightest resistance to mutual adjustment.
90

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Write to me a detailed letter. How are you settled ? How do you find
the climate and the surroundings?
Amritlal had a little fever today. Even a slight change has its
effect. There is nothing to worry about. Mr. Kallenbach is fairly
improved although the fever is still there.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Write a letter to Ba.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7108. Also C.W. 4600. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

116. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL AND
MRIDULA SARABHAI
S EGAON,

February 18, 1939
CHI. . MANI AND MRIDULA,

It is God’s grace that you both are there. I would be happy if all
three of you were here together. But we have to live as God wills.
You do not have to worry about Subhas Babu and others.
As far as that is concerned you are in jail. I shall act as God directs
me.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro- 4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 125

117. NOTES
JAIPUR

After all the Jaipur Durbar has been obliged to arrest Seth
Jamnalalji. It is reported that he is decently housed though kept in an
out-of-the-way place under a strong guard. There seems to be secrecy
about everything. I suggest that the authorities make a public
statement as to his whereabouts, the facilities given to him and the
conditions as to correspondence and interviews. Is medical assistance
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

91

easily available?
But if what one hears about Shekhavati is true, the detention and
treatment under detention of Sethji is of minor account. In the
absence of detailed news on behalf of the State the public are bound
to give credence to the statements appearing in the Press.
S EGAON, February 20, 1939
TRUE S WADESHI

If I have to use the adjective ‘true’ before swadeshi, a critic may
well ask, ‘Is there also false swadeshi?’ Unfortunately I have to answer
‘yes’. As, since the days of khadi, I am supposed to be an authority
on swadeshi, numerous conundrums are presented to me by
correspondents. And I have been obliged to distinguish between the
two kinds of swadeshi. If foreign capital is mixed with indigenous, or
if foreign talent is mixed with indigenous, is the enterprise swadeshi?
There are other questions too. But I had better reproduce the
definition I gave to a Minister the other day. “Any article is swadeshi
if it subserves the interest of the millions, even though the capital and
talent are foreign but under effective Indian control.” Thus khadi of
the definition of the A. I. S. A. would be true swadeshi even though
the capital may be all foreign and there may be Western specialists
employed by the Indian Board. Conversely, Bata’s rubber or other
shoes would be foreign though the labour employed may be all
Indian and the capital also found by India. The manufacture will be
doubly foreign because the control will be in foreign hands and the
article, no matter how cheap it is, will oust the village tanner mostly
and the village mochi1 always. Already the mochis of Bihar have
begun to feel the unhealthy competition. The Bata shoe may be the
saving of Europe; it will mean the death of our village shoemaker and
tanner. I have given two telling illustrations, both partly imaginary.
For in the A. I. S. A. the capital is all indigenous and the whole of the
talent also. But I would love to secure the engineering talent of the
West to give me a village wheel which will beat the existing wheels,
though deep down in me I have the belief that the improvements that
indigenous talent has made are by no means to be despised. But this is
a digression. I do hope that those Ministers and others who guide or

1

92

Cobbler
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

serve the public will cultivate the habit of distinguishing between true
and false swadeshi.
S EGAON, February 20, 1939
Harijan, 25-2-1939

118. TRAVANCORE AGAIN
I take the following from Shri Ramachandran’s letter to the
Rajkumari:
I know there is nothing we can expect unless we burn ourselves out
peacefully and truthfully for the cause for which we stand. You must have seen
how at the last meeting of the Working Committee of the State Congress we
laid down a time limit of six weeks before commencing a programme of civil
resistance. God is witness that we are anxious for peace. But there has been no
enquiry into shootings which took place in nine places. Many lawyers
convicted during the last campaign have been debarred from practising for two
years. 19 members of the State Congress Party in the Legislature have been
disqualified just on the eve of the present session now sitting. Government
had ample time to notify disqualification earlier and order has been made to
destroy the State Congress volunteer organization under another iniquitous
regulation brought into force for that specific purpose. Just now there are over
200 political prisoners. Many respectable people have been arrested under
section 90 meant for security proceedings against goondas. Fresh
accommodation has been added in the central jail. Over 1,000 special police
have been recruited from among bad elements at the astounding monthly
salary of Rs. 5. Can anything beat that? And as though the Travancore police
trusted cannot beto do the dirty work, numerous police constables have been
recruited from outside Travancore. The Government’s policy of repression has
gone on unabated, without fuss and without precipitating a frontal battle. That
is why we feel compelled to lay down a time limit of six weeks. I wish you to
study carefully the papers I have sent to Bapu—specially the two resolutions
we passed at the last meeting of the Working Committee. I am oppressed with
the idea that Sir C. P. Ramaswamy Aiyer’s policy will create a gulf between the
Ruler and the people.

I have refrained from giving in these columns the resolutions
and the preface referred to in the letters. It is well for the reader to
have these before him to enable him to judge what the State Congress
is doing. They will be found elsewhere in this issue.
The documents make painful reading. What has happened since
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

93

the amnesty has robbed it of the grace that should accompany
generous amnesties as this one on the birthday of the Maharaja was
claimed to be. It was a spontaneous gesture. After events seem to
suggest that it was no gesture of generosity, but that it was a part of the
tactics adopted by the authorities to allay the agitation that was rising
against the Travancore Durbar and to divide the people in Travancore.
If the information given by Shri Ramachandran is correct, the second
object has not been gained and the first was partly- achieved. For the
Indian Press was inclined to believe, after the release of prisoners, that
the fight was over.
I would love to think that there was no sinister motive behind the
partial amnesty. If so, it seems to me to be quite easy to conciliate the
State Congress, unless crushing, not conciliation, is the aim of the
authorities. Let the amnesty be completed and Reforms Committee be
appointed in consultation with the State Congress, and peace between
the Prince and the people is assured.
But there may be no such good fortune either for the people or
the Prince. In that case the State Congressmen should remember that
satyagraha, if it is the greatest force in the world, requires also the
capacity for the greatest suffering with a heart without anger or
malice. Whilst it is right to publish the news about the doings of the
oppressor, there must be infinite patience for endless suffering and yet
a burning faith in the ultimate success of truth.
It is well that the Congress has fixed upon a six weeks’ limit. But
if it is found that six weeks are not enough for ensuring non-violence
as far as it is humanly possible and for also ensuring continuity of
constructive work, there would be no shame but additional credit in
taking further postponement. If thoughtless persons and unkind
critics regard such postponement as a sign of weakness, the fighters
need not mind such imputations. After all the soldier knows when to
stay his hand and when to move on. He knows that often there is
action in so-called inaction and imprudent action is worse than real
inaction. And weak is not he who is so called but he who feels that he
is weak. Let the members of the Working Committee realize that the
technique of non-violent action requires general and effective control
over forces of violence, no matter how or by whom instigated. If and
when the struggle is resumed, I hope that in answer to my wires I will
not be told that the State Congress is not responsible for violence if it
breaks out. Does not responsible government mean that the people,
94

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

instead of a dictator appointed by a Paramount Power, are responsible
for all the acts of the people? Let them realize that if violence breaks
out on any appreciable scale, it might, very probably will, be a call for
another suspension, even as there was suspension in Bardoli, though
violence broke out in far-off Chauri Chaura.1
S EGAON, February 20, 1939

Harijan, 25-2-1939

119. LAWLESS LIMBDI
Limbdi is a Kathiawar State. It had the reputation of being
progressive. I have the good fortune to know many of its workers.
They are wise, self-sacrificing and capable of doing hard work. In
common with many States, Limbdi also had a great awakening among
the people. The workers used to boast of their progressive Yuvraj. But
they have now discovered that he has imbibed some curious notions
of the dictatorships of the West. He would let the reformers have a free
run of little Limbdi. But they must not go to the villages. In the
villages he was to make his own experiments unhindered by anybody.
The Limbdi reformers thought that they had as much right as the
Yuvraj to work among the villagers, especially as they had already
established connection with them. They therefore dared to go to the
villages, with the result mentioned in the following telegram:
At least eighty persons, armed with lathis, dharias, native guns,
swords, axes, attacked village Pansina midnight fifth. Entrances of village
were guarded by batches of three to five persons. Two batches of twenty
persons went round village and selected houses of Prajamandal workers and
sympathizers for dacoity. First of all they went to the Prajamandal office and
chained it from outside so that volunteers could not go out. Then one batch
went to house of Chhotalal, prominent merchant and Prajamandal worker, and
brutally assaulted him and his wife. She received serious injuries including on
her sex organs. President of local branch attacked with sword and received
punctured wound in lungs. About thirty persons are seriously injured.
Ornaments, cash and goods worth about sixty thousand rupees taken away
from ten to twelve houses of active members of Prajamandal. Dacoits
continuously carried on firing in air and at houses for about two hours. After

1

Vide “The Crime of Chauri Chaura”

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

95

this they went to another village, Ralol, two miles away from Pansina and
repeated process there. Three goldsmiths and one bania sympathizing with
popular movement have been seriously wounded and property worth ten
thousand rupees taken away. One bania Jeychand Valji was attacked today with
knife, stabbed at four places and plundered in Siani; his sister also beaten.
People have strong grounds to suspect State Officers’ hand in dacoity. Some
dacoits were identified as Pagis and Pasayatas of State. Prajamandal workers
and sympathizers were actually being threatened since last week by State
Pagis, Pasayatas that they will be robbed and beaten. Stolen property removed
in about eight motor-cars and two buses which could not have been supplied
by private individuals. Dacoits continued firing in air for two hours using
number of cartridges which could not have been supplied by private individual.
State police has not started any investigation as yet. Even panchanamas have
not been made. No medical aid sent by State from capital. Thakore Saheb even
though approached has not taken any strong action. Threats of similar dacoity
are being given by State Pasayatas in other villages. Previous incidents of
goondaism strengthen this suspicion. Attacking Bhaktiba’s car with lathis in
Jambu by Mukhi’s men, smashing Prajamandal car and beating its driver and
worker in Siani, beating members of Prajamandal in village Raska,
threatening head of volunteers in Siani by village Pasayatas with death, free
movement of about thirty goondas with lathis, dharias, knives in Siani and
number of such incidents have left no doubt here that organized goondaism is
started by State to suppress recently started popular movement. Attention of
Thakore Saheb has been drawn to these incidents times without number but in
vain. As protest against last act of dacoity about 400 to 500 persons including
Nagarsheth Lalchandbhai and prominent citizens like Durlabhji Umedchand,
Amulakh Amichand have started hunger strike and are sitting day and night
before Palace. About three thousand other persons have joined this morning.
Great indignation prevails against State. People observing remarkably
non-violent attitude and are prepared for any contingency.

They also dared to announce a meeting of their Parishad with
the result embodied in the following message received by me:
Sitting Praja Parishad arranged tomorrow. To break Praja Parishad
many goondas imported Limbdi. People suspect hand of State officials in this.
Strong grounds for this suspicion. Procession of goondas armed with lathis,
naked swords, guns, dharias, marching through town for whole day. Some of
these tried to assault certain women. Seth Amulakh Amichand, prominent
merchant of Bombay, intervened and asked them to beat him rather than
women. Seth Durlabhji Umedchand and Bhagwanlal Harakhchand rushed to

96

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

scene with six male volunteers. Male volunteers were brutally assaulted with
sticks and beaten. At another place goondas caught hold of Prahladrai Mody,
pleader of Bhavnagar, and released him only when they knew that he was not
Prajamandal worker. Bhogilal Gandhi was threatened with death by goonda
armed with naked sword. Manubhai Thakar was given one lathi blow. Goondas
are shouting before Prajamandal office. Batch of goondas, headed by Tapubha
of Siani who is State servant and who beat Prajamandal volunteers in Siani two
days before, have stationed themselves outside Sthanakvasi Bhojanshala
where peasants from villages are sleeping. They threaten anybody who comes
out with death. Different batches of goondas are marching streets. Practically
state of siege amounting to virtual martial law by State prevails. People feel
that State is responsible for this. Narubha, superintendent of police, was seen
talking with some of these by respectable people. Many peasants are forcibly
brought from villages and made to parade streets in procession headed by these
goondas. People have adopted remarkably non-violent attitude and have
decided to suffer anything for asserting their right to meet in Parishad.

I have since learnt that Durbar Gopaldas Desai and his wife
Bhaktiba were surrounded by the same gentlemen described in the
message. Both suffered minor injuries. The goondas had the satisfaction for a time of preventing the meeting of the Parishad. I have no
reason whatsoever for disbelieving the messages which describe the
events with a wealth of detail that carries conviction. What is more,
they are sent by parties whom I hold to be incapable of conscious
exaggeration or of invention.
In spite of this lawlessness, the reformers will win if they have
grit enough to be ground to the dust and if they really represent the
wishes of the people. The public outside will help them. The
Paramount Power is also bound by treaty obligations to help them as
has been amply proved by Pyarelal in the extracts produced from Lee
Warner. But let the satyagrahis know that salvation comes from within.
They will have to lose all, if they will save their souls and gain the
freedom which is their birthright.
S EGAON, February 20, 1939
Harijan, 25-2-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

97

120. LETTER TO SHARDABEHN G. CHOKHAWALA
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 20, 1939
CHI. BABUDI,

I have your letter. I see that you are getting wiser. With patience
all will be well. You have done well in getting rid of the fever. Engage
yourself in work now. Take the diet which suits you.
My tour of the Frontier Province is likely to be after the 12th. I
am well. It does not seem probable that I shall be going for the
Congress session.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 10008. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

121. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
S EGAON,

February 20, 1939
BA,

Be alert. Take care of your health. Everybody has come so
I shall not write much. Nanavati has gone to stay with Kaka today.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, p. 34

122. LETTER TO VIJAYABEHN M. PANCHOLI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 20, 1939
CHI. VIJAYA,

You must have received my letters. How bad you are! Why
should you feel giddy? Why should you feel so unhappy going to
your own house? Be wise and do your duty cheerfully. Your
constantly falling ill won’t do. Write to Ba. Address the letter care of
98

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the First Member. Write to others also.
Amritlal has gone to live with Kakasaheb today.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7110. Also C.W. 4602. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

123. LETTER TO BALKRISHNA SHARMA
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 20, 1939
BHAI BALKRISHNA SHARMA,

What have they been doing in Kanpur? Why all this rioting? 1
Did not another Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi2 offer himself as a
sacrifice ?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 7516. Also C.W. 4993. Courtesy:
Parasuram Mehrotra

124. TELEGRAM TO AKBAR HYDARI3
WARDHA ,

February 21, 1939
S IR AKBAR HYDARI
HYDERABAD DN
IN

REPLY

SHOLAPUR.
BY

OUR

YOUR

TELEGRAM

NARAYANSWAMI
REPRESENTATIVE

HAS

BEEN

INTERVIEWED

RECEIVED
AFTER

SUNDERPERSHAD

FROM

PERMISSION
ON

SEVEN-

1

There had been communal riots in Kanpur from 11th to 13th February, 1939.
Editor of Pratap; he had been killed during the Hindu-Muslim riots in Kanpur
in March 1931.
3
Photostats of these items were displayed at the Gandhi Darshan Exhibition
held in New Delhi in 1969-70. Illegible in the source Vide “Letter to Akbar Hydari”
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

99

TEENTH

GULBARGA

AND

RING

IRON

IN

JAIL . . . . 1
HIS

WITH

CONVICT

DRESS

FOOT.

GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 10097. Courtesy: Government of Andhra Pradesh

125. LETTER TO AKBAR HYDARI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 21, 1939
DEAR SIR AKBAR,

Here is a letter on the Arya Samaj satyagraha. Their demand
seems to me to be reasonable. But I do not want to say anything in
public till I hear from you.
I still await your reply to my letter4 about State Congress.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 10096. Courtesy: Government of Andhra Pradesh

126. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 21, 1939
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,

I am much obliged to you for your cordial and frank letter. 1 In
the circumstances I shall await the time that you may consider
appropriate for our meeting.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: Lord Linlithgow Papers. Courtesy: National Archives of
India. Also C.W. 7810
1

In his letter of February 19, the Viceroy had referred to Gandhiji’s letter to
him of February 12 and said he did not “in the least misunderstand your decision to
publish the article which you were kind enough to let me see.” (This was the one
entitled “Jaipur”, 30-1-1939, which Gandhiji in his letter of 31-1-1939, had said he
was not publishing and which evidently he decided later to publish.) He had also
referred to Gandhiji’s suggestion that they might meet and said he did not see the time
was appropriate but nevertheless if Gandhiji still felt they might meet it would be a
great pleasure to him to see Gandhiji again but would prefer that it should be after his
Rajputana tour.

100

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

127. LETTER TO PADMAJA NAIDU
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 21, 1939
MY DEAR PLAYMATE,

I hope you are making substantial progress. Await me in Delhi.
I have to be there for the Hindu Temple on 18th March.1
Love.
S LAVE -DRIVER
S HRI P ADMAJA NAIDU
20 C URZON R OAD
NEW DELHI
From the original: Padmaja Naidu Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library

128. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
S EGAON ,

February 21, 1939
BA,

I get your letters regularly. My letters are despatched regularly
from here. I shall find out why they are not delivered to you in time.
Take proper care of your health. I must get a detailed report. Prabha
will write the rest. I have not been able to look after Sushila’s diet.
You did well in cautioning me.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, p. 34

1
Gandhiji had been invited to perform the opening ceremony of the Lakshmi
Narayan Temple and the Buddha Vihar; vide also “Statement to the Press”, 18-3-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

101

129. TALK TO HYDERABAD STATE CONGRESS
DELEGATION 1
S EGAON,

February 21, 1939
A satyagrahi will, like a general, always choose his own time and
ground for fight. Satyagraha should be kept in reserve until all other
means of advancing the cause are exhausted. Even in armed warfare,
suspensions and withdrawals are the recognized tactics.
Suspension does not exclude facing imprisonment if in the
course of legitimate, peaceful and constructive activities people are
arrested. These will not constitute civil disobedience. Your decision to
continue the suspension is a wise one. You have lost nothing by
suspension. There is nothing to prevent you from resuming the
satyagraha when the situation again demands it and there is ample
cause to compel you to revive satyagraha.
The Hindu, 22-2-1939

130. A MISCHIEVOUS SUGGESTION
A correspondent sends the following cutting from The Bombay
Chronicle:
Mr. Rushbrook Williams in a letter to The Manchester Guardian
declares that during the last few months of last year there was a definite
progress by the Right Wing elements of the Congress High Command towards
a position in which Mahatma Gandhi would have found it possible to approach
the authorities with suggestions in relation to the Central Government,
roughly corresponding to those which he so successfully carried through in
connection with the Provincial Governments. What was then regarded as the
approach of Federation compelled the Congress to reckon up its forces. It had
little Muslim support and without such support, thanks to the Muslim League,
and unless it found new allies, it will be unable to form a Government in the
Centre. Therefore it was necessary to concentrate on Indian States in order to
secure that the representations of States should be drawn from elements
sympathizing with the Congress programme.
1

The Delegation had informed Gandhiji of the State Congress decision to
continue suspension of the satyagraha for some time more. The satyagraha was
suspended on or about 26-12-1938. Vide “Draft of Statement for Hyderabad State
Congress”, Before 26-12-1938, and “Letter to Akbar Hydari”, 26-12-1938

102

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

He adds: “It is not without significance that Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya is
intimately associated with the States Subjects’ Conference, but the election of
Mr. Bose has been a blow to the Right Wing and apparently has postponed
any rapprochement with the authorities as the High Command had in mind.
Mr. Bose does not like the States, but he also does not like Federation. He can,
therefore, have little sympathy with an endeavour to convert States into allies
of the Congress in preparation for a Congress domination over the new
Central institutions. In fact he desires to keep them at arm’s length to secure a
settlement of British Indian destinies by British India and eventually no doubt
to expel the Princes and absorb the States into the new self-governing India he
projects.”

Mr. Williams is an old ‘enemy’. During the non-co-operation
days he edited an official Year Book, in which he drew upon his
imagination and gave his own colour to facts which he could not
avoid. He has played the same role again in his letter to The
Manchester Guardian, assuming that he is correctly quoted. It is
wrong to say that there was a definite or any progress by the Right
Wing elements of the Congress High Command towards the position
pictured by Mr. Williams’s imagination. The suggestion about
Muslim support is malicious. I know my own mind and so far as I
know the Congress mind, neither it nor I ever dreamt that there could
be any federation without Muslim support. Indeed so long as there is
opposition to federation by the Muslims, the Congress has no need to
worry about federation coming. Therefore, unless there is perfect
communal unity, no Congressman can think or talk of federation
whether of the Government mint or cent per cent swadeshi mint.
About Dr. Pattabhi, the whole of India knows that his
candidature was thought of at the last moment when Maulana Saheb
withdrew and as Dr. Pattabhi was the only candidate left besides
Subhas Babu. His connection with the States People’s Conference has
been a convenient fact for building up Mr. Williams’s case.
As for the innuendos about Subhas Babu, he is well able to look
after himself. But throughout one year’s intimate connection with him
I never once heard him say of the States what Mr. Williams attributes
to him. I am quite certain that if the States come to terms with the
Congress about the treatment of the people in their jurisdiction,
Subhas Babu will be quite as keen as any Congressman to close the
bargain but not in anticipation of federation.
I have come into the States agitation by accident. Responsible
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

103

government in the States is a goal by itself and independent of
federation which may never come. It won’t come till the Congress and
Muslims are ready for it. But liberty of the States people has to Come
in any and every case. They cannot be in chains and what is called
British India become free.
S EGAON, February 23, 1939

Harijan, 4-3-1939

131. TELEGRAM TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI 1
[February 23, 1939] 2
R T. H ONOURABLE S ASTRI
MADRAS
NEVER

KNEW

ANYTHING

SITY.

FULL

LETTER

SHOCK.

MY

STUDENTS
GREAT

HEART

WHO

HAVE

WAS

SERIOUS

RECEIVED
WENT
BEEN

IN

YOUR

YESTERDAY

OUT
SO

TO

YOU.

UNWORTHY

UNIVER-

GAVE
I
OF

ME
PITY
YOUR

STEWARDSHIP.

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

132. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
S EGAON,

February 23, 1939
BA,

You always complain about my not writing, but today there is
no letter from you. What about that? All is well here. Nothing to
worry about.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, p. 34

1
2

104

At this time Vice-Cancellor of Annamalai University
Vide “Statement to the Press? 23-2-1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

133. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1
February 23, 1939
I continue to receive daily wires about hunger-strikes in Rajkot
over the treatment, said to be inhuman, of prisoners and
others in villages. The Rajkot matter is becoming daily graver because
of the breach of faith on the ruler’s part with which the second
struggle started. Agitated inquirers should know that I am in
telegraphic correspondence with the State authorities. I hope to take
them into confidence in the near future. In the mean time let the
satyagrahis understand that the first thing they have to show is an
infinite capacity for suffering with inward joy and without malice or
anger.
The Hindustan Times, 24-2-1939

134. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
February 23, 1939
The news of Lord Brabourne’s death has grieved me deeply.2 I
had the privilege of close friendship with him.
The Hindu, 24-2-1939

135. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS3
February 23, 1939
I saw yesterday a letter from Annamalai University, addressed
to a colleague, giving a detailed description of the students’ strike.
According to the letter, the strikers prostrate themselves in front of the
entrances to prevent non-strikers from attending classes and when the
classes are held, they enter the class-rooms, shout, and otherwise make
holding of classes impossible. The letter ends by saying that the
strikers are likely to give up the strike if they know that, in my
4

1
This was also published in Harijan, 4-3-1939, under the title “Gandhiji’s
Statement on Rajkot”.
2
Lord Brabourne had served as Governor in Bombay and Bengal. He died in
Calcutta on February 23.
3
This was also published in Harijan, 4-3-1939, under the heading “Students’
Strike at Annamalai”.
4
Vide “Is It Non-violent?”

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

105

opinion, the methods adopted by them are contrary to non-violence.
If the description reproduced by me is correct, I have no
hesitation in saying that the methods adopted by the strikers are not
only not non-violent but positively violent. I would implore the
strikers to desist from the methods they have adopted and allow those
who want to attend classes to do so without any obstruction.
The Hindu, 23-2-1939

136. TELEGRAM TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
THE VICEROY
February 24, 1939
P RIVATE S ECRETARY TO HIS EXCELLENCY VICEROY
NEW DELHI
HAVE

WIRED

TO

FIRST

PLEASE

PLACE

THIS

BEFORE

MEMBER
HIS

RAJKOT

AS

FOLLOWS:1

EXCELLENCY.

GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 7811. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

137. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
S EGAON,

February 24, 1939
BA,

You should be receiving letters regularly now. I take as much
service as necessary from the girls. Keep up patience and courage. All
will be well.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, p. 34

1

106

For the text of this telegram, vide “Statement to the Press”, 25-2-1939

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

138. TALK WITH AN ASHRAM INMATE 1
S EGAON,

February 24, 1939
Who knows. But somehow I think it would not happen that way.
I expect this visit to be brief. My relations with the Rajkot ruling
family are such as to warrant a frank talk. Either the Thakore Saheb
will restore the pact or he will refer me to the Resident and I shall
settle it up with him in no time. The case is so clear that I do not
expect any serious resistance. It will be a test of my ahimsa too.
People may think that I am gone crazy in my old age to give so much
importance to a small State like Rajkot. But I am made that way. When
the moral fibre in me is touched to the quick I simply cannot sit still.
Harijan, 25-3-1939

139. LETTER TO VIJAYABEHN M. PANCHOLI
[Before February 25, 1939] 2
CHI. VIJAYA,

I am now coming nearer you. It does not mean that you both
have to come over to Rajkot. Take care of your health. Do not fall ill.
I hope you are cheerful now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7105

140. WORK INSTEAD OF ALMS3
To those who are hungry and unemployed God can dare reveal
Himself only as work and wages as the assurance of food.
I do not want to humiliate the naked by giving them clothes of
1
Extracted from Pyarelal’s “The Rajkot Fast”. On hearing about Gandhiji’s
decision to go to Rajkot an Ashram inmate had asked him when he expected to return
and whether there was not a chance of his being made a ‘State guest’ at Rajkot like
Kasturba.
2
Gandhiji left for Rajkot on February 25.
3
This was originally published in Sarvodaya, a monthly organ of Gandhi Seva
Sangh.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

107

which they have no need. Instead I will give them work which they
need very badly. I will never commit the sin of becoming their
benefactor. But having realized that I had a hand in their ruination, I
will give them a respectable place in society. I will never give them
left-overs and discarded things. I will share with them my best food
and clothes and help them in their work. My ahimsa will not tolerate
giving free food to a healthy person who does not put in honest
labour. If I had my say I would close down all charitable institutions
and alms-houses. It is because of them the country has fallen and such
vices as laziness, hypocrisy and crime have got encouragement.
[From Hindi]
Harijan Sevak, 25-2-1939

141. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 25, 1939
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,

My telegram to the Rajkot State of yesterday was wired to you
last night.1 Nevertheless I attach a copy of it as also of the Rajkot
answer and my reply thereto.
For me Rajkot has become a moral issue of tremendous
importance. I am sure you recognize it and will give me all the help
you can.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm: Lord Linlithgow Papers. Courtesy: National Archives of
India

1

Vide “Telegram to Private Secretary to the Viceroy”, 24-2-1939 and
“Statement to the Press”, 25-2-1939

108

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

142. LETTER TO AKBAR HYDARI1
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 25, 1939
DEAR SIR AKBAR,

I am obliged to you for your two letters of the 16th and one of
the 21st inst.
About the State Congress, for the time being, we must agree to
differ. You will have seen my advice2 to the State Congress. In order
to make assurance double sure I enclose herewith the relevant cutting.
You will have also seen the manifesto of the State Congress accepting
my advice. I suppose you will say even that is not enough. I am
hoping, however, that some day you will see eye to eye with me and
release the State Congress prisoners and let the organization function
normally.
As to Mahatma Narayanswami I realize what you say and I am
glad that I referred the matter to you. 3 I am now trying to persuade
my informants to correct the mistake they have made, I hope, quite
unconsciously.
With reference to your letters about the prisoners I am unable to
agree with you that ghee is a luxury. But I am going to bear your
suggestion in mind and must think out the name of someone whom I
can ask to visit your jails.
I am glad you are restored to health and that you are Working at
the proposed reforms which I hope will answer the time spirit.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 10098. Courtesy: Government of Andhra Pradesh

1

A photostat of the letter was displayed at the Andhra Pradesh Pavilion at
Gandhi Darshan Exhibition held in New Delhi in 1969-70.
2
Vide “Draft of Statement for Hyderabad State Congress”, 26-12-1938
3
Vide “Letter to Akbar Hydari”, 21-2-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

109

143. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1
February 25, 1939
The following wires have been exchanged between the First
Member2 of the Rajkot State Council and myself:3
Hear satyagraha prisoners Rajkot jail fasting. For Sardhar
prisoners said to be inhumanly treated. Could you enlighten
me?—Gandhi (dated 20-2-’39).
Your telegram. Personally visited Sardhar yesterday. No truth
absolutely whatsoever regarding ill-treatment to prisoners. First Member of
Council (dated 21-2-’39).

Thanks wire. You are silent about hunger-strike. Have
again long wire about atrocities which difficult to disbelieve.
Every day urge growing that I should myself plunge. Agony of
Ruler’s breach of faith, coupled with growing tales of terrorism,
becoming unbearable. Have no desire embarrass Thakore Saheb
or Council. Would like you listen to voice of old man claiming
to be Rajkot’s friend.—Gandhi (dated 22-2-’39).
Absolutely no truth in allegations of ill-treatment to Sardhar prisoners.
Whole thing nothing but fabrication. Regular programme of daily diet,
bedding, etc., nearly on same lines as Rajkot arranged. Written information to
above effect given to prisoners on hunger-strike in local jail by me. In spite
of these they unreasonably insist continue fasting. Assure you everything
humanly possible being done give fair treatment. Please have no anxiety.—
First Member (dated 23-2-’39).

If all reports are fabrication, it is serious for me and
co-workers. If there is substance in them, it is serious reflection
on the State authorities. Meanwhile, the hunger-strike continues.
My anxiety is unbearable. Therefore, propose start for Rajkot
tomorrow night taking with me medical attendant, secretary and
typist. I come in search of truth and as peacemaker.
Have no desire to court arrest. I want to see things for
myself and shall make ample amends if my co-workers have
been guilty of fabrication. I shall also plead with Thakore Saheb
to repair breach of faith with his people. I shall ask people to
1

This was also published in Harijan, 4-3-1939, under the heading “Gandhiji’s
Statement on Rajkot”.
2
Khan Bahadur Fateh Mohammed Khan
3
None of the telegrams quoted here are available from any other source.

110

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

avoid demonstrations and am asking Sardar, pending my effort
in Rajkot, to suspend satyagraha by persons in Rajkot or from
outside.1 If by any chance Thakore Saheb and Council can
restore pact intact, subject to adjustment of members, and
prisoners are immediately set free and fines restored, I naturally
cancel my proposed departure. You can send official with full
authority to negotiate adjustment as to personnel. Majority of
Sardar’s nominees will be a condition. May God guide Thakore
Saheb and his Councillors. May I expect express wire?—Gandhi
(dated 24-2-’39).
Since your telegram you must have received information that hungerstrike has been discontinued since last night having no justification, as
telegram sent to you by Nanalal Jasani and Mohanlal Gadhadawala must have
convinced you. His Highness does not consider there has been any breach of
faith on his part and is only anxious that representative Committee appointed
by him should be able to start working in calm atmosphere, so that he may be
in a position to introduce as soon as possible such reforms as may be found by
him to be required after fully considering the Committee’s recommendations.
His Highness feels sure that in the circumstances explained, you will
appreciate that no useful purpose could be served by your coming here now. He
wishes once again to assure you that no atrocities or terrorism have been or
will be allowed. —First Member (dated 24-2-’39).

Your wire is no answer to my heart-felt entreaty. I leave
for Rajkot today on my mission of peace.—Gandhi (dated
25-2-’39) .
These wires tell their own tale. I am glad the fast is broken. That
certainly removes one cause of anxiety. But the charge of fabrication
abides. I know personally many of the workers in Rajkot. They and I
must make full reparation if they have resorted to falsehood in order
to make out a case of atrocities against the authorities. The struggle in
Rajkot, as in other States, is part of the struggle for the liberation of
India. Mutual mud-flinging cannot advance the cause. Truth must be
ascertained.
The telegram of the First Member denies the charge of breach
of faith. It baffles me. I do not know what is meant by the denial. The
notification announcing the pact and the notification announcing the
1

On February 25, Vallabhbhai Patel issued a statement suspending the
satyagraha.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

111

breach with Sardar Patel are clearly contradictory as one reads the
plain language of the two.
I have suggested that the Resident at Rajkot is responsible for
the breach. 1 I have been told that I have been hasty in bringing this
charge and that there is another side. If there is, it is my duty to know
it. I shall make it a point to seek an interview with him and if I find
that I have done an injustice to him, I shall tender a public apology. I
feel that it is wrong on my part to allow the sufferings to continue in
the midst of mutual recriminations. The least I can do is to go to
Rajkot and find out the truth and invite the Thakore to repair what is a
palpable breach of faith, unless I discover that the repudiation of this
charge is somehow justified.
If the statements made by the workers about atrocities are true,
there must be found a way of avoiding such exhibitions of man’s
worst passions. He must be helped against himself, if it is at all
possible. It is part of the struggle for liberty, if it is non-violent, to
reclaim even the goondas, whether they are to be found among the
people or those in authority. By going to Rajkot, I want to exert
myself to the utmost of my capacity and find out the way of dealing
with the goonda element in society. In this respect Rajkot is a test
case. I go to Rajkot because I am the same friend of the States that I
have always claimed to be.
It hurts me that by force of circumstances, all of which perhaps I
do not know, the Ruler of Rajkot has been made to break his word
given to his people. I hold that it is the duty of the Princes of
Kathiawar, if not of all India, and their advisers to help to rectify the
wrong, if it is done. An honourable mutual understanding is
impossible if faith becomes a valueless article. Life to me becomes a
burden when I find myself witness to a breach of faith, as I happen to
be in this case. Let it be recalled that I was the author of the draft2 that
the Ruler of Rajkot signed with but a slight modification. I know that
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel left no stone unturned to ensure that it was
signed with the fullest understanding.
As I go to Rajkot purely as a messenger of peace, I have asked
Sardar Patel to suspend the Rajkot civil resistance whilst, under God’s
guidance, I make the humble effort to end the agony. The public will
1
2

112

Vide”Rajkot” and “Statement to the Press”, 3-2-1939
Vide “Draft of Statement for Thakore Saheb of Rajkot”, 19-11-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

please remember that I am an invalid so far as the body is concerned.
They will avoid demonstrations at the stations. In Rajkot the citizens
will carry out the instructions of the State authorities during the
suspension period. I shall need freedom from turmoil during my
negotiations. I want the silent prayers of all who believe in them.
Though Rajkot is a tiny place on the map of India, the principle
forthe vindication of which I go to Rajkot is one without which society
must disintegrate.
The Hindu, 25-2-1939

144. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

February 25/26, 1939
CHI. MANILAL,

I received your letter yesterday. How good you are at
deciphering! And Schlesin! Why did you not read ‘M.A.’ instead of
‘ma’? Where was there any talk of sending a woman? I have acted on
the advice of Schlesin. The person who was to be sent is the
brother-in-law of Nirmala, Mahadev’s sister. You should have sent a
cable to ask.
February 26, 1939
However, I hope that Mahadev has written to you all the details.
Even if he has not, you now know them. If you cannot pay his salary
there, there is provision for payment from here. He can take up the
work in Gujarati, English, etc. Your burden will be reduced. Cable to
me about what you wish to do now. If you do get the permission to
call him, wire accordingly.
Mr. Kallenbach has recovered now. He has to be careful,
however. I am leaving for Rajkot. Don’t worry about it. I hope to
return only after solving the problem. I am going at God’s command.
I shall act according to His directions. Ba is fine. Don’t worry about
the Congress. It is enough if you can remain absorbed in your work.
Pyarelal, Sushila and Kanaiyo are accompanying me. Rami,
Manu, etc., had come to see me. Rajkumari is at Segaon.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4895
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

113

145. QUESTION OF HONOUR
On my way to Rajkot, going via Bombay, I have to wait a whole
day for the Kathiawar mail. I am passing the time in writing for
Harijan. And I read the following note:
Ramdurg—a small State in the Bombay-Karnatak, area 169 sq. miles,
population 33,997, revenue Rs. 2,69,000—was hard hit by famine and
scarcity conditions, and also depression due to fall in prices for some years
past. On 20th March 1938 some agriculturists from villages gathered together
in front of the palace and requested the Rajasaheb to grant some concessions
in respect of land revenue. It was alleged on behalf of those assembled at the
Palace that they were dispersed by lathi charge by the Ramdurg police. On the
other hand these allegations were denied by the State authorities. It seems that
no definite demands were made on behalf of the people, nor was there any
organization to speak for them. Some time later some of the people of the
State approached Shri Yalgi, a Congressman and one of the Secretaries of the
Karnatak Provincial Congress Committee, and requested him to visit Ramdurg
and see the situation for himself. Accordingly, Shri Yalgi visited Ramdurg in
April and advised the people there to organize a committee to place their
demands before the authorities. In accordance with his advice, a body named
Ramdurg Sansthan Praja Sangh was established and on its behalf demands were
formulated and submitted to the Rajasaheb.
A Conference of Deccan States’ People took place at Sangli on 22nd
May 1938, presided over by Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel. He left Sangli on the
22nd. But the Conference continued under the presidentship of Shri
Gangadharrao Deshpande.
On the 23rd, the question of Ramdurg was taken up and it was decided
that a committee, consisting of (I) Shri Gangadharrao Deshpande, President,
K. P. C. C., (2) Shri Shankarrao Deo, Member of the Congress Working
Committee, (3) Shri Munoli, President, Ramdurg Praja Sangh, (4) Shri
Kanabur, Secretary of Deccan States People’s Conference, (5) Shri Andaneppa
Doddameti, M. L. A., (6) Shri K. S. Patil, M. L. A., (7) Shri Ari, Pleader,
Hubli, a subject of the State, was appointed to investigate and report on the
Ramdurg affair. In the mean time the Ramdurg Durbar, on their own initiative,
had issued a proclamation and announced certain concessions. But the people
were not satisfied with these concessions and the agitation was assuming a
serious turn. . . .
Then on the 5th June 1938 the Committee appointed at Sangli visited
Ramdurg and instituted an enquiry. It was felt by the Committee and also by
the prominent representatives of the Ramdurg Praja Sangh that a mere enquiry

114

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and report would not serve the purpose. Therefore the latter requested the
Committee to bring about a settlement in respect of the demands which were
submitted to the Ramdurg Durbar.
The matter was discussed for two hours and on the 6th of June Shri Deo
was entrusted with the sole authority of settling the differences. Shri Deo, in
accepting the responsibility, made clear to the people all the implications of
what they were doing. Shri Deo, on behalf of the Committee, formulated the
demands and submitted them to the Rajasaheb. After some discussions the
matter was postponed at the desire of the Rajasaheb. However, most of the
suggestions, with slight modifications, were conceded by the Rajasaheb. Shri
Deshpande wrote to the Sardar as to what had happened. He also informed him
of the demands of the Praja Sangh and the offer of Rajasaheb. In reply, Sardar
wrote to Shri Deshpande on the 11th June 1938 to say that the terms offered
by Rajasaheb could not be improved upon, that they were quite good and that
the people should be advised to accept them.
Though Shri Deo was entrusted with full powers to negotiate and settle
the terms, he on the 21st June 1938 took Shri Munoli and all the members of
the Managing Committee of the Praja Sangh into confidence, and after long
discussion secured their assent to the terms settled between himself and
Rajasaheb. The members of the Committee appointed by the Sangli
Conference with the exception of Shri Shastri, who was absent, also agreed.
The acceptance of the terms was communicated to Rajasaheb. The same
evening durbar was held in the palace to which the President and
representatives of the Praja Sangh and leading men of Ramdurg were invited.
The Rajasaheb in his opening speech surveyed the history of his rule and gave
the outlines of the terms of settlement. The Dewan, Rao Bahadur Pradhan, then
read out the proclamation embodying the terms of the settlement. Thereupon
the President of the Praja Sangh, on behalf of the Sangh, thanked the
Rajasaheb in suitable terms. After the durbar was over, Shri Deo and others
went to the public meeting. The meeting was attended by more than 12,000
persons. The President of the Praja Sangh presided. When Shri Gangadharrao
Deshpande was explaining the terms of the settlement, a slight disturbance
was noticed in one corner of the meeting. It was ascertained that they belonged
to Sureban and were weavers. Shri Andaneppa Doddameti went to that corner
and successfully tried to restore peace. After Shri Deshpande, Shri Andaneppa
spoke for more than one hour and fully explained all the details of the terms
and defended them very vigorously. He carried conviction to the audience and
concluded his speech amongst enthusiastic cheers. Shri Deo also made a short
speech asking people to organize and strengthen their position by working

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

115

the reforms granted. Shri Munavalli, the President in his concluding speech,
which was very touching, defended all the terms settled and asked the audience
whether they had confidence in him. The audience with one voice replied in the
affirmative. He then asked them to accept the terms and they assented. At the
conclusion of the meeting a paper, containing the terms of the settlement, was
brought to the President for his signature by an officer of the State. Shri
Munavalli, the President, again asked the audience whether he should sign it
and with concurrence of not only the large audience but of the representatives
of the Praja Sangh, signed the document.
The Council of the Karnatak Provincial Congress Committee passed
the following resolution:
“The Council congratulates the people of Ramdurg, Jamkhandi, Miraj
Sr. and Jr. and Mudhol for the success they have achieved in their struggle for
redress of their grievances and trusts that they will strengthen their
organizations by non-violent and peaceful means for the attainment of full
responsible government in the near future.
“This Council expresses its sense of appreciation of the Rulers of the
above States for readily responding to the demands of their subjects and trusts
that the terms of the settlement will be implemented by both the portions
without delay. It also requests the Rulers of all the States in Karnatak to follow
the liberal policy followed by the above-mentioned States.
“This Council, however, notes with extreme pain that anti-propaganda
is being carried on by some people and especially by some Congressmen on
the plea that the settlement was arrived at by the efforts of prominent
Congress leaders between the people and the Prince of Ramdurg. This Council
while requesting them not to carry on anti-propaganda is definitely of opinion
that the good of the people will advance only by standing by the settlement.”

I have omitted some part irrelevant for my purpose. It appears
that an attempt is now being made on behalf of the Ramdurg Praja
Sangh to terrorize the Ruler into making further concessions1 . He
refrains from taking action against the mischief-mongers for fear of
losing Congress sympathy. The question I am asked is, “What are
Congressmen involved in the settlement to do?” Assuming the
correctness of my information, my unequivocal answer is that they
have to keep at any cost the plighted word of the Provincial
Committee. I am going to Rajkot to entreat H. H. the Thakore Saheb
of Rajkot to keep his word. The breach, as I interpret his action, has
1

116

Vide also “Popular Violence in Ramdurg”, 24-4-1939.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

shaken me to my depths. I can think of no other answer with regard to
the Congress. Rajkot represents the Princely order. Its shame or credit
would be the shame or credit of the whole order. If a representative
Congressman breaks his word, the reputation of the whole Congress is
at stake. How much more so, if a Provincial Congress Committee
cannot redeem its word? The Congress claims to represent the whole
nation. Its transactions must be above reproach.
In these days of awakening, all kinds of forces must rise up.
Demands, even extravagant, will be made by new additions to the
Congress. If they are in excess of Congress commitments and if the
Congress credit is to go up day after day, they must be checked. I do
not know what the Ramdurg Praja Sangh claims. It may be that the
claim is intrinsically sound. But they cannot enforce it by rowdyism
and threats even before the ink is dry on the settlement paper. The
representative Congressmen in Karnatak have to stand by the
Ramdurg Chief and see that the settlement is honoured by the people
even though in battling with them they should lose their lives.
BOMBAY, February 26, 1939
Harijan, 4-3-1939

146. KHADI AS FAMINE RELIEF
This letter1 shows conclusively what a relief khadi is to famine
areas. Those, therefore, who buy relief khadi help the famine-stricken
and themselves. In addition they give not doles but wages and these at
khadi market rates for spinning which are higher than for any other
relief work. I hope, therefore, that this appeal will receive a generous
response from the public.
BOMBAY, February 26, 1939

Harijan, 4-3-1939

1

Not reproduced here. The correspondent had said that because of drought and
failure of crops in certain taluks of Coimbatore district, the farmers there had taken up
spinning and so there was a surplus stock of khadi in Tamil Nadu. He had requested
Gandhiji to appeal to the readers of Harijan to buy the khadi produced in the
drought-hit areas.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

117

147. IS NON-VIOLENT?
Below is an extract from a letter from a teacher in the
Annamalai University:1
Some time in November last, a group of five or six students
organizedly assaulted the secretary of University Union, a fellow student. Shri
Srinivasa Sastri, the Vice-Chancellor, took a serious view of it and punished
the leader of the group with expulsion from the University and the rest with
suspension till the end of this academic year.
Some sympathizers and friends of these punished students wanted to
abstain from attending classes and strike work. . . .
The next day, about 20 per cent of the students stayed away from the
classes; the remaining 80 per cent attended the classes as usual. I may add, the
strength of this University is about 800.
The student who was expelled next day came inside the hostel to direct
the strike. Finding the strike unsuccessful he adopted other methods in the
evening, as for example, bodily Iying across the four main outlets from the
hostel, locking some gates of the hostel, locking up some of the young boys
inside their own rooms. . . . In this way in the afternoon, the rest of the
students were prevented from coming outside the hostel gates by fifty or sixty
people.
The authorities thus finding the gates closed wanted to make an
opening in the fencing. But when they started pulling down the fence with the
help of servants of the University, the strikers prevented the other students
from passing through the breaches to attend college. . . . The authorities
finding the situation unmanageable requested the police to remove the
expelled student from the hostel premises . . . which the police did. This
naturally irritated some more of the students who began to show sympathy
with the strikers. . . . Shri Srinivasa Sastri then closed down the University for
a long vacation of 1_ months from November 29th to January 16th. He gave a
statement to the Press appealing to the students to come back from home in a
chastened and happier mood for study.
But the college reopened with renewed activities on the part of the
strikers who had extra advice during the vacation from . . . 2 They wentto
Rajaji, it appears, but he asked them to obey the Vice-Chancellor, and declined
to interfere. . . .
The picketing is still going on. . . . The strikers are about 35 to 45 in
1
2

118

Only extracts from the quotation are reproduced here.
Omission as in the source
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

mumber. They have got about 50 sympathizers who dare not come into the
open and strike with them, but from within they create trouble. Every day they
come in a body and lie down in front of entrances to classes, and on the stairs
leading to classes on the first floor and thus prevent the students from entering
the classes. But the teachers shift from place to place and hold classes before
the picketers can reach there. . . .
Yesterday there was a new development. The strikers came into the
classes, rolled on the floor and uttered shouts. Some strikers, I heard, began
writing on blackboards before the teacher could come. If any teachers are
known to be meek, some of the strikers try to intimidate them also. In fact
they threatened the Vice-Chancellor with ‘violence and bloodshed’, if he did
not accede to their demands.
One other important point I ought to tell you is that the strikers get
help from some outsiders, employ goondas to enter the University premises
and disturb the work there. . . .
Now the point I am driving at is this: We have all been feeling,
i. e., several teachers and a large number of students, that these activities are
not truthful and non-violent and so are against the spirit of satyagraha.
I learn reliably that some of the striker students persist in calling this
non-violent. They say that if Mahatmaji declares this to be violent they will
stop these activities.

The letter is dated 17th February and addressed to Kakasaheb
Kalelkar whom the teacher knows intimately. The portion not printed
by me seeks Kakasaheb’s opinion whether the conduct of the students
can be called non-violent and deplores the attitude of unruliness
which has become rampant among so many students in India.
The letter gives the names of those who are inciting the strikers
to persist in their behaviour. On the publication of my opinion1 on the
strike, someone, presumably a student, sent me an angry telegram
saying that the behaviour of the strikers is perfectly non-violent.
Assuming the correctness of the version reproduced by me, I have no
hesitation in saying that the attitude of the students is essentially
violent. Surely, if someone blocks the passage to my house, his action
is violence just as much as if he pushed me bodily from the doorstep.
If students have a real grievance against their teachers, they may
have the right to strike and even picket their school or college but
only to the extent of politely warning the unwary from attending their
1

Vide “Statement to the Press”, 23-2-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

119

classes. They could do so by speaking or by distributing leaflets. But
they may not obstruct the passage or use any coercion against those
who do not want to strike. And the students have struck against
whom? Shri Srinivasa Sastriar is one of India’s best scholars. He had
become renowned as a teacher before many of the students were born
or were in their teens. Any university in the world will be proud to
have him as Vice-Chancellor as well for the greatness of his learning
as for the nobility of his character.
If the writer of the letter to Kakasaheb has given an accurate
account of the happenings in the Annamalai University, Sastriar’s
handling of the situation seems to me to have been quite correct. In
my opinion the strikers are harming themselves by their conduct. I
belong to the old school which believed in reverence for teachers. I
can understand not going to a school for whose teachers I have no
regard. But I cannot understand disrespect towards or vilification of
my teachers. Such conduct is ungentlemanly, and all ungentlemanliness is violence.
BOMBAY, February 26, 1939

Harijan, 4-3-1939

148. TELEGRAM TO RADHAKRISHNA BAJAJ
R AJKOT ,

February 26, 1939
R ADHAKRISHNA BAJAJ
JAIPRAJA
AGRA
NO

HARTAL

JAIPUR

CITY.

BAPU
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 214

120

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

149. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI1
February 26, 1939
You must not be anxious. I miss you on this journey. I am
going there as God is taking me there. Within me is joy, hope. Who
knows if the prospect is no more than a mirage? I know that I will not
return from Rajkot with hope blasted.
Harijan, 11-3-1939

150. LETTER TO SATISH D. KALELKAR2
February 26, 1939
3

CHI. SHANKER ,

I had no-time to reply to your letter. I liked it. Chandan is quiet
and happy. It should be sufficient that she has been proved innocent,
that is, truthful. We should not be interested in proving a person
guilty. So long as H.4 does not admit his guilt, it does not seem fair to
give a final verdict about him. Ninety-nine per cent he is no longer
innocent. I think now he will not indulge in backbiting against you.
Doing anything more will be like killing a man who is already down.
It will be good if you can forget this incident. I should like it even
better if you can see that my viewpoint is correct.
Take care of your health.
Poor Chandan came here to go to Rajkot. I feel as if I was going
there on her behalf. I am writing this in the train. Chandan is accompanying me. She will go to Bhavnagar from Viramgam. There she will
wait and watch.
What Chandan has written above was really my test. I wanted to
see whether she would respond to my advice or not. She may be said
to have scored 331 / 3 per cent marks in the test.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 949. Courtesy: Satish D. Kalelkar
1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “A God-given Fast”. The letter, which was
presumably in Gujarati, is not available from any other source.
2
This was written below a letter Chandanbehn wrote to the addressee, whom
she later married.
3
Son of D. B. Kalelkar, who later changed his name to ‘Satish’.
4
The name has been omitted.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

121

151. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
February 27, 1939
MY DEAR IDIOT,

The journey up to now has been quite pleasant and uneventful.
This is being written at Viramgam. You bore yourself bravely on
parting. The same bravery must continue. It is strange that responsibility for the secretariat work should rest solely upon you
sosuddenly. You had not bargained for it. You will expect a wire from
Rajkot either today or tomorrow.
You will keep well both in body and mind.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3903. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7212

152. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
VIRAMGAM ,

February 27, 1939
CHI. MIRA,

We reach Rajkot about 2.50 p. m. Train going, so good-bye.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6429. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 10024

153. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI1
February 27, 1939
How mysterious are the ways of God! This journey to Rajkot is a
wonder even to me. Why am I going, whither am I going? What for? I
have thought nothing about these things. And if God guides me, what
1

Extracted from, Mahadev Desai’s “A God-given Fast”. The letter, which was
presumably in Gujarati, is not available from any other source.

122

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

should I think, why should I think? Even thought may be an obstacle
in the way of His guidance.1
The fact is it takes no effort to stop thinking. The thoughts do
not come. Indeed there is no vacuum—but I mean to say that there is
no thought about the mission.
Harijan, 25-3-1939

154. INTERVIEW TO THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
February 27, 1939
A few minutes prior to his arrival at Rajkot, Mahatma Gandhi told the
Associated Press special correspondent travelling with him that he had no specific
plans with regard to his “mission of peace in Rajkot”.
Asked how long he would be at Rajkot, Mahatma Gandhi said:

I really don’t know how long I will be here. I have to be here till
I finish my work.
QUESTION:

Does that mean that you will not be able to go to Tripuri Congress ?

ANSWER: Well, if my work in Rajkot detains me, I am afraid I will
not be able to go to Tripuri.
On being told that despite the suspension of satyagraha in Rajkot State the
authorities have continued the arrests and the auctioning of houses for the purpose of
recovering fines, Mahatma Gandhi said:

I myself heard of an instance just now in the train. If this is true,
it is most unfortunate.
The Hindustan Times, 28-2-1939

155. TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
R AJKOT ,

February 27, 1939
R AJKUMARI
MAGANWADI
WARDHAGANJ
BORE JOURNEY WELL.

TALKS BEGUN. LOVE. LASTSENT TELEGRAM FIRST

MEMBER

HERE.

NOT

RECEIVED

INQUIRE.

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3902. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7211
1

For Shri Ramana Maharshi’s comments on this, vide “Sri Ramana
Maharshi’s Comments on Gandhiji’s Description of his State of Mind”
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

123

156. TELEGRAM TO MIRABEHN
R AJKOT ,

February 27, 1939
MIRABEHN
C ARE BADSHAHKHAN
C HARSADDA
BORE

JOURNEY

WELL.

TALKS

BEGUN.

LOVE.

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6430. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 10025

157. INTERVIEW TO THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
February 27, 1939
I am a born optimist. I hope that as a result of my visit to Rajkot
there will be an honourable settlement.
I had a friendly exchange of views with Khan Saheb Fateh
Mahomed and Durbar Virawala. They have offered me full facilities
to visit the jails and see prisoners and also to visit the villages. I am
seeing the prisoners tomorrow afternoon, The Muslims and Garasias
(landholders) have asked for an appointment and I expect to meet
them tomorrow.
The negotiations are likely to take a few days. Although I am
most anxious to attend the Tripuri Congress, I am afraid work in
Rajkot will take me some time.
The Hindustan Times, 28-2-1939

158. INTERVIEW TO “THE HINDU”
February 27, 1939
. . . I do not know how long I may stay here. I have no ready
plan. I desire to study the situation and interview the Ruler and Mr.
Gibson and do my best to restore the Pact between the Administration
and the Praja Parishad, I am doubtful of my visit to Tripuri. If I finish
my mission in time, I shall go to Tripuri. Otherwise I may have to miss
it.
The Hindu, 27-2-1939
124

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

159. TELEGRAM TO RADHAKRISHNA BAJAJ1
[On or after February 27, 1939]
HARTAL

SHOULD

BUT

MUST

YOU

BE
BE

ABANDONED

FINAL

WHEN

VICEROY

ENTERS.

JUDGES.

BAPU
Panchven Putrako Bapake Ashirvad, p. 215

160. TALKS TO REPRESENTATIVES OF MUSLIM
COUNCIL OF ACTION2
February 28, 1939
But surely, you do not mean to ask for separate electorate
without reservation of seats ? The former without the latter would be
meaningless. You must, therefore, have that too. Having made that
unilateral offer, may I take the liberty of telling you that if you chose
to represent your interests through the Parishad, the latter would be
bound to safeguard your religion and culture and protect every
legitimate Muslim interest? But I agree that so long as the atmosphere
is vitiated with mutual distrust and suspicion you are entitled to ask for
and have separate representation.
Harijan, 25-3-1939

1

This was in reply to the addressee’s telegram of February 27, 1939, which
read: “Received. Jaipur hartal spontaneous and continues in connection Viceroy visit.
We favour hartal. Wire if you disapprove.”
2
Extracted from Pyarelal’s “The Rajkot Fast”. Pyarelal says: “The
representatives of the Muslim Council of Action met him at 7 a. m. They told him
that during the last civil disobedience struggle in Rajkot the Muslim community had
given its passive support to the movement. Gandhiji at the very outset of the
conversation set them at their ease by telling them that he would gladly agree to have
their two nominees on the committee. They also insisted on separate electorate. He
conceded that too.”
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

125

161. DISCUSSION WITH DEPUTATION
OF GARASIA MANDAL1
February 28, 1939
As in the case of the Muslim Deputation, Gandhiji set them completely at their
ease by telling them at the very start that they would have their one nominee on the
Committee. In reply to further questions on their part, he told them that if they
expected to be confirmed for all time in all the privileges that they had up till now
enjoyed, they were doomed to disappointment. That was neither right nor feasible. If
the condition of India’s countless destitute masses was to be ameliorated, the
privileged class shall have to divest itself of some of its privileges in favour of
Daridranarayana. If the Garasias would only understand the spirit of the times, become
one with the toiling masses and make the latter’s interests their own, their legitimate
interests would be safeguarded. He would therefore give them the advice he had given
to the Princes, viz., to make themselves true servants of the people and not want to
ride on their backs. They should hold their wealth as a trust to be used wisely in the
interest of the people. They were entitled to a reasonable emolument for themselves
but only in return for service rendered.
“We are bitterly attacked by a certain section of Congressmen, we are even
called names. Would not you protect us?”

You should know that there is today in the Congress a
considerable and growing section that wants to do away with all vested
interests altogether, because they have no faith in the possibility of
their conversion. My capacity to protect you will, therefore, entirely
depend on your willingness to adopt and live up to the ideal of
trusteeship that I have placed before you. I would not be able to help
you unless you co-operate with me.
Harijan, 25-3-1939

1

126

Extracted from Pyarelal’s “The Rajkot Fast”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

162. INTERVIEW TO “THE HINDU”
R AJKOT ,

February 28, 1939
Gandhiji in an interview stated that the day began with a cordial exchange of
views with representatives of Muslims.1

After the meeting with the Muslim representatives, I went to the
Resident’s bungalow, and there was a very friendly conversation
between us two. At 2 p.m. I met representatives of the Garasia
Association with whom also I had a cordial talk.2 Later I visited the
jails of the State in the company of Col. Daly, Lt. Col. Aspinal and
Khan Saheb Fateh Mahomed Ahmed, who were all present at the
interviews with the prisoners. At Rajkot Jail, I met men and women
satyagrahi prisoners for an hour and then drove to Sardhar Jail where
I spent an hour and a half.
Asked about his impressions of his talks with prisoners in the two jails,
Gandhiji refused to commit himself to any definite opinion until he had had a
discussion with Khan Saheb Fateh Mahomed. Continuing, Gandhiji said:

From the Sardhar Jail, I went to Tromba where I met Kasturba,
Mridulabehn and Manibehn. I had my meal there. On returning to the
capital, I went to the Thakore Saheb and spent nearly an hour and a
half with him.
Replying to a question about the chances of his going to Tripuri, Gandhiji
said:

I still entertain the hope that there will be an honourable
settlement, and I am making desperate efforts to go to Tripuri as early
as possible. It is, however, difficult for me to say whether I will be able
to leave before the week-end.
The Hindu, 1-3-1939

1
2

Vide “Telegram to Radhakrishna Bajaj”, 27-2-1939
Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

127

163. A TELEGRAM 1
R AJKOT,

March 1, 1939
I

AM

DESPERATE

UNABLE

TO

EFFORTS.

THE EXHIBITION

TO

SAY
POSTPONE
MARCH

ANYTHING.
THE
SIXTH.

I

AM

OPENING
2

INFORM

MAKING
DATE

OF

SETH

GOVINDDAS.

The Hindu, 2-3-1939

164. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA3
R AJKOT,

March 1, 1939
In the morning, I saw peasants from Halenda Khari, Hodthali
and several other places who had complaints to make about the
delivery of the State’s portion of the crops and against lathi charges
and the like. There were nearly one hundred and fifty of them
including about twenty to twenty-five women. I did not know that I
was going to meet them this morning. Therefore, I had not informed
the Khan Saheb 4 . Happily he dropped in after I had proceeded with
the conversation. He was able to listen to what the peasants had to say
and asked them certain questions also. At this stage I do not want to
go into the details of these allegations.
1

This was sent “in response to a request” from the Reception Committee of the
52nd session of the Indian National Congress at Tripuri. The telegram was
presumably addressed to Shankerlal Banker. In “The Rajkot Fast [–I]” (Harijan, 25-31939), Pyarelal explains: “There was a desperate S. O. S. from Shankerlal Banker and
Seth Govinddas [Chairman, Reception Committee] telling Gandhiji that his presence
alone at Tripuri would help to pull the Reception Committee through a number of
financial and other difficulties and even if he could reach there by sixth, they would be
satisfied. . .”
2
Gandhiji was to open the Khadi and Village Industries Exhibition on March
3. As Gandhiji could not leave Rajkot, Jawaharlal Nehru opened the exhibition on
March 6.
3
The source says that “after the evening prayers Gandhiji reviewed the day’s
work”.
4
Fateh Mohammed Khan, First Member, Rajkot State Council.

128

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

After the talk with the peasants, I had a prolonged conversation
with the Khan Saheb, as usual of a friendly character.
In the afternoon I saw co-workers and had a full discussion with
them for an hour and a half over the questions agitating the public
mind. The discussion with the workers was very interesting in that they
asked some penetrating questions and I endeavoured to put before
them my view of what the implication of true satyagraha were. I
believe that they are working with a full sense of their responsibility.
In this connection, I am glad to be able to say that the authorities
allowed some leaders, who are in jail, to come to me because I needed
their assistance for the purpose of carrying on negotiations. They
were kept with me for a few hours, and taken back to their respective
quarters at about 6·30 p.m.
Gandhiji told the Associated Press Special Correspondent that his talks
tonight with Durbar Virawala1 were inconclusive and that he was waiting to hear from
him tomorrow to resume the talks.

The Hindu, 2-3-1939

165.

LETTER TO DHARMENDRASINH2
ANANDKUNJ, R AJKOT,

March 2, 1939
,
I write this letter not without hesitation, but duty compels it.
You know the reason for my coming here. For three days I had
conversation with Durbar Virawala. He gave me cause for intense
dissatisfaction. He seems to be incapable of keeping his resolutions
from moment to moment. Such is my opinion based upon my three
days’ contact with him. In my opinion, his guidance has harmed the
State.
Now I come to the object of this letter. At the time of leaving
Wardha I had resolved that I would not leave Rajkot without inducing
fulfilment of your promise. But I had never thought that I would have
to be here for more than one or two days or that I would have to
suffer what I have suffered.
MAHERBAN THAKORE SAHEB

1
2
3

3

Dewan of Rajkot State
The letter appeared as “translated from original Gujarati by Gandhiji”.
The addressee was the Ruler of Rajkot State.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

129

My patience is exhausted. I should hasten to Tripuri if it is at all
possible. If I do not go, over a thousand co-workers will be
disappointed and lakhs of poor people will become disconsolate.
Time, therefore, has a special value for me at this juncture.
I beseech you, therefore, to adopt with a full heart the following
suggestions of mine and free me from anxiety by speeding me on my
return journey tomorrow.
1. You should announce to the people that our Notification
No. 50,1 dated 26th December, stands.
2. You should cancel your Notification No. 61 2 , dated 21st
January. Names 2, 3, 5 and 7 of the Reforms Committee announced
by you should stand and you should accept on behalf of the Rajkot
Rajakiya Praja Parishad the following names ;
1. U. N. Dhebar,
2. P. P. Anada,
3. V. M. Shukla,
4. J. H. Joshi,
5. S. V. Modi.
The underlying motive of this suggestion is that the Parishad
should have a majority on its side.
3. Shri U. [N.] Dhebar should be appointed as President of
the Committee.
4. You should appoint three or less than three officials as
guides and advisers to the Committee. They should be such as I could
accept on behalf of the Parishad. They should have no vote in the
proceedings of the Committee.
5. You should issue instructions to the heads of the several
departments of the State to furnish to the Committee such papers,
figures and other material and assistance as it may need. You should
appoint for the use of the Committee suitable quarters in the
Secretariat.
1

This was drafted by Gandhiji, vide “Draft of Statement for Thakore Saheb of
Rajkot”, 19-11-1938
2
According to Harijan, 4-2-1939, the Notification had given the names of the
following “seven gentlemen, representing all important interests in the State, to
work along with the three officers of the state. . . to draw up, after proper
investigation, . . . a scheme of reforms with a view to associating the people more
closely with the administration of the State”: (1) P. P. Anada, President, Praja
Parishad Sabha, (2) J. J. Dhirubha, (3) D. H. Valimohmed, (4) P. D. Malaviya, (5) M.
M. Tank President, Municipal Corporation, (6) Dr. D. J. Gajjar and (7) H. Abdul Ali.

130

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

6. My advice is that the advisers whom you may appoint in
terms of Clause 4 should form the Executive Council and that Council
should be responsible for the management of the State in the spirit of
the Notification of the 26th December so as not to do anything likely
to be injurious to its main purpose. One of them should be the
President of the Council. You will unhesitatingly endorse the actions
of the Council. If you deem it fit to appoint other persons than the
advisers of the Committee as Councillors, the appointment should be
made in consultation with me.
The Committee should commence its proceedings on the 7th
instant and finish them by the 22nd instant. The enforcement of the
recommendations of the Committee should take place within seven
days of their being in your hands.
7. The satyagrahi prisoners should be discharged tomorrow.
Fines and execution orders should be stopped and fines already
collected and confiscations should be returned.
I gather from the conversation with Mr. Gibson1 that he will not
interfere with whatever you may do in connection with the
Notification of the 26th December.
If you cannot see your way to accept my suggestions before
noon tomorrow, my fast will commence from that time and will
continue till after acceptance.
I trust that you will not regard the language of my letter to be
stiff. And if I do use stiff language or my action appears to be such, I
claim that right in connection with you. My father had the privilege of
serving the State when your grandfather was its Chief. Your father
regarded me as a father to him. Indeed at a public meeting he called
me even his guru, but I have been guru to no one; therefore, I have
never regarded him as a disciple. You are therefore as a son to me. It
is possible that you do not regard me as father. If you do, you will
accept joyfully my submission in a moment and, in addition, you will
express your regret for what has befallen your people after 26th
December. You will please not consider me your or the State’s
enemy. I can never be anybody’s enemy and have never been. I have
implicit faith that in the acceptance of my submission to you lies your
good, your prestige and your duty. If you will observe that in some
of my suggestion I have gone outside the four corners of the
1

E. C. Gibson, Resident of Rajkot State

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

131

Notification of the 26th December, such departure will be found to be
merely superficial. You will note that in not interfering with your
nominations of the persons outside the Parishad I have had solely in
view your prestige. Thus the departure is purely in favour of the State.
If the other departures may not be so considered, they are solely due
to, what I have considered, your breach of promise. In my view they
are for the protection of both the parties and the people and for the
purpose of preventing another breakdown of the Settlement.
In conclusion, I give you my word of honour that if I am then
alive, I shall critically examine the report that the Reforms Committee
may prepare. If I am not, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel may do so, and the
examination will be such as to make sure that no damage is done to
your prestige or to the State or your people.
I am sending a copy of this 1 letter to Mr. Gibson. I am not
handing this letter to the Press and I entertain the hope that you will
kindly adopt my suggestion so that I may never have to publish this
letter.
May God bless you and give you right guidance.2
Blessings from

MOHANDAS

Harijan, 11-3-1939

166. LETTER TO VIRAWALA
March 2, 1939
What am I to do? I am writing this after having remained awake
half the night. During the last three days, you have made me pass
through a very bitter experience. I could see no desire on your part to
adhere to any statement you made. All the time you appeared anxious
to get out of every commitment. Last night’s talk was the culmination,
and I am now able to understand why it is that the citizens of Rajkot
stand in terror of you.
You have invited me to study your whole career. I accepted that
1

The source, however, has “your”; vide also “Letter to E.C. Gibson”,
2-3-1939
2
In “The Rajkot Fast [–I]”, Pyarelal explains: “Gandhiji forbade all discussion
as to the merits of his step. He only remarked, ‘I want the note to be delivered to the
Thakore Saheb by 12 noon today. That to me is the God-appointed time and the
hour’.” For the addressee’s reply, vide “Letter from Dharmendrasinh”, 3-3-1939

132

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

invitation. But you have really not left very much for me to
investigate. God has not given me that much strength, that much
purity and that much non-violence for, otherwise I would have been
able to enter your heart. I feel ashamed and sad that I have been
unable to win you over. I believe that the influence you have over the
Thakore Saheb is not an influence for his good. My heart wept night
before last when I saw his mental helplessness and I hold you
responsible for it.
I have just addressed a letter 1 to the Thakore Saheb and am
sending this at the same time to you. You will no doubt see that letter
and, therefore, I am not sending you a copy of it. Although you had
given me your final decision, I would still request you to advise the
Thakore Saheb to accept my suggestions. May God enter your heart.
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel. Vol II, p. 346.

167. LETTER TO E.C. GIBSON
ANANDKUNJ, R AJKOT,

March 2, 1939
DEAR MR. GIBSON,

With the deepest sorrow but as a matter of sheer duty, I have just
sent to H. H. the Thakore Saheb a letter 2 of which I enclose a copy
herewith. I have not been able yet to translate it. In order to save time,
therefore, I have sent you only a copy of the Gujarati original. I hope,
however, to send [an] English translation in the course of the day. You
will then please regard it as the only authorized translation or, as if it
were, the original.
May I bespeak your full-hearted co-operation, in so far as it lies
in your power, in the prosecution of my proposal?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

Harijan, 11-3-1939

1
2

Vide “Letter to Dharmendrasinh”,2-3-1939
ibid

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

133

168.TALK TO SATYAGRAHI VOLUNTEERS 1
March, 2, 1939
After the evening prayer Gandhiji gave a talk to satyagrahi volunteers. They
had distinguished themselves by their bravery and proved their non-violent mettle.
But that was not what had brought him to Rajkot. What filled him with concern was
the growth and spread of the cult of goondaism. In Travancore, in Talcher, in
Dhenkanal, and finally in Rajkot itself, he had noticed that the continuance of civil
resistance was provoking more and more violence on the part of the authorities and
brutalizing them progressively. He had therefore called a halt to civil resistance and
taken upon himself the entire burden of the fight. He hoped through Rajkot to find a
remedy for this cult of the cudgel and the hired bravoes with which the civil resister
was being confronted. [He said:]

I see the hand of God in this. I could not have chosen a purer or
a nobler means for this than the Rajkot issue. It is essentially a moral
issue.
Nothing could be clearer, no breach of promise could be more
flagrant needing rectification.
He advised the satyagrahis to be extremely wary and beware of having any
truck or making any compromise with violence. There could be no ‘united front’
between violence and non-violence; the two were incompatible. If, therefore, in any
place, those who did not believe in non-violence were in preponderance, the
satyagrahis should isolate themselves from them and refuse to be drawn into civil
resistance in conjunction with them.
One of the satyagrahi volunteers, referring to what some of them had been put
through by the State authorities, asked if satyagraha required them to submit to illegal
and inhuman treatment to which very often they were subjected. For instance, if a
police officer put a satyagrahi under arrest and ordered him to enter a prison van, the
latter was bound to obey the order. But supposing he was ordered to enter a bus in
order to be taken to a distant place in the jungle, there to be bundled out after a
beating without even a pretext of a trial or legal procedure of any kind, was he still to
obey the policeman in question? Gandhiji replied:

A satyagrahi courts suffering and submits to it willingly and
cheerfully in the hope therethrough to melt the heart of the opponent.
He does nothing out of compulsion. Prahlada did not hesitate when
ordered by his father to be tied to a red-hot iron post. On the contrary
1

134

This is extracted from “The Rajkot Fast [–I]”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

he eagerly embraced it and the legend says that he remained unhurt.
An ideal satyagrahi would as a matter of fact be insensible to all the
bodly tortures that might be inflicted upon him and experience
nothing but exultation and joy under them. I know that I am far from
having attained that ideal myself. But a worthy heir always adds to the
legacy that he receives, and satyagraha presents infinite scope for
research and further development.
A satyagrahi may, however, not obey an order that offends
against his moral sense or hurts his self-respect even though it may
cost him his life. Nay more, it may be one’s duty to put an end to
one’s life, if that is the only way of protecting one’s honour. Such an
act would not be termed suicide. It would be the triumph of immortal
spirit over the ‘muddy vesture of decay’ that our physical body is.
It has been my unvarying experience that God never tries a
satyagrahi beyond his capacity. Somehow the strength comes to us
when we need it most if we utterly rely on Him. But this needs intense
preparation and self-discipline through ceaseless labour of love. Jailgoing is only a small step and by no means the most important.
Unaccompanied by the spirit of service, courting imprisonment and
inviting beatings and lathi charges becomes a species of violence. I
would therefore expect every satyagrahi to keep a regular diary and
account for every minute of his time in terms of constructive service.
The path of satyagraha is sharp as a razor’s edge. A satyagrahi has to
be ever vigilant, always in harness and never for a moment idle.
Numbers do not matter in satyagraha. Even a handful of true
satyagrahis, well organized and disciplined through selfless service of
the masses, can win independence for India, because behind them will
be the power of the silent millions. Satyagraha is soul-force. It is
subtle and universal in its action. Once it is set in motion it goes
forward with gathering momentum and speed till it bursts through all
physical barriers and overspreads the whole world.
At the end of it he suggested to those in charge that the volunteer camp might
now be dissolved and such volunteers as were not strictly required for the local work
in hand might be sent back to their respective homes.

Harijan, 25-3-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

135

169.STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1
March 2, 1939
I am sorry to have to say ‘yes’ in answer to your question. I am
also sorry that the information has leaked out before its time. I do not
wish as yet to publish my letter.2 All that I would like to say at this
critical juncture is that it cost me a night’s rest before I came to the
conclusion that if the suspended struggle was not to be revived, and if
the atrocities of which I have heard so much and of which I was
obliged to make mention in my Press note3 were also not to be
revived, I must adopt some effective remedy to end the agony, and
God gave me the remedy.
The public should not laugh at my connecting God with the
proposed step. Rightly or wrongly, I know that I have no other
resource as a satyagrahi than the assistance of God in every
conceivable difficulty, and I would like it to be believed that what may
appear to be inexplicable actions of mine are really due to inner
promptings.
It may be a product of my heated imagination. If it is so, I prize
that imagination as it has served me for a chequered life extending
over a period of now nearly over 55 years, because I learned to rely
consciously upon God before I was 15 years old.
One thing more. The weapon of fasting, I know, cannot be
lightly wielded. It can easily savour of violence unless it is used by
one skilled in the art. I claim to be such an artist in this subject.
It should be remembered that I am intimately connected with
Rajkot and its Rulers. Regarding the Thakore Saheb as my own son, I
have every right to evoke the best in his nature by means of selfsuffering. If my fast, which I hope will be avoided, is to be interpreted
as pressure, I can only say that such moral pressure should be
welcomed by all concerned.
A breach of promise shakes me to my root, especially when I
am in any way connected with the author of the breach. And if it costs
my life, which after all at the age of 70 has no insurance value, I
1

The statement is extracted from “The Fiery Ordeal”, in which it appeared with
an explanatory note that “a group of Press correspondents approached Gandhiji” to
confirm the rumour about his decision to go on a fast. In “The Rajkot Fast [– I]”,
Pyarelal explains that the statement was “dictated” by Gandhiji.
2
Vide “Letter to Dharmendrasinh”,2-3-1939
3
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 25-2-1939

136

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

should most willingly give it in order to secure due performance of a
sacred and solemn promise.
Harijan, 11-3-1939

170. MESSAGE TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL1
March 2, 1939
You must not be perturbed over my decision. It was taken
purely in answer to the voice of God. But reason too dictated no other
course. I would not like you to mention this thing to anybody. If
Durbar Virawala allows the Thakore Saheb to accept my proposal, let
the Thakore Saheb have the full credit for it.
You may not leave your post . . . 2 It should suffice for you that
I am here to shoulder the burden of the Rajkot issue.
I would have liked even to save all telephonic charges in this
crisis. But knowing your temperament as I do, I would not stint
telephonic communications, if there are any developments to report.
Harijan, 25-3-1939

171. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS3
March 3, 1939
I release my letter to the Thakore Saheb with a heavy heart, but
I have had the misfortune many a time to perform painful duties. This
is one of them. I would like all friends and sympathizers rigidly to
refrain from embarking on sympathetic fasts, even for one day. I
know that fasting, like satyagraha, is very much abused nowadays.
One finds people fasting on the slightest pretext. Often there is
violence behind such fasting. If for no other reason, than for this
4

1

This is extracted from “The Rajkot Fast [–I]”. Pyarelal says that Gandhiji
conveyed the message over the telephone.
2
As in the source
3
This is extracted from “The Fiery Ordeal”.
4
Vide In “Diary of the Fast-II” (Harijan, 1-4-1939), Pyarelal says : “As
suggested by Gandhiji the Press . . . came . . . at 9 a.m. as by that time he expected .
. . the Thakore Saheb’s reply . . . Gandhiji was still hopeful that a satisfactory reply
would come and the fast would be obviated. . . . At 11.15 a.m. Gandhiji’s last meal
was served . . . . At one minute to 12 no reply had come. Gandhiji was going to hand
the text of his letter . . . he had his favourite hymn Vaishnavajana sung first . . .
Ramadhun was sung next. At the end of it Gandhiji released the text of his letter . . .
and straightway began dictating a statement to the Pressman . . . ”
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

137

practical reason of preventing thoughtless imitation, I was most
reluctant to undertake this fast. But an inner urge brooks no denial. I
can only therefore warn the people, who may wish hereafter to fast for
redress of grievances, real or imaginary, against imitating me. Fasting
like some very potent medicines can only be taken on rare occasions
and under expert guidance. It is wrong, it is sinful for everybody to
consider himself an expert.
Let the public know that at a very early age I began fasting for
self-purification and then I took a prolonged fast1 for an erring son of
mine. This was soon after followed by a still more prolonged fast2 for
an erring daughter of a very dear friend. In both these cases the
results justified the fast. The first public fast3 that I undertook was in
South Africa in connection with sufferings of the indentured who had
joined the satyagraha struggle in South Africa. I have no recollection
of a single experiment of mine in fasting having been a fruitless
effort. In addition, I had the experience of priceless peace and
unending joy during all those fasts, and I have come to the conclusion
that fasting, unless it is the result of God’s grace, is useless starvation,
if not much worse.
The second thing I would like to say is that there should be no
bitter speeches or writings either in connection with the Thakore
Saheb or his advisers or the Resident. I have used strong language in
connection with the Resident and actions of State officials. If I find
that I have in any way wronged them, I know how to make
reparations. Any harsh language used in connection with the Thakore
Saheb or other actors in the tragedy will mar the effect the fast is
intended to produce.
The breach of a solemn pact does not require any harsh or bitter
language in order to enhance the enormity of the evil consequences
of such breaches. What the public and the Press can usefully do is, by
a dignified disapproval of the Thakore Saheb’s action, to bring home
to him the pressure of enlightened public opinion.
1

Presumably, the references are to the week-long fast in 1913 for the moral
lapse of two inmates at Phoenix Settlement, and the 14-day fast in 1914; vide “An
Autobiography”, Fasting As Penance.
2
ibid
3
On December 21, 1913, Gandhiji announced his decision to eat only once a
day as “mark of inward mourning” for Indians shot dead during the strike by the
indentured Indians in Sourth Africa.

138

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

All satyagraha and fasting is a species of tyaga1 . It depends for
its effects upon an expression of wholesome public opinion, shorn of
all bitterness. Let there be no impatience to produce the desired result
because of fasting. He who has urged me to undertake the fast will
give me strength to go through it, and if it is His will that I should still
live for a while on this earth to carry on the self-chosen mission of
humanity, no fast, however prolonged, will dissolve the body.
I am painfully conscious of the fact that my fast2 in connection
with the late Mr. MacDonald’s decision on the communal question
induced many persons to act against their will. I hope no such thing
will happen in connection with this fast. If there are public men who
think that I have erred in characterizing the Thakore Saheb’s
Notification of January 21 as a breach of the promise made by the
Notification on December 26, they will perform a friendly act by
condemning my characterization, as also the fast. It is designed
undoubtedly to melt the Thakore Saheb’s heart, but it is in no sense
designed to coerce public opinion into bringing pressure to bear upon
the Thakore Saheb or those in whose opinion his action may be free
of all blame.
Another thing I would like to mention is the first paragraph of
my letter3 in which I have criticized Durbar Virawala. I can truthfully
say that I am slow to see the blemishes of fellowbeings, being myself
full of them and therefore being in need of their charity. I have learnt
not to judge anyone harshly and to make allowances for defects that I
may detect.
What has happened about Durbar Virawala is that I have been
inundated by very bitter and serious complaints against him. In my
conversations with him I had even made mention of those complaints,
and let me say to his credit that he invited me to investigate those
complaints. I told him that I would do so, and but for the intervention
of the fast it was fully my desire to undertake this investigation.
I had already invited friends to put me in possession of evidence
in support of specific allegations against him; but prolonged
conversations with him for three days confirmed the impression that
the complaints against him had produced upon me, so much so that I
1

Sacrifice
In 1932; the “fast unto death”, commenced on September 16, was broken on
September 26.
3
Vide “Letter to Dharmendrasinh”
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

139

felt that the evidence that the conversations gave me was sufficient
proof of the heavy indictment against him.
What I have said in the first paragraph of my letter is a
deliberate understatement of my opinion. It gave me much pain to
write that paragraph, but it was necessary for my mission to warn the
Thakore Saheb of the overpowering influence that he exercises over
His Highness. Sober and influential persons, not few but many, have
repeatedly told me that so long as Durbar Virawala exercises that
influence upon the Thakore Saheb there is no peace for the people.
I myself feel that there is very considerable truth in this
statement, and it would be wrong on my part whilst I am embarking
upon the fast to suppress this relevant truth from the public. I have
sent a private and personal letter to him, which, so far as I am
concerned, shall never see the light of day. But I do make a humble
appeal to him, and I would like those who know him to join me in the
appeal, that he should refrain from influencing the Thakore Saheb,
although the latter may find it difficult to free himself from that
influence. I can say much more, but I must not.
Although I have been in exile from Kathiawar for more than a
generation and a half, I know how turbid Kathiawar politics is. This
unfortunate sub-province is notorious for its intrigues. I have felt its
deadly influence even during these four days. How I wish that my fast
may contribute, be it ever so little, to the purification of Kathiawar
politics. I therefore invite the Princes and politicians of Kathiawar to
use my fast to rid Kathiawar of the deadening influence of the
poisonous atmosphere that makes healthy living in Kathiawar so
difficult.
Harijan, 11-3-1939

172. TALK WITH FIRST MEMBER, RAJKOT
STATE COUNCIL1
March 3, 1939
GANDHIJI: It only adds fuel to the fire. I shall formally reply to it
later. But may I, in the mean time, suggest to you that you should
1

This and the following item are extracted from “Diary of the Fast–II”.
Pyarelal explains that “the First Member arrived with the Thakore Saheb’s reply”
when Gandhiji had just completed his statement to the Press; vide the preceding item.
For the Thakore Saheb’s reply, vide “Letter from Dharmendrasinh”, 3-3-1939

140

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

advise the Thakore Saheb that all satyagrahi prisoners may now be
released? Now that I have commenced the fast there can be no
resumption of civil resistance on this issue during my lifetime. The
news of my fast is bound to perturb them and they might launch on a
sympathetic fast. As prisoners it may be difficult to control or check
them.
FIRST MEMBER

: If they are not released, will the civil disobedience be resumed?

No. My fast has rendered the suspension absolute.
But must you fast? Is there no alternative? I would far rather have any amount
of civil disobedience than this fast on your part.

I know that. But if at the ripe age of seventy I have to reconsider
a decision taken after so much introspection and waiting upon God, I
shall have lived my three score and ten years in vain. I launched upon
the fast when there was no other course open to me. Can you suggest
any other ?
Harijan, 1-4-1939

173. NOTE TO KASTURBA GANDHI1
March 3, 1939
I hope you are all calm and collected. But if you cannot remain
at peace there2 , you can come to me.
Harijan, 1-4-1939

174. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS3
March 3, 1939
I am sorry for this reply. I cannot help saying that the Thakore
Saheb has been badly advised. The reply adds fuel to the fire.
Considerations urged in the letter became irrelevant when he gave the
following note4 to the Sardar :
1

Pyarelal explains that the note was sent “with the First member” after his
talk with Gandhiji; vide the preceding item.
2
The addressee was under detention at Tramba.
3
This appeared under the title “Adds Fuel to the Fire” as Gandhiji’s comments
“on the Thakore Saheb’s reply”; vide Appendix I. In “Diary of the Fast-II”, Pyarelal
says that the statement was “dictated” by “Gandhiji after the First Member had left the
place with the note to Kasturba Gandhi; vide the preceding item.
4
Dated December 26, 1939; vide “Letter From Dharmendrasinh”, 3-3-1939
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

141

[It is] agreed seven members of the Committee mentioned in Clause 2 of the
State announcement of today’s date1 are to be recommended by Sardar [Vallabhbhai]
Patel and they are to be nominated by us.

The language is unequivocal and emphatic. The Thakore Saheb,
in giving that note, divested himself of the responsibility of choosing
the nominees. The responsibility of nomination rests with the Thakore
Saheb, but the nomination is conditioned by the fact that the names
had to be recommended by the Sardar. Therefore the responsibility
for making suitable recommendations devolved upon the Sardar and
that devolution took place at the will of the Ruler of Rajkot. It was
open to the Ruler and his advisers to negotiate with Sardar, if they did
not find his recommendations suitable and to induce him to make
other recommendations but if the Sardar could not be so persuaded,
the Thakore Saheb, having divested himself of the responsibility to
choose a nominee, had to accept the Sardar’s recommendations.
Reason also suggests that if the reference to the committee was to be
made good it must be a Committee of the choice of those for whose
sake the Notification containing the reference had become necessary.
Otherwise, what was given with one hand could not be taken away with
the other.
If the choice is left to the Ruler and his advisers, there is
nothing to prevent them from appointing a committee which would
make recommendations such that they would completely nullify the
spirit of the reference. However, the matter is past argument. If the
Thakore Saheb’s letter is the last word, my fast has to continue to the
end of my time on this earth. I shall undergo the ordeal, I hope, with
a cheerful heart, and I know also that what may not take place in my
lifetime will take place without the shadow of a doubt after the
sacrifice.
Harijan, 11-3-1939

1

The source, however, has “said announcement of this date”. For the “State
ann-ouncement”, vide “Letter to Dharmendrasinh”, 14-4-1939

142

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

175. TELEGRAM TO MIRABEHN
R AJKOT,

March 3, 1939
MIRABAI
C ARE BADSHAHKHAN1
C HARSADDA
FAST
BEGUN
WITH
LIKELYBE
PROLONGED.
CONTINUE WORK.
LOVE.

PRAYER
YOU

AND
MUST

REJOICING.
IT
NOT
WORRY

IS
BUT

BAPU
From the original: C. W. 5431. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G. N. 10026

176. TELEGRAM TO ABDUL GHAFFAR KHAN
R AJKOT,

March 3, 1939
KHANSAHEB ABDUL GHAFFAR KHAN
C HARSADDA
FAST
BEGUN
GOD’S
NAME.
CAUSE
MIRABAI.
KHUDAI
KHIDMATGARS
OTHER CONSTRUCTIVE
WORK.
LOVE..

FOR JOY.
SHOULD

LOOK
AFTER
DO
SPINNING

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

177. TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
R AJKOT,

March 3, 1939
R AJKUMARI
MAGANWADI, WARDHA
FAST
BEGUN
UNDER
GREAT
JOY.
MAY
PROLONGED. YOU
SHOULD
ALL
BE
ENGROSSED
HOPE
LOWER HOUSE2
CONTINUES
WELL
LOVE..

BE
WORK.

BAPU
From the original: C. W. 3904. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 7213
1

Abdul Ghaffar Khan, whom the addressee was helping in teaching spining to
Khudai Khidmatgars in the Frontier Province
2
Hermann Kallenbach; Gandhiji used to address Kallenbach as ‘Lower House’
and called himself ‘Upper House’. Vide “Letter to H. Kallenbach”, 18-9-1932
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

143

178. TELEGRAM TO GOVINDDAS
[March 3, 1939] 1
FAST
TO

BEGUN.
TRIPURI

LITTLE
SEEMS

HOPE

IMPOSSIBLE.

OF

AN

EARLY

END.

COMING

SORRY.

GANDHI

The Hindu,

4-3-1939

179. LETTER TO DHARMENDRASINH2
R ASHTRIYASHALA, R AJKOT,

March 3, 1939
MAHERBAN THAKORE SAHEB,

Your letter3 is painful. You seem to attach no value to a promise. You are acting like a man who promises donation and then
goes back upon the promise. Have you not given much by your
Notification4 of 26th December? Donations are but one of the
attributes of princeship as they are also its ornament. By that
Notification you promised a big donation. Its very core includes
surrender of the right of making the choice of names of members of
the Reforms Committee. But in the case in point you surrendered5 that
right by a special letter addressed to Sardar Vallabhbhai in his
capacity as Representative of the Parishad. Your letter of today cancels
that surrender. This action of yours does not befit you. I believe that
compliance with my suggestion contained in my yesterday’s letter is
necessary for the due fulfilment of your promise.
May God move you to such compliance. It behoves you to give
effect to the suggestion I have sent you today through the Khan
Saheb. Inasmuch as civil disobedience now remains definitely
1

From the reference to the fast; vide also the three preceding items.
The letter appeared as “translated from original Gujarati by Gandhiji”. In
“Diary of the Fast-II”, Pyarelal explains that Gandhiji sent the letter after he had
“slept peacefully and long in the afternoon”.
3
Vide “Letter from dharmendrasinh”, 3-3-1939
4
Vide “Draft of Statement for Thakore Saheb of Rajkot”, 19-11-1938
5
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 3-3-1939
2

144

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

suspended it seems to me to be your obvious duty to discharge the
civil-disobedience prisoners.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS

Harijan, 11-3-1939

180. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1
March 3, 1939
There is a misunderstanding about a certain telegram received
by me at Segaon, of which I made use in the first Press Note2 I issued
on the eve of my coming to Rajkot. I did not think it was necessary
for me to refer to that telegram. On my attention being drawn to the
fact, I immediately discovered that I should have inserted in my Press
Note the telegram received from shri Nanalal Kalidas Jasani
Rangoonwalla on February 24 reading :
The State granted our request to allow Mohanbhai Gadhadawala and
myself to visit the Trumba, Sardhar and Rajkot jails. There were
inconveniences which were mended by the State authorities. There shall be no
differentiation in treatment between the Sardhar and Rajkot prisons. Glad to
inform you that fasting has terminated.

It will be recalled that one of the telegrams received by me from
the First Member made mention of this telegram and said that the
telegram received from Shri Nanalal would show that the fasting was
unjustified.
On my coming here I discovered that the omission by me to
reproduce this telegram gave rise to the rumour that Shri Nanalal had
come to the decision that the fast was not justified. There was no
mention in this telegram to me to the effect that the fast was not
justified. It was unnecessary to say in the telegram that the fast was
justified because the sender of the telegram and other friends were
trying to find out a remedy for dealing with the situation.
It has become necessary for me to clear this misunderstanding
because there is an atmosphere of suspicion and disturbance, which
1

This appeared under the title “A Misunderstanding Cleared”. In “Diary of the
Fast-II”, Pyarelal explains that Gandhiji had an “informal talk” with “a group of
journalists”.
2
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 25-2-1939
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

145

may interfere with the working of the satyagraha machinery.
Therefore, it has become necessary for me, in the interest of the cause,
to inform my co-workers that there is absolutely no cause for
suspicion that Shri Nanalal had come to a hasty decision about the
fast. His whole reason for intervening was to find out if he can be of
any assistance in terminating the hunger strike of the prisoners, and
we now know the result of this intervention.
Harijan, 11-3-1939

181.

LETTER TO BALVANTSINHA

March 3, 1939
The longer words should be more widely spaced. Anyway the
improvement is considerable and it will be good if it is sustained. If I
have my way you shall turn out into a true and expert gosevak.
This letter1 reached me here today, having been forwarded from
Bardoli.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 1919

182. TELEGRAM TO C. F. ANDREWS2
[On or after March 3, 1939] 3
ALL

WELL.

ANXIETY

COMPLEX

NOT

ALLOWED.

LOVE.

MOHAN

Harijan, 11-3-1939

1
Gandhiji had written on the back of the letter from the addressee, who had
requested him to make corrections in it.
2
This and the following item are extracted from the addressee’s article “Ordeal
by Fire”. C. F. Andrews explains that the telegram was “sent to me at Delhi.” He had
already “started when it came to Bolpur”.
3
According to the addressee, the telegram was in reply to the one he had sent
to Gandhiji on receipt of a telegraphic message about the fast.

146

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

183. TELEGRAM TO C. F. ANDREWS1
[On or after March 4, 1939]
YOUR

COMING

LOVE. TELL

UNNECESSARY

AT

PRESENT.

KEEPING

WELL.

MAHADEV OTHERS.

MOHAN

Harijan, 11-3-1939

184. TELEGRAM TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE
[On or before March 4, 1939] 2
GURUDEVA
YOUR

LOVING

WILLNOT
KNOW I

MESSAGE.

THINK
HAVE

OF
YOUR

KEEPING

RUNNING
BLESSING

WELL.

TO
AND

ME

HOPE
AS

YOU

BEFORE.

I

LOVE.

GANDHI

The Hindu, 5-3-1939

185. TELEGRAM TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
R AJKOT, 3

March 4, 1939
C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
KEEPING

WELL

FIT.

STEP

WAS

INEVITABLE.

From a photostat: C. W. 10887. Courtesy: C. R. Narasimhan

186. TELEGRAM TO HAREKRUSHNA MAHTAB
R AJKOT,

March 4, 1939
HAREKRUSHNA MAHTAB4 , M. L. A.
C UTTACK
ONLY

ADVICE

I

GIVE

IS

GO

ON

WITH

WORK

1
Vide the preceding item. C. F. Andrews explains : “This was in answer to an
express telegram I had sent on the train Journey asking him to advise me whether I
should come to Rajkot or remain in Delhi.”
2
ibid
3
The telegram was reported under the date-line “Santiniketan, March 4”.
4
Chief Ministr of Orissa, 1946-50 and 1957-61; Minister of Commerce and
Ind-ustry, Government of India, 1950-52; Governor of Bombay, 1955-56

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

147

WITHINCREASING

DEVOTION

AND

WE

SHALL

SOON

COME THROUGH.

BAPU
H. K. Mahtab Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

187. TELEGRAM TO MIRABEHN
R AJKOT,

March 4, 1939
MIRABAI
C ARE BADSHAHKHAN
C HARSADDA TAHSIL
KEEPING

WELL.

HAVE

NO

ANXIETY.

INFORM

KHAN

SAHEB.

BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6432. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G. N. 10027

188. LETTER TO E. C. GIBSON1
R ASHTRIYASHALA, R AJKOT,

March 4, 1939
DEAR MR. GIBSON,

I woke up early this morning and felt like sending to the Press
what I am about to write down here. I then felt like wiring the contents
to H. E. the Viceroy2 . At last the correct thing appeared to me, to pass
on my thoughts to you with the request that you should wire them to
His Excellency with such remarks as you may choose to make
thereon.
It seems to me that in regarding the Thakore Saheb as a
responsible thinking Ruler, I am, or shall I say we are all, giving
currency to a fraud. I felt this when I sent him day before yesterday
my letter 3 embodying my suggestions. I do not know if he was
allowed even to read it, and if he was, whether he understood it in all
its bearings. I am hoping that my own and my ancestral connection
1

In “The Rajkot Fast-III” (Harijan, 8-4-1939), Pyarelal explains that Gandhiji
dictated the letter at 5.30 a.m. after “a very peaceful night”.
2
Lord Linlithgow
3
Vide “Letter to Dharmendrasinh”, 2-3-1939

148

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

with his father and grandfather may provoke him to a sense of his
duty. Durbar Virawala is the Virtual Ruler of Rajkot. As I have
already Remarked in my letter to the Thakore Saheb, he is utterly
unreliable. He does not like the first Notification 1 . If he could, he
would undo it by packing the reforms Committee with a majority of
his nominees. At the present moment he holds no office in the State,
and yet his will is the supreme law. He even issues written orders and
has in the Rajkot palace his nephew who alone has access to the
Thakore Saheb at all times. Sir Patrick Cadell, as you are aware, had
no trust in him and had even prohibited him from remaining in
Rajkot or having any connection with the Thakore Saheb. You may
not know that Col. Daly had to pull him up for entering Rajkot during
the first struggle. I cannot recall a parallel to such a chaos as exists in
Rajkot. I do feel that this is a case for the immediate intervention of
the Paramount Power so as to induce fulfilment of the promise made
by the Thakore Saheb.
Nomination by the Thakore Saheb of the names recommended
by Sardar Patel, of unofficial members of the Reforms Committee, is
part of the transaction of 26th December. Moreover as I have said in
my letter 2 of yesterday to the Thakore Saheb, without some such
precaution the Notification could be easily made a dead letter. I
enclose herewith a copy of Thakore Saheb’s letter 3 and copy of
translation of my reply thereto.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C. W. 10137. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

189. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS4
March 4, 19395
It has grieved me to read the Rajkot Durbar’s communique.
Those who have studied the documents already published will have no
hesitation in agreeing with me that the communique is full of evasions
and misrepresentations of facts. I have neither the energy nor the wish
1

Dated December 26, 1938
Vide “Letter to Dharmendrasinh”, 3-3-1939
3
Vide “Letter to Dharmendrasinh”, 3-3-1939
4
The statement appeared under the title “An Unkind Cut” as Gandhiji’s
comments “on the Rajkot Durbar’s communique on the 5th instant”. However, in
“The Rajkot Fast-III”, Pyarelal refers to it among the events of March 4.
5
ibid
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

149

to examine the communique in detail. But one omission in my letter
to the Thakore Saheb and in the Press statements requires explanation.
That is in connection with my reference to atrocities in my telegrams
which brought me to Rajkot. The omission was due to my desire to be
absolutely fair to the Khan Saheb and his subordinates, who are
primarily responsible for dealing with the actions of civil resisters. But
the fact that the omission, instead of being appreciated, has been
turned against me,1 compels me to put the actual state of affairs before
the public.
After my visit to the two jails I told the Khan Saheb that I was
much moved by the statements made by the prisoners. I told him that
I was inclined to believe the allegations made by the prisoners, some
of whom were personally known to me and many of whom enjoyed in
society a status which entitled them to have their evidence believed
until it was proved to be untrue. I therefore told the Khan Saheb that
the allegations were so serious, covered such a wide field, and affected
so many persons that the only way I could do justice to the State was
to suggest a judicial inquiry by an impartial tribunal. For his own part,
he at once accepted the suggestion and, at my request, even mentioned
the names of certain English officials to conduct the judicial enquiry.
And it was agreed between us that I should prepare a charge-sheet
which he would examine and answer and, on his part, he would
prepare a counter charge-sheet which I would examine and answer.
After this process had been gone through and agreed charges
eliminated, the balance, if any was left, would be referred to the
tribunal.
The Khan Saheb also asked me what reparation I would make if
the charges of utter falsehoods which he proposed to make against the
civil resisters were found to be true. I said that if a representative of
the civil resisters was proved to be guilty of falsehoods I would
entirely withdraw from the struggle, and so far as I was concerned, I
would treat the claim for responsible government by persons capable
of falsehoods to have lapsed. The Khan Saheb seemed to be more
than pleased over the unhesitating reparation that I had offered.
I hope to make good the promise I have made to the Khan
1

According to Pyarelal, it was “misconstrued as meaning that Gandhiji’s
enquiries and inspections of Rajkot had satisfied him of the ‘falsity of these
allegations’ and Gandhiji was accused of withholding due expression of regret for the
allegations in question”.

150

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Saheb if I survive the ordeal that I am going through. Even on my
sick-bed I am organizing collection and collation of evidence already
received. I have before me more than 175 statements made by
sufferers and others.
The charge against me of breach of faith is an unkind cut. My
fast I hold to be part of my mission. At the end of it, whatever
happens, there will be peace. The alternative to the breakdown of
negotiations would have been a revival of the struggle with increasing
bitterness of strife.
Harijan, 11-3-1939

190.

STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1
R AJKOT,

March 4, 19392
Whilst there is still strength in me, I want to thank all those who
have been overwhelming me with their kind messages. I know that
many hearts are praying for the right thing to be done. He in whose
name the fast has been undertaken will guide India and the Paramount
Power in the right path. I am dictating this message, however, in order
to warn Congress workers against forgetting Tripuri. I have made
every effort that is humanly possible to go to Tripuri. But God willed
it otherwise. All whose duty it is to go, should unhesitatingly attend
the session, and, with combined effort, cut their way through the
difficulties which will confront them.
I have implored Subhas Babu not to defy medical advice, but
humbly submit to it and regulate proceedings from Calcutta.
In my opinion, the one and only task before the Congress is to
make supreme efforts to clean the Congress house of proved corruption and impurities. The strongest resolutions that the Congress may
pass will be of no value if there should be no incorruptible organization to enforce them. I shall pray, whilst I lie on my back, that Congressmen will jealously guard the reputation which has been built up by
painful effort during the past 52 years.
The All-India Spinners’ Association and the All-India Village
1
The statement appeared under the title “The One and Only Task” and was dated
“Rajkot, March 6”. However, in “The Rajkot Fast-III”, Pyarelal says it was dictated
by Gandhiji at 6 p.m. on March 4.
2
ibid

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

151

Industries Association, which are an appendage to the Congress, stand
apart, and are untouched by internal politics [of the Congress. But
even these may be affected by the corruption that has crept into the
organisation]1 . I hope that, as usual, it will be attended by tens of
thousands of people. Tamil Nadu, Bihar and Hissar have proved
beyond the shadow of a doubt that khadi not only revives villages and
village craft, but is also the finest form of famine insurance. The
phenomenal increase made by the All-India Spinners’ Association in
the wages of spinners has given a new hope to millions of women in
the villages. They flock to the All-India Spinners’ Association depot
for work, but there is surplus stock of khadi. Will not the
Congressmen and others denude the khadi stores of khadi and enable
the A. I. S. A. to take all women who are eager to do spinning under
the new wages scheme, which has succeeded beyond all expectations?
Here also let us be true to ourselves and to the dumb millions whom
the two Associations are designed to serve. The wages scheme cannot
work if unscrupulous men sell khadi or village articles are produced at
starvation wages. The only security lies in the public refusing to buy
khadi and village articles except from duly certified stores.
My fast must not unhinge the minds of Congressmen at Tripuri,
but if we are to work out our own salvation by truthful and nonviolent means, it is essential to attend to the smallest detail. Whilst I
prize the unbounded affection of the people, let them realize that my
life is not worth keeping if anxiety to save it deflects the attention of
the nation from the main purpose.
Harijan 11-3-1939; also The Hindu, 5-3-1939

191. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI2
March 4, 1939
You are worrying for nothing. You ought to rejoice that God
has sent me an opportunity to do His will. How could I consult you or
anybody else before undertaking the fast when I myself was not aware
that it was coming? God gave the signal, and what else could I do than
1

From The Hindu. The Harijan version has : “The Congress may even be affected by corruption that has crept into the organization.”
2
This is extracted from “The Rajkot Fast–III”. Pyarelal says that Dr. Sushila,
Vijayabehn and Narandas Gandhi met the addressee at Tramba in the evening. “She
was disconsolate . . . She had addressed a pathetic note to Gandhiji mildly
reproaching him for not even consulting her before launching on his fast.”

152

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

obey? Will there be any stopping to consult you or anybody when the
final peremptory summons comes as some day it must come?1
Harijan, 8-4-1939

192. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
R AJKOT,

March 5, 1939
CHI. MANI,

Why are you uneasy? Are such experiences new to you? You
have exceeded my expectations in this matter. I have come on my
own. I thought it my duty. God has inspired me to come. Do not be in
the least unhappy. I am not writing any letters now, excepting one2 to
Ba and this to you.
BAPU
S HRI MANIBEHN P ATEL
P RISONER
C/ O F IRST MEMBER
R AJKOT

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro- 4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 125

1

Pyarelal says further: “Dr. Sushila conveyed to Shrimati Kasturba an oral
message too that Gandhiji has sent through her. Did she want him to entreat the State
authorities to allow her to be with him during the fast?Her unhesitating reply was:
‘No, by no means. I shall be quite content if they will let me have daily news of him.
God who has taken care of him during all his previous trials will pull him safely
through this too. But may not one expose oneself to risk once too often?’ The remark
being conveyed to Gandhiji, he observed; ‘Yes, that may happen. But a spiritual fast
is justified not by its result but by unquestioning and joyous surrender to His will of
which it is the expression. Even death should be welcome if it comes in the
performance of one’s highest duty’.”
2
Vide the preceding item. It was, however, written on March 4.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

153

193. TELEGRAM TO MAHADEV DESAI1
R AJKOT,

March 6, 1939
MAHADEV DESAI
BIRLA HOUSE
NEW DELHI
IMPLICATIONS
SHOULD BE
TERMS
OR

OR

GIBSON

LETTER

REMOVED
ANY

COUNCIL

ARE

THAKORE

OTHER

ACCEPTABLE

APPOINTED

AND

SIGN
GOOD

MY
DEWAN

NOTIFICATION DECEMBER TWENTY-SIXTH PENDING INAUGURATION

REFORM

OF

ALTERNATIVE

GIVE

PUBLIC

CONSTITUTIONAL

LAWYER
CHOSEN

SELECTED

SUGGESTED

AS

I

SHOULD

APPOINTED

BY

THE

REFERENCE

IN

EVENT

DO

NOT

“STATESMAN”

THINK
IS

I

WOULD

BY

NEW

ABOVE.

ACT

AS

AS

ACCEPT

ANOTHER
MEMBER

POSITION

IN

ANY

CURTAILMENT

COMMITTEE

ALTERNATIVE
WITH
GIBSON

WITH
US.

SUGGESTED
OF

IS

ANOTHER

BETWEEN
AS

TERMS

SATISFY

ADMINISTRATION

MR.

OF DIFFERENCES

NECESSARY.

PARAMOUNT

WOULD

INTERIM

VICEROY SAY
THE

IF

OF CONSTITUTION

NOTIFICATION

IMPARTIALLY
THAT

FORMULA IS

ASSURANCE

TWENTY-SIXTH

ON

NEW

IN SPIRIT

POWER

CARRY

VIRAWALA

MADE

ADMINISTRATION

CONSTITUTION.

TO

THAT

SAHEB

POWERS

I
BY
IS

NECESSARY.

BAPU
From a copy: C. W. 10134. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar. Also Gandhi Nidhi File
(August 1976). Courtesy: Gandhi National Museum and Library

1
In “The Rajkot Fast-IV” (Harijan, 15-4-1939), Pyarelal reports: “In reply to
a wire from Mahadev Desai, Gandhiji wrote down the implications of his letter to
Mr. Gibson of 4th March,” Vide “Letter to E. C. Gibson”, 4-3-1939

154

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

194. TELEGRAM TO GEORGE S. ARUNDALE
[March 6, 1939] 1
THANKS
FOR
YOUR
WIRE2 .
IF
MY
FAST
IS
DIVINELY
INSPIRED
AS
I
HAVE
CLAIMED
IT
CANNOT
BE
TERRORISM.
IF
IT
IS
ONLY
A
PRODUCT
OF
MY
IMAGINATION
MY
LIFE
IS
NOT
WORTH
PRAYING
FOR
NOR
WORTH
SAVING.
IN
ASKING
THE
THAKORE
SAHEB
TO
KEEP
HIS
PROMISE
I
DO
NOT
ASK
HIM
TO
YIELD
HIS
PRINCIPLES.
I
FEEL
I
HAVE
COURAGE
ENOUGH
TO
BREAK
THE
FAST
IF
I
DISCOVER
A
FLAW
WARRANTING
A
BREACH.
IF
YOU
HAD
STUDIED
ALL
THE
FACTS
PERHAPS
YOU
WOULD
NOT
HAVE
CHARACTERIZED
MY
ACTION
AS
YOU
HAVE
DONE.
NEVERTHELESS I
THANK
YOU
AND
YOUR
ASSOCIATES
FOR
THEIR
OUTSPOKENNESS.
YOU
HAVE
RAISED
A
PUBLIC
ISSUE
OF
THIS.
IF
DESPITE
MY
REPLY
YOU
MAINTAIN
YOUR
OPINION
IT
MAY
BE
PUBLIC
SERVICE
FOR
YOU
TO
PUBLISH
YOUR
WIRE
WITH
MY
REPLY.
I
HAVE
NO
GOD
TO
SERVE
BUT
TRUTH.

The Hindu, 9-3-1939

195. LETTER TO E. C. GIBSON
R ASHTRIYASHALA, R AJKOT,

March 6, 1939
DEAR MR. GIBSON,

In reply to your letter3 of even date, will you please wire to H. E.
as follows?
“I am grateful for your wire. My actions especially my fasts are
1

From “The Rajkot Fast-IV” by Pyarelal.
Dated March 4, According to Pyarelal the addressee had asked Gandhiji,
“Whe-ther his fast did not amount to violence since its net effect would be to compel
the Thakore Saheb either to give up his ‘principles’ or to face the prospect of
becoming the most hated man in India by allowing Gandhiji to fast himself to death.
He ended by exhorting him to abandon his fast ‘with your own great courage and thus
preserve your life for India and the Thakore Saheb’s honour for his convictions’.”
3
Vide “Letter from E. C. Gibson”, 6-3-1939
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

155

never taken mechanically. They are promptings of the inner call. The
call to fast came to deal with an emergency. There could be no
waiting, no consultation with anybody. As to police excesses, my
observations so far have led me to think that they have been far in
excess of my fears. Moreover there have been so far as I can see gross
illegalities and irregularities. I invite your attention to my Press
statement 1 on the matter. But they did not cause the fast. Breach of
promise is the determining factor. If I get your clear assurance that
the substance of the terms of my letter2 to the Thakore Saheb of 3rd
instant will be satisfied, I shall gladly break the fast. The strain of the
fast is nothing compared to the uncertainty of the immediate future. I
may run no risk. There is anarchy in Rajkot. If I survive to tell the tale
I shall relate it. Durbar Virawala should be removed. Thakore Saheb is
a cipher. He does not rule. Durbar Virawala’s will is law. A
sympathetic Dewan should be appointed who need not have Thakore
Saheb’s signature to documents. Prisoners should be released before I
can leave Rajkot. I have never seen things like what I have seen, and
am daily seeing, in Rajkot. I appreciate your anxiety to end my fast. I
have great regard for you. I feel that there is a sympathetic bond
between us. I feel too that I could rely upon your honour. But if I do
not at once respond to your kind suggestion, you know the
importance I attach to what to me is a calculated breach of honour
and all the dark things that have come under my observation during
these days of agony.” 3
This being my silence-day, I could not dictate this letter. I am
writing it lying on my bed. But in order to enable you to read it with
ease I am asking Miss Harrison to type it for me. The typed copy will
accompany this. Miss Harrison will carry this to you.
I know how anxious these days are for you. I am sorry that I am
the unwitting cause.
Yours sincerely,

PS.
After finishing this I saw your note to Miss Harrison. I shall be
1

Vide “Statement to the Press”, 3-3-1939
Vide “Letter tp Dharmendrasinh”, 3-3-1939. The letter was released to the
Press on March 3.
3
For the Viceroy’s reply, vide “Letter to E. C. Gibson”, 7-3-1939
2

156

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

glad to see you tonight at 8 p.m. when my silence breaks, i.e., if that
hour is convenient to you.
M. K. G.
From a copy: C. W. 10139. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

196. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 6, 1939
CHI. NARANDAS,

Please examine Kanaiyo’s 1 method of keeping accounts and
give your opinion on it as an expert; if you find it necessary to teach
him account- keeping, please do so. The walls and doors in the school
are dirty and there are cobwebs. The walls must be cleaned and the
cobwebs, etc., removed.
The walls should be whitewashed up to four or five feet. Start
the work immediately from tomorrow.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M. M. U./II. Also C. W. 8556. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

197. DISCUSSION WITH AGATHA HARRISON2
R AJKOT,

March 6, 1939
Somehow I am able to draw the noblest in mankind and that is
what enables me to maintain my faith in God and human nature.
I know Kathiawar, the land of Kathis, very brave soldiers, but
full of intrigue and corruption. How could I clean these Augean
stables except through this vicarious suffering? If I was what I want to
be, the fast would not have been necessary. I would not then need to
argue with anyone. My word would go straight home. Indeed, I would
not even need to utter the word. The mere will on my part would
suffice to produce the required effect. But I am painfully aware of my
limitations. That is why I have to undergo all this to make myself
heard.
1

Also called Kanu; son of the addressee
This is extracted from “The Rajkot Fast-IV”. Pyarelal explains that this
followed Gandhiji’s 20-minute interview to Gibson.
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

157

The other way, namely, that of civil resistance, I deliberately
ruled out in this case, because from what I could see it would have,
under the existing circumstances, only served further to arouse the
brute in those in power. The aim of a satyagrahi, on the othere hand,
always is to put the brute in everyone to sleep. By suffering myself I
have saved the suffering on the part of the people which would have
been inevitable in case civil resistance was revived.
There is nothing but an indescribable peace and spiritual
exultation within me. There is no trace of ill will in my heart against
anybody. I am making a ceaseless, strenuous effort not to be irritated.
My heart is overflowing. with goodwill even for Virawala. My fast will
be worth while if it serves to move him and the Thakore Saheb to a
sense of their responsibility. And, if the Viceroy should in the end
decide not to concede my demand, I shall not misunderstand him. I
know how difficult it is for Englishmen to grasp the meaning of the
fasting method.1
Harijan, 15-4-1939

198. TELEGRAM TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
[On or after March 6, 1939]2
S HANKERLAL BANKER
EXHIBITION
TRIPURI
SEND

POONA
3

ADDRESS

WITH

DIRECTLY
COPY

JAWAHAR’S
DELHI.

EXHIBITION

OPENING

4

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Agatha Harrison had a long talk with Gandhiji the previous morning also.
For her report, vide “Discussion with Agatha Harrison”, 5-3-1939
2
From the reference of Jawaharlal Nehru’s inaugural address at Khadi
Exhibition, Tripuri, on March 6, 1939
3
Presumably for publication in Harijan and other allied editions. An “abridged
summary of the speech in Hindustani” appeared in Harijan, 18-3-1939.
4
Gandhiji wanted to proceed to Delhi after the fast; he however reached there
on March 15.

158

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

199.

LETTER TO E. C. GIBSON
R ASHTRIYASHALA, R AJKOT

March 7, 1939
DEAR MR. GIBSON,

I have received your kind letter, and as I wanted some points to
be cleared you were good enough to come to me and discuss them. In
my present state I want to conserve my energy and therefore I do not
want to reduce them to writing. I will ask you please to wire the
following message to His Excellency:
“ I am grateful to you for your prompt reply1 which was
delivered to me at 10. 45 today. Although naturally it leaves several
things unsaid, I regard your kind message as sufficient warrant for
breaking the fast and ending the anxiety of millions who are
following the fast with their prayers and such effort as they can make
to hasten the settlement.
It is only proper for me to say that those things [which ] are not
mentioned in your message are not waived by me but that I should
expect satisfaction on them. They can however await mutual
discussion.
As soon as the doctors permit me to undertake a journey to
Delhi I shall do so.
I thank you once more for taking up so promptly and so
sympathetically the matter that necessitated the fast.
I hope that the prisoners will be released as soon as possible
today.
I await your reply as to publication before breaking the fast."2
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C.W. 10141. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

1

Vide “Letter from E. C. Gibson”, 7-3-1939. In “The Rajkot Fast-IV”, Pyarelal
explains that “after peru-sing the note” Gandhiji remarked : “It does seem to provide a
basis for breaking the fast, but I must clear up certain points with Mr. Gibson.”
Gibson arrived at 11.30 a.m. and was closeted with Gandhiji for 20 minutes.
2
Pyarelal says further that the addressee’s reply of even date was received at 2
p.m. It read: “. . . Thakore Saheb is issuing immediate order for the release of
prisoners. I. . . appreciate your decision about releasing for publication only today’s
letters containing the Viceroy’s last message to you and your reply . . . . His
Excellency agrees that these can now be released for publication” (C.W. 10142).
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

159

200. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1
March 7, 1939
In my opinion this good ending is an answer to the prayers of
millions. I claim to know my millions. All the 24 hours of the day I
am with them. They are my first care and last, because I recognize no
God except the God that is to be found in the hearts of the dumb
millions. They do not recognize His presence; I do. And I worship the
God that is Truth or Truth which is God through the service of these
millions.
But I also know I had the prayers and sympathy of others all the
world over. And there was a persistent effort of the intelligentsia in
order to bring about an honourable understanding and a speedy end
of this fast. Englishmen have co-operated as well as Indians.
Politically speaking, it is His Excellency the Viceroy who is
responsible for the settlement.
I know Englishmen do not understand the method of fast,
especially on what would appear to be a purely political issue. They
often feel disgusted with such method. I know also there are Indians
who do not appreciate the method of fast. I hope, when I am strong, to
write1 about ‘The Fast Method’, because over 50 years’ experience
has convinced me that in the plan of satyagraha it has a definite place.
The reason why I bring fast here is because I want to give full
valuation to the Viceregal gesture, and he represents the English mind.
It was open to him—and I at least would have justified his action—If
he had said: ‘I do not understand this man’s actions. There seems to
be no end to his fasts. There must be a stop somewhere. He will give
no guarantee that this is his last fast. We propose even this time not to
parley with him until he has broken his fast.’
I know that, ethically speaking, he would have been wrong if he
had taken up that attitude, but, politically speaking and examining the
position from the English standpoint, I would have justified his action
if he had been unbending. I am hoping that such a good ending and
appreciation even of a method which the English mind cannot
1

This appeared under the title “A Good Ending”. In “The Rajkot Fast –IV”,
Pyarelal reports : “The fast was broken with the usual ceremonies at 2.20 p.m. From
2.30 to 3.20 Gandhiji dictated a long statement to the Press.”
1
Vide “Fasting”

160

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

understand will produce not merely the righting of what I have held to
be a primary wrong, but it will clear the atmosphere and help also in
the general solution of the States’ problem.
I do not mean to say that all States will have to follow the Rajkot
precedent. Rajkot is a speciality and must be regarded as an isolated
case. There are States whose problems must be considered on their
merits. But public attention is rivetted on the problem of the States. I
hope it will be recognized that it is a problem which does not brook
delay.
I would like the Princes to believe me when I assure them that I
came to Rajkot as their friend and as a cent percent peacemaker. I saw
that civil resisters in Rajkot were, and could not but be, unyielding.
Their honour was at stake. I had tales of atrocities poured into my
ears. I felt that the basest human passions would be let loose if I
allowed civil resistance to go on from day to day. That would have
resulted in a bitter feud not merely between Rajkot and the civil
resisters but—as the human mind works and even jumps from the
particular to the general—there would have been a bitter feud between
the Princes and the people.
I know that, even as it is, there is a growing school of public
opinion in India which is convinced that the Princes are beyond
reform, and that there would be no free India unless this ‘relic of a
barbaric past’ is done away with. I honestly differ with them, and, as a
believer in non-violence and therefore in the goodness of human
nature, I could not do otherwise. They have a place in India. It is not
possible to wipe out all the traditions of a hoary past. I therefore hold
that if the Princes will read from the lessons of the past and will
respond to the time spirit, all will be well. But it will not do to tinker
with the problem. They will have to take heroic measures. They need
not follow the Rajkot model, but they will have to part with real and
substantial powers in favour of the people.
There is, so far as I am aware, no via media of saving the
situation and saving India from a terrible blood feud. I dare not
publish the letters that I have received about the Princes, but of this I
shall have to speak more later. In my present weak state of health it is
an effort to give this statement. And yet whilst the effect of the fast is
on me and whilst I am full of what I call spiritual exultation, I must
give out the best of my thoughts just now.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

161

Then there are the Bhayats 1 and Garasias2 . They pleaded with
me their case. I told them that they had my sympathy. They could
count upon me as their friend. I want them also to live as Garasias and
Bhayats, but they will also have to march with the times. They will
have to remodel their lives. They will have to feel one with the people
over whom they exercise a kind of sway.
Our Mussalman friends came to me, and I had no hesitation in
telling them without any argument that their special interests would be
safeguarded, that if they wanted separate electorates in Rajkot with
reservation of seats I would see to it that they got them. Without their
asking they would have had ample guarantees for the fullest
protection of their religious freedom. And I told them that if they
insisted upon their nominations, I would not resist them. It is
necessary for me to say this in order to ease their minds and to ease
the minds of the Mussalmans throughout India. I want them to feel
that neither I nor the Congress can ever be guilty of diminishing an
iota of the safeguards that they may need for their full growth and for
the protection of their faith and culture.
I must explain why I have released for publication only the
Viceregal telegraphic message received today at 10·45 a.m. and my
reply. There is an allusion to previous messages in these two
communications. With the full consent of the Viceroy, I am refraining
from publishing those communications. His Excellency has not
prevented me from publishing them. I know that he does not believe
in sending secret communications to public men, but, for reasons
which I need not go into, I felt the force of the argument that, for the
sake of the cause, it is not wise to publish them. I hope that it will
never be necessary to publish them. There are in my communications
allusions which were relevant, but they are not for the public. Hence
the responsibility for withholding previous communications is solely
mine.
One word about the Congress. My heart is there, but I see that I
will not be able to reach there. I am still too weak but, what is more, if
I am to give the finishing touch to the Rajkot matter and what it
implies, I must not divide my attention between Tripuri and Rajkot. I
must concentrate my attention solely on Rajkot at present. I have work
1
2

162

Kinsmen; brothers, etc., of the ruling chief
Holders of gifted land; a caste of Rajputs
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to do here. I must hasten to Delhi as soon as I am able. I only hope
that all will go well in Tripuri.
It is a strange experience for me to miss the Congress session
through all these years. But it is a good thing. Why should I be so
proud as to think that nothing serious can be done without me? There
are leaders in Tripuri who are every whit as courageous, as selfsacrificing and as devoted as I am. I have no doubt, therefore, that
though another policy may be evolved, there will be no acrimony and
there will be no violence in their thoughts, in their words and in their
deeds.
The last thing I would like to say is that I want to thank the Press
correspondents who have been with me during all these anxious days.
I have felt proud of them. They have carried out the best traditions of
good journalism. They have not been newsmongers but they have
been fellow-messengers of peace with me. They have shown me the
greatest consideration. They have never pestered me.
I should like also publicly to thank my medical friends who
have so ungrudgingly attended upon me.
I hope that the prayers of those who believe in them will still
continue. In a way, my work begins from now. I begin to lead an
earthly life. I have to carry on delicate negotiations. I do not want to
lose the goodwill with which I am surcharged at the present moment. I
think of the Thakore Saheb, I think of Durbar Shri Virawala. I have
criticized them. but only as a friend. I repeat that I am in the place of
a father to the Thakore Saheb. I have done no more towards him than
I could have done to my truant son. I would like them to understand
the significance of what has gone on in front of them, and it would be
a noble ending to this fast if I discover that they have appreciated all
that I have said as from a friend, and that there will be the response
from them that I expect.
Rajkot is the hub of Kathiawar, and if Rajkot is given a popular
government, other States in Kathiawar will of their own accord and
without any further civil resistance fall in line. There is no such thing
as perfect coincidences on this earth. Its beauty lies in its
multitudinous variety. There will be, therefore, variety of constitutions
in Kathiawar States. But let the trunk be true.
Harijan, 11-3-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

163

201. LETTER TO E. C. GIBSON
R AJKOT,

March 7, 1939
DEAR MR. GIBSON,

I broke the fast, gave a message1 to the Press and now send you
my thanks for your warm letter 2 . Let me hope this contact is a
foundation for lasting friendship.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C.W. 10143. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

202. TELEGRAM TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE3
[March 7, 1939] 4
BROKE

FAST.

GOD.5

THANK

BAPU

The Hindu, 8-3-1939

203. TELEGRAM TO RAMESHWARI NEHRU
R AJKOT,

March 7, 1939
MRS. B RIJLAL NEHRU
LAHORE
FAST

BROKEN.

THANK

GOD.

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 7988

1

Vide the preceding item.
Vide footnote 1, “Statement to the Press”, 7-3-1939
3
The addressee was the Congress President.
4
Inferred from the contents. The telegram was reported under the date-line
“Tri-puri, March 8”. Vide also the two following items.
5
The addressee’s reply read : “Your telegram. Whole country is happy and
relieved.”
2

164

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

204. TELEGRAM TO WOMEN’S INDIAN ASSOCIATION,
MADRAS 1
[March 7, 1939]2
FAST

BROKEN.

THANK

GOD.

BAPU

The Hindu, 8-3-1939

205. TELEGRAM TO GOVINDDAS3
[March 7, 1939] 4
IT

IS

INSIST
THEY
THE

IMPOSSIBLE
ON
PERMIT

RAJKOT

TO

SOME
I

REACH
DAYS’

MUST

WORK.

MAY

THERE
REST

PROCEED
GOD

IN
AND

TO
GUIDE

TIME.
AS

DELHI
THE

DOCTORS
SOON

TO

AS

FINISH

CONGRESS

DELIBERATIONS.

The Hindu, 8-3-1939

206. ITS MEANING
A critic may say: ‘What have you gained to warrant the
breaking of your fast? Not one of the terms of your ultimatum to the
Thakore Saheb has been fulfilled except the release of prisoners. But
you never took the fast for their release.’
On the surface this argument is perfect. It is consistent with a
vengeance. My answer is, ‘The letter killeth; the spirit giveth life.’ The
life-giving fact is that Rajkot has become an all-India issue and the
place of the Thakore Saheb has been taken up by the Viceroy whose
word I have no reason to doubt. Even if the Thakore Saheb had
granted all my terms, I should not have been sure of due fulfilment,
1
The telegram was reported under the date-line “Madras, March 8”, as released
by S. Ambujammal, Honorary Secretary, Women’s Indian Association. It was in reply
to the Association’s telegram dated March 6, which read : “Women’s Indian
Association feels intensely grieved, anxious at decision. Prays Almighty to give
strength and success.” Vide also the two preceding items.
2
ibid
3
The telegram was reported under the date-line “Tripuri, March 8”. It was in
reply to the addressee’s of March 7, which he had sent “on behalf of the Reception
Committee”.
4
ibid

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

165

though I would have been obliged to accept them. What I have
deliberately put in doubt is the meaning of the famous letter1 given to
the Sardar. In my ultimatum I had acted on the assumption that it
bore only one meaning. But as a satyagrahi I must always allow my
cards to be examined and re-examined at all times and make
reparation if an error is discovered. Hence my reading of the
settlement is that God has given me much more than I had ever
expected. Time will show whether my claim is justified.
RAJKOT, March 8, 1939
Harijan, 11-3-1939

207. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
R AJKOT,

March 8, 1939
CHI. MIRA,

I hope you have bravely borne the fast which has enriched me
perhaps more than the previous ones. I am quite happy. Strength too
is coming. No more just now.
LOVE.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6434. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 10029

208. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
R AJKOT,

March 8, 1939
CHI. PREMA,

Sushila is sitting by my side. She does her work absentmindedly. I was in fact in perfect bliss. As for the rest of the news,
Sushila has written to you. To write more would mean disobeying
doctors.
Blessing from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10398. Also C.W. 6837. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

1

The reference is to the draft of statement for Dharmendrasinh; vide “Draft of
Statement for Thakore Saheb of Rajkot”, 19-11-1938

166

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

209. TALK WITH AGATHA HARRISON1
March 8, 1939
Agatha had an interesting talk with Gandhiji in the morning and then in the
afternoon. In the course of it she asked him the question, “Now that the Paramount
Power has been appealed to intervene, would it be consistent with this attitude to go
on with the anti-imperialist cry? In other words, would it be right from your
viewpoint to make use of the machinery set up by the imperialist power whilst you
are pledged to the anti-imperialist goal ?”
Gandhiji explained to her that the inconsistency to which she referred was in
appearance only. Non-violent non-co-operation did not mean mechanical isolation
or complete avoidance of contact with the opponent under all conditions. In seeking
intervention of the Paramount Power he had put the Paramount Power on the trial and
given it a chance to do the right thing.

The Paramount Power has so far constantly been helping the
Princes in their misrule. But it owes also an obligation to the people.
The people of Rajkot have now asked the Paramount Power to meet
that obligation. Not to do so when an opportunity occurs would be
not non-co-operation, it would be folly. It may even lead to the
strengthening of the Paramount Power. Although non-co-operation is
one of the main weapons in the armoury of satyagraha, it should not
be forgotten that it is after all only a means to secure the co-operation
of the opponent consistently with truth and justice. The essence of
non-violence technique is that it seeks to liquidate antagonisms but
not the antagonists themselves. In non-violent fight you have to a
certain measure to conform to the traditions and conventions of the
system you are pitted against. Avoidance of all relationship with the
opposing power, therefore, can never be a satyagrahi’s object, but
transformation or purification of that relationship. The people of
Rajkot would never be able to end the dominance of the Paramount
Power through non-violent means if they said, ‘We shall not touch it
even with a pair of tongs; we shall refuse to meet it even for the sake
of converting it.’
The field of co-operation between the Paramount Power and the people of the
States was likely to grow rather than diminish with the growth of non-violent
strength and consciousness among the people. In fact he foresaw a time when the
Residents and Political Agents in Indian States would become true trustees and
servants of the people on behalf of the Paramount Power and be made use of by them
1

This is extracted from “The Rajkot Fast–V” by Pyarelal.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

167

as such.
The Congress had advised the country to boycott the reformed legislatures at
the beginning of the non-co-operation movement. It regarded them as a trap and a
snare. But as a result of phenomenal awakening that had taken place among the
masses as a result of the schooling they got through successive civil disobedience
campaigns, and the ensuing relative transformation of relationship between them and
the Government, in 1937 it decided to capture the machinery of Government in the
seven provinces where the Congress commanded a majority.
His seeking the intervention of the Paramount Power in the present case,
therefore, did not necessarily imply any fundamental change in his outlook. On the
contrary it was a further step towards the ending of that system as it exists and
functions today.

Harijan, 29-4-1939

210.TELEGRAM TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE1
[On or before March 9, 1939] 2
DOCTORS

ADVISE

THIRTEENTH

ME

NOT

INSTANT.

YOU

TO

LEAVE

DEFIED

BEFORE

DOCTORS

THE
I

DARE

NOT.

The Hindu, 9-3-1939

211. TELEGRAM TO K. M. MUNSHI3
[On or before March 9, 1939] 4
PLEASE

WELCOME

BEHALF. HOPE
THEIR VISIT
BETWEEN EGYPT

WAFDIST

THEY
WILL

WILL
FORGE

AND

DELEGATION
HAVE
AN

A

ON
NICE

INDISSOLUBLE

MY
TIME.
LINK

INDIA.

The Hindu, 9-3-1939

1

This was in reply to the addressee’s telegram which read : “Strongly feel your
presence indispensably necessary here. That is also the general feeling here” (The
Hindu, 8-3-1939).
2
The telegram was reported under the date-line “Tripuri, March 9.”
3
The addressee was the Home Minister of Bombay.
4
The telegram was reported under the date-line “Bombay, March 9”. Also, according to the source, “the Egyptian Wafdist Delegation to the Tripuri Session of the
Indian National Congress” arrived in Bombay from Cairo on March 9.

168

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

212. TELEGRAM TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
R AJKOT,

March 9, 1939
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
TRIPURI C ONGRESS
[JABALPUR]
IT

WILL

TAKEN
SHOULD
CHANGES
BEING

TO

BE

FIRST

RID
BE
IN

CLASS

CONGRESS
GIVEN

OF
TO

CONSTITUTION

SUBMITTED

TO

BLUNDER

IF

INTERNAL
A. I. C. C.

RESOLUTION NOT

CORRUPTION.
TO

WITHOUT

CONGRESS. KEEPING

MAKE
NECESSITY
WELL.

POWER
REQUIRED
THEIR

1

BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1939. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

213. LETTER TO E. C. GIBSON
R ASHTRIYASHALA, R AJKOT,

March 9, 1939
DEAR MR. GIBSON,

As I am now comparatively less weak, I have begun to gather
threads of information. You will agree that repressive measures,
whether by way of Notifications or acts done under them or reprisals
outside Notifications, should be cancelled. I collect a few out of a long
list submitted to me.
1. Bans on persons.
2. Bans on newspapers.
3. Bans on organizations.
4. Confiscations and fines.
5. Closing of schools and dispensaries.
6. Sale of movable and immovable property.
7. Grains belonging to the cultivators not allowed to be
removed.
1

According to The Hindu, 11-3-1939, an identical telegram was sent to Subhas
Chandra Bose. It was read out by Sarat Chandra Bose in the Subjects Committee
meeting as the former could not attend it owing to bad health. Sarat Chandra Bose said
that Subhas Chandra Bose “Whole-heartedly endorsed Gandhiji’s view”.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

169

8. Increase in student’s fees and water charges.
9. Deprivation of freeships.
You will please see to the rectification of these matters. If you
think that it is necessary to see me before you could take any action I
am at your disposal.
Doctors have prohibited journeying before Monday next. I,
therefore, propose to leave for Delhi on Monday evening.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C.W. 10145. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

214. APPEAL TO PEOPLE OF RAJKOT1
March 9, 1939
Through the grace of God, the object of my coming to Rajkot
has been fulfilled. The Thakore Saheb, and with his consent the
Paramount Power, have given assurance that the Thakore Saheb’s
word will be honoured and Rajkot will have a constitution in terms of
the Notification of 26th December 1938. This is the simple and
common-sense interpretation of the telegraphic communications
between H. E. the Viceroy and myself. The result has surpassed all my
expectations. The honour of both the Ruler and the ruled has been
vindicated and the sufferings of the people have borne fruit. Let us all
offer our thanks to the Almighty. Such a happy ending would have
been impossible without His grace and intervention.
I would not go into the other points mentioned in my letter to
the Thakore Saheb. I gave not given them up. It should be sufficient
for all concerned to know that I am aware of the fact that restrictions
on the Press and other repressive measures have not been withdrawn.
My efforts for their withdrawal continue, and I am sure they will go
shortly.
Let us not indulge in exultation over this settlement. The real
work will begin now only. Responsible government will come, but will
the people be able to shoulder the burden and rise equal to their task?
If they are to give a proper account of themselves, they will have to
begin preparing from today. They would not need, for this purpose,
to hold meetings and deliver speeches. If meetings are held at all, they
1

This appeared under the title “To the People of Rajkot” as originally “issued
in Gujarati”.

170

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

should be for the purpose of educating the public. Every citizen of
Rajkot will have to contribute his or her mite if success is to crown our
efforts.
1. There should be real Hindu-Muslim unity.
2. The canker of untouchability and the distinction between
high and low must be uprooted from the heart of the Hindu
community.
3. It should be realized that we have no other sanction at our
disposal except that of truth and non-violence. We should, therefore,
understand their working in our everday dealings.
4. The public should cultivate the spirit of corporate service.
5. Young men and women in thier numbers should come
forward to dedicate their lives to the service of the people.
6. We must rid ourselves of petty jealousies and bickerings and
learn to be disciplined.
7. The people should shed their lethargy and occupy themselves
with some useful activity like spinning, etc. Everyone should take the
vow of khadi.
8. Those who are educated should help their illiterate brethren
to read and write.
Harijan, 18-3-1939

215. TALK WITH RAJKOT PRAJA PARISHAD WORKERS1
March 9, 1939
One of the workers had admitted in the course of his talk that he accepted nonviolence as a policy, not as his creed. Gandhiji explained to him that he could be
satisfied with that provided the acceptance was whole-hearted and sincere. It must be
without any mental reservations. The greater danger was that although many people
professed to believe in non-violence, not all of them meant the same thing by that
term. Himsa did not merely mean indulgence in physical violence; resort to trickery,
falsehood, intrigue, chicanery and deceitfulness—in short, all unfair and foul
means—came under the category of himsa, and acceptance of ahimsa whether as a
policy or a creed necessarily implied renunciation of all these things.
A votary of ahimsa had therefore to be incorruptible, fair and square in his

1

This is extracted from “The Rajkot Fast-VI” by Pyarelal.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

171

dealings, truthful, straightforward and utterly selfless. He must have also true
humility. It was of the utmost importance, therefore, that there should be no
confusion or misunderstanding as to the meaning or implications of non-violence.
The controversy about ‘creed’ or ‘policy’ could be put aside if there was a clear,
common understanding on this point.

Harijan, 20-5-1939

216. TELEGRAM TO NAHAS PASHA1
[After March 9, 1939] 2
THOUSAND

THANKS

RECIPROCATE

EVERY

FOR

YOUR

WARM

KINDLY

MESSAGE.

I

SENTENCE.

GANDHI

The Bombay Chronicle, 18-3-1939

217.TELEGRAM TO EGYPTIAN DELEGATION3
R AJKOT,

March 11, 1939
EGYPTIAN DELEGATION
R EST HOUSE
JABALPUR
DELIGHTED
FINDING
DELHI

YOUR

YOUR

AFFECTIONATE

EXPECTATIONS

FIFTEENTH.

HOPE

MEET

WIRE.

I

SOMEWHAT
YOU

HOPE
REALIZED.

YOU

ARE

REACHING

THERE.

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
This was in reply to a message from the addressee, the leader of the Wafd
Party, which read: “Please accept Wafd’s heartfelt thanks and mine for kind message
of welcome to Egyptian Deputation. Egyptians, united to their Indian brethren by
sacred bonds of common ideal and efforts to realize them through channels of
suffering and abnegation, have ever been inspired by your great example. May God
give you strength to pursue your mission for salvation of downtrodden humanity.”
The Egyptian delegation landed in India on March 9; vide “Telegram to K. M.
Munshi”, p. 42, and also the following item.
2
ibid
3
This was in reply to a telegram dated March 11 from the delegation, who
wanted to meet Gandhiji in Delhi or at any other place chosen by him.

172

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

218. TELEGRAM TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
[March
THANKS
MAY

FOR
GOD

WIRE 2 .
BE

DO

WITH

CONSERVE
YOU

ALL.

HEALTH

11, 1939] 1

AND

ENERGY.

AM PROG-RESSING.

BAPU

The Hindu, 12-3-1939

219. TELEGRAM TO AMTUSSALAAM
R AJKOT

March 11, 1939
AMTUSSALAAM
GANDHI S EVASANGH
WARDHA
SHOULD

GO

PATIALA.

HEALTH

GOOD.

GETTING

STRONGER.

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 414

220.

LETTER TO MIRABEHN
March 11, 1939

CHI. MIRA,

I am daily getting stronger. Therefore there should be no
anxiety. I reach Delhi on 15th and know not how long I shall have to
stay there. There is just a possibility that I would have to come back to
Rajkot. I must think of nothing else before Rajkot is set on its feet.
Ba goes with me to Delhi without Kano3 .
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6435. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 10030

1

The telegram was reported under the date-line “Rajkot, March 11”.
Of even date which read: “Have communicated to Subjects Committee your
telegram [vide “Telegram to Jawaharlal Nehru”] . . . Hope the Committee will follow
your advice. Myself attended Subjects Committee on 8th and 9th. Yesterday, medical
board banned activity . . . Hope you are improving.”
3
Also called Kanam, son of Ramdas Gandhi.
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

173

221. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1
R AJKOT,

March 11, 1939
Having been out of touch with everything since my leaving
Segaon, that is, for nearly a fortnight, I do not feel competent to give a
decisive opinion upon the impending resumption of civil resistance in
Travancore. But I have no difficulty in stating certain general
principles. The first indispensable condition precedent to any civil
resistance is that there should be surety against any outbreak of
violence whether on the part of those who are identified with civil
resistance or on the part of the general public. It would be no answer
in the case of an outbreak of violence that it was instigated by the
State or other agencies hostile to civil resisters. It should be obvious
that civil resistance cannot flourish in an atmosphere of violence. This
does not mean that the resources of a satyagrahi have come to an end.
Ways other than civil disobedience should be found out. The second
condition is that disobedience should not be destructive, that is,
harmful to the country. The laws to be picked up, therefore, should be
those which are harmful to the people or laws whose breach will not
harm the people but are likely merely to make more work for the
authorities. Thirdly, it must be a movement in which the largest
number of people can take part. Fourthly, students should not be
invited or allowed to take part in civil resistance. There should be no
secrecy. Civil resisters must conform to the minimum requirements
that may be laid down for the sake of discipline or otherwise.2
Asked why he called the students to come out of the colleges and schools in
1921 and to participate in non-co-operation and why he was opposed now to
students’ participation in the civil resistance movement, Gandhiji explained that the
position then was different. He asked the students to empty the colleges and schools
as signifying complete non-co-operation with the Government. The moment a
student came out of the college, he became a citizen—when he was free to participate
in the movement. Gandhiji would have no quarrel if students left the colleges
altogether and participated in the movement.

Harijan 18-3-1939; also The Hindu, 11-3-1939
1

In Harijan this appeared under the title “Travancore” with an explanatory
note that Gandhiji made this statement when he was shown the report about the
Travancore State Congress having resolved on reviving civil resistance on March 25.
2
What follows is from The Hindu.

174

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

222. TALK WITH WORKERS OF RAJKOT PRAJA
PARISHAD
March 12, 1939
I think the initial mistake was made when all Kathiawaris were
permitted to join Rajkot Satyagraha. That step introduced an element
of weakness in the fight. Thereby we put our reliance on numbers,
whereas a satyagrahi relies solely upon God who is the help of the
helpless. A satyagrahi always says to himself, ‘He, in whose name
satyagraha was launched, will also see it through.’ If the people of
Rajkot had thought in these terms, there would have been no
temptation to organize big processions or mass demonstrations and
probably there would have been no atrocities such as Rajkot has had
to experience. A genuine satyagrahi proceeds by setting the opponent
at his ease. His action never creates panic in the breast of the ‘enemy’.
Supposing as a result of rigid enforcement of the rules of satyagrahis
Rajkot satyagraha had been confined to a few hundred or even a few
score true satyagrahis and they had carried on their satyagraha in the
right spirit till their last breath, theirs would have served as a heroic
example.
I shall soon be going to Delhi as your representative. I shall not
be able to proceed with my work with self-confidence or to speak with
authority unless I have the confidence that we shall be able to
vindicate and do justice to the devolution of power into the hands of
the people that we are fighting for. As a lifelong devotee and votary
of truth, I know that my pleading will be ineffectual, it will lack power,
unless it has the double backing of faith on my part in the inherent
justice of the cause that I represent and in the capacity and sincerity of
purpose of those who represent this cause. The question that you must
seriously set yourself to answer is: ‘What shall we do with swaraj,
supposing we got it today?’1
You want democracy—the rule of the people, by the people, for
the people. Surely, all the 75,000 people of Rajkot cannot become
rulers or administrators. Democracy must in essence, therefore, mean
the art and science of mobilizing the entire physical, economic and
1

This and the preceding paragraph are extracted from “The Rajkot Fast-VI” by
Pyarelal; what follows is from “The Rajkot Fast—VII” (Harijan, 27-5-1939).
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

175

spiritual resources of all the various sections of the people in the
service of the common good of all.
Service of the family has been the motive behind all our
activities hitherto. We must now learn to broaden our outlook so as to
include in our ambit the service of the people as a whole.
We are familiar with several conceptions of village work.
Hitherto it has mostly meant propaganda in the villages to inculcate
upon the village masses a sense of their rights. Sometimes it has also
meant conducting welfare activitiy among them to ameliorate their
material condition. But the village work that I have now come to place
before you consists in educating the villager in his duties.
Rights accrue automatically to him who duly performs his
duties. In fact the right to perform one’s duties is the only right that is
worth living for and dying for. It covers all legitimate rights. All the
rest is garb under one guise or another and contains in it seeds of
himsa.
The swaraj of my conception will come only when all of us are
firmly persuaded that our swaraj has got to be won, worked and
maintained through truth and ahimsa alone. True democracy or the
swaraj of the masses can never come through untruthful and violent
means, for the simple reason that the natural corollary to their use
would be to remove all opposition through the suppression or
extermination of the antagonists. That does not make for individual
freedom. Individual freedom can have the fullest play only under a
regime of unadulterated ahimsa.
We cannot afford to have discord in our midst if we are to
educate the people. We must all speak with one voice. If we want to
weld the various sections into one people—and that is the sine qua
non of democracy—we may not, in rendering service, make any
distinction between those who took part in our struggle and those who
did not.1
Harijan, 20-5-1939 and 27-5-1939

1

176

Vide also “Appeal to People of Rajkot”, 13-3-1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

223. FASTING
Fasting in an institution as old as Adam. It has been resorted to
for self-purification or for some ends noble as well as ignoble.
Buddha, Jesus and Mahomed fasted so as to see God face to face.
Ramachandra fasted for the sea to give way for his army of monkeys.
Parvati fasted to secure Mahadev Himself as her Lord and Master. In
my fasts I have but followed these great examples no doubt for ends
much less noble than theirs.
I do not propose to discuss the merits of my recent fast beyond
answering a suggestion whether I left Segaon with the knowledge that
I was going to fast. I have become a coward of late for fasting. My
fast in August 1933though short-lived was a perfect torture to me. I
had prepared for death the very day I was discharged. I had made
over many of my medical stores to the nurse in charge. Since then I
have dreaded fasts. The twenty-four-hour annual fasts of 6th 1 and
13th 2 April have shown me since then that my system is ill able to
undergo any protracted fasting. Therefore when I left Segaon there
could be no question of my light-heartedly thinking ahead of any fast
in Rajkot. Had I made any such resolution, I was bound by a promise
to friends that I should give them due notice. Thus there could be no
pre-meditation. It came upon me all of a sudden and out of the
intense agony of the soul. The days preceding the fast were days of
deepest prayer. The experience of the night before the determination
to take the fast had choked me. I did not know what to do. The
morning following told me what I was to do, cost what it might. I
simply could not have taken the resolution but for the belief that God
wanted me to take it.
So much for the Rajkot fast.
Fasting is a potent weapon in the satyagraha armoury. It cannot
be taken by everyone. Mere physical capacity to take it is no
qualification for it. It is of no use without a living faith in God. It
should never be a mechanical effort nor a mere imitation. It must
1

The week was observed as ‘National Week’ in memory of the total hartal on
April 6, 1919, in protest against the Rowlatt Act (Bill No. 29, 1919) and the
Jallianwala Bagh massacre on April 13 of the same year.
2
ibid
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

177

come from the depth of one’s soul. It is therefore always rare. I seem
to be made for it. It is noteworthy that not one of my colleagues on
the political field has felt the call to fast. And I am thankful to be able
to say that they have never resented my fasts. Nor have fellowmembers of the Ashram felt the call except on rare occasions. They
have even accepted the restriction that they may not take penitential
fasts without my permission, no matter how urgent the inner call may
seem to be.
Thus fasting though a very potent weapon has necessarily very
strict limitations and is to be taken only by those who have undergone
previous training. And, judged by my standard, the majority of fasts
do not at all come under the category of satyagraha fasts and are, as
they are popularly called, hunger strikes undertaken without previous
preparation and adequate thought. If the process is repeated too often,
these hunger-strikes will lose what little efficacy they may possess and
will become objets of ridicule.
RAJKOT, March 13, 1939
Harijan, 18-3-1939

224. APPEAL TO PEOPLE OF RAJKOT 1
March 13, 1939
In swaraj based on ahimsa people need not know their rights,
but it is necessary for them to know their duties. There is no duty but
creates a corresponding right, and those only are true rights which
flow from a due performance of one’s duties. Hence rights of true
citizenship accrue only to those who serve the State to which they
belong. And they alone can do justice to the rights that accrue to
them. Everyone possesses the right to tell lies or resort to goondaism.
But the exercise of such a right is harmful both to the exerciser and
society. But to him who observes truth and non-violence comes
prestige, and prestige brings rights. And people who obtain rights as a
result of performance of duty, exercise them only for the service of
society, never for themselves. Swaraj of a people means the sum total
1
This appeared under the title “To the People of Rajkot” as “the translation” of
Gandhiji’s second appeal. For the first appeal, vide “Appeal to People of Rajkot”,
9-3-1939

178

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of the swaraj (self-rule) of individuals. And such swaraj comes only
from performance by individuals of their duty as citizens. In it no one
thinks of his rights. They come, when they are needed, for better
performance of duty.
Whilst I was expounding these views to a meeting of workers it
was decided that volunteers should be called for who would go to the
villages and tell the people what under swaraj they would be expected
to do. Thus men or women who would go to the villages would tell the
village people that it would be their duty to keep their village clean
and make them self-supporting. They must not expect the swaraj
government to do these things for them. Our villages are on the verge
of destruction owing to the disappearance of village industries. They
can be revivified only by a revival of village industries. Among these
industries the spinning-wheel occupies the centre. The others easily
arrange themselves around the wheel. If the people of Rajkot realize
their duty, they would wear khadi of their own spinning. Thus
everybody will learn the value of industry, and if all will engage in
industries conducive to the welfare of the State, several lakhs of rupees
will be saved for the people by the people. And it can be shown that
by putting into practice the ideal of self-help and self-sufficiency they
will have to pay the lowest taxes and realize a greater degree of
happiness in the sum than is possible under any other system. Those
who labour for the State pay their taxes just as much as those that pay
them in coin. Coins are but a measure of labour performed. They
have no other value. If I buy a rupee worth of flour, I have paid for
the labour of cultivation, carrying and grinding. Therefore, the real
owner of wealth is one who puts in a certain amount of labour with a
conscious productive aim. It is the same thing whether I pay the State
one rupee or its equivalent of labour as tax. Often it will be found that
payment in labour is of greater value to the State than payment in
coin. Payment in labour invigorates the nation. Where people perform
labour voluntarily for the service of society, exchange of money
becomes unnecessary. The labour of collecting the taxes and keeping
accounts is saved and the results are equally good.
Every man and woman should be educated along the lines
mentioned above. The property of the State is the property of the
people, the Thakore Saheb is their trustee. As trustee the Thakore
Saheb and other members of his family should perform their duty.
Through the performance of their duty to the State they earn the right
of taking a certain amount of money from the State. If the Ruler and
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

179

the ruled perform their duty in this way, there is no room for mutual
bitterness.
Under responsible government everyone, from the king to the
poorest citizen, must prosper. Under swaraj based on non-violence
nobody is anybody’s enemy, everybody contributes his or her due
quota to the common goal, all can read and write, and their knowledge
keeps growing from day to day. Sickness and disease are reduced to
the minimum. No one is a pauper and labour can always find
employment. There is no place under such a government for
gambling, drinking and immorality or for class hatred. The rich will
use their riches wisely and usefully, and not squander them in
increasing their pomp and worldly pleasures. It should not happen
that a handful of rich people should live in jewelled palaces and the
millions in miserable hovels devoid of sunlight or ventilation.
Hindu-Muslim differences, untouchability, vertical differences
between high and low, these must not be. I have referred to these in
the previous leaflet. It is necessary here, perhaps, to say a word about
the Girasias and the Bhayats. They are also a limb of the people.
Swarajists have to show to them that they have nothing to fear from
the former. In non-violent swaraj there can be no encroachment upon
just rights; contrariwise no one can possess unjust rights. In a wellorganized State, usurpation should be an impossibility and it should
be unnecessary to resort to force for dispossessing a usurper. But
some Garasia friends have begun to fear the Congress. But if they use
their garas as trustees and are or become industrious, they have no
cause for fear. The congress cannot keep its prestige if it tramples
upon just rights. Its prestige is solely due to its ceaseless efforts to
secure universal good. The conference of the Garasias is in session at
Rajkot at the present moment. They had an orderly procession today,
part of which I witnessed from my bed. A volunteer wrote down for
me the maxims inscribed on their banners. They are so good as to
arrest attention. Here they are :
1. Educate yourselves, abstain from spirituous liquors and cultivate
simplicity.
2. Garasdars believe in constructive programme.
3. Say not mine is right, but say what is right is mine.
4. Avoid pomp, jealousy and bad habits.
5. We do not believe in encroaching upon other people’s rights.
6.

180

It is our duty to protect the afflicted.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

7.
8.
9.

Forgiveness is the virtue of the strong.
Speak only that which has value and never a word thoughtlessly.
Be manly if you will be free.

May the association have the strength to put their maxims into
practice.
The programme that I have sketched above can be carried out
only if Rajkot puts forth worthy young men and women for it. They
must have faith in it. We have not sufficiently cultivated the habit of
silent service. We must cultivate it. I asked for a band of such silent
workers at yesterday’s meeting. They gave me their names. If they
have a living faith in truth and non-violence and will do their work
with full concentration, the people of Rajkot will certainly be able to
shoulder the responsibility that is coming to them. The names that
were given to me are as follows :
1. Shri Uchharangrai N. Dhebar,
2. Shri Jethalal H. Joshi
3. Shri Popatlal P. Anada,
4. Shri Ramjibhai Manekchand Doshi,
5. Shri Saubhagyachand Virchand Modi,
6. Shri Jamnadas Shah.
The reader will see from the names that those who have not an
abiding faith in truth and non-violence have wisely kept themselves
aloof. But they have assured me that they will not oppose the
programme to be chalked out by this band in terms of this leaflet.
They have further assured me that they will willingly perform such
tasks as may be entrusted to them if they can conscientiously do so. I
congratulate these workers upon their restraint and patriotism.
Harijan, 18-3-1939

225. A LETTER
ANANDKUNJ, R AJKOT,

March 13, 1939
I have put you to much trouble. God will compensate you for it.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 223

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

181

226. DISCUSSION WITH HARIBHAU UPADHYAYA
AND OTHER WORKERS 1
March 14, 1939
Gandhiji, after giving them a careful hearing. explained to them his idea about
‘intensification’. They had broken virgin soil in launching upon satyagraha in
Jaipur. The popular response had exceeded their anticipations and even expectations.
So far so good. But it was bad horsemanship to run a good horse to death. Instead of
seeking further to spread out the volume they should now set to deepen the
foundations and inculcate inward strength. He proposed some stringent tests and
preparatory training as an indispensable condition for participation in satyagraha
hereafter. Pending the attainment of the minimum standard laid down by him the civil
disobedience part of satyagraha might remain suspended; that would not mean
suspension of satyagraha itself. He invited them to Delhi for further discussion, if it
was thought necessary.

Harijan, 27-5-1939

227. MESSAGE TO PEOPLE OF JAIPUR
March 14, 1939
I am told the people of Jaipur have maintained peace during the
satyagraha. Let everyone remember that the individual or groups that
fully observe truth and ahimsa in the pursuance of their aim are ever
victorious.2
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji aur Rajasthan, p. 76

1

This is extracted from “The Rajkot Fast—VII”. Pyarelal explains: “Haribhau
Upadhyaya and some other workers met Gandhiji on the train and discussed the Jaipur
situation with him. A stalemate had set in there. They wanted.. . the movement to be
‘intensified’”.Vide also the following item.
2
Vide also the preceding item.

182

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

228. LETTER TO SIR REGINALD M. MAXWELL
NEW DELHI

March [15 ] 1 , 1939
DEAR SIR REGINALD,

Owing to the facilities kindly given to me I was able to see the
three prisoners on hunger-strike in the Delhi Jail and I am glad to be
able to say that they accepted my advice and gave it up—perhaps it is
more correct to say suspended it. I tried to persuade them to give the
assurance required by the Government. But they said they did not
want to purchase their freedom by giving any undertaking. They were
prisoners without any trial and so they should be discharged without
any condition as so many others have been discharged. I felt the force
of their objection. But I told them that in order to enable me to
work for their release, they should give me satisfaction that they
believed in the Congress policy of non-violence and that they would
work under the Congress. This they readily agreed to do, and they
gave me, too, a letter reducing their assurance to writing. But they
wanted to make it plain to me that I was not to use that letter for
securing their freedom, nor to ask the Government to discharge them
on the strength of that letter. I wish you could see your way to
discharge these prisoners unconditionally. If you do so it will
strengthen my hands in the prosecution of my mission of nonviolence on the political field.
I see in the letter that was sent to me by Mr. Puckle 2 another
condition that they should not enter this or that province. Surely it is a
superfluous condition. If the Governments of the provinces concerned
do not want them to remain within their Jurisdiction they would issue
orders of prohibition. Why should the Government of India attach
those conditions?
I am sending this letter with Mahadev Desai so that he can give
you, if you require it, a graphic description of the conversation that
1
Inferred from the reference to this letter in the following item. The sources,
however, has “16”.
2
F. H. Puckle, Home Secretary

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

183

took place between the three prisoners and myself.
Yours sincerely,

THE HON. S IR R EGINALD M. M AXWELL, C..S. I., ETC.
HOME MEMBER, G OVERNMENT OF INDIA

NEW DELHI
From a copy: C.W. 7814. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

229. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
BIRLA HOUSE, N EW DELHI,

March 15, 1939
1. I had hoped to send you this letter in the afternoon. But from
the Viceroy’s House1 I went directly to the prisoners in the Delhi Jail
who were hunger-striking. Contrary to my expectations I had to be
with them for full two hours. I am happy to be able to say that they
listened to me and broke their fast in my presence. They were being
forcibly fed. I am now writing 2 to Sir Reginald Maxwell about their
discharge.
2. I now reduce to writing what I tried to explain in the course
of our conversation. As I read your telegram3 , the Chief Justice4 is to
interpret the letter 5 given to Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel on the 26th
December last by the Thakore Saheb. Assuming that it accords with
our contention, the Committee has then to be set up with seven
nominees of the Sardar and three officials nominated by the Thakore
Saheb, the Thakore Saheb selecting the President of the Committee
out of the ten.
3. The next thing contemplated in your telegram is that if there
is a difference of opinion between the Sardar’s nominees on the one
hand and the officials on the other6 as to the meaning of the
1

In “The Rajkot Fast—VII”, Pyarelal explains that Gandhiji had a two hour
mee-ting with the Viceroy.
2
Vide the preceding item.
3
Conveyed through E. C. Gibson, Resident; Vide “Letter from E. C. Gibson”,
7-3-1939
4
Sir Maurice Gwyer
5
In the source, Viceroy’s marginal note reads: “Right, I don’t know what the
C. J. will do; e. g., C. J. may interpret Notification as meaning President in addition
to ten members”.
6
Viceroy’s marginal note reads: “No. Any members. Not between this or that
group(see my wire). The question of a majority decision is very definitely within the
terms of the remit to the C. J. I don’t know what he may say.”

184

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Notification of 26th December, the Chief Justice is to be the referee
whose decision will be final. This as I read your telegram is its
technical meaning, so far as the two references to the Chief Justice are
concerned. So far as the framing of the constitution is concerned, the
majority decision should prevail.
4. This letter need not go further so far as my promise to write
to you on the two points raised by me is concerned. But perhaps it is
fair to you for me to draw your attention to the fact that the advisers
of the Thakore Saheb have committed 1 him to certain nominations,
from which commitment it might be embarrassing even for the
Paramount power to recede. I refer to the nominations of two
Mussalman members and one Bhayat. Perhaps you are aware of this
difficulty and also of the several ways out that I have suggested. If
you are not, I shall be glad to explain them to you. As I reflect upon
our conversation, it seems to me that it was inconclusive in more ways
than one. Consideration for your time was weighing heavily upon me,
and as everything else, as I thought, appeared to you to be smoothsailing, I did not wish to tax you any further. You will agree that there
should be no misunderstanding about the several steps that have to be
taken for implementing the conditions in terms of which I broke the
fast. It would be terrible if it becomes my duty to object to any step
after it is announced. I therefore suggest that I should be made aware
beforehand of the announcement or announce-ments 2 that may have
to be made in connection with the Rajkot affair.
5. And there are, as I mentioned to you, several other matters
brought out by me in what has been termed my ultimatum to the
Thakore Saheb and about which assurance has been given to me in
your two telegrams. Another conversation between us seems to me to
be necessary for a proper and final elucidation of the various points
arising out of the interchange of the telegrams between us3 . As I think
over the hurried talk that you gave me about the States in general and
the policy you contemplate to adopt in the immediate future, a feeling
of disturbance creeps over me. I do not want to reduce to writing,
unless you desire otherwise, the vague fear that is seizing hold of me
1

Viceroy’s note reads: “We are back on the Notification of December 26th and
Thakore’s letter to Sardar Patel.”
2
Viceroy’s note reads: “What ‘announcement’? I contemplate none.”
3
The rest of the paragraph is from the C.W. source.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

185

on the assumption that I have understood you correctly. I would
therefore like to have the interview for this purpose also.
Could you please send me a time?1
I am,
yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm; Lord Linlithgow Papers. Courtesy: National Archives of
India. Also from a copy: C. W. 7813. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

230. DISCUSSION WITH PHILIPOSE 2
DELHI,

March 15, 1939
Satyagraha does not begin and end with civil disobedience. Let
us do a little more tapascharya which is the essence of satyagraha.
Suspension thus conceived can never do harm to the movement. The
opponent will find that his battery is exhausted when we do not act up
to his expectation, refuse to have any firework displays or put
ourselves at his disposal for brutal assaults of his goondas. We must
meet all his provocative and repressive measures with a coolness and
an exemplary self-restraint even at the risk of being charged with
cowardice. If there is no cowardice in us, we are safe; ours will
ultimately be reckoned an act of rare bravery.
Meanwhile we should watch how things shaps themselves. I am
thinking out new plans of conducting the movement in view of the
terrorist methods that some States seem to have adopted, We have to
develop that technique of rendering futile the employment of hired
hooligans against peaceful citizens.
An able general always gives battle in his own time on the
ground of his choice. He always retains the initiative in these respects
and never allows it to pass into the hands of the enemy.
In a satyagraha campaign the mode of fight and the choice of
tactics, e. g., whether to advance or retreat, offer civil resistance or
1

According to Pyarelal, on March 16, “Gandhiji had. . . another interview. . .
from 5 to 7.30 p. m. The interview was conclusive... ”
2
The discussion is extracted from “The Rajkot Fast—VII”. Pyarelal explains
that the discussion which took place in the afternoon was “about the Travancore
situation.”

186

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

organize non-violent strength through constructive work and purely
selfless humanitarian service, are determined according to the exigencies of the situation. A satyagrahi must carry out whatever plan is laid
out for him with a cool determination giving way to neither excitement nor depression.
For a satyagrahi there can be only one goal, viz., to lay down his
life performing his duty whatever it may be. It is the highest he can
attain. A cause that has such worthy satyagrahi soldiers at its back can
never be defeated.
Harijan, 27-5-1939

231. TELEGRAM TO MIRABEHN
NEW DELHI,

March 16, 1939
MIRABEHN
UTMANZAI
C HARSADDA TAHSIL
NOT
IF

GOING
YOU

RAJKOT.

LIKE.

HERE

KEEPING

SOME

DAYS.

YOU

CAN

COME

WELL.

BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6436. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G. N. 10031

232. LETTER TO SIR REGINALD M. MAXWELL
BIRLA HOUSE, N EW DELHI,

March 16, 1939
DEAR SIR REGINALD ,

Mahadev Desai has given me a gist of his talk with you when he
delivered my letter1 to you. I thank you for giving him the time you
did. He told me of the suggestion you made. As I wanted to take no
step without knowing the prisoners’ wishes I sent him to them. And I
am able to say that I am satisfied that they have no belief in violence
as a method for achieving India’s freedom, and they have no
intention of joining any organization whose activity is violent. I hope
that on the strength of this letter you will be good enough to
1

Vide “Letter to Sir Reginald M. Maxwell”, 15-3-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

187

announce the release of the prisoners unconditionally. I hope, now,
that the condition about movement from province to province will be
entirely waived.
Yours sincerely,

THE HON. S IR R EGINALD M . MAXWELL, C. S. I., C. I. E.
HOME M EMBER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
NEW DELHI
From a copy: C. W. 7812. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

233. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
DELHI,

March 16, 1939
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I have your letter. I deliberately do not want to write much. It is
my firm belief that we should not increase our demands. We may
withdraw civil disobedience if the Praja mandal is recognized
unconditionally and civil liberties are granted.1 Of course the
prisoners must be released.
I hope you are keeping well and mentally also you are at your
best.
Do you do any reading? Do you spin? What is your weight?
You should take fruit, etc. It is moha 2 to be obstinate about this. We
may not pander to the palate, but we should give to the body what it
needs as a medicine.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 3001

1
2

188

The Praja Mandal suspended civil disobedience on March 23.
Ignorant attachment
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

234. INTERVIEW TO GOBIND BIHARI LAL1
[March 16, 1939 ]2
Gandhiji started the interview about America and my personal experience in
my adopted country... He talked to me in Hindustani, the national language of India.
He said:

You have not forgotton our language? Not even after a quarter
century spent in the United States? That is gratifying indeed.
In reply to my first question... Gandhiji tensely retorted :

India is not far from political independence, pure and simple.
Mahatma Gandhi said not a word of anger against the British Government. He
emphasized the fact that now the real problem of India’s freedom and advancement
was one of self-organization... He pointed out :

The outsiders may not realize the fact that the majority of the
provinces of British India (as distinct from the parts ruled by the
Princes) are now administered by the Nationalists, by Ministers of the
Congress Party. That roughly shows that the Nationalist movement is
already in the seats of political power in this country.
The great question now was of the Government of India as a whole. When the
Central or Federal Government came into the hands of the Indians, India would
become like Ireland—virtually an independent country. But according to Mahatma
Gandhi, and the Nationalists, the scheme of Federation evolved by the British
Government in 1935 was not the one to give self-government to India. He said :

The present Federation scheme cannot be accepted without
damaging the cause of India’s independence. The Viceroy will try to
have the scheme accepted. The Nationalists, many of the Princes,
religious fanatics and others will oppose it—for diverse reasons. It is a
very tense situation. The Indian atmosphere is in fact heavy with
impending storms.
QUESTIONS : What will Nationalist India do if war comes?
GANDHIJI

: I cannot answer in advance. But this is certain that a

1

The interviewer was Science Editor of the Hearst Newspapers. He represented
the International News Service at the Tripuri Congress. Gandhiji received him in the
afternoon.
2
Bihari Lal explains that the day before the interview Gandhiji received a
donation of Rs. 10,000 from a woman. According to Gandhi—1915-1948: A Detailed
Chronology, this donation was made on March 15.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

189

free India will join hands with other real democracies, and will always
help in promoting the cause of democracy and humanism throughout
the world.
I was curious to know how under his guidance, employing a new technique of
non-militant rebellion, he has integrated millions of Indians in a fervent struggle for
“self-rule”. He explained :

Real self-rule is emancipation from India’s own traditional
inequalities as well as from those imposed from outside.
The Bombay Chronicle, 19-5-1939

235. DISCUSSION WITH HYDERABAD ARYASAMAJ
LEADERS1
March 16, 1939
Mixing up of motives is damaging in any species of satyagraha,
but in religious satyagraha it is altogether inadmissible. It is fatal to
use or allow religious satyagraha to be used as a cloak or a device for
advancing an ulterior political or mundane objective.
As with regard to the goal so with the means, unadulterated
purity is of the very essence in this species of satyagraha. The leader
in such a movement must be a man of deeply spiritual life, preferably
a brahmachari—whether married or unmarried. He must be a believer
in—as in fact everybody participating in such a movement must be—
and practiser of the particular religious observance for which the
movement is launched. The leader must be versed in the science of
satyagraha. Truth and ahimsa should shine through his speech. All his
actions must be transparent through and through. Diplomacy and
intrigue can have no place in his armoury. Absolute belief in ahimsa
and in God is an indispensable condition in such satyagraha.
In religious satyagraha there can be no room for aggressiveness,
demonstrativeness, show. Those who take part in it must have
equal respect and regard for the religious convictions and
susceptibilities of those who profess a different faith from theirs. The
slightest narrowness in their outlook is likely to be reflected magnified
1

This is extracted from “The Rajkot Fast—VII”. According to The Indian
Annual Register, 1939, Vol.I, “The Deputation including Lala Deshbandhu Gupta and
Professor Sadhikar waited on Gandhiji with regard to Aryasamaj Satyagraha in
Hyderabad State.”

190

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

multifold in the opponent.
Religious satyagraha is, above all, a process of self-purification.
It disdains mere numbers and external aids since these cannot add to
the satyagrahi’s self-purification. Instead, it relies utterly on God who
is the fountain-head of all strength. Religious satyagraha, therefore,
best succeeds under the leadership of a true man of God who will
compel reverence and love even of the opponent by the purity of his
life, the utter selflessness of his mission and the breadth of his
outlook.1
Harijan, 27-5-1939

236. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
BIRLA HOUSE, N EW DELHI,

March 17, 1939
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,

I now return the draft reference to the Chief Justice of India
which you kindly gave me yesterday. I showed it to Sardar Patel and
neither he nor I wish to add anything to it. I have taken a copy of the
document.
I tender my apology again for having taken so much of your
time yesterday. I hope, however, that you think as I do that it was well
spent, if only for avoiding, as far as it is humanly possible, any further
misunderstanding on the Rajkot matter.
I thank you once more for introducing me to Lady Linlithgow.1
I am,
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy : C. W. 10149. Courtesy : D. B. Kalelkar

1
Pyarelal adds: “Miss Agatha Harrison, who came shortly afterwards, asked . ..
‘Is it true, Gandhiji, that genuine satyagraha can never provoke reprisals?’ ‘Yes,’
replied Gandhiji. ‘Genuine satyagraha is a spiritual exercise. As such it can only
evoke the best, not the worst, in man’.”
1
Aknowledging this on March 18, the Viceroy said: “Thank you very much...
for sending me back the Terms of Reference to the Chief Justice. I am glad that you
should have no comment on them.”

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

191

237.

LETTER TO YESHWANTRAO HOLKAR
DELHI,

March 17, 1939
MAHARAJA SAHEB 1 ,

I have not forgotten the sweet memories of Hindi Sahitya
Sammelan2 . I hope that the work of setting up a Hindi University in
Indore is making progress.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy : Pyarelal

238. A HARIJAN TOUR
The following account by shri Rameshwari Nahru of a tour
undertaken by Shri Thakkar Bapa and her in the Central India and
South Rajputana states will be read with interest.3
Harijan, 18-3-1939

239. TELEGRAM TO U. N. DHEBAR

4

NEW DELHI,

March 18, 1939
UCHHRANGRAI DHEBAR, V AKIL
R AJKOT
EXPEDITING THINGS
MAY
HAPPEN. KEEP

HERE.5 MEANWHILE SUBMIT TO WHATEVER
ME
INFORMED.

BAPU
Harijan, 3-6- 1939. Also from a copy : C. W. 10147. Courtesy : D. B
Kalelkar
1

Of Indore.
From April 20 to 23, 1935
3
Rameshwari Nehru, Vice-President, All-India Harijan Sevak Sangh, reported:
“The object of the tour was to consolidate the work of the Harijan Sevak Sangh
wherever it existed, to start new centres where our work did not exist and to do
propaganda for the removal of untouchability.” The report, which subsequently
appeared in four fortnightly instalments, is not reproduced here.
4
This is extracted from “The Rajkot Fast—VIII”.
5
The C. W. source has: “Expedite everything.” Vide also the following item.
2

192

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

240. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
BIRLA HOUSE, N EW DELHI,

March 18, 1939
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,

I hope you will not say, ‘Oh ye of little faith’. My faith in you
is abundant, but I am filled with the fear that you have not visualized
my difficulty about Rajkot. There is an air of unreality about the
freedom to come. The people of Rajkot are used to the utmost
freedom of expression of opinion and of action, so long as it is nonviolent. But today on the eve of getting self-government they have
practically no liberty. A copy of a telegram 1 received from there is
already in front of you. Here is copy of another :
Khan Saheb (First Member of the Council) orally informs that he considers
Seva Mandal literacy campaign undesirable in existing circumstances and desires its
stoppage till negotiations over. Dhebar.

If the people of Rajkot cannot enjoy ordinary liberty today, how
will they two or three weeks hence get full liberty? In order that the
whole thing may not end in a catastrophe, I suggest that you ask the
Resident to take full charge and make himself responsible for
preparing the way for popular control. Supposing that there is a
proper constitution framed, there is no one in Rajkot to deliver the
goods, the invisible hand of Durbar Virawala will deliver nothing. I
suppose you know that he has no official status, if he told me the
truth.
Pray pardon me for this infliction, and that too on a Sunday.
But you should know the reality as I see it.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy : C.W. 10135. Courtesy : D. B. Kalelkar

1

The telegram, which was from U. N. Dhebar, said: “State’s policy unchanged.
Gives Izara for fruit selling. Azad chowk foundation being dug two workers not
allowed to remain in Kherdi. Cultivators being pressed for fine and removal charges.
Permission disallowed to carry their own share. Third instead fourth share demanded
from sympathetic cultivators.”
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

193

241. MESSAGE TO EGYPT1
March 18, 1939
I have nothing new. I would repeat what I said in my telegram2
to you on your arrival that there must be a real bond of friendship
between India and Egypt. It is not a mere courteous wish. It is a wish
from the heart. There is such a lot which is common between the
cultures of the two countries. Besides, India has such a big Muslim
population. Friendship between India and Egypt should help to solve
many of our domestic troubles.3
Harijan, 27-5-1939

242. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS4
March 18, 1939
These two temples have been constructed at the instance of
Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya and are the result of the munificence
of the House of Birlas, principally of Shri Jugal Kishore Birla who is
parti-cularly inclined in this direction. It would have been in the
fitness of things if the temples had been opened by Malaviyaji who
inspired their construction. But as he is not here, it has fallen to my lot
to perform the ceremony.
It is my hope that both these temples will make a special
1
This is extracted from “The Rajkot Fast—VII”, Pyarelal explains that the
Egy-ptian Delegation, which met Gandhiji “at noon”, requested for ”a message to
Egypt”.
2
Vide “Telegram to K. M. Munshi”, 9-3-1939
3
Concluding, Pyarelal adds: “The message was translated into Egyptian language by an interpreter to the leader of the Deputation. At parting he... said in
Egyptian: ‘We pray for your long life, as you are the hope not of India only but of the
whole world. The work that you are doing is for the whole of the Orient.’ ‘That is my
hope at least,’ replied Gandhiji.”
4
This appeared under the title “Equal Respect for Religions” with an
explanatory note which read: “. . . Gandhiji performed the opening ceremony of the
Lakshmi Narayan Temple and the Buddha Vihar. . . in Delhi. The vast concourse of
people. . . made it difficult for Gandhiji to enter the Temple precincts and the
microphone arrangements broke down. He therefore . . . later issued to the Press what
he would, under normal conditions, have spoken.”

194

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

contribution to promote the religious sense of the worshippers. The
temple of Buddha admits of no untouchability. But even in the
temple of Krishna untouchability and the idea of high and low are
taboo. For me, untouchability and the idea of high and low have no
room in Hinduism. There are the varnas, but none of the varnas is
superior to the other.Varna does not connote superiority ; it connotes
different functions and different duties.
Whoever has more of the earthly or spiritual goods has to
perform more service to the community, has to be more humble. The
moment untouchability and the sense of high and low crept in,
Hinduism began to decline. Hinduism is based on the firm foundation
of truth and non-violence and, therefore, there is no room in it for
conflict with other religions.
It must be the daily prayer of every adherent of the Hindu faith
that every known religion of the world should grow from day to day
and should serve the whole of humanity. I hope that these temples will
serve to propagate the idea of equal respect for religions and to make
communal jealousies and strife things of the past.
Harijan, 25-3-1939

243. NOTE TO JAIPUR SATYAGRAHA COUNCIL
March 19, 1939
My opinion is that the departure of the batch of satyagrahis for
Jaipur should be postponed till I have further considered the matter.
M. K. GANDHI
From Hindi: C.W.6166. Courtesy: G. D. Birla. Also The Hindustan Times,
20-3-1939

244. REQUISITE QUALIFICATIONS
The four days’ fast set me thinking of the qualifications
required in a satyagrahi. Though they were carefully considered and
reduced to writing in 1921 1 they seem to have been forgotten. As
satyagraha in the form of civil disobedience is being offered or
contemplated in several States, it is necessary to reiterate the
qualifications and to dispel false ideas that seem to be prevalent
1

Vide “Speech at Congress Session, Ahmedabad”-I

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

195

among many workers.
Moreover the greatest care is necessary at the present moment
when violence, not non-violence, seems to pervade the air. Indeed it
may be reasonably argued that in an atmosphere surcharged with
violence there is no scope for non-violence. This argument may be
carried too far, so far that non-violence may be made wholly ineffective; whereas it is claimed to be the only effective force for counteracting violence no matter how terrible. But when violence pervades the
air the expression of non-violence may not be through civil disobedience. And if it is to be civil disobedience, it must be hedged in by
adequate restrictions. In satyagraha, It is never the numbers that count;
it is always the quality, more so when the forces of violence are
uppermost.
Then it is often forgotten that it is never the intention of a
satyagrahi to embarrass the wrongdoer. The appeal is never to his
fear; it is, must be, always to his heart. The satyagrahi’s object is not to
convert, not to coerce, the wrongdoers. He should avoid artificiality in
all his doings. He acts naturally and from inward convictions.
Keeping these observations before his mind’s eye, the reader
will perhaps appreciate the following qualifications which I hold are
essential for every satyagrahi in India :
1. He must have a living faith in God, for He is his only Rock.
2. He must believe in truth and non-violence as his creed and
therefore have faith in the inherent goodness of human nature which
he expects to evoke by his truth and love expressed through his
suffering.
3. He must be leading a chaste life and be ready and willing
for the sake of his cause to give up his life and his possessions.
4. He must be a habitual khadi-wearer and spinner. This is
essential for India.
5. He must be a teetotaller and be free from the use of other
intoxicants in order that his reason may be always unclouded and his
mind constant.
6. He must carry out with a willing heart all the rules of
discipline as may be laid down from time to time.
7. He should carry out the jail rules unless they are specially
devised to hurt his self-respect.
196

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The qualifications are not to be regarded as exhaustive. They
are illustrative only.
NEW DELHI, March 20, 1939
Harijan, 25-3-1939

245. DRAFT TELEGRAM TO R. SANKAR1
March 20, 1939
R. S ANKAR2
TRAVELLERS‘ BUNGALOW
MADURA
WAS

NOT

BENEFIT

UNPREPARED

CAUSE.

ISSUING

FOR

ARRESTS.

THEY

WILL

STATEMENT 3 .

GANDHI
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal. Also Pattom Thanu
Pillai Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

246. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
NEW DELHI,

March 20, 1939
MY DEAR C.R.

Read this 4 from Satyamurti and do what you think is right. The
conscience clause does appeal to me as right. But my ‘right’ may be
your ‘wrong’ and vice versa.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: C. W. 10889. Courtesy: C. R. Narasimhan

1
This was in reply to the addressee’s telegram of even date informing Gandhiji
of the arrests of Pattom Thanu Pillai, President, Travancore State Congress, and G.
Ramachandran, Member of A. I. C. C. and Travancore State Congress Working
Committee, and other members.
2
President, Kerala Provincial Congress Committee.
3
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 20-3-1939
4
Vide”Letter from S. Satyamurti to Mahadev Desai”, 20-3-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

197

247. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
NEW DELHI,

March 20, 1939
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

Shaukat has just brought your note. The news you give me is
astounding. I only hope that there is a misunderstanding. Did you get
the name of the Congressman?1 I am inquiring.
I hope Maulana Saheb2 is much better. Please give him my love
and tell him I am anxious to see him. I shall do so as soon as I can
safely leave.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi—Nehru Papers, 1939.
Library.

Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and

248. LETTER TO SHARDABEHN G. CHOKHAWALA
DELHI,

March 20, 1939
CHI. BABUDI,

How are you? Are you quiet now? I do not find time to write.
But what about you? What did you observe in the Congress? Are you
keeping good health? We shall be in Delhi for a couple of days more.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C. W. 10020. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

1

In his reply dated March 22, the addressee, inter alia, said: “I do not know the
names of the Congressmen who are supposed to have approached a Government
official in Delhi. The names have not been mentioned to me.”
2
Abul Kalam Azad

198

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

249. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
March 20, 1939
CHI. KAKA,

I have been able to attend to letters properly for the first time
only today. I went through your letters carefully. Do not, for the
present, send the letter to Baburamji. I am returning It. I hope Jamnalalji will be released shortly. We shall arrange to get this work done
through him. In case we fail, resignation is certainly there as the last
resort.
I have not replied to Gopinath. However I will do that, saying
that in view of the prevailing circumstances he may carry on with the
Roman script for some time. I would be glad if the government of
Bombay were to do what you want it to do.
Could not Diwakar be made President of the Hindustani Board?
Or co-opt Shankarrao and make him the President. Perinbehn perhaps
may not do justice to the office of President. Kazi is not necessary. I
would certainly like Brelvi. He is a straightforward man. But Dev’s
objection does deserve consideration. Narahari cannot be burdened
with this responsibility.
I am not writing separately to Amritlal. You must be taking care
of your health. My programme is uncertain. I am in Delhi for the
present and staying at Birla House.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 7974

250 . DISCUSSION WITH TRAVANCORE SATYAGRAHIS 1
March 20, 1939
Suspension should never bring despondency and weakness in a
satyagraha struggle. Even though people may be ready and non1

This is extracted from “The Rajkot Fast—VIII”. Pyarelal explains that the
Travancore satyagrahis who called on Gandhiji in the afternoon feared that “indefinite
suspension of civil disobedience would bring in depression from which it would be
difficult for the people to recover”.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

199

violence ensured, and suspension is ordered through a miscalculation
of the general, it cannot jeopardize the future of the movement.
Satyagraha means readiness to suffer and a faith that the more
innocent and pure the suffering the more potent will it be in its effect.
Helplessness is thus ruled out in satyagraha. Suspension of civil
disobedience, if it resulted in an accentuation of repression, would
itself become satyagraha in its ideal form.
Today the opponent is afraid of your numbers. You cannot
expect him to show a change of heart while he is filled with panic. He
senses in your action a spirit of retaliation which irritates him the
more. It thus becomes a species of violence.
Your struggle hereafter may have to be restricted to a few men
only, but their satyagraha will tell. While we are playing with nonviolence we are only giving a chance to the powers that be in
Travancore to organize the brute in man. This must not be.1
Harijan, 3-6-1939

251. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS3
NEW DELHI,

March 20, 1939
I observe that Sir C. P. Ramaswami Aiyar3 had no better use for
the two Travancore stalwarts, Shri Thanu Pillai and Shri Ramachandran, than to send them to prison. They will give a good account
of themselves in prison as they have done outside. But I cannot
congratulate the Travancore Durbar on their action.
When I was in Rajkot I had seen Sir C. P. Ramaswami Aiyar’s
statement in condemnation of what he was pleased to term outside
interference. May the Princes summon whatever outside assistance
they may choose, and not the people? There is no restriction on the
outside help the Princes may take. The popular party has put many
voluntary restrictions on such help. After all, what am I doing except
to give advice as an expert in the science of satyagraha? By doing so I
promote the spirit of non-violence and the cause of peace. The
connection between the people of the States and of the so-called
1

Vide also “Discussion with Philipose”, 15-3-1939
The statement appeared under the title “Read the signs”.
3
Dewan of Travancore State
2

200

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

British India is organic, vital and indissoluble. There is no such
connection between the Princes who are and who pride themselves on
being independent of one another. The common tie between them is
that of subservience to the Paramount Power, without whose
permission, implied or explicit, they cannot move a blade of grass.
But the Paramount Power itself growingly lives on the will of the
nation, including the people of the State. If the nation realizes that it
can develop invincible strength through truth and non-violence, the
Paramount Power will be voluntarily replaced by the power of the
people. It, therefore, seems to me that Sir C. P. Ramaswami and those
Dewans who think like him are bad advisers of their Princes and ill
serve them. The effort to ignore the Congress and Congress workers
and to prevent its natural influence working in the States is like that of
a child who by the little palm of his right hand tries to stop an
onrushing flood. This attempt to stifle the legitimate aspirations of the
people of the States surely sows seeds of bitterness on the one hand
between the people of the States and their Princes to whom they want
to be loyal, and on the other between the Princes and the Congress
which wants to help them if it is allowed to do so.
I ask the Princes and their advisers to read the signs of the times
and march with them. They may succeed by frightful measures in
sending for a time the freedom movement underground, but they will
never be able to crush it altogether. I venture to think also that the
Paramount Power will have to shed their nervousness and overcautiousness. If they owe a duty to the Princes, surely they owe a duty to
their people. The days when the people could be ignored are gone.
If the Princes will not listen, let the Paramount Power tell them in
plain terms that they may not expect the latter’s assistance in
suppressing their people. The Paramount Power who draw Ministers in
many Provinces from the Congress may not sit still when neighbouring states heap insults upon the Congress. It is an anomaly that
demands quick handling.
To the people of Travancore I suggest that the cause has
benefited by the premature arrests of the two stalwarts. The benefit
can only accrue if they will use the arrests wisely. If there is the
slightest risk of violence breaking out, let there be no demonstration
by way of processions and the like. Let them all devote themselves to
constructive work. The date of launching out upon civil disobedience
must not be anticipated. If I am to continue to advise, let me study the
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

201

situation and let them await my opinion 1 before resuming civil
disobedience. Civil disobedience is but a minor part of satyagraha. Let
the people, including the most illiterate and the downtrodden, be knit
in a common bond by silent service. In this work even the students
can take their due share. Let the satyagrahis remember that haste is
waste. Their freedom was assured when they took the solemn vow of
fighting for it through truth and non-violence, that is, through
enlightened and disciplined self-suffering. For I know that they will
never go back upon their vow.
Harijan, 25-3-1939

252. DICUSSION WITH JAIPUR SATYAGRAHIS

1

March 20, 1939
Provoking lathi charges or receiving lathi blows on your body
in a spirit of bravado is not satyagraha. True satyagraha consists in the
readiness to face blows if they come in the course of performing
one’s duty.
Today the whole atmosphere in the country is reeking of
violence as was evidenced at Tripuri. Under violence I include
corruption, falsehood, hypocrisy, deceit and the like. If our satyagraha
is to survive this atmosphere, we ahimsaites shall have to be more strict
with ourselves. Let only the purest and the most innocent go to jail. It
does not matter if they have to remain immured behind the prison
bars for a whole lifetime. Their sacrifice will fill the prison with a
sweet fragrance and its influence will even travel outside and subtly
transform the entire atmosphere. They will never long for their release
nor doubt that their sacrifice is being ‘wasted’. They will realize that a
consecrated resolve is more potent in its action than mere physical
action can ever be. The discipline that they will be acquiring in prison
will help the non-violent organization of the people outside and instil
fearlessness among them.
So much for those who are in prison, what about those outside?
They must engage in constructive work as the embodiment of the
active principle of ahimsa. If it does not appeal to them, it will only
1
1

202

Vide “Statement Suspending Travancore Satyagraha”, 23-3-1939
This is extracted from “The Rajkot Fast—VIII”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

betray their lack of faith in ahimsa.
The other thing is internal. They must cultivate a living faith in
God—an attitude of utter reliance on Him to the exclusion of all
external aids. A single satyagrahi imbued with such faith will inspire
the whole people by his example and may induce a heart change even
in the opponent who, freed from fear, will the more readily appreciate
his simple faith and respect it.1
Harijan, 3-6-1936

253. INTERVIEW TO “THE NEW YORK TIMES”2
NEW DELHI,

[Before March 23, 1939] 3
Asked what advice he would give the Congress regarding his attitude, should
the Paramount Power become involved in a European war, Mahatma Gandhi pleaded
that that was too difficult to answer at that time.
He demurred also to a question whether he wished India to take her
independence within the British Commonwealth of Nations or outside it. Gandhiji
said :

That again is difficult. I cannot exactly tell where I myself stand
on that. Both are difficult questions.
CORRESPONDENT
GANDHIJI :

: But don’t they go to the root of the situation?

Wise journalists never go to the root.

When asked if he was content with the result of the Tripuri Congress, the
Mahatma was still smilingly evasive:

Contentment is bliss. That is one of your proverbs, isn’t it?
C.

Then let me ask : Is India making progress to your liking?

G.
(Thoughtfully) Yes, it is. I get frightened sometimes; but there
is progress at the bottom and that progress is sound.

The greatest difficulty is Hindu-Muslim differences. That is a
serious obstacle. There I cannot say I see visible progress, but the
1
Pyarelal adds: “As a result of the talk it was decided to suspend the Jaipur
Satyagraha indefinitely.” Vide also the preceding item.
2
The newspaper was represented by its special correspondent, F. E. Birchell.
The interview, which was reported by Reuter, appeared under the date-line “New York,
March 23”, as “an Associated Press message from New Delhi”. A brief report of the
interview was also reproduced in “The Rajkot Fast— VIII”.
3
Ibid

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

203

trouble is bound to solve itself. The mass mind is sound if only
because it is unselfish. The political grievances of both the communities are identical, so are the economic grievances.
During further conversation, the correspondent asked Mahatma Gandhi if in
the present unrest he had got some message which he might carry across the world,
moving men’s hearts towards peace. His eyes gleamed at the word “peace” and he bent
his head in thought.

I don’t see at the moment an atmosphere which would carry
my voice to all nations. Perhaps I am far in advance of the times.
G.

C.

Might not it be said with equal truth that the times are falling behind you?

G.
If you like. I am thinking over your suggestion. Should I
again allow myself to become the laughing-stock, as has some-times
been the case? Should I? But why not? Laughter is wholesome.
Perhaps it may be a good thing. So take this as coming from me :
I see from today’s papers that the British Prime Minister is
conferring with Democratic Powers as to how they should meet the
latest threatening developments. How I wish he was conferring by
proposing to them that all should resort to simultaneous disarmament.
I am as certain of it as I am sitting here, that this heroic act would
open Herr Hitler’s eyes and disarm him.
C.

Would not that be a miracle?

G.
Perhaps; but it would save the world from the butchery that
seems to be impending. Isn’t that enough for one morning?

The Hindustan Times, 24-3-1939

254. TELEGRAM TO U. N. DHEBAR
NEW DELHI,

March 23, 1939
U.N. D HEBAR, V AKIL
R AJKOT
AUTHORITIES
PUT

BEFORE

HERE

AND

RELIFE.

YOU

HERE

SUGGEST

RESIDENT
ANY
CAN

THAT

ALL

OTHER
SHOW

YOU

FACTS
COMPLAINT
HIM

THIS

SHOULD

YOU
AND
IF

TELEGRAPHED
SEEK
NECESSARY.

GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 10136. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar.

204

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

255. LETTER TO SARAT CHANDRA BOSE
NEW DELHI,

March 23, 1939
MY DEAR SARAT,

Your letter1 makes me sad. I have shown it to the Sardar and
Kripalani and asked them to give me their reaction. I am on the train
taking me to the Maulana who wants me and who is too disabled to
come to Delhi. I am going to show it to him and Jawaharlal also and
ask them to let me have their reaction.2 You shall have their statements.
With so much that you have to say against your erstwhile
colleagues and they against you both, how can I act, what can I do?
Do you know that I have no official notice of the resolution? I have
not even seen the full text. But even if I had official notice, what could
I do so long as the terrible mutual distrust lasted?
I therefore suggest either a meeting of all of you so that you can
pour out your hearts to one another and come to an understanding or,
if the poison has gone too deep to be eradicated, I suggest Subhas’s
(when he is restored to health) telling the A. I. C. C. that he cannot
work with the old Working Committee and that he should be relieved
of the command or be left a free hand to choose his own cabinet.
In any event I think an early meeting of the A. I. C. C. should
be called to consider the situation. I feel too that something should be
done for the interim administration. What that something should be, I
do not know.
You say I had said to Subhas that I would advise the Sardar and
others not to obstruct Subhas. I did say so to Sardar. The Sardar when
he read your letter flatly denied that there was any obstruction on the
part of old colleagues. On the contrary, he says there was every
attempt made to smooth Subhas’s way. I am sorry you are also ailing.
I hope you will rest and be soon your old self again.
I have assumed that your letter represents Subbas’s sentiments
also. 3
Love.
BAPU

Status, June 30, 1985
1

Presumably of March 21, 1939, complaining against “some of the exmembers of the Working Committee” who, he alleged had carried “malicious”
propaganda against Subhas Chandra Bose at the Tripuri Congress; vide Selected
Works of Jawaharlal Nehru.
2
For Jawaharlal Nehru’s reactions, op. cit.,
3
Vide also “Letter to Subhas Chandra Bose”, 24-3-1939
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

205

256. STATEMENT SUSPENDING TRAVANCORE
SATYAGRAHA

1

NEW DELHI,

March 23, 1939
2
I have had long Chats with Shri Philipose about the situation in
Travancore. I have also carefully studied the resolution of the last
Working committee of the State Congress and the well-thought-out
elaborate plan of action to be taken all over Travancore together with
great precautions embodied in it to ensure non-violence. I have also
read the telegram received by Shri Philipose wherein he is told that if
civil disobedience is further suspended, there will be much heartburning and disappointment.
But after having weighed the pros and cons I have come to the
conclusion that it will be in the interest of the cause not to start civil
disobedience on March 25 and to suspend it till I advise resumption.
In satyagraha there is no such thing as disappointment or heartburning. The struggle always goes on in some shape or other till the
goal is reached. A satyagrahi is indifferent whether it is civil
disobedience or some other phase of the struggle to which he is
called. Nor does he mind if, in the middle of the civil disobedience
march, he is called upon to halt and do something else. He must have
faith that it is all for the best. My own experience hitherto has been
that each suspension has found the people better equipped for the
fight and for control over forces of violence. Therefore in advising
suspension, I dismiss from my mind the fear that it may lead to
desertion and disbelief. If it does, I should not feel sorry, for it would
be to me a sign that the deserters did not know what satyagraha was
and the movement was better without those who did not know what
they were doing.
The reasons that have prompted me to tender this advice are
these: If it is true that the Travancore Durbar have drafted untrained
raw men as police in order to strike terror among satyagrahis, it
1

The statement appeared under the title “Suspend Civil Disobedience”. In “The
Rajkot Fast— VIII”, Pyarelal explains that Gandhiji issued the statement “after final
consultation with Travancore friends”.
2
Vide “Discussion with Philipose”, 15-3-1939

206

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

behoves the satyagrahis not to tempt the Durbar whilst suspension is a
possibility. In view of the inhumanities which I believe have been
perpetrated in various States, I am myself thinking out a new
orientation of civil disobedience. I may fail. But if I am to succeed at
all, I must have the quiet which can be produced only by suspension
of civil disobedience wherever I am guiding it.
This suspension gives one a chance of mobilizing public
opinion in favour of the movement for liberty in Travancore. It gives
also an opportunity to the Travancore Durbar to reconsider their view
of satyagrahis and their demands.
The Princes are themselves agitated over the tremendous awakening that has taken place among the people in the States. Suspension
in Travancore and elsewhere gives them breathing time and an
opportunity of thinking out their course of action free from the
burden of dealing with civil resistance.
Lastly, it is wise to allow the recent Viceregal message to the
Princes to work itself among them.
The satyagrahis of Travancore should know too that I have
advised 1 suspension of civil disobedience in Jaipur for similar reasons
and I am likewise holding the hands of workers in other States. But I
give my assurance to Travancoreans and all concerned that I shall not
sit idle during suspension, nor shall I be long in coming to a final
decision, assuming that in the mean while no relief has come in the
States in which civil disobedience was going on and is under
suspension.
Harijan, 1-4-1939

257. LETTER TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
ON THE TRAIN,
ADDRESS AS AT BIRLA HOUSE, N EW DELHI

March 24, 1939
MY DEAR SUBHAS,

I Do hope this will find you steadily progressing towards
complete recovery.
I enclose herewith copy of Sarat’s letter to me and my reply. If
it represents also your sentiments, then and then only my suggestions
1

Vide “Discussion With Jaipur Satyagrahis”, 20-3-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

207

are applicable. Anyway, the anarchy at the Centre should end. In
accordance with your request, I am keeping absolutely silent, though
pressure is being put upon me to give my opinion on the crisis.
I saw the resolution1 for the first time in Allahabad. It seems to
me to be quite clear. The initiative lies with you. I do not know how
far you are fit to attend to national work. If you are not, I think you
should adopt the only constitutional course open to you.2
I shall have to be in Delhi still for a few days.
Love.
BAPU

The Hindustan Times, 14-5- 1939

258. TELEGRAM TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
NEW DELHI,
March 25, 1939
R ASHTRAPATI BOSE
JEALGORA
WIRE 3 .

YOUR

MAULANA

AS

WAS
HE

YESTERDAY
WAS

ANXIOUS

IN

ALLAHABAD
FOR

TALK.

SEE
POSTED

1

The resolution, sponsored by Govind Ballabh Pant in the Subjects
Committee at the Tripuri Congress, read: “In view of various misunderstandings that
have arisen in the Congress and the country on account of the controversies in
connection with the Presidential election and after, it is desirable that the all-India
Congress Committee should clarify the position and declare its general policy. The
Committee declares its firm adherence to the fundamental policies of the Congress
which have governed its programme in the past years under the guidance of Mahatma
Gandhi and is definitely of opinion that there should be no break in these policies and
that they should continue to govern the Congress programme in future. The
Committee expresses its confidence in the work of the Working Committee which
functioned during the last year and regrets that any aspersions should have been cast
against any of its members. In view of the critical situation that may develop during
the coming year and in view of the fact that Mahatma Gandhi alone can lead the
Congress and the country to victory during such crisis, the Committee regards it as
imperative that the congress executive should command his implicit confidence and
requests the President to nominate the Working Committee in accordance with the
wishes of Gandhiji.”
2
Vide also the following items.
3
Dated March 24, which read: “In view of your suggestion to Sarat regarding
Congress work and impossibility of my meeting you immediate future consider
necessary start consultations with you through post. Am writing.”

208

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

LETTER1
HOPE

FROM

TRAIN.

PROGRESS

STEADY.

AWAITING

YOUR

COMMUNICATION.

LOVE.

BAPU

The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939

259. TELEGRAM TO DR. SUNIL BOSE
[March 25, 1939]2
WIRE 3 .

YOUR

INVENTIONS

GOD

AND

THOSE

SAVE

ME

WHO

NEWSPAPER 4

FROM

BELIEVE

IN

THEM.

The Sunday Statesman, 26-3-1939

260. TELEGRAM TO R. K. JHA
March 25, 1939
JHA
DRUG C ONGRESS
IT

DOES. 5

From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

261. BOMBAY THE BEAUTIFUL
‘Handsome is that handsome does’ is a neat proverb. I have
often said that it is wrong to call Bombay beautiful only because of
1

Vide the preceding item.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary.
3
Which read: “Doctors have not the slightest objection to your visiting
Subhas at Jealgora. In fact, your kind visit will be most heartily welcomed.”
According to the source, this was “in connection with a Press report from New Delhi
that doctors had objected to Mr. Subhas Chandra Bose receiving visitors, and that,
therefore, Gandhiji was unable to visit him at Jealgora.”
4
The manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary has “Press”.
5
The addressee, in his telegram dated March 25, had asked Gandhiji whether
the statement suspending Travancore satyagraha (Vide pp.78-9) contemplated similar
action in Nandgaon State. According to The Indian Annual Register, 1939, Vol. I,
satyagraha in Rajnandgaon and Chhuikhadan States in Chattisgarh division was
suspended on April 10. Vide also “Letter to Mulkraj”, 5-4-1939
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

209

the fine approach to the harbour or for its many beauty spots so long
as it contains dirty chawls, overcrowded lanes and uninhabitable
hovels, which serve as dwelling places for its Harijans. But when
Bombay goes dry,1 as it will very soon, it will become truly beautiful
even for this one singularly beautiful act and it will deserve the title in
spite of the blemishes I have mentioned. For when its labouring
population has the temptation of drink removed from them, with the
improvement in their condition which always follows the exorcism of
the drink devil, it must become easier for the Bombay Municipality
to deal with the problem of providing better habitations for the poor
classes. The Bombay Govern-ment, and especially Dr. Gilder, deserve
the thanks of the citizens of Bombay, nay of the whole Province, for
the courage with which they have approached their task. I know that
many Parsis who depend upon drink traffic for their living will be
affected. Bombay is the stronghold of the Parsis. Then there are its
fashionable citizens who think they need their spirituous drinks as
they need water. I have every hope that they will all rise to the
occasion, think of their poor brethren, even if they do not appreciate
abstinence for themselves, and set an example to all India and make
good the claim of Bombay not only to be beautiful but also the first
city in India.
Prohibition in Bombay will mean a big fall in revenue. The
Finance Minister has to balance his budget. He has to find money. He
has to levy new taxes. Let there be no complaint from those who will
have to bear the burden. Dislike of taxes, be they ever so reasonable, is
proverbial. I understand that the Finance Minister has met all just
objections. Why should those who will have to bear the burden not
feel a pride in being given the privilege of contributing to the great
experi-ment? It will be a proud day for Bombay if prohibition is
ushered in amid the rejoicings of the whole population. Let it be
remembered that this prohibition is not a superimposition. It is being
introduced by Govern-ments that are responsible to the people. It has
been a plank in the national programme since 1920. It is coming,
therefore, in due fulfilment of the national will definitely expressed
nearly twenty years ago.
NEW DELHI, March 26, 1939
Harijan, 1-4-1939

1

210

Prohibition came into force in Bombay on August 1, 1939.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

262. ‘SUSPENSION SHOULD CONTINUE’
Shri Philipose has received the following telegram from
Trivandrum :
Arrests continue. Kunjukrishna Pillai and others arrested.Kuzhitharai Krishna
Pillai, President, arrested today (24th).Korah nominated President. Inform
Gandhiji.

I had not expected that arrests would continue even after the
suspension of civil disobedience. But of course my expectations need
not be fulfilled. Suspension was advised for reasons publicly stated by
me. If Travancore authorities consider it necessary to continue arrests,
satya grahis may not complain. Civil disobedience gives cause for
arrest or makes some action by the authorities necessary. Therefore, as
a rule, suspension without any previous understanding with the State is
generally followed not only by discontinuance of arrests but even by
discharge of those convicted for disobedience. If the Trivandrum wire
is correct, authorities in Travancore have adopted an unexpected
course. Their action need not perturb or perplex satyagrahis.
Suspension should still continue. I have no doubt that such arrests will
help the popular cause more than if civil disobedience was continued,
assuming, of course, that there was no cause for arrest other than that
the arrested persons were satyagrahis. Since suspension has been
declared I hold it to be unnecessary to appoint a President instead of
the one arrested. The object of appointing successive Presidents in
place of those arrested no longer subsists. There must be a provision
in the ordinary constitution of the State Congress for conduct of
business in the absence of the President.
I am painfully conscious of the fact that satyagrahis were
unprepared for the exigency created by my advice. Let them console
themselves, if they can, by the fact that though they may not just now
appreciate or understand what may to them appear to be new
technique, it has been advised by one who claims to know the science
of satyagraha. It calls for infinite patience and boundless faith in its
efficacy. Everything comes right for those who watch, wait and pray.
Since writing the foregoing I have seen the official reaction to
suspension. An Associated Press message says that official opinion
seems to be that civil disobedience is neither given up nor even
suspended. If there was any ground for suspicion, it should be
dispelled by the State Congress second President, Shri N. Srikrishna
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

211

Pillai, who, according to another Associated Press message, says :
Civil disobedience has been suspended at the instance of Mahatmaji,1 and
it will be resumed only with his sanction, whatever time it may take. My
instruction to the country is that the State Congress workers should preach
the technique of non-violence (as different from non-violent direct action) to
the masses as well as the message of khadi and swadeshi. The State Congress,
as it stands at present, does not contemplate any direct action without
command from Mahatmaji. I know that picketing of liquor shops is not
breaking of any law and it is not prohibited by Government. Yet, fearing
trouble and misunderstanding, we are not launching even that.

This emphatic statement puts the matter beyond any suspicion. I
am hoping that civil resisters who were eagerly looking forward to the
resumption of civil disobedience will conform to the letter and the
spirit of the presidential instructions and thus show that if they
understood what ‘disobedience’ was they understood equally well
what ‘civil’ meant.
I am convinced that much of our trouble has arisen from our
not putting due emphasis in our actions on the implications of the
word ‘civil’ which is the very opposite of criminal, uncivil and violent.
Let the suspension enable the members of the State Congress and the
Travancore public in general to realize the tremendous implications of
non-violence, and I promise that its practice in thought, word and
deed will hasten the progress towards their goal as nothing else will.
NEW DELHI, March 26, 1939
Harijan, 1-4-1939

263. JAIPUR CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE
The cry comes from Jaipur that some civil resisters are
disappointed over the suspension and are not as enthusiastic to tackle
the constructive programme, which is chiefly the spinning-wheel and
khadi, as they were for fight. If this is the general feeling, the suspension is doubly justified. For the reluctance betrays lack of appreciation of ahimsa without which resistance becomes a species of violence. Those who lightly talk of freedom in the States and hope to
attain it through civil resistance, evidently do not know what they are
talking about. Will thay not learn the lesson of the Provinces?
1

212

Vide “Statement Suspending Travancore Satyagraha”, 23-3-1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Provincial Autonomy1 such as it is, has been won by civil resistance
however inferior it may have been. But do they not realize that it is
likely to break down if Congress Ministers cannot carry on without
the aid of the Police and the Military, i.e., without British guns? If the
partial autonomy was won by non-violent means, it must be held also
by such means and no other. From recent experiences it seems clear
that the country is not ready to hold power through non-violent
means. Though for the past twenty years—the period of the greatest
mass awakening—the people have been taught to abjure the use of
arms including brick-bats and the lathi, and to rely upon non-violence
pure and simple, we know that Congress Ministers have been obliged
to resort to violence to suppress popular violence real or imaginary. It
is clear also that the country cannot be made ready for the use of
violence without training. Was our non-violence that of the weak?
Hindu-Muslim tension is to me the acid test. The Congress corruption
is a sure sign of violence. Swaraj within the States is not to be obtained
by any non-violent trick. It will be won, if it is to be won, by nonviolence of the strong, i. e., by hard work, patient and mute suffering,
service of the poor, the hungry and the forsaken of society, and a
voluntry obedience to the laws of the State and society in so far as
they are not repugnant to public and private morals. Unless nonviolence of the strong is really developed among us, there should be
no thought of civil disobedience for swaraj, whether within the States
or in British India. And as an indispensable test—by no means
infallible—of non-violence I adhere to habitual spinning and habitual
use of khadi by the would-be civil resister. The Jaipur satyagrahis, if
they desire to take part in any civil disobedience struggle that may
take place in future, should understand the implications of nonviolence and apply themselves with zest to the fulfilment of the
minimum conditions I have prescribed. Let them also know that what
applies to them applies to all future satyagrahis that I may have to deal
with.
This, however, does not mean that the fight for swaraj stops. It
only means that civil disobedience is not to be so cheap as I fear I
have, indirectly if not directly, made it. But I am never too old to
learn. One is ever young in the felt presence of the God of Truth or
Truth which is God. But if civil disobedience is henceforth to be a
very dear commodity, I hope, God willing, to show that it will prove to
1

Granted under the Government of India Act of 1935.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

213

be infinitely more effective and faster moving than the alloy with
which we have so far contented ourselves.
NEW DELHI, March 27, 1939
Harijan, 1-4-1939

264. TELEGRAM TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
NEW DELHI,

March 27, 1939
R ASHTRAPATI S UBHAS BOSE
JEALGORA
AWAITING
YOUR
LETTER.
AS
YOU
SAY
IN
YOUR
STATEMENT
IT
IS
DESIRABLE
WE
MEET.
RAJKOT
AFFAIR
TIES
ME
DOWN
TO
DELHI
OR
I
WOULD
RUN
TO
YOU
DESPITE
WEAKNESS.
I
SUGGEST
YOUR
COMING
HERE
AND
LIVING
WITH
ME.
UNDERTAKE
NURSE
YOU
TO
HEALTH
WHILE
WE
ARE
SLOWLY
CONFERRING.
LOVE..

BAPU

The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939

265. LETTER TO SIR MAURICE GWYER
March 27, 1939
I had kept my reply ready . In the mean time, I got your letter.
1

1
In the source Mahadev Desai explains: “Bapu had already kept his brief reply
ready last night [March 26]. Next morning, he was going through a few changes
suggested in it. He was about to despatch the letter at 11 a. m. when in the mean time
he got Chief Justice’s letter saying ‘you should write in detail as I do not wish to give
prima facie ruling on preliminary objections.”
In “The Rajkot Fast— VIII”, Pyarelal reports the following under March 26:
“Although Sardar had sent in his submission as required by the Chief Justice on the
17th instant, further proceedings had been held up because no statement had been
received on behalf of the Rajkot Durbar. This delay was irksome to a degree but it
could not be helped. Durbar Virawala at last arrived yesterday to represent the Rajkot
Durbar before the Chief Justice. He submitted a statement covering forty typed
foolscap sheets. A copy of it was sent to the Sardar for reply. The Durbar’s statement
was full of vituperation against the Sardar. It questioned the validity of the Thakore
Saheb’s letter to the Sardar of December 26th which it alleged had been obtained by
the Sardar from the Thakore Saheb ‘under duress’ and by ‘fraudulent means’. The
Sardar’s reply to it was brief, barely covering half a sheet. The bulk of the Rajkot
Durbar’s submission, he pleaded, consisted of irrelevant and libellous statements,
unsupported by evidence. These he requested should be ordered to be expunged. As for
the Thakore Saheb’s letter of even date with the notification No. 50 of December

214

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Even then, it does not warrant any change. Let me add that I
repudiate1 the story regarding fraud 2 . in fact, the question does not
arise at all.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy : Narayan Desai

266. INSCRIPTION IN A BOOK 3
Ramanavami, March 29, 1939
Life is only for yajna.
[From Hindi]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

267. DISCUSSION WITH AGATHA HARRISON

4

March 29/30, 1939
The thing is incredibly simple. But the simplest things have the
knack sometimes of appearing to us as the hardest. If our hearts were
opened, we should have no difficulty. Non-violence is a matter of the
heart. It does not come to us through any intellectual feat. Everyone
has faith in God though everyone does not know it. For, everyone has
5

26th, it was self-explained and admitted of only one meaning, and extraneous
evidence was inadmissible for its interpretation. He therefore prayed that the Chief
Justice give his interpretation of the said Note of 26th December last without
permitting any further procrastination. The hearing took place at half past three in
the afternoon at the Chief Justice’s residence. At the request of the Chief Justice the
Sardar gave a brief narrative of the events from the time he came into the picture till
the signing of the Thakore Saheb’s note to him of December 26th. The judgment was
reserved for another date” (Harijan, 3-6-1939)
1
In the source, these two words are transliterated.
2
Ibid
3
Gandhiji wrote this on a copy of the Bhagavad Gita, which G. D. Birla had
brought with him when he went to seek Gandhiji’s blessings on his birthday.
4
The discussion is extracted from “The Rajkot Fast— VIII”. Pyarelal explains
that “Agatha Harrison was discussing the difficulties experienced in training people
in non-Violence”.
5
Ibid
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

215

faith in himself and that multiplied to the nth degree is God. The sum
total of all that lives is God. We may not be God but we are of God—
even as a little drop of water is of the ocean. Imagine it torn away
from the ocean and flung millions of miles away. It becomes helpless
torn from its surroundings and cannot feel the might and majesty of
the ocean but if someone could point out to it that it is of the ocean,
its faith would revive, it would dance with joy and the whole of the
might and majesty of the ocean would be reflected in it. Even so it is
with all non-violent activities. Take spinning for half an hour daily. It
is nothing unless it is tacked on to non-violence. Take the counting of
beads. A monkey also can count them but devotees count them to get
nearer to God. I want everybody to spin as a token of his faith in nonviolence, as a token of his identification with the dumb millions. Then
alone shall we feel the upwelling of non-violent strength in us.1
The non-violence that we have offered hitherto has not been the
non-violence of the brave. As a weapon of the weak, as an expedient,
it was good enough. It did answer its purpose for a while. But how
long can the non-violence of the weak last? I have not been able to
answer for Europe because I have not worked it out in India. And yet
I would not rewrite those chapters in our history. God fulfils Himself
even through the weakness of His instruments sometimes. But if we
now do not overhaul the basis of our non-violence and if we continue
to drift in the old style, It would be nothing short of a catastrophe. We
shall not have evolved the non-violent strength and courage, and,
faced with a crisis, might behave like cowards.
Harijan, 3-6-1939

268.

TELEGRAM TO DR. SUNIL BOSE
NEW DELHI,

March 30, 1939
DR. S UNIL BOSE
JEALGORA
VIEW

YOUR

SUGGESTION.

3

WIRE 2
ON

I UNRESERVEDLY
NO

ACCOUNT

WILL

WITHDRAW
I

MY

ENDANGER

1

According to Pyarelal, what follows was said on March 30.
Dated March 29, which inter alia read: “From experience. . . feel . . . long
journey . . . will cause. . . set back . . . aggravation . . . suggest you both
correspond . . . urgent problems leaving other problems for future discussion.”
3
Vide “Telegram to Subhas Chandra Bose”, 27-3-1939
2

216

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

PROGRESS

TOWARDS

RECOVERY.

SUGGESTION

AND

QUESTIONS

RAISED

THIS

WITH

MY

SHALL
IN

DEAL

I WILL
BY

SUBHAS’S

ACCEPT

YOUR

CORRESPONDENCE
LETTER.

TELL

WITH
HIM

LOVE.

BAPU

The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939

269. LETTER TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
NEW DELHI,

March 30, 1939
MY DEAR SUBHAS,

I have delayed my reply to your letter of 25th 1 instant for the
sake of having your reply to my wire2 . I got Sunil’s wire last night. I
have now got up before morning prayer time to write this reply.
Since you think that Pandit Pant’s resolution 3 was out of order
and the clause relating to the Working Committee is clearly unconstitutional and ultra vires, your course is absolutely clear. Your choice
of the Committee should be unfettered.
Your several questions on this head, therefore, do not need any
answering.
Since we met in February, my opinion has becomes strengthened that where there are differences on fundamentals, as we agreed
there were, a composite committee would be harmful. Assuming,
therefore, that your policy had the backing of the majority of the A. I.
C. C., you should have a Working Committee composed purely of
those who believe in your policy.
Yes, I adhere to the view expressed by me at Segaon at our
February meeting that I would not be guilty of being party to any
self-suppression by you, as distinguished from voluntary self-effacement. Any subordination of a view which you may strongly hold as in
the best interests of the country would be self-suppression. Therefore,
if you are to function as President, your hands must be unfettered.
The situation before the country admits of no middle course.
1

The source, however, has “26th”.
Vide “Letter to Subhas Chandra Bose”, 27-3-1939
3
Vide footnote 1, “Letter to Subhas Chandra Bose”, 24-3-1939
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

217

So far as the Gandhi-ites (to use that wrong expression) are
concerned, they will not obstruct you. They will help you where they
can, they will abstain where they cannot. There should be no difficulty
whatsoever, if they are in a minority. They may not suppress themselves if they are clearly in a majority.
What worries me, however, is the fact that the Congress electorate
is bogus and that, therefore, majority and minority lose their full
meaning. Nevertheless, till the Congress stable is cleansed, we have to
manage with the instrument we have for the time being. The other
thing worrying me is the terrible distrust among ourselves. Joint work
is an impossibility where the workers distrust one another.
I think there is no other point in your letter that needs
answering.
In all you do, may you be guided by God. Do be well quickly
by obeying the doctors.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
So far as I am concerned, our correspondence need not be
published. But you have my permission to publish it, if you think
otherwise.
The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939

270.

LETTER TO AKBAR HYDARI
NEW DELHI,

March 30, 1939
DEAR SIR AKBAR1 ,

I am grateful to you for your kind letter.
Dr. Moonje’s letter is striking. You may depend upon my not
rushing to print without first reference to you on matters relating to
Hyderabad. I expect great things from you. I cannot forget our talks
on our return journey from London. We were to have embarked on a
joint mission of peace between the two communities, but God had
willed otherwise. I was to go to prison instead. But though seemingly
we could not work together, the wish has persisted with me, as I am
sure it has with you. You have opportunities, which I have not, to fulfil
that wish. I am watching you with a friend’s interest. I am looking
1

218

Dewan of Hyderabad State.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

forward to the reforms adumbrated in your letter.
Every day I look for the news that you have discharged the State
Congress Prisoners. You Know that I have prevented resumption of
satyagraha by that body. Unless you have definite information to the
contrary, I would like you to believe me when I tell you that if you
treated them with sympathy, they will help and not hinder you in your
effort to open a new era in Hyderabad.
I thank you for your reference to my fast.
I hope you are well.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat : G.N. 6842

271. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
NEW DELHI,

March 30, 1939
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I had your two letters1 . Both were good.
I send you copies of correspondence.
The events in U. P. disturb me.2 My solution is that you should
become Prime Minister or dissolve the Ministry. You must get control
over the unruly elements.
I have had three days heart-to-heart conversations with the
socialists who were here. Narendradev will report to you. If he does
not of his own accord, you should make him.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru papers, 1939. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Also A Bunch of Old Letters, p. 354

1
Dated March 22 and 24, forwarding copies of correspondence with Subhas
Chandra Bose. Jawaharlal Nehru had also informed Gandhiji of his telegram to S. C.
Bose that “. . . Gandhiji . . . keenly feels Congress work suffering owing lack
direction office arrangements also national international crises demand ceaseless
vigilance. . .” .(Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1939).
2 In “The Rajkot Fast— VIII”, Pyarelal explains: “Communal riots in
Allahabad exercise Gandhiji’s mind very much.” Vide also the following item.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

219

272.

A DISCUSSION1
March 31, 1939

QUESTION :

What would you do in Allahabad, if you were there?

ANSWER : I would scrap the existing Congress machinery. It is a
burden today. If there were half a dozen genuine Congressmen only
on the Congress register today, they would be real messengers of
peace. But today their effort is smothered under the weight of
numbers. If all Congressmen whose names are on the Congress
register today were worth their salt, they would offer themselves to be
cut to pieces before the communal trouble proceeds any further. But
today each wants to use the dagger against his fellow. We have either
to revise everything in terms of non-violence or give up non-violence
and rebuild the organization.
Harijan, 3-6-1939

273. TELEGRAM TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
NEW DELHI,

March 31, 1939
R ASHTRAPATI S UBHAS BOSE
JEALGORA
YOUR

LETTER 2 .

DAY.

REPLY3

ALL-INDIA

PROCEDURE
REQUIRES
THROUGH

MEETING

RULE
SEVEN

PRESS.

FIRST

TWO
DAYS’

LETTER
MUST

SAYS
NOTICE

POSTED
HAVE

YESTERPRECEDENCE.

EMERGENCY
WHICH

CAN

MEETING
BE

GIVEN

LOVE.4

BAPU

The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939

1
This is extracted from “The Rajkot Fast—VIII” by Pyarelal. who explains:
“Today when the little ‘domestic group’ at Birla House met as usual at 7 a. m.,
naturally the communal situation at Allahabad came in for discussion”.
2
Dated March 29, which informed Gandhiji of the addressee’s proposal to call
for the A. I. C. C. and the Working Committee meeting in Calcutta about April 20.
Subhas Bose had requested Gandhiji to decide whether they should hold the meeting
before or after the Gandhi Seva Sangh Conference scheduled to meet in Bihar at about
the same time.
3
Vide “Letter to Subhas Chandra Bose”, 30-3-1939
4
The addressee’s telegram of even date, inter alia, read: “. . . any date after
20th preferable. . . . shall be guided by your wishes.”

220

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

274. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
NEW DELHI,

March 31, 1939
MY DEAR IDIOT,

Your wire was duly received. I needed it. The headache must go.
Kallenbach went today. He was fretting. He well take the steamer to
Aden and thence to Durban. The house is empty. Here is a copy of
letter from Subhas.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C. W. 3905. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 7214

275.

LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
NEW DELHI,

March 31, 1939
MY DEAR RAIHANA,

Your dear letter is before me. How I wish I could give you and
Ammajan the fullest satisfaction and occupy the place I used to have
in the family. I live in the hope that I shall be restored some day. That
is my heartfelt prayer.
Love to all who may be with you and send it to Saroj1 .
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: S.N. 9674

276.

LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
March 31, 1939

CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

I do get your letters but I have simply no time. In order to
preserve my strength I have almost given up writing letters.
Tell Balkrishna that he must gain more weight. The strength will
return. My programme for the present cannot be certain. I have no
idea when I may return to Segaon.
1

Saroj Nanavati

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

221

How are Chakrayya, Rajbhushan getting on with their work? Is
Balvantsinha in good cheer? Is Parnerkar keeping good health? And
how are Bhansalibhai, Chimanlal and Shakaribehn? Yashodhara
should be given some more time. How is Mathew and what is he
doing? Please write.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 4312; also S.G. 75

277.

LETTER TO NARAYANI DEVI
NEW DELHI,

March 31, 1939
DEAR SISTER,

Keeping in view the present situation I think the satyagraha, or
the preparations for it, going on in the Indian States should be
suspended. It would be good, therefore, if in Mewar too the
satyagraha was suspen-ded.1 Constructive work must of course go on
and what I write these days should be studied.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
2

S HRIMATI N ARAYANI D EVI
MEWAR

From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 9132

278. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
March 31, 1939
CHI. LILA,

I got your letter after a long wait. I expect your letter every
day, but I am thankful for it whenever it comes. It is to your good that
you have not come. Study a lot. Continue spinning. It seems you are
pestered by scorpions. What remedy have you tried? My plans are all
in suspense. It does not appear that I shall be going to the Frontier
1

According to The Indian Annual Register, 1939, Vol I, this was done on

April 4.
2

222

Secretary, Mewar Praja Parishad
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

right now. Come for the Gandhi Seva Sangh. 1 We shall at least meet
there.
It will be good if your brother can be convinced. I am closing
now as I have some visitors.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

279.

TELEGRAM TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
NEW DELHI,

April 1, 1939

RASHTRAPATI SUBHAS BOSE
JHARIA
WIRE 2 .

YOUR
SHALL
LOVE.

FIX

DATE

ACCOMMODATE

THAT
MYSELF

SUITS
TO

YOU

BEST.

YOUR

I

DATE.

3

BAPU

The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939

280.

LETTER TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
BIRLA HOUSE, N EW DELHI,

April 2, 1939
MY DEAR SUBHAS,

I Have yours of March 31, as also the previous one. 4 You are
quite frank and I like your letters for the clear enunciation of your
views.
The views you express seem to me to be so diametrically
1
The fifth session of the Sangh was to be held at Brindaban (Bihar) from May
3 to 7, 1939.
2
Vide footnote 4, “Telegram to Subhas Chandra Bose”, 31-3-1939
3
The addressee, in his reply of even date, suggested April 28 for the Working
Committee meeting and the 30th for the A. I. C. C. meeting.
4
For the addessee’s letters of March 29 and 31,Vide “Letter From Subhas
Chandra Bose”, 29-3-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

223

opposed to those of the others and my own that I do not see any
possibility of bridging them. I think that each school of thought
should be able to put forth its views before the country without any
mixture. And if this is honestly done, I do not see why there should be
any bitterness, ending in civil war.
What is wrong is not the differences between us but loss of
mutual respect and trust. This will be remedied by time, which is the
best healer. If there is real non-violence in us, there can be no civil
war, much less bitterness.
Taking all things into consideration, I am of opinion that you
should at once form your own Cabinet fully representing your views,
formulate your programme definitely and put it before the
forthcoming A. I. C. C. If the Committee accepts the programme, all
will be plain-sailing and you should be enabled to prosecute it
unhampered by the minority. If, on the other hand, your progamme is
not accepted you should resign and let the Committee choose its
President. And you will be free to educate the country along your
own lines. I tender this advice irrespective of Pandit Pant’s resolution.
Now for your question. When Pandit Pant’s resolution1 was produced, I was on my bed. Mathuradas, who happened to be in Rajkot
that day, one morning brought me the message that there was to be a
resolution expressing confidence in the old horses. I had not the text
before me. I said it would be good so far as it went, for I had been
told at Segaon that your election was not so much confidence in you
as censure of the old horses, especially the Sardar. After this, I saw the
actual text only in Allahabad when I went to see the Maulana Saheb.
My prestige does not count. It has no independent value of its
own. When my motive is suspected or my policy or programme
rejected by the country, the prestige must go. India will rise or fall by
the quality of the sum total of the acts of her many millions.
Individuals, however high they may be, are of no account except in so
far as they represent the many millions. Therefore, let us rule it out of
consideration.
I wholly dissent from your view that the country has been never
so non-violent as now. I smell violence in the air I breathe. But the
violence has put on a subtle form. Our mutual distrust is a bad form
of violence. The widening gulf between Hindus and Mussalmans
1

224

Vide footnote 1,”Letter to Subhas Chandra Bose”, 24-3-1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

points to the same thing. I can give further illustrations.
We seem to differ as to the amount of corruption in the
Congress. My impression is that it is on the increase. I have been
pleading for the past many months for a thorough scrutiny.
In these circumstances, I see no atmosphere for non-violent
mass action. An ultimatum without an effective sanction is worse than
useless.
But, as I have told you, I am an old man, perhaps growing timid
and over-cautious, and you have youth before you and reckless
optimism born of youth. I hope you are right and I am wrong. I have
the firm belief that the Congress, as it is today, cannot deliver the
goods, cannot offer civil disobedience worth the name. Therefore, if
your prognosis is right, I am a back number and played out as the
generalissimo of satyagraha.
I am glad you have mentioned the little Rajkot affair. It brings
into prominent relief the different angles from which we look at
things. I have nothing to repent of in the steps I have taken in
connection with it. I feel that it has great national importance. I have
not stopped civil disobedience in the other States for the sake of
Rajkot. But Rajkot opened my eyes; it showed me the way. I am not in
Delhi for my health. I am reluctantly in Delhi, awaiting the Chief
Justice’s decision. I hold it to be my duty to be in Delhi till the steps
to be taken, in due fulfilment of the Viceroy’s declaration in his last
wire1 to me, were finally taken. I may not run any risk. If I invited the
Paramount Power to do its duty, I was bound to be in Delhi to see that
the duty was fully performed. I saw nothing wrong in the Chief Justice
being appointed the interpreter of the document whose meaning was
put in doubt by the Thakore Saheb. By the way, Sir Maurice
examines the document not in his capacity as Chief Justice but as a
trained jurist, trusted by the Viceroy. By accepting the Viceroy’s
nominee a judge, I fancy I have shown both wisdom and grace and,
what is more important, I have increased the Viceregal responsibility
in the matter.
Though we have discussed sharp differences of opinion between
us, I am quite sure that our private relations will not suffer in the least.
1

Vide “Letter from E. C. Gibson”, 7-3-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

225

If they are from the heart, as I believe they are, they will bear the
strain of these differences.
Love.
BAPU
The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939; also Crossroads, pp. 140-2

281.

TELEGRAM TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
NEW DELHI,

April 2, 1939
R ASHTRAPATI S UBHAS C HANDRA BOSE
JEALGORA
POSTED
FULL
REPLY1
YOUR
LETTERS.
MY
ADVICE
THEREIN IS
IRRESPECTIVE
OF
PANDIT
PANT’S RESOLUTION AND
IN
VIEW
DIAMETRICALLY
OPPOSITE
VIEWS
HELD
BY
TWO
SCHOOLS
OF
THOUGHT
YOU
SHOULD
FORTHWITH
FORM
YOUR
OWN
CABINET
FULLY
RE-PRESENTING
YOUR
POLICY.
YOU
SHOULD
FRAME
AND
PUBLISH
YOUR
POLICY
AND
PROGRAMME
AND
SUBMIT
SAME
TO
A. I. C. C.
IF
YOU
SECURE
MAJORITY
YOU
SHOULD
BE
ENABLED
TO
CARRY
OUT
YOUR
POLICY
UNHAMPERED.
IF
YOU
DO
NOT
SECURE
MAJORITY
YOU
SHOULD
RESIGN
AND
INVITE
A. I.
C. C.
TO
ELECT
A
NEW
PRESIDENT.
GIVEN
HONESTY
AND
GOODWILL
I
DO
NOT
FEAR
CIVIL
WAR.
LOVE.

BAPU

The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939

282.

LETTER TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE
NEW DELHI,

April 2, 1939
DEAR GURUDEV,

I have your letter full of tenderness.2 The problem you set
before me is difficult. I have made certain suggestions3 to Subhas. I
1

Vide the preceding item.
The addressee’s letter dated March 29 read: ”At the last Congress session
some rude hands have deeply hurt Bengal with ungracious persistence. Please apply
without delay balm to the wound with your own kind hands and prevent it from
festering.”
3
Vide the two preceding items.
2

226

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

see no other way out of the impasse.
I do hope you are keeping your strength.
Charlie is still in the hospital.
With love.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat; G. N. 4650

283. LETTER TO AKBAR HYDARI
NEW DELHI,

April 2, 1939
DEAR SIR AKBAR,

I hope you had my letter 1 . I have been conferring2 with
Aryasamaj leaders about their satyagraha. Their demands seem to be
so small that they should lend themselves to easy adjustment. Is not
this possible?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat; G. N. 6843

284. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
NEW DELHI,

April 2, 1939
No time to send anything more than love. Copies of Subhas
Correspondence of course.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 3906. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7215

1
2

Vide “Letter to Akbar Hydari”, 30-3-1939
Vide “Discussion with Hyderabad Aryasamaj Leaders”

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

227

285.

NOTE TO LADY RAZA ALI1
April 2, 1939

There is no God but Truth.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G. N. 7750

286. LETTER TO SHARDABEHN G. CHOKHAWALA
April 2, 1939
CHI. BABUDI,

It is not proper that you don’t write to me. I am fine.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 10010. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

287. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM K. JERAJANI
NEW DELHI,

April 2, 1939
BHAI KAKUBHAI,

You are asking for a message for the Matunga [Khadi]
Exhibition.2 What message can I give? I am of course crazy about
khadi and will remain so till I die. Hence I pray that everyone
becomes as crazy about khadi as I am. Know that if this craze spreads
among our millions, swaraj is at our door step.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 10841. Courtesy: Purushottam K.
Jerajani

1

As given in the G.N. Register. Raza Ali was Agent of the Government of
India in South Africa, 1935-38.
2
The Bombay Chronicle, 6-4-1939, reported Gandhiji’s message with a note :
“The Tirupur Famine Relief Khadi Exhibition will be opened at the Nappoo Hall,
Matunga, under the auspices of Khadi Sales Depot today at 8 a.m. by Mrs. Gosibehn
Captain. The Exhibition will remain open till April 16.”

228

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

288. THE STATES
A clear understanding of the suspension of civil disobedience in
the States is necessary if the people are to reap the full benefit of it.
One result—not unexpected—seems to have been that some States
have stiffened their attitude and are resorting to repression they had
not perhaps thought of before suspension. Where this happens there is
no cause for losing heart. Repression itself affords a training in
satyagraha, even as an unsought war affords a training for the soldier.
Satyagrahis should discover the causes of repression. They will find
that repressed people are easily frightened by the slightest show of
force and are unprepared for suffering and self-sacrifice. This is then
the time for learning the first lessons of satyagraha. Those who know
anything of this matchless force should teach their neighbours to bear
repression not weakly and helplessly but bravely and knowingly.
Thus, for example, a State declares an association illegal. The
members may submit either because of fear of punishment or
knowingly because they do not yet wish to offer civil disobedience. In
the latter case, they husband their energy and develop the will to resist
non-violently. Individual members of the association will still carry on
activities that may not be regarded as in themselves illegal. They will
also carry on constitutional agitation to secure legal recognition for
their organization. And if in spite of voluntarily working within the
four corners of the local laws workers are arrested or otherwise
illtreated, they would cheerfully submit to the sufferings involved. So
doing they will examine themselves whether they bear any ill will or
anger towards their persecutors, they will ask themselves whether they
feel the presence of God as their true Helper and Guide in their
difficulties. Indeed such training if properly and persistently taken
will generate in the learners a power of calm, non-violent resistance
which in itself will become invincible and therefore may render
further effort by way of civil disobedience wholly unnecessary.
I am afraid I must plead guilty to being over-confident and
hasty in launching previous civil disobedience campaigns. No harm
seems to have accrued to the country because I had always my hand
on the pulse of the country and, thank God, had no hesitation in
retracing the step taken if I scented danger or discovered an error of
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

229

judgment or calculation. This much harm must, however be admitted.
The people having become used to laxity about previous preparation
now find it irksome to conform to the strictness in the observance of
the unexciting rules of preparation. And yet they are much the most
important part of satyagraha training. Potent and active non-violence
cannot be cultivated unless the candidate goes through the necessary
stages which require a lot of plodding. If, however, I have succeeded
in showing the repression, if properly understood, evokes natural and
spontaneous resistance in a satyagrahi, perhaps this knowledge will
rob 1 the constructive effort and the waiting of their seeming insipidity.
Indeed the fact that these things appear insipid betrays want of
appreciation of satyagraha and the beauty and efficacy of nonviolence. In other words, the spirit of satyagraha has not sunk deep
and violence still lurks even though unconsciously in the seeker’s
breast.
I hope, therefore that repression, wherever it is resorted to, will
not depress the repressed people but will accelerate the pace of the
constructive effort. It is necessary so far as it is possible to convince
the powers that be of our absolutely non-violent intention. Such
conviction is half the battle won. In order to carry this conviction
home there must be sufficient curb on our speech and writing as our
action must be non-violent beyond doubt.
NEW DELHI, April 3, 1939
Harijan, 8-4-1939

289. TELEGRAM TO U. N. DHEBAR
NEW DELHI

April 3, 1939
UCHHRANGBHAI DHEBAR, V AKIL
R AJKOT
OUR

POSITION

COMPLETELY

VINDICATED.2

BAPU
The Hindu, 4-4-1939. Also C.W. 10167. Courtesy: D.B. Kalelkar

1

The source has “role”.
The reference is to Sir Maurice Gwyer’s judgment in favour of Vallabhbhai
patel on the interpretation of the terms of the “Settlement” of December 26, 1938. In
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, Vol. II, pp. 356-7, Narahari D. Parikh explains: “Virawala
personally argued his case. Sardar Patel, on his part, narrated briefly the story leading
up to the Settlement of the 26th December. After reading the statements of both and
hearing their arguments, Sir Maurice Gwyer delivered his judgement on the 3rd of
April. The following extracts from the judgment will show how completely the Sardar
was vindicated: ‘. . . In my opinion, the true construction of each document is that the
Thakore
2

230

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

290. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
BIRLA HOUSE,

April 3, 1939
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,

I learn that the belated Award1 will be sent today to the Political
Department. I wonder if I could have a copy today? And will you
please send me an appointment for discussing the next step?2
I am,Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm: Lord Linlithgow Papers. Courtesy: National Archives of
India.

291. LETTER TO GOPINATH BARDOLOI
NEW DELHI,

April 3, 1939
DEAR BARDOLOI 3 ,

You are embarking on a great experiment4 , perhaps the greatest
for Assam. You have my prayers for the success of your experiment.
If Assam can really get rid of the opium habit, the face of its people
1

Saheb undertakes to appoint the persons whom Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel may
recommend, and that he does not reserve to himself any discretion to reject those
whom he does not approve. . . .’ The judgement went on to say that one could not
build up such an argument solely on the basis of the word ‘recommend’. . . And in the
opinion of the Chief Justice, the statement in the Notification that Shri Vallabhbhai
Patel would recommend the names of the members of the Committee was intended to
convey the meaning that the names so recommended would be accepted by the
Thakore Saheb.”
2
Viceroy’s reply of even date read: “Many thanks for your letter of today
which I have just received. I am at once passing your request to the Political
Department. I have as little knowledge myself as you have of the Chief Justice’s timetable or the arrangements he contemplated. I shall of course be delighted to see you
whenever you like; but I suggest that you may prefer to consider the situation further
in the light of the terms of the Award whatever it may be, before we make any definite
arrangement.”
3
Premier of Assam
4
The opium prohibition movement to be launched by the Assam Government
in Sibsagar and Dibrugarh on April 15.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

231

will be changed. But before that happens you will have to add to
prohibition much constructive effort. You will require skilled medical
assistance to enable you to find out a substitute for opium which will
kill the craving and rebuild the shattered bodies of the opium-eaters.
May you be blessed with all the strength and wisdom you would need.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal. Also The statesman,
24-4-1939

292. TELEGRAM TO B. G. KHER
NEW DELHI,

April 4, 1939
KHER, P REMIER
BOMBAY
HOPE

YOUR

SARDAR

LITERACY

CAMPAIGN

WILL

SUCCEED

FULLY.

JOINS.

From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal. Also The Hindu, 5-4-1939

293. TELEGRAM TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
NEW DELHI

April 4, 1939
R ASHTRAPATI S UBHAS BOSE
JEALGORA
NEWSPAPER
TIONS

ABOUT

THEM
TO

CORRESPONDENTS

ALL
ANYONE

OUR
TO

ASKING

ALL

CORRESPONDENCE.
YOU.

EXCEPT

I

HAVE
COLLEAGUES

KINDS

HAVE

QUES-

REFERRED

DISCLOSED

NOTHING

AND

CO-

WORKERS.
LOVE.

BAPU

The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939

232

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

294. TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
NEW DELHI,

April 4, 1939
R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
JULLUNDUR C ITY
THANK
ARE BETTER.

GOD

ONE

STEP

FINISHED.

HOPE

YOU

LOVE.

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3907. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 7216

295. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1
NEW DELHI

April 4, 1939
I have read long accounts of a great Parsi meeting in Bombay
protesting against prohibition in Bombay. I note that Parsi ladies also
took part in the meeting. I have also some letters from Parsi friends
appealing to me, as the author of prohibition as a chief plank in
the Congress programme, to ask the Bombay Ministry to desist from
their policy of prohibition.
It is not clear whether the objection is to prohibition as such or
to the new taxation. All India knows the intimate connection that
subsists between the Parsis and me. It hurts me to think that this race
of the greatest philanthropists in the world should ally itself to a
campaign against a cause whose basis is purest philanthropy. The hurt
is all the greater for the knowledge that even Parsi ladies have allied
themselves to the campaign. I see that unworthy threats were used at
the meeting and the rights of minorities were pleaded. I can only hope
that all the heat shown at the meeting was due to the momentary
passion, and that the innate philanthropy of the Parsis will assert itself.
I venture to suggest that the Parsis will be among the first to benefit by
the prohibition policy. It is wrong to suggest that drink has done or is
doing no harm to the Parsis. The Parsis will be the gainers for the
1

This appeared under the title “Prohibition and Parsis”. The statement was
also published in The Hindustan Times, 5-4-1939.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

233

diversion of Parsi liquor-sellers to some other means of livelihood.
Let me remind the objectors that prohibition does not affect
unfermented toddy which is called nira. Therefore no Parsi will be
deprived of his nira which, I admit, is as healthy as sugarcane juice
and perhaps cheaper if a means can be discovered of preventing quick
fermentation which nira undergoes more than other sweet juices.
The objectors departed from truth when they raised the cry of
attack on religion. I have read the carefully drawn prohibition rules
which provide for special permits for the use of spirituous liquors for
bona-fide religious rites. The rules also provide for their use for
medicinal purposes. And so far as taxation is concerned it ill behoves
philanthropists to grumble at taxation for a cause so noble as
prohibition which means the welfare of ignorant millions. I hope,
therefore, that the nobler element, of which there is so much among
the Parsis, will assert itself and help the glorious movement which
promises to deliver the labouring population from a curse which is
destroying them body and soul.
Harijan, 8-4-1939

296. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1
NEW DELHI,

April 4, 1939
Shri Philipose, who is specially with me to keep me informed of
events in Travancore, has received a revealing wire from the President
of the Travancore State Congress. It appears that though the leaders
who were arrested and imprisoned in anticipation of the contemplated
civil disobedience were released, arrests of others on some pretext or
another continue. These are active, well-known workers. What is worse,
special police, who are without uniforms and are untrained, are
reported to be acting like goondas. They break up meetings by
creating rowdyism, and beating drums. They molest parties of workers
doing constructive work. Thus a party of 11 persons led by Shri
Verghese, a well-known lawyer, was brutally assaulted in Quilon on
March 31, and robbed of their cash. Several were seriously injured
and are laid up.
1

This appeared under the title “Repression in Travancore”. The statement was
also published in The Hindu, 5-4-1939.

234

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Assuming that the information furnished to me is correct, it is a
serious reflection on the authorities. I can only hope that such
repression will die out if only for want of retaliation on the part of the
people. Let the workers realize that they have one fruit of civil
resistance in spite of its suspension. They have the privilege of
undeserved suffering. And, if they can undergo it without malice and
anger, they will find themselves nearer their goal than hitherto. At
least I have no reason for revising my opinion1 as to the necessity of
suspension. Indeed this thoughtless repression proves the wisdom of
suspension.
Harijan, 8-4-1939

297. TELEGRAM TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
NEW DELHI

April 5, 1939
R ASHTRAPATI S UBHAS BOSE
JEALGORA
WIRE 2 .

YOUR

NO

DATE

GIVEN

OUT

FROM

3

HERE. MISSED
CONFIRMING
YOUR
WIRE .
FORGIVE.
LEARN
TODAY
GANDHI
SEVA
SANGH
POSTPONED 4
OWING
PLAGUE.
FIX ANY
DATE
CONVENIENT
TO
YOU.
AS
TO
PUBLICATION
LEAVE
ENTIRELY
TO
YOU. LOVE.

BAPU

The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939

298. TELEGRAM TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
NEW DELHI

April 5, 1939
R ASHTRAPATI S UBHAS BOSE
JEALGORA
NEWSPAPERS
MANUFACTURE

HAVE
NAMES

KNACK
PLACES

OF
OF

HIDING
ORIGIN

TRUTH.
THEY
ALSO
IMAGINE

1

Vide Statement Suspending Travancore Satyagraha”, 23-3-1939
Of even date, which read: “... My view publicity should be arranged in [the]
fulness [of] time by our mutual agreement. Papers report from New Delhi All-India
Congress Committee fixed twenty-eight but no reply received from you.”
3
Vide footnote 3, “Letter to Subhas Chandra Bose”, 2-4-1939
4
The Sangh held its meeting at Brindavan (Bihar) from May 3 to 7.
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

235

THINGS.
DON’T
“PATRIKA” OFFICE.
I
ONE
TO
MY
FOR
NEWS.1 TELL
DO.
LOVE.

KNOW
CAN
ONLY
KNOWLEDGE
ME
WHAT

WHAT
HAS
ASSURE
YOU
HERE
IS
YOU
WOULD

HAPPENED
THAT
NO
RESPONSIBLE
HAVE
ME

BAPU

The Hindustan Times 14-5-1939

299. LETTER TO R. K. JHA
NEW DELHI

April 5, 1939
BHAI JHA,

Have received your letter. The telegram could not be replied to.
I wish satyagraha at both the places, Rajnandgaon and Chuikhadan, to
be suspended for the time being. I am writing 2 in Harijan. It should
be carefully read and people should be educated.
M. K. GANDHI

The Hitavada, 12-4-1939

300. LETTER TO MULKRAJ
BIRLA H OUSE, N EW DELHI,

April 5, 1939
MY DEAR MULKRAJ,

I have your note of 26th ultimo.
With regard to the reinvestment of Jallianwala Bagh Memorial
Fund that is lying in fixed deposits in the Central Bank of India and
the Punjab National Bank,3 I am of opinion that it should be deposited
half and half in the Central Bank of India and the Bank of India
1

In his telegrams of even date, Subhas Bose had said that according to A. P. I.
United Press was issuing forecasts concerning their correspondence; also that reports
in Amrita Bazar Patrika and The Leader bore “clear indications” of news leaking from
Delhi. Vide also “Statement to the Press”, 4-4-1939
2
Vide “The States”
3
The addressee, Secretary of Jallianwala Bagh Memorial Fund, informed
Gandhiji that money was lying with The Punjab National Bank, without fetching any
interest.

236

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

respectively. The deposit in 1 the Punjab National bank should be
withdrawn.
I would like you to send me the respective rates of interest paid
by the Central Bank of India and the Punjab National bank.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

301. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
April 5, 1939
CHI. MUNNALAL,

There has been no letter either from you or from Kanchan. Why
so? I may expect letters from you both, may I not? As for me, things
are hanging in mid-air just now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 8562. Also C. W. 7047. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

302. LETTER TO BALVANTSINHA
NEW DELHI,

April 5, 1939
CHI. BALVANTSINHA,

You know I do not write letters these days. Do come for the
Gandhi Seva Sangh. I learn today that it has been postponed on
account of the plague. The date will be announced later.
I understand about the dictionary. You should not mind such
things. It is true that I was trying to avoid giving Shankaran a separate
dictionary but one must get the things one needs. Study well. It will be
good to learn Urdu as well. The health, of course, has to be improved.
I have no idea when I shall be arriving.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1920

1

The source has “from”.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

237

303. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
NEW DELHI

April 5, 1939
DEAR DAUGHTER,

I have your letter. I never even dreamt that I had anything more
to do or say after all that had happened. I only quote your own words
here. Yes, Raihana, I do admit that Mother and you people are not
deceitful and this I admit sincerely. I never believed that you people
could ever be deceitful. Is Saroj with you?
I am happy to hear that Mother is well.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: S. N. 9675

304. MESSAGE FOR THE NATIONAL WEEK
NEW DELHI

[On or before April 6, 1939]
The best way to celebrate the National week is for everyone to
manufacture or buy as much khadi as possible and thus help the
needy and famine-stricken millions, whether Hindu or Muslim.
Remember that genuine khadi can only be had from stores certified
by the A. I. S. A.
The Bombay Chronicle, 6-4-1939

305.

LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
NEW DELHI,

April 6, 1939
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

Who can help feeling distressed over the turn things are taking?1
Let us hope that the cloud would be soon lifted.
The Rajkot Award2 is but one step towards the objective. I have
1

Jawaharlal Nehru, in his letter of April 1, had referred to a riot that broke out
on March 29 at Baradari Hall, Lucknow, and had commented that communal riots were
becoming political and superficial, with no passion or emotion about them. He
thought that the local leaders of the Muslim League must be held responsible for what
was happening.
2
Vide footnote 2, pp.”Telegram to U. N. Dhebar”, 3-4-1939

238

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

still to watch the next step. However, I telephoned to Dr. Khan saheb
today. He has promised to telephone and tell me if he wants me. I was
agitated over the raids that have become a feature there. I have to see
the Viceroy today. I might have to go Rajkot in connection with the
committee.
My love to Indu. I take it that Krishna1 is also going. This means
that you will be in Bombay on 15th?
Love.
BAPU

[P.S.]
I note what you say about the tension there.2
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1939, Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

306. TELEGRAM TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
NEW DELHI,

April 7, 1939
R ASHTRAPATI S UBHAS C HANDRA BOSE
JEALGORA
YOUR

TELEPHONE

ME RAJKOT
WITHOUT
I CAN
AT
MY

COULD

SACRIFICING

IMMEDIATE

DISPOSAL.

ADVICE. FORM

PROGRAMME.

RAJKOT

TONIGHT.

DISENGAGE
YOUR

MESSAGE.

REACHING

MYSELF

FROM

MEANWHILE
YOUR
RAJKOT

WORK
NOT

DUTY
RAJKOT
URGE

CABINET
SUNDAY

TAKES
POSTPONE

BUT
I

MOMENT
SHALL

YOU

AND

PUBLISH

MORNING.

BE

ACCEPT
YOUR
LOVE.3

BAPU

The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939

1

Krishna Hutheesing addressee’s sister.
The reference is to the communal tension in Allahabad.
3
Vide also the following item.
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

239

307. TELEGRAM TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
NEW DELHI,

[April 7, 1939] 1
R ASHTRAPATI S UBHAS C HANDRA BOSE
JEALGORA
YOUR
WIRE 2 .
AM
HELPLESS.
SUGGEST
YOUR
SENDING
REPRESENTATIVE
RAJ-KOT.
HE
EXPECT
RELEASE
FROM RAJKOT

MUST
PROCEED
RAJKOT.
SARAT
OR
OTHER
CAN
FLY.
DO
NOT
FOR
TEN
DAYS.
LOVE.

BAPU

The Hindustan Times,

14-5-1939

308. TELEGRAM TO MR. PATHER3
April 7, 1939
P ATHER C HAIRMAN
C ARE R USTOMJEE
DURBAN P IETERMARTZBURG
SIR RADHAKRISHNAN’S MESSAGE MUST IMPROVE
INDIANS SOUTH AFRICA.

RELATIONS

EUROPEANS

GANDHI
From a copy : Pyarel al Papers . Courte sy : Nation al Archiv es of India

309. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
NEW DELHI

April 7, 1939
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,

I must thank you for your letter 4 received and the full and
1

From The Hindu, 13-5-1939
Of even date, in which the addressee requested Gandhiji to arrange for their
meeting before leaving for Rajkot. Vide also the preceding item.
3
This was in reply to a request by Mr. Pather, Chairman of the newlyinstituted Gandhi-Tagore lecturership, for a message for the inaugural lecture under its
auspices by Sir S. Radhakrishnan on April 10, 1939.
4
The viceroy in his letter of even date said : “I have taken time further to
consider our conversation of yesterday, with every desire to assist you and with full
appreciation of your attitude. But with much regret I am clear, after careful and earnest
thought, that it would not be possible for me to accept your view in regard to the
appointment of an official chairman; and I see nothing for it but that the Committee
as agreed between the Thakore Saheb and Mr. patel, constituted in the light of the
Chief Justice’s ruling, should proceed with its work. Let me, however, repeat what I
told you yesterday, that so far as I have undertaken to be responsible for the actions
of the Thakore Saheb on this whole case, I will implement that promise to the full
through my Resident, and that you need have no doubts on that point and that in my
judgement all arrangements should be made in Rajkot and not here.”
2

240

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

unequivocal assurance contained therein. Armed with it, I leave
tonight in the confidence that there will be no hitch in the due.
fulfilment of terms of the Thakore Saheb’s Notification of 26th
December last.
My reply will be incomplete if I did not express my regret that it
was not possible for you to accept my suggestion that question
whether your wire to me of 6th March last cancelled that of the 5th or
whether it merely explained and amplified the latter, should be
referred to the Chief Justice of India.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C.W. 7818. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

310. A LETTER1
NEW DELHI,

April 7, 1939
I hope that you will have a successful meeting. There is no
doubt hat the proposed measure 2 , if it becomes law of the Union of
South Africa, will mean slow death of the Indian community in the
Transvaal. It is the fashion of the day to condemn many of Hitler’s
acts as so many breaches of Pacts. What is it the proposed measure is
not an attempt to commit a flagrant breach of the Cape Town
Settlement of 1914 and subsequent declarations of the Union
Government?
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

311. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
April 7, 1939
MY DEAR IDIOT,

Yours. I am off to Rajkot. Mahadev will tell you all about it. Of
1

This was, presumably, addressed to Bhawani Dayal, President of the Natal
Indian Congress who, according to The Indian Annual Register, 1939, Vol. I, visited
India at this time and held meetings at several places with a view to enlightening the
Government and the people about the conditions in South Africa.
2
According to The Indian Annual Register, 1939, the reference is to “the
Asiatics (Transvaal) Land and Trading Bill, which required that Indians must agree to
live in lands separate from others, that they must not be allowed to acquire lands in
‘European quarters’ and that they must ply their trades in non-European quarters.”
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

241

course there is no Brindavan1 now. The Talimi Sangh will meet on
12th, 13th, 14th. I can’t attend. I shall try to go to Subhas if I can
from Rajkot. I am quite fit.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3908. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7217

312. LETTER TO M. M. MALAVIYA
NEW DELHI

April 7, 1939
BHAI SAHEB,

I got your letter through Sundaram. I got the wire too. It will be
a pilgrimage for me to come for your darshan. I shall try my best.
I am trying to do something about Bannu. It is a difficult
matter.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From Hindi: C. W. 10229. Courtesy: Bharat Kala Bhavan, Varanasi

313. LETTER TO DINESH SINGH
NEW DELHI

April 7, 1939
CHI. DINESH,

I had your letter and your mother herself arrived. She stayed
with me for a couple of days. My efforts are continuing. You should
not worry but concentrate on studies.
Blessings from

BAPU

[P.S.]
Mother’s health was improving. She has also taken some
medicines from here.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 8673

1

The reference is to the Gandhi Seva Sangh Meeting; vide “Letter to
Balvantsinha”, 5-4-1939

242

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

314. HAVE I ERRED?
Some friends have been expostulating with me for involving
myself in the Rajkot affair. I sum up their argument below:
In giving so much attention to Rajkot to the exclusion of all
else you seem to have lost all sense of proportion. It was your
obvious duty to be at Tripuri. If you had been there, things
would have taken a different turn. But you chose to undertake
an indefinite fast. You had no right thus to disturb national life
without notice. Why should you fast to make a Prince keep his
promise? The people of Rajkot were offering civil disobedience.
They would have become stronger in any case if you had not
suddenly stopped the movement. Surely, democracy cannot be
built by your method. And then you, who taught India to shun
Viceroys and Governors and such other functionaries who used
to fill us with awe, are now found dancing attendance on the
Viceroy and awaiting His Excellency’s pleasure when great
affairs demand your attention elsewhere. You are believed to
oppose Federation, but you recognize the Chief Justice of the
Federal Court and will not leave Delhi till His Lordship has
delivered his Award. Truly the ways of mahatmas are strange.
To the hasty reader this argument must make a forcible appeal.
But one who goes a little deeper into the subject and knows the
working of satyagraha should have no difficulty in seeing the falsity
of the argument. Nor is there anything new in what I have done and
am doing about Rajkot. Geographically Rajkot is a tiny spot on the
map of India, but the disturbance which I felt called upon to deal with
was symptomatic of a universal malady. My endeavour in Rajkot was
meant to nip the evil in the bud. I am of opinion that the result of the
endeavour has so far benefited the whole of India. I acted the part of a
wise general who never disregards the slightest weakness in his
defences. Kheda and Champaran are but instances in point. Whilst
they lasted they occupied the attention of the whole of India, and
whilst the fight was going on I had to devote the whole of my time
and attention to them. It is a rare occurrence to have to deal with the
whole front at the same time. We must distinguish between preparations for war and actual outbreak of a skirmish, be it ever so insignificant in itself. Tripuri was a preparation, Rajkot was a Skirmish.
The fast is a most efficacious weapon in the armoury of non-

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

243

violence. That it can be used only by the fewest possible persons is no
objection to its use. It would be foolish for me not to use the talents
given to me by God on the ground that others or all do not possess
some of them. I have never heard it said that use of special talents
placed at the service of democracy can retard its even growth. I hold
that such use stimulates it as the Rajkot fast undoubtedly has. And
why is the Rajkot fast to be condemned, if the nation benefited by the
previous fasts? It is open to the critics to say that the previous ones
were also criticized. So they were. But my point is that the nation
gained by every one of them. What does arrest the growth of the
democratic spirit is the outbreak of violence. I must ask the public to
believe me when I say that if my fast did nothing else, it prevented
much violence.
I have no sense of shame about going to H. E. the Viceroy. I
had invited him as the Crown Representative to perform his duty by
intervening to enforce performance of a promise by a tributary of the
Crown. I had not gone as a petitioner depending upon his mercy. It
would have been churlish on my part to have sought his intervention
and yet not to respond to his invitation to see him to discuss things. I
have already acknowledged the handsome manner in which he acted
during the fast. It was open to him to disregard it and take his time in
deciding whether and when if at all he should intervene. But he did
not do so. He recognized the nation’s anxiety. And I have no doubt
that his humane instinct, too, had a share in cutting short his tour in
Rajputana in order to determine his action with sufficient quickness. I
have no apology to offer for my attendances on the Viceroy. It is part
of satyagraha to lose no opportunity of converting one’s opponent or
coming to terms with him on strictly honourable lines. I repeated on a
small scale with Lord Linlithgow what I did with Lord Halifax when as
Lord Irwin he was Viceroy of India.
Lastly, as to my acceptance of the Chief Justice of India as the
interpreter of the Thakore Saheb’s letter of 26th December last sent to
Sardar Vallabhabhai Patel. The Thakore Saheb interpreted it one way,
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel another way. The Viceroy suggested interpretation by the Chief Justice of India. What was I to do? Was I to say
he must not because he was Chief Justice of a Court which was a
creation of the Government of India Act? My sense of propriety
would rebel against any such objection. Federation has come no
nearer by my accepting Maurice Gwyer’s nomination as judge of the
meaning of a document. If it comes as an imposition, it will come
244

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

because of our impotence born of our inability to bring into nonviolent subjection the forces of violence that are growing in the
country and the increasing indiscipline and corruption in the
Congress against which I have been raising my voice for the past
twelve months.
It may interest the reader to know that Sir Maurice did not
interpret the document in his capacity as Cheif Justice of the Federal
Court but as a jurist of established repute. He who reads the
judgement cannot fail to notice the pains he bestowed upon it.
ON THE TRAIN FROM DELHI TO RAJKOT, April 8, 1939
Harijan, 15-4-1939

315.

TELEGRAM TO DHARMENDRASINH1
AJMER S TATION,

April 8, 1939
HIS HIGHNESS THAKORE S AHEB
R AJKOT
REACHING
WITH

ACTION

RAJKOT
TO

SUNDAY
BE

TAKEN

MORNING
PURSUANCE

CONNECTION
AWARD.

GANDHI

Harijan, 22-4-1939

316. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
ON THE TRAIN,

April 8, 1939
CHI. KAKA,

I got your letter. I am on my way to Rajkot. Only God knows
when it will all end. I have a fear that you yourself tore up the papers
relating to the budget. Prepare it afresh and send it. It is only in May
that we shall now be able to attend to the Gandhi Seva Sangh affairs. It
will be excellent if the Hindi propagation work in Assam is properly
organized. We should meet their request for free teachers. The money
for that can be raised in Calcutta. Why not ask all the Provinces to give
an account of the Hindi work done? I don’t think you will get any.
1

This is extracted from “Rajkot Events”.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

245

How can they send any when there is no account to give?All the same
you may try. Do you take proper care of your health?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7973

317. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI

1

[April 8, 1939] 2
CHI. AMRITLAL,

How is your health? I hear from Krishnachandra that Rajbhushan is not making much progress either in Hindi or in spinning. Is
there any letter from Vijaya?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7973

318. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
[April 8, 1939] 3
CHI. BRAJKISAN,

Why such a long letter? I admit my mistake. My nature is
responsible for it. Only those who demand insistently get anything
from me. I have not the ability to judge everyone. Nevertheless, my
confessing my error does not in any way reduce your own. Your lack
of method is terrible though you are not at all careless. Your
attachment, too, is equally terrible. That is why you have not finished
any work. Let the brothers alone even now. Where do you have any
money to give? Do not take even a pie from the family. Beg for
Jugatramji. Take up a job and live on the salary. You will thus set an
example for the brothers.
Forget me, and surrendering yourself to God make an effort.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
How much did you spend on having the watch repaired?
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2474.
1
2
3

246

This and the preceding item are written on the same sheet.
Ibid
The date has been inferred from information supplied by the addressee.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

319. WHAT TO DO?
Here is an important letter 1 from a Principal who wishes to
remain anonymous:
A troubled conscience seeks the reasoned opinion of others to help to
solve the following pressing question: Is the carrying out of the pledge of the
Peace Pledge Union (the late Dick Shepard’s organization for opposing war by
the refusal to resort to violence under any circumstances whatever) a right and
a practicable course of action in the present conditions of our world ?
On the side of ‘Yea’ there are the following arguments:
1. The world’s greatest spiritual teachers have taught and exemplified in
their own lives that an evil thing can only be destroyed by good means, and
never by evil means, and any sort of violence . . . is undoubtedly an evil
means, whatever may be the motive. . . .
2.The real causes of the present violence and misery can never be
removed by war. . . .
3. . . . War . . . even if it ends in victory, means. . . destruction of such
liberties as remain to us. . . for no modern war can be waged . . . without the
complete regimentation . . . It is better to die in conscientiously resisting
oppression non-violently, than to live as a pawn in the regimented
society . . .
On the side of ‘Nay’ there are the following arguments:
1. Non-violent resistance can only be effective in resisting people who
are capable of being moved by moral and humanitarian consideratons.
Fascism . . . has no scruple . . . in employing any degree of brutality . . .
2. To refuse co-operation in violent resistance. . . in defence of
democratic liberty, is tantamount to helping those who are destroying that
liberty. Fascist aggression has undoubtedly been encouraged by the
knowledge that the democracies contain numbers of people who are unwilling
to fight in their defence, and who would even oppose (and thus obstruct) their
own Governments ... This being so, the conscientious objector to violent
means of defence becomes not merely ineffective in promoting peace, but
actually helpful to those who are breaking it.
3.War may destroy liberty, but if the democracies survive there is at least
some possibility of regaining part of it, whereas if the Fascists are allowed to
rule the world, there is no chance at all. . . .
1

Only extracts are reproduced here.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

247

The solution of this question is obviously terribly pressing ... But is it
not really just as pressing for those in other countries, say South Africa,
Egypt, or Australia which may have to face the possibility of invasion, or in
an India which in the event of ‘complete independence’ might be faced with
the possibility of invasion by Japan or by a pan-Islamic combination?
In the face of such possibilities (say rather probabilities), ought not even
every keen conscience (whether in a young body or in an old) to be certain
exactly what is the right and practical way of action?...

Nothing need be said about the arguments in favour of the
Peace Pledger’s resistance. Those against resistance deserve careful
examination. The first argument, if it is valid, cuts at the very root of
the anti-war movement. It is based on the assumption that it is possible
to convert Fascists and Nazis. They belong to the same species as the
so-called democracies or, better still, war-resisters themselves. They
show in their family circles the same tenderness, affection,
consideration and generosity that war-resisters are likely to show even
outside such circles. The difference is only of degree. Indeed Fascists
and Nazis are a revised edition of so-called democracies if they are
not an answer to the latters’ misdeeds. Kirby Page in his brochure on
the toll of the late war has shown that both the combatants were guilty
of falsehoods, exaggerations and inhumanities. The Versailles Treaty
was a treaty of revenge against Germany by the victors. The so-called
democracies have before now misappropriated other people’s lands
and have resorted to ruthless repression. What wonder if Messrs Hitler
and company have reduced to a science the unscientific violence their
predecessors had developed for exploiting the so-called backward
races for their own material gain? It is therefore a matter of rule of
three to find out the exact amount of non-violence required to melt
the harder hearts of the Fascists and the Nazis, if it is assume, as it is,
that the so-called democracies melt before a given amount of nonviolence. Therefore, we must eliminate from consi-deration the first
and the fatal argument if it could be proved to have any content in it.
The other two arguments are practical. The pacifists may not do
anything to weaken their own Governments so as to compel defeat.
But for fear of so doing they may not miss the only effective chance
they have of demonstrating their undying faith in the futility of all
war. If their own Governments go mad and make martyrs of warresisters, they (the Governments) must, suffer the consequence of the
unrest of their own creation. The democracies must respect the liberty
248

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of individual non-violent conscience however it may be. From that
respect there will spring hope for the world. This means that they put
their conscience and truth before their country’s so-called interest.
For regard for one’s conscience, if it is really such, has never yet
injured any legitimate cause or interest. Therefore, it comes to this that
a pacifist must resist when he feels strongly that, whether so-called
democracies live or die, the tug of war will never end war and that it
will only end when at the crucial moment a body of pacifists have at
any cost testified their living faith by suffering, if need be, the extreme
penalty. I know the point for me to consider is not how to avoid the
extreme penalty but how to behave so as to achieve the object in view.
Where the very disturbing but potent factor of faith is part of one’s
conduct, human calculations are of no avail. A true pacifist is a true
satyagrahi. The latter acts by faith and therefore is not concerned
about the result, for he knows that it is assured when the action is true.
After all, what is the gain if the so-called democracies win? War
certainly will not end. Democracies will have adopted all the tactics of
the Fascists and the Nazis including conscription and all other forcible
methods to compel and exact obedience. All that may be gained at the
end of the victory is the possiblity of comparative protection of
individual liberty. But that protection does not depend upon outside
help. it comes from the internal determination to protect it against the
whole world. In other words, the true democrat is he who with purely
non-violent means defends his liberty and therefore his country’s and
ultimately that of the whole of mankind. In the coming test pacifists
have to prove their faith by resolutely refusing to do anything with
war whether of defence or offence. But the duty of resistance accrues
only to those who believe in non-violence as a creed—not to those
who will calculate and will examine the merits of each case and decide
whether to approve of or oppose a particular war. It follows that such
resistance is a matter for each person to decide for himself and under
the guidance of the inner voice, if he recognizes its existence.
R AJKOT, April 9, 1939
Harijan, 15-4-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

249

320. LETTER TO DHARMENDRASINH1
ANANDKUNJ, R AJKOT,

April 9, 1939
MAHERBAN THAKORE SAHEB,

You must have received my wire2 sent from Ajmer yesterday.
It is necessary now for you to appoint the Committee in terms of
Sir Maurice’s Award3 .
It seems to me that you will desire to include the four names
you have already notified. So long as the Sardar’s nominees have a
bare majority on the Committee, he will gladly accept those names.
Thus, if the four names remain and the three officials are to have the
right to vote, the Sardar will have to nominate eight members.
If you withdraw the four names, the Sardar will have to give
seven names. Will you kindly let me have your opinion? Will you
please also let me know who the three officials will be and of them
who will be the president of the Committee?4
Blessings from

MOHANDAS

Harijan, 22-4-1939

321. LETTER TO E. C. GIBSON
ANANDKUNJ, R AJKOT,

April 9, 1939
DEAR MR. GIBSON,

I arrived here this morning in connection with the fulfilment of
the terms of the Thakore Saheb’s Notification. Sardar Patel too flew
here this morning on my invitation.
I belive that His Excellency has sent you certain instructions in
connection with the matter. If you think that we should meet I am at
your disposal whenever you like.
1

The letter is extracted from “Rajkot Events” in which it appered as a “translation”.
2
Vide “Telegram to Dharmedrasinh”, 8-4-1939
3
Vide footnote 2,”Telegram to U. N. Dhebar”, 3-4-1939
4
For the addressee’s reply, vide “Letter to dharmendrasinh”, 10-4-1939

250

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I have sent a letter1 to the Thakore Saheb of which I send you
copy of translation herewith.2
Yours sincerely,

M. K.G.
From a copy: C.W. 10171. Courtesy: D.B. Kalelkar

322. LETTER TO BHOLANATH
R AJKOT,

April 9, 1939
BHAI BHOLANATH3 ,

I have your letter of March 23. I have fully discussed the matter4
with Haribhau Upadhyaya. Kindly consult him.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1310

323. LETTER TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
R AJKOT

April 10, 1939
MY DEAR SUBHAS,

Your letter5 of 6th instant has been redirected here.
I suggested a meeting of the foes to have it out among
themselves without any reservation. But so much has happened since
that I do not know if it is worth while. They will only swear at one
another and bitterness will become more bitter. The gulf is too wide,
suspicions too deep. I see no way of closing the ranks. The only way
seems to me to recognize the differences and let each group work in
its own manner.
I feel myself utterly incompetent to bring the warring elements
1

Vide the preceding item.
In his reply, the addressee expressed concern for Gandhiji’s “hot and tiring
journey” from Delhi to Rajkot, and indicated his readiness to meet him “at any time”.
3
A Congress worker of Alwar
4
The reference is to the refusal of the Alwar administration to register the
Alwar Praja Mandal.
5
Vide “Letter From Subhas Chandra Bose”, 6-4-1939
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

251

together for joint work. I should hope that they can work out their
policies with becoming dignity. If they do so it will be well with the
country.
Pandit Pant’s resolution I cannot interpret. The more I study it
the more I dislike it. The farmers meant well. But It does not answer
the present difficulty. You should, therefore, give it your own
interpretation and act accordingly, without the slightest hesitation.
I cannot, will not, impose a Cabinet on you. You must not have
one imposed on you, nor can I guarantee approval by A. I. C. C. of
your Cabinet and policy. It would amount to suppression. Let the
members exercise their own judgment. If you do not get the vote, lead
the opposition till you have converted the majority.
Do you know that I have stopped civil disobedience wherever I
have influence? Travancore and Jaipur are glaring examples. Even
Rajkot I had stopped before I came here. I repeat that I breathe
violence in the air. I see no atmosphere for non-violent action. Is not
the lesson of Ramdurg 1 enough for you?In my opinion it has done
immense injury to the cause. It was, so far as I can see, premeditated.
Congressmen are responsible for it as they were in Ranpur. Do you
not see that we two honestly see the same thing differently and even
draw opposite conclusions? How can we meet on the political
platform? Let us agree to differ there and let us meet on the social,
moral and municipal platform. I cannot add the economic, for we
have discovered our differences on that platform also.
My conviction is that working along our lines, in our own way,
we shall serve the country better than by the different groups seeking
to work a common policy and common programme forged out of
irreconcilable elements.
I sent you wires2 from Delhi about my utter inability to go to
Dhanbad. Rajkot I dare not neglect.
I am well. Ba is down with malignant malaria. This is the fifth
day. I brought her with me when she had already commenced it.
I wish you will conserve your health by taking decisive action,
leaving the result to God. Your reference to your father is touching. I
had the pleasure of meeting him.
1
Ramdurg Praja Sangh had resorted to violent means to compel the Ruler to
give them more concessions. Vide “Lawless Limbdi”
2
Vide “Khudi Khidmatgars and Badshah Khan”

252

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I forget one thing. Nobody put me up against you. 1 What I told
you in Segaon was based on my own personal observations. You are
wrong if you think that you have a single personal enemy among the
Old Guard.
Love.
BAPU

The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939

324. LETTER TO AKBAR HYDARI
S HREE R ASHTREEYASHALA, R AJKOT,

April 10, 1939
DEAR SIR AKBAR,

Shri Ghanshyamsinh Gupta and Shri Deshbandhu Gupta have
followed me to Rajkot to seek my advice after the utter breakdown of
negotiations between the Government and the Aryasamaj by reason of
H. E. H’s Government’s denial of the reports about negotiations.
I may state that for some time I have been advising the
Aryasamaj friends who have regard for my opinions to suspend the
civil disobedience part of their movement and give a chance to
negotiations. I need not go into the reasons that actuated me to give
the advice. The friends were seriously considering my advice, when a
door seemed to them to open to its acceptance on grounds other than
those I had advanced. I refer to the negotiations. They thought that if
their minimum demand could be satisfied they would discontinue the
civil disobedience. But as stated, their hope was frustrated. Now they
want me to guide them as to the next step. They wanted to issue a
manifesto stating their ground for entertaining the opinion that actual
negotiations had started.
On reading the manifesto I felt that before I could give them
guidance I should write to you myself and know your own opinion.
If the information I gather from the manifesto is true, the Nizam
Government’s denial is inexplicable. Here are the relevant paragraphs
from the draft manifesto which has been with-held for the time being
at my instance:
About the last week of February, the Divisional Commissioner and the
1

The addressee had said: “At Tripuri the Old Guard cleverly dropped out of the
picture and more cleverly pitted me against you.”
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

253

Collector of Gulburga interviewed Mahatma Narain Swami Maharaj, the leader
of the movement, in Jail with a view to ascertain the grievances of the Aryas,
and promised to move the higher authorities to explore the possibilities for an
amicable settlement.
On the 27th March, 1939, Mr. S. T. Hollins, the Director-General of
Police and Jails, Hyderabad State, Nawab Ghos Yarjang Bahadur,
Commissioner, Gulburga Division, Mr. Razvi, the Collector, Gulburga
District, and the Superintendent, Gulburga Jail, interviewed Mahatma Narain
Swamiji Maharaj, Kunvar Chand Karanji Sharda, Lala Khushalchandji and
Swami Vivekanandji in the Gulburga Jail and Mr. S. T. Hollins made certain
proposals, the substance of which was that H. E. H. The Nizam’s Government
would take no objection whatever to the hoisting of the om flags, that no
permission would be required for building yajnashalas and havan-kundas and
all Aryasamajs and Mandirs at present existing without any permission
having been obtained would be recognized, and in the matter of building new
temples, machinery would be povided to secure the granting of sanction
within 15 days of the application, sanction not to be withheld on any ground
other than the ground of its location being such as to give rise to communal
disturbances and full liberty of preaching religious doctrines (dharma-prachar)
with due regard to the feelings of the followers of other faiths would be
secured.
Mahatma Narain Swamiji and his colleagues expressed their wilingness
to recommend the above proposals as the basis for negotiating the settlement,
provided the settlement conformed to the spirit of the Sholapur Resolutions.
Swamiji made it clear to Mr. Hollins that the authority to call off the
satyagraha movement rested with the Serva Deshik Sabha.
Mr. Hollins thereupon undertook to arrange a meeting of the
representatives of the Sarva Deshik Sabha and the Government Officers
concerned at Hyderabad and also to arrange for the transfer of Swamiji Maharaj
and his three colleagues to Hyderabad for participating in the discussions. On
the request of the Swamiji, Mr. Hollins and the Commissioner Nawab Ghos
Yarjang Bahadur promised that the representatives of Sarva Deshik Sabha
would not be molested and their records would not be seized or otherwise
interfered with.
Swamiji Maharaj, having been thus assured, called Swami
Swatantranandji, Secretary, Satyagraha Committee, Sholapur, by telegram and
also forwarded the notes recording the substance of the above conversation
duly countersigned by Jail Superintendent, to the President, Secretary and
some other members of the Sarva Deshik Sabha. On the 7th instant when I,

254

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Messrs G. S. Gupta and Deshbandhu Gupta saw Narain Swamiji in Gulburga
Jail, the Jail Superintendent told us that before putting his own signature he
had shown the notes of the conversation contained in Swamiji’s letters to the
Talukdar, Gulburga, and had got his approval.
Swami Swatantranandji went to Gulburga and interviewed Narain Swamiji
Maharaj who asked the former that an emergent meeting of the working
committee of the Sarva Deshik Sabha should be immediately convened at
Sholapur before 10th April 1939.
Swami Swtantranandji convened the meeting at Sholapur and wrote to Sir
Akbar Hydari sending him a copy of the gist of the conversation Narain
Swamiji Maharaj had with Mr. Hollins and his colleagues and informing him
that the representatives of the Sarva Deshik Sabha would be reaching
Hyderabad to meet the state representatives on the 9th April to discuss the
question and requesting him to communicate the time and place of the meeting.
In a letter dated the 1st April, 1939, Swami Swatantranandji also wrote to the
Superintendent, Gulburga Jail, informing him that in addition to the members
of the Executive body of the Internatinal Aryan League, the gentlemen named
in the letter would represent the Sarva Deshik Sabha at the Hyderabad meeting.
Swami Swatantranandji received a letter No. 2697, dated the 3rd April,
1939, from the Superintendent, Central Jail, Gulburga, which is very
important, as it throws considerable light on the present controversy; it reads
as follows:
“With reference to your letter No. 37060, dated the 31st March, ’39,
received today, I write to inform you that it has been decided to hold the
meeting of your representatives with Mahatma Narain Swami, Mr.
Khushalchand and others at Gulburga but not at Hyderabad. Please get all your
representatives to Sholapur and send to Gulburga by the morning mail of the
7th April, 1939, so that they may see Mahatma Narain Swami and others
beforehand and be ready for the 8th instant to talk with the State officers.”
“I assure you that your representatives would never be harassed by police
nor would your papers be seized here provided there would be no demonstration
on your part. Kindly let me know the date and time of their arrival at Gulburga
by telegram so that necessary arrangements may be made here. I am writing
this to you with the approval of the First Talukdar, Gulburga.”
The letter speaks for itself and shows that the Jail Superintendent wrote
with full authority because he distinctly states that the deputation was to meet
the State officials on the 8th April, 1939.
While the leaders of the Aryasamaj were on their way to Hyderabad,
Hyderabad Government issued the surprising communique that the news
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

255

published in certain sections of Press that H. E. H. the Nizam’s Government
were negotiating with the International Aryan League with a view to arrive at
some settlement or compromise was totally incorrect.

The letter dated 3rd instant and signed by the Superintendent of
the Central Jail, Gulburga, seems to be conclusive. I suggest that even
if Mr. Hollins and other officials were over-enthusiastic and went
beyond their authority, their action should be endorsed by H. E. H.’s
Government for the sake of the good name if for nothing else. Public
confidence in the word of such a great Government as H. E. H. the
Nizam’s ought not to be shaken, but perhaps there is a sound answer
to what prima facie appears to be unanswerable. May I expect an early
reply?I am fixed up in Rajkot at present.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C. W. 10216

325.

LETTER TO E. C. GIBSON
ANANDKUNJ, R AJKOT,

April 10, 1939
DEAR MR. GIBSON,

I thank you for your kind note 1 . Thanks, I am none the worse
for the journey.
Today is my silence day. May I come to you at 3 p.m.
tomorrow?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 10172. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

326.

LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
R AJKOT

April 10, 1939
DAUGHTER AMTUL SALAAM,

I have your letter. Fasting can do you no good. It appears that
1

256

Vide footnote 2, “Letter to Subhas Chandra Bose”,
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

here everything will turn out right. Qureshi, too, must not worry. No
one need come. Sushila’s letter will tell you about Ba.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 415

327.

LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
R AJKOT,

April 11, 1939
MY DEAR IDIOT,

“As you were” sums up my position here. No end of
difficulties in the midst of honeyed words. I am glad I sent for the
Sardar. He being by my side I feel a kind of safety which I would not
in his absence. He must know and endorse every step I may take.
Here is copy of further correspondence with Subhas Chandra
Bose. What is one to do? Resoluteness seems to be the only answer if
one has faith in one’s judgement.
Ramdurg is a pointer. No more civil disobedience till nonviolence has asserted itself.
I hope you have got rid of your cough and headache. I am
quite fit. Ba has sixth day of malaria. It is steadily decreasing.
I am off to Gibson’s now. This is being finished in the
‘liberary’ 1 . Very little letter-writing. It is an eternal round of
interviews.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3909. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7218

1

Gandhiji used this expression for lavatory.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

257

328. TELEGRAM TO JIVANSINH D. JADEJA
Express

R AJKOT,

April 12, 1939
JADEJA JIVANSINHJI DHIRUBHA1
P RIVATE S ECRETARY
S ANAND
HAD

EXPECTED

CHIEF

SEE

JUSTICE

YOU

AWARD

THAKORESAHEB’S CONTENTION
OF

YOU

INCLUDED

AS
IN

OWN

RESPONSIBILITY.

OUT

UNLESS

YOU

UNDERTAKE

TO

HIS

NOMINEES

OTHER

THAT

BHAYATS’

THEM.
BY

HE

MEMBER
SARDAR’S

PLEASE
TOMORROW

HERE.

IN

HAVING

HIS

NOMINATION

COMMITTEE

LIST.

THUS

HE

THEREFORE

YOUR

NAME

ACT

WORK

AS
AS

SUBJECT

JUST

RIGHTS

WIRE

REPLY

TEAM

OF

COURSE

WILL

BE
I

BEING

DISOWNS

SARDAR’S
ONE

AS

OF

AGAINST

DESIRES

REFORMS

SPITE

GONE

WILL

NOMINEE

AND

ALONG

WITH

TO

ASSURANCE

PROTECTED

MUST

HIS
DROP

SEND

BY
LIST

LATEST. 2

GANDHI
From a copy: C. W. 10175. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

329.

LETTER TO GARASIAS
[On or before April 13, 1939 ] 3

It is understood that Mahatma Gandhi has written a letter to the Garasias
(Bhayats), stating that he is unable to include a Bhayat on the Reforms committee,
for which seven representatives are to be nominated by Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel
according to the Gwyer Award.
It is stated that Mahatma Gandhi had pointed out that, in view of the decision
of the Thakore Saheb not to increase the number of members of the Reforms
committee, if the Bhayats’representative is included among the seven nominees of
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, then what is majority for the Parishad, according to the
1

He was nominated by the President, Rajkot Bhayats and Garasdars Samaj, to
represent the Bhayats and zamindars of Rajkot on the Reforms Committee which the
Thakore Saheb had agreed to appoint.
2
Vide also the following Item.
3
The letter was reported under the date-line “Rajkot, April 13”.

258

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Gwyer Award, would be reduced to a minority. He is also stated to have pointed out
that his assurance1 to the Bhayats early in March was never unconditional, and that it
had always been understood that the Parishad should have a majority on the Reforms
Committee.
Mahatma Gandhi regrets to note that the Bhayat Association has not thought
it necessary to continue the negotiations to find out a via media.2

The Hindu, 13-4-1939

330

TELEGRAM TO B. R. AMBEDKAR
ANANDKUNJ, R AJKOT,

April 14, 1939
DOCTOR AMBEDKAR, M. L. A.
BOMBAY
SO

FAR

AS

WILL

FULLY

NAMES

BEING

I

CAN

SEE

REPRESENT
CHOSEN

BY

AT

LEAST

DEPRESSED

FOUR

CLASS

MEMBERS
INTERESTS.

SARDAR.

GANDHI
From a copy: C. W. 10176. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

331.

TELEGRAM TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
R AJKOT,

April 14, 1939
R ASHTRAPATI S UBHAS BOSE
JEALGORA
MINE

3

CROSSED

HELPFUL.

YOUR

CONVINCED

LETTER.4
BEST

CAN

COURSE

ADD
NATIONAL

NOTHING
INTEREST

1

In “The Rajkot Fast— VI” Pyarelal explains: “In the middle of a crowded
programme on March 11, a letter from the Bhayats was handed to Gandhiji asking for
permission to wait in deputation upon him to request him to give them an assurance
regarding their representation on the Reforms Committee similar to what he was
believed to have given to the Mussalmans. Gandhiji, anxious to save their time and
his own for which he was hard pressed, sent them a laconic, hurried note which would
have the effect of placing them on a level with Mussalmans, so far as the question of
their representation on the Reforms Committee was concerned”. Vide
also
“Statement to the Press”, 15-4-1939
2
Vide also the preceding item and “Letter to Ranjitsinh”, 15-4-1939
3
Of April 10; vide “Letter to Subhas Chandra Bose”, 10-4-1939
4
Of April 10, recapitulating principal points of previous letters
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

259

FOR

YOU

UNFETTERED

IS

TO

CHOICE

FORM

AND

CABINET

FORMULATE

OF

PROGRAMME.

YOUR
LOVE.

BAPU

The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939

332. TELEGRAM TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
RAJKOT,
April 14, 1939
R ASHTRAPATI S UBHAS BOSE
JHARIA
WIRE 1 .

YOUR
TENTH.

GANDHI

BETTER

IF

SEVA
WORKING

INSTANT

A. I. C. C.

TWENTY-NINTH.

EFFORTS

ATTEND.

BA’S

SANGH

THIRD

COMMITTEE

FEVER

SHALL

MAKE

ABATED.

MAY

TO

TWENTY-EIGHTH
NO

DESPERATE
DANGER.

LOVE.

BAPU

The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939

333. LETTER TO DHARMENDRASINH2
ANANDKUNJ, R AJKOT,

April 14, 19393
NAMDAR THAKORE SAHEB,

I am able to answer your letter 4 dated April 10, 1939, only
today.
It pains me to note that you have shaken your responsibility off
your shoulders. The Muslim and the Bhayat names to which you refer
were nominated by you. My promise therefore meant and could be
1

Dated April 14, which read; “Am perturbed by persistent Press reports
yourself not coming Calcutta during A. I. C. C. meeting and Gandhi Seva Sangh
Conference being postponed till second week may. Your presence during A. I. C. C.
meeting absolutely necessary. Will first week May for A. I. C. C. meeting suit you
better ?”
2
These letter is extracted from “Rajkot Events”, in which it appeared as a “translation” along with a note by Vallabhbhai Patel, which read: “This letter is written
by my consent and the names given here should be taken as submitted by me”.
3
According to The Hindu, 17-4-1939, the letter is dated April 15.
4
Vide “Letter from Dharmendrasinh”, 10-4-1939

260

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

interpreted to mean only that I on my part would help you to fulfil
your promise even if the Chief Justice’s Award went against you. It
passes my understanding how anyone can interpret my promise to
give what I had no power to give. I am acting only as the Sardar’s and
the Parishad’s trustee. It is obvious that I may not give anything
outside the terms of my trust. Therefore, my promise can only mean
that if you desire to retain the names in question, I would help you on
behalf of the Sardar to do so subject to the majority of the Sardar’s
names remaining intact. I hold that it is impossible to put more
meaning into my word. Unfortunately you have taken an extraordinary step and thrust upon me the responsibility of accommo-dating
in the Sardar’s list the names of your nominees. What pains one is that
you should misconstrue my promise in a manner that would render
nugatory the right secured by the Sardar.
Therefore, although after your letter the only thing that remained
for me was to send you seven names on behalf of the Sardar, I
entreated three out of the four nominees named by you to allow
themselves to be included among the Sardar’s nominees and to work
as one team with the rest. But my entreaty has ended on failure. I have
exhausted all effort to honour your nominations if it were at all
possible. You have mentioned a fourth name in your letter. I did not
think it necessary to put Shri Mohan Mandan to the trouble of
coming to me to discuss things, as he is not a Harijan.
The exclusion of the above four names, however, dose not mean
that the representatives nominated by the Sardar will not guard the
special and legitimate rights of Muslims, Bhayats, Harijans or any
other section. These members recognized no caste distinctions so far
as the Committee and service of the people are concerned. They have
before them only the cause of the Rajkot people as a whole. They are
on the Committee because the party they represent conducted the
fight for the rights of the Rajkot people. You appreciated their
endeavour and gave the right of nominating the names of seven
Rajkot State subjects outside the officials to the Sardar or the Parishad.
These names are as below :
1. Shri Popatlal Purushottam Anada1 B.A., L L. B.,
2.
" Popatlal Dhanji Malaviya2
3.
" Jamnadas Khushalchand Gandhi,3
1
2

Member of the Kathiawar Bar and of Praja Pratinidhi Sabha
Member of the mercantile community, President of the local Social Service

League
3

Principal. Rajkot Rashtriya Shala (national school); participated in
satyagraha in South Africa
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

261

4.
" Becharbhai Walabhai [Wadher]1
5.
" Jethalal [Harikrishna] Joshi,2
6.
" Vrajlal Mayashanker Shukla,3
7.
" Gajanan Bhawanishanker Joshi4 , M.A., L L.B.
Let me once more entreat you to listen to me. You say that you
are unable to enlarge the Committe. This is not right. The Chief
Justice’s Award does not mean any absolute obligation to limit the
number of the Committee to ten. The two parties can make any
alterations by mutual agreement. The Sardar is still desirous of
helping you to keep your four nominess. The only condition is that
the Parishad’s majority should not be affected in the extended
Committee. According to the Chief Justice’s Award, the Sardar has a
majority of four at present. Instead of that, for your sake and for the
sake of avoiding bad blood, the Sardar is willing to reduce it to a
majority of one.
Can you expect anything more?
In your Notification of December 26th, the time-limit for the
Committee to complete and submit its report to you was fixed at one
month and four days. May remind you that the limit may not be
exceeded?
During the second satyagraha struggle there were confiscations,
fines and other repressive measures. It is hardly necessary to remind
you that these should be now cancelled.5
Blessings from
MOHANDAS

Harijan, 22-4-1939

1

A constructive worker; had taken interest in Harijan service
Teacher, Rashtriya Shala; Secretary of the local Social Service League
3
Teacher in Rashtriya Shala
4
Secretary, local Ramakrishna Mission
5
According to The Hindustan Times, 19-4-1939, the addressee replied, inter
alia: “I very much regret to find that in spite of what I wrote to you no representation
whatsoever on the Committee has been given to the Mahomedans or the Bhayats and
that the representative for the Depressed Classes has also been omitted although
about his qualifications a special recommendation was made. I write to say that
according to the opinion of the Legal Adviser of the State only one gentleman out of
the seven, viz., Mr. Bechar Wala Wadher, happens to be the subject of Rajkot; the
other six do not appear to enjoy that status. I have, therefore, to request you to let me
know in detail the grounds on which you hold them to be eligible for appointment on
the said Committee.”
2

262

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

334. LETTER TO CHANDAN PAREKH
R AJKOT,

April 14, 1939
CHI. CHANDAN,

I got your letter. I wrote one letter to you at Dehra Dun. You
don’t seem to have received it. Write to me now.
Ba has completely recovered now. You needn’t, therefore, come
for her sake.
If you feel inclined to go to Bihar, do go. There is of course
plenty of work to be done there. But it may be desirable now to wait
for Shankar1 .
.

Blesings from
BAPU

From Gujarati: C. W. 950. Courtesy: Satish D. Kalelkar

335. LETTER TO KHWAJA HASAN NIZAMI
BIRLA HOUSE, N EW DELHI, 2

April 14, 1939
KHWAJA SAHEB,

I am grateful to you for sending me the Koran in Hindi. I have
high regard for Urdu, am trying to learn it and want it to prosper.
I am of the opinion that those Hindus who want to serve both
[the communities] should know Urdu and should read Urdu
newspapers and books. Similarly those Muslims who want to serve
both [the com-munities] should know Hindi and should read Hindi
newspapers and Hindi books.
From a copy of the Urdu: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
2

Satish D. Kalelkar, who later married the addressee
As in the letter-paper

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

263

336. LETTER TO RANJITSINH
April 15, 1939
I have received your letter of the 14th instant. I have personally
explained to you that you are giving an entirely different meaning to
my written promise. If the meaning which you have given is the real
meaning of it, the result would be that I took a vow to give what I did
not possess. I was then going to Delhi to obtain a decision from the
Chief Justice. If that decision was against the Sardar I had nothing to
give, because your representative was well protected. But if the
decision was in favour of the Sardar and if the Sardar raised protest
against the appointment of more than seven representatives. obviously
your representative’s name would vanish. Only those persons could
be in the list of the Sardar who could work as part of a team. Having
this fact in view, I wrote a letter to you that you were safe because the
Sardar would not protest if his purpose was served, and the Thakore
Saheb would keep your name intact. The only meaning of my
promise was that the Sardar would not raise any protest if his purpose
was served. Where had I any authority to give a promise to others
which would carry a meaning contrary to the above?2
It appears to me to be quite clear as daylight that, if your
representative is not prepared to work as one team, it would be very
clear to you that he cannot be included in the list of the Sardar.
Therefore, if you intend to have your representative included in the
1

1

In this. the addressee, President of the Kutch-Kathiawar-Gujarat Garasia
Association, had said: “. . . You were firm in your opinion that one of the Bhayats can
remain as a member of the Committee only if he works in team with Mr. Vallabhbhai
Patel. If we agree to it, we lose our right to an independent vote, and no one who has
got self-respect can agree to this suggestion. You have given us a promise to give
one seat to the Bhayats without any condition. We strongly believe that there is no
other meaning to it, and we still hold this view. If a Bhayat of Rajkot is not
appointed on the Committee, the Bhayats have decided to offer satyagraha, and, the
Rajkot Bhayats’ Garasia Samaj being part of the Kutch-Kathiawar-Gujarat
Association, we shall have to uphold the decision of the central body, and in that
contingency, we fear the situation in Rajkot will become worse. . .” According to the
source, an English translation of the Gujarati correspondence between Gandhiji and
the addressee was “released to the Press on behalf of the Garasia Association”.
2
Vide also “Letter to Garasias” 13-4-1939

264

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Committee, you should request the Thakore Saheb to do so, and I
have already written to him a letter1 . As a friend I tell you that your
threat about agitaion and satyagraha, etc., is out of place.2
The Hindu, 18-4-1939

337. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS 3
April 15, 1939
There has been for me unusual delay in sending on behalf of
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel names of seven representatives to sit on the
Reforms Committee in terms of the Thakore Saheb’s Notification of
December 26 last and in terms of the Chief Justice’s Award. The
delay shows the measure of my anxiety as well as Sardar Patel’s to
include in the list the Thakore Saheb’s four nominees whose names
he had published in his now defunct Notification of 21st January last.
In accordance with the Award his nominees automatically dropped
out, but the Thakore Saheb could have retained them with the cooperation of Sardar Patel. My first act on arrival in Rajkot on the 9th
was to offer to His Highness in writing the Sardar’s co-operation in
retaining the names. To my regret and to my astonishment the offer
was summarily rejected. The public knows from the Thakore Saheb’s
reply, which was handed to the Press on his behalf, in what terms it was
rejected. He has allowed to be inferred that the Award left no scope
for increasing the number of members of the Committee. On the face
of it this is not right. With mutual consent there is ample scope for
adjustment. The Thakore Saheb is not bound by the Award not to
increase or even decrease the number on the Committee, if in wanting
to do so he secures the Sardar’s co-operation.
When this unfortunate decision became known to me, with the
fullest co-operation of the Sardar I set about exploring means of
accommodating at least two Muslim representatives and one Bhayat
representative among the seven. This could not be done unless they
could see their way to agree to work as one team with the Sardar’s
other nominees. If this condition could not be fulfilled, the very
object of giving the Sardar, i.e., the Parishad, the right to select all the
1

Vide “Letter to Dharmendrasinh”, 14-4-1939
According to the source, “in the course of a lengthy reply” the addressee
“asserted that Gandhiji’s promise to give one seat to the Bhayats was unconditional.”
3
This is extracted from “Rajkot Events”. The statement appeared in The
Hindustan Times and The Hindu on April 16.
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

265

seven members could be easily frustrated. But in spite of making all
efforts it was humanly possible both for the Sardar and me to make,
we failed and, therefore, the public will find that all the four nominees
of the Thakore Saheb have been omitted.
This, however, does not mean that the Committee will not
represent all interests that could have been covered by the four
nominees and several other interests, not specifically represented, for I
have not known a single such committee in the world which could
cover specifically and sectionally all imaginable interests. The very
essence of democracy is that every person represents all the varied
interests which compose the nation. It is true that it does not exclude,
and should not exclude, special representation of special interests, but
such representation is not its test. It is a sign of its imperfection.
I do not claim perfection for the Rajkot committee, but any
attempt on the part of the Sardar to accommodate all the special
interests,without the indispensable safeguard that I have suggested,
would have failed to produce a constitution which could be
satisfactorily worked in the interests of the whole of the people of
Rajkot. I venture to suggest that the Sardar’s nominees have been
selected after fulfilling the first indispensable condition of teamwork, so that they would all make a conscientious effort to represent
each in his own person the whole of the interests of the people of
Rajkot. Therefore, it will be doubly the duty of the seven members to
safeguard and protect all the special and legitimate rights of the
Muslims, the Bhayats and the Harijans of the Rajkot State.
As to the Harijan representation, I may say that Shri Mohan
Mandan, the fourth nominee of the Thakore Saheb, an estimable
citizen of Rajkot though he is, is in no sense a Harijan any more than
the seven nominees whose names have now been submitted to the
Thakore Saheb on behalf of the Sardar.
The Garasia Association has accused me in forcible language of
a breach of promise in excluding their representative from the list of
seven. All I can say is that they have hopelessly misread and
misunderstood my letter1 of March 11. I do not propose at present to
go into the immediate circumstance in which I hastily penned my
reply to their note, but it has got to be read in conjunction with the

1

266

Vide footnote 3, “Letter to Garasias”, 13-4-1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

statement 1 with which I left Wardha on what I have described as a
mission of peace. I then stated, as an indispensable condition of
acceptance of any permutation and combination that might be offered
for the composition of the Committee, that on it Sardar’s nominees
should have at least a bare majority of one. The letter of March 11 has
got to be read together with that condition. Nothing whatsoever
happened on March 11 to make me waive that condition.
Assuming for the moment that I forgot to incorporate the
condition in my letter, the Garasia friends would be expected to read
my letter with the missing condition. But I go a step further, that to
read into my letter the meaning that the Garasia Association gives it, is
to frustrate the very object which was sought to be secured by the
Thakore Saheb’s letter to the Sardar. With the meaning that he
attached to it and which meaning the Chief Justice’s Award has fully
upheld, I had no right to throw away that precious right. I should be
guilty of a breach of trust if I did so. It should be remembered that
the fast was taken for the purpose of vindicating the Sardar’s position
and, therefore, if you like, to repair the breach of faith which I had
imputed to the Thakore Saheb. The Award has done it. Is it to be
expected that at a time when I was proceeding to Delhi in the full
expectation of the Sardar’s contention being upheld, I was to undo
in advance the effect of such a happy termination of the Delhi visit? I
have more than fulfilled my promise contained in my letter of March
11 addressed to the Garasia Association by offering to reduce to one
the majority of four which the Award gives to the Sardar’s nominees.
I think I deserved better treatment from the Association. All their
appeal should have been to the Thakore Saheb to seize the
opportunity given by me of rehabilitating his nominees. Instead of
choosing that obvious course, they have chosen the wrong course. I
have reminded the Garasias that, when I returned from my selfimposed exile, at the end of 1914, I gave them ample proof of my
friendship and concern for them. They had first met me in
Bhavnagar. Since then they have been off and on seeking my
guidance and advice. Many of them know that it has been always at
their disposal. But no mischief is yet done. As I have said, they may
rest assured that all their just rights will be respected by the Sardar’s
nominees.
Harijan, 22-4-1939
1

Vide “Letters From Subhas Chandra Bose”, 29-3-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

267

338. TELEGRAM TO A. I. KAJEE1
April 16, 1939
KAJEE
DURBANSUB
SUGGESTION

DIFFICULT.

WHOLE

THING

DEPENDS

YOUR

EFFORT.

GANDHI
From a copy : Pyarel al Papers . Courte sy : Nation al Archiv es of India

339.

LETTER TO E. C. GIBSON
RAJKOT,
April 16, 1939

DEAR MR. GIBSON,

As I know that you were in possession of my letter2 of yesterday
to the Thakore Saheb, I gave myself time to write to you informing
you of my having sent the letter. It has been a most anxious and
taxing time for me. I have been experiencing difficulties I had little
thought of. But of this when the proper time comes.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C.W. 10177. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

340.

FRAGMENT OF LETTER TO RANJITSINH3

April 16, 1939
What I have written has been written as a duty. There is not the
slightest intention to throw off my responsibility in writting that I am
working on behalf of Sardar Patel. I, however, showed the legal
position. It did not at all mean that I was in the least prevented by the
1

This was in reply to a telegram of May 11, 1939, from Mr. Kajee, Secretary
of the South African Indian Congress and Natal Indian Congress, requesting Gandhiji
to appeal to General Herzog and General Smuts to postopone the Asiatics (Transvaal
Land and Trading) Bill and agree to a Round Table Conference.
2
presumably, a reference to the letter dated April 14; vide “Letter to
Dharmendrasinh”, 14-4-1939
3
According to the source, this was in reply to the addressee’s letter dated
April 15; vide footnote 3, “Statement to the Press”, 15-4-1939

268

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Sardar. The use of the word ‘trustee’ only meant that I cannot give a
promise beyond my authority.
You have written also about other matters to which it is possible
to reply, but I did not wish to take your time. A time will come when
you will agree that, in whatever I have written or said, there is no
breach of promise, nor any disregard for your comrades. The words
which you put in the mouth of the Sardar are nothing but an illusion1 .
I have asked those who were present at that time. They heard like this:
What guarantee can be believed regarding the rights of the Bhayats
when the Paramount Power is investigating the rights of Princes?’
The meaning was that there is no permanency of rights in respect of
anyone. Therefore, when you have a guarantee from the Parishad, you
should accept it. You have misconstrued also my innocent words at
the end. But what wonder is there that words uttered by either of the
parties are misconstrued when mutual confidence is lost?
The Hindu, 18-4-1939

341. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
April 16, 1939
CHI. MAHADEV,

I have your letter. I learnt a great deal from my talk with
Laithwaite. It is a difficult matter. I do not remember ever having
gone through anything like what I am now experiencing. I am in the
midst of a forest fire. I am being tested. It is good that Sardar is with
me. I cannot say where I stand now and where I shall end up. The
article in the Statesman has had a tremendous effect. You are going to
join me in Calcutta. Why don’t Durga and Bablo go to Simla? Will
they come to Brindaban?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujara ti origin al: Pyarel al Papers . Nehru Memori al Museum and
Librar y. Courte sy: Belade vi Nayyar and Dr. Sushil a Nayyar

1

The source explains that the addressee had referred to “threats which Sardar
Val-labhbhai Patel used to the Association’s deputation in Gandhiji’s presence on the
14th instant”. Ranjitsinh had said: “. . . when Mr. Dhebar started to talk about the
statement of the rights of Bhayats by the Durbar that such rights would be preserved,
we told Mr. Dhebar that nobody can touch our rights. At that time Sardar Patel said,
‘Who are they (Garasias and Bhayats) when the Rulers are made to bend down ?’ ”
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

269

342.

STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1

April 16, 1939
What has hurt me most about this evening’s demonstration 2 is
that the demonstrators chose what was for me a solemn hour of the
day. For years all India knows I have offered without practically a
breach my evening prayers in open congregation. Why did thay seek
my prayer time to molest me, and what had the numerous men,
women and children, who at the end of the day had come to offer
their humble prayers to the one and only God of us all, done to
deserve such inter-ference? Why was it not enough, seeing that I do
not go out except for prayers, to shout their slogans and wave black
flags as I entered the prayer ground? Even that would have been bad
enough. But they continued vigorously to shout their slogans
throughout the prayers. And they were all my countrymen. Their
cries pierced me like arrows whilst I was trying to concentrate my
mind on the words of the prayers. I have not attained the power of
meditation which makes one impervious to all disturbances from
without. They knew that if they had invited me to attend their meeting
in order to witness their hostile demonstration and their wrath, weak as
I have been, I would have gone there and tried to appease them.
I maintain I have not committed any breach of promise. To my
knowledge, throughout my public and private career, I have never
broken a promise. Here the very motive for a breach of promise is
lacking. But lest I might have made a promise, however hastily, which
could bear another meaning than one I had put upon my letter to the
Bhayats of March 11, I asked as many legal friends in Rajkot as I
could get together and warned them to give their unbiased opinion
and told them that their reputation would be lost if they sought to
support without full cause my own reading of my letter. I have their
reasoned and unanimous opinion in my possession, fully supporting
my meaning to the exclusion of any other.
I fear the demonstrators have not served their cause by their
unwarranted interference with the prayer of innocent men and
women. There are tremendous difficulties in the way of getting due
1
This is extracted from “Rajkot Events”. The statement appeared in The Hindustan Times and The Hindu on April 17.
2
For Pyarelal’s account of the incident,Vide “The Way of Satyagraha”

270

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

fulfilment of the Award of the Chief Justice. I am not free to go into
these difficulties at the present stage. But I appeal to those who feel
grieved at my conduct in excluding certain names from the Sardar’s
list to bear with me. They may adopt all the just means to redress their
grievances. The method they adopted today was very far from being
just.
Harijan, 22-4-1939

343.

UNHAPPY TRAVANCORE

The following is the substantial translation of the resolutions
passed by the Working Committee of the Travancore State Congress
in the first week of the month1 :
The working committee records its appreciation of the decision taken by
the Acting President and the Council of Action to suspend civil disobedience
pursuant to the advice2 of Mahatma Gandhi. The working Committee desires
to emphasize the need at this juncture for local and taluk committees to
concentrate on the constructive work and strengthen the organizational side
of the movement....
Khadi: The working Committee appoints a sub-committee consisting of
Sjts. Elankath Ramakrishna Pillai(Convener), G. Ramachandran and K. M.
Bhoot-halingam Pillai to submit an exhaustive report on the facilities
available in the State for the spinning and weaving of khadi and to submit a
scheme for the same. This committee is further directed to choose and
recommend further centres where work can be immediately commenced.
Indigenous weaving: For the purpose of encouraging indigenous
weaving (which is an important industry in the State), the Working
Committee constitutes Sjts. R. Shankar (Convener), K.S. Thangal and M.G.
Koshi as a sub-committee to submit scheme for the same.
Official goondaism: The Working Committee view with deep concern the
rowdyism that is being inspired to suppress the State Congress activities. The
Committee recalls the hooliganism instigated by the police in the State
Congress meetings during the months of May and June last year. Until the
release of political prisoners in November last, State Congress meetings were
sought to be prevented either by prohibitory orders or by hooliganism or by
declaring the State Congress illegal. After the release, though numerous

1
2

Only extracts are reproduced here.
Vide “Statement Suspending Travancore Satyagraha”, 23-3-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

271

meetings were held before the middle of January, there were no disturbances
whatever. In the mean time the Government began recruiting what is called the
special police. These special policemen have no uniform and their pay was
fixed at Rs. 5 per month. Towards the middle of January 1939, these special
policemen commenced attending meetings at Neyyattinkara and Parurtaluks.
These so-called policemen and the rowdies under them have since been
endeavouring to break up State Congress meetings. . . . Even after annonucing
on the 22nd the suspension of satya-graha,volunteer jathas and meetings for
constructive work have been subjected to goondaism. . .
Exhortation to workers: Last November, when the political prisoners
were released, it was believed that we had at least secured the liberty to hold
public meetings. The present situation, however, is worse than what existed in
August last when the State Congress was declared illegal. The committee
deeply appreciates the firm faith in non-violence evinced by those who
attended the recent State Congress meetings. This rowdyism is the result of the
persistent policy of repression continued by Government even after the
suspension of satyagraha. Not only is the Government unwilling to grant any
of the demands of the State Congress but it is continuing to arrest State
Congress workers on some pretext or other and endeavouring to obstruct even
the carrying out of the constructive programme of the Congress. Whatever be
the force of the repression and the extent of rowdyism that the Government
may release, the State Congress will continue its work awaiting further
instructions from Gandhiji. While protesting against the hooliganism
inspired and encouraged by the Government the Committee exhorts the
people to carry on the work of the Congress with courage and with nonviolence.

I would like the workers to realize that events there have more
than justified suspension of civil disobedience. The authorities have
provided them with ample opportunity for the exercise of patience
and restraint. They have also provided them with opportunity for
suffering without civil disobedience. If, therefore, the workers can go
through the ordeal without losing faith or heart and prosecute quietly
and resolutely the constructive programme, swaraj will come
automatically. This is a bold statement; some will call it ridiculous.
Nevertheless it comes from the deepest conviction.
What worries me, however, is the statement in the concluding
paragraph that “the State Congress will continue its work awaiting
further instructions from Gandhiji.” This declaration of faith in me is
both touching and embarrassing. Let the workers know that whilst my
272

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

advice and guidance are always at their disposal, I have no further
instructions to give till new light dawns on me. I have prescribed a
well-tried remedy. And I am quite capable of saying, “Go on
repeating it, for it is never-failing.’ I am not likely easily to advise
resumption of civil disobedience. There is too much violence and
untruth in the air to warrant resumption anywhere. And in the case of
Travancore, as I have said resumption is superfluous.
With reference to the alleged goondaism by the State, the public
are bound to put implicit faith in the allegations, unless there is an
impartial inquiry made. Surely the mere denial by the authorities, no
matter how often repeated, can carry no conviction. Nor will it serve
the intended purpose if a local white-washing commission is
appointed. Confidence can be restored and truth brought to light
only if the inquiry is made by outside judges of unimpeachable
impartiality.
RAJKOT, April 17, 1939
Harijan, 22-4-1939

344.

TELEGRAM TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
R AJKOT,

April 17, 1939
R ASHTRAPATI S UBHAS BOSE
JEALGORA
YOUR

LETTER

A. I. C. C.
ME

ME

SHALL

A. I. C. C.
ISSUE

ON

DECIDE.

IMPRACTICABLE.
TRY

RETAIN

SHALL

COMMITTEE

LET

TO

PLEASE

TWENTY-NINTH.

IMPOSE

ONE

WIRE1 .

DATE

ATTEND.
YOU.

IF

IMPOSSIBLE
YOU

COMPOSITE

AS
PUBLIC

YOU

MEETING

HAVE

STATEMENT

WILL

CABINET

SEEMS

LIFTED
IF

FOR
FORM

I

BAN
GET

LOVE.2

TIME.

BAPU

The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939

1

The addressee in his two communications of April 15 had said that he could
not give effect to Gandhiji’s advice regarding a homogeneous Cabinet and that the
only alternative was for Gandhiji to nominate the Cabinet.
2
The addressee’s telegram of even date in reply to this read: “If you issue statement, kindly permit me release correspondence. My last letter posted fifteenth.”
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

273

345.

TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
R AJKOT,

April 17, 1939
R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
JULLUNDUR
THOUGH

IN

WELL. NO

CAUSE

HELL

FEEL

ANXIETY.

GOD’S

PRESENCE

AND

AM

LOVE.

BAPU
From the original: C. W. 3910. Courtesy; Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 7219

346.

DRAFT TELEGRAM TO S. SATYAMURTI1
April 17, 1939

S ATYAMURTI, M..L.A.
NEW DELHI
AM

AGAINST

PROCLAIMING

DAYS

FOR

GRIEVANCES.

GANDHI
From the original ; Pyarelal papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

347.

LETTER TO RANJITSINH2
R AJKOT,

April 17, 1939
KUMAR SHRI RANJITSINHJI,

I have seen the handbill issued by the Rajkot Bhayats and
Garasdars’s Committee. The allegations made therein are serious.
What has come to my notice is completely the reverse of it. There is
only one solution for it. We both may appoint an arbitrator and obtain
his decision on all complaints.
The object of my walking, instead of going in car, was plain, i.e.,
the processionists may have an opportunity to say and do what they
might want to. In deciding to go on foot I was confident that they did
not desire to cause any injury to my person. But, in case they were
1

This was in reply to the addressee’s telegram dated April 16, seeking Gandhiji’s blessings for observing May 14 as ‘Kenya Day’.
2
This appeared as “a correct rendering in English of the correspondence... in
Gujarati”. The superscription and the subscription are reproduced from The Hindustan
Times.

274

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

inclined otherwise, I wanted them to feel that they had me wholly at
their disposal.
There is no Congress here. There is only Praja Parishad. No
handbill was issued by it. Of course, I have issued a public appeal 1
which is sent herewith2 .
Yours,
The Hindu, 19-4-1939; also The Hindustan Times, 19-4-1939

348. LETTER TO RANJITSINH
April 17, 1939
I notice in the papers that you intend to obtain the interpretation
of my letter through the Chief Justice and that you have appealed to
the Viceroy for it. I do not think that this is a fit case for the Chief
Justice to be bothered with. Nor is there any room for persuasion on
the part of the Viceroy in this behalf so far as I am concerned. If you
people should desire it and the Chief Justice is agreeable, I, on my
part, am always ready. My suggestion is that we may place this case
before any Judge in Bombay. If reference to an arbitrator will satisfy
you, I am quite game for it. But, there is one more condition and that
is that, pending the reference to and decision by the arbitrator, the
work of the Committee should not be held up. If your interpretation is
accepted, I shall accept your representative by withdrawing one of the
Sardar’s nominees from the Committee.
[PS.]
While I was writing this letter, I received your second letter. The
answer to it is included in the foregoing. But even if the Chief Justice
takes up your reference, would it not be necessary to have an
arbitrator to go into the allegations made in your handbill?3
The Hindu, 19-4-1939
1

The reference is to Gandhiji’s statement to the Press on the demonstration;
vide “Statement to the Press”, 16-4-1939
2
For the addressee’s reply, vide “Letter from Ranjitsinh”, 17-4-1939
3
In his letter of even date, the addressee acknowledged receipt of Gandhiji’s
“reply written in the afternoon to my letter of the morning” and thanked him“for
agreeing to obtain the decision of an arbitrator”. He informed Gandhiji that a
telegram was sent to the Viceroy “to get this matter decided by Sir Maurice Gwyer”.
Ranjitsinh also assured Gandhiji : “. . . I am taking steps for cessation of all kinds of
demonstration started by Bhayats against you.”
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

275

349. LETTER TO RANJITSINH1
R AJKOT,

April 17, 1939
KUMAR SHREE RANJITSINHJI,

I have received your letter. May a misunderstanding never arise
between us hereafter. As soon as I saw in the papers I decided to write2
to you that if you would be satisfied by the appointment of an
arbitrator there could possibly be no objection to it on my part.
I suggest that we may select for the purpose some Judge in
Bombay. I have no objection against the Chief Justice, but I am not
prepared to give him all this trouble. It seems to me to be improper.
That means that if you persist in it, you have to obtain his consent.
Whoever is appointed as arbitrator, my condition should not be
forgotten. The Committee’s work should not be held up till the
arbitrator’s decision.
You have not replied to my other request3 , viz., that we should
obtain an arbitrator’s decision on the allegations made in your
today’s handbill.
Yours,
The Hindu, 19-4-1939; also The Hindustan Times, 19-4-1939

350. LETTER TO M. VISVESVARAYA
R AJKOT,

April 17, 1939
DEAR SIR VISVESVARAYA 4

Perhaps you will like to read the enclosed. It was so good of you
to respond to the call of poor Orissa.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C. W. 10211. Courtesy: Government of Mysore

1

This appeared as “a correct rendering in English of the correspondence... in
Gujarati”. The superscription and the subscription are reproduced from The Hindustan
Times.
2
Vide the preceding item.
3
Vide postscript to the preceding item.
4
Dewan of Mysore State, 1912-18

276

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

351. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
R AJKOT,

April 17, 1939
CHI. NARAHARI,

I don’t get a single minute free. I am writing this in the
“library’.
Ramji’s letter is enclosed.
Qureshi’s salary may be raised. It would not be right for Sardar
to pay his debt. That will not be to his good either. Let him give up
other activities and mind the store only and pay off his debt.
According to me he will be doing public service and will be
contributing to Hindu-Muslim unity even by doing that. It wouldn’t
be desirable that he should become altogether dependent on others.
You may show all this to him. If, however, you yourself hold a
different view, please let me know.
You must take whatever freedom may be necessary for your
health. Why not consult the vaid who is treating Vasumati? Sometimes
the remedies of such vaids succeed. Consult Dinshaw also. Don’t be
negligent about regaining your health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9117

352. TELEGRAM TO RANJITSINH
[After April 17, 1939] 1
IF
AM

SIR
MAURICE
WILLING.

GWYER

CONSENTS

TO

ARBITRATE

I

The Hindu, 2-5-1939

353. THE TRAGEDY OF TALCHER
The reader will recall the twenty to twenty-five thousand
refugees of Talcher State in Orissa2 . They are, living under great
difficulties in the forests of Angul in British Orissa. I rely upon these
figures because they are vouched for by Thakkar Bapa and Shri
Harekrushna Mahtab. Both of them have a reputation to lose.
Moreover Thakkar Bapa is purely a humanitarian and social reformer
of long standing. He does not dabble in politics.
1
Inferred from the reference to Maurice Gwyer; vide letters to the addressee,
The telegram appeared under the date-line “Rajkot, May I”.
2
Vide “Interview to Deputation of Victualers Association”, 2-6-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

277

Only a few days ago it was announced in the Press that a
settlement had been arrived at and that the refugees were about to
return to their homes. This news was immediately contradicted and it
was stated that the Raja of Talcher had refused to honour the pact
entered into by Major Hennessey, Assistant Political Agent for Orissa
States North.
This was the pact signed on 21st March last:
1. Reduction of the Miscellaneous Cess from five annas to three annas
per rupee of rent, and an undertaking that after the settlement to be started
about next November, the combined rent and cesses will not be higher than
the Angul rent and cesses with the same classes of land.
2. The abolition of monopolies on the necessaries of life except hides,
skins, horns, ganja, opium, bhang and liquors.
3. State administrative machinery should not be used for enforcing
fines, etc., levied by Ecclesiastical Courts and Panchayats.
4. Compulsory labour (bethi ) should be abolished except when
necessary for public purposes and then on payment of wages at ordinary rates.
5.

The abolition of special taxes (poll-tax) on industrial castes.

6. There should be no victimization of refugees on their return to the
States.
7. Constitutional Reforms enabling the people to participate in the
administration through their representatives will be introduced as soon as the
schemes are approved by the Political Department.
8. There shall be no interference with freedom of speech and meeting
provided that there is nothing subversive or disloyal to the Ruler or his
administration in those speeches or meetings.
9. People should be allowed to kill wild animals in the State on their
own property without any penalties or fees.

There were present at the time Major Hennessey, F.R.S.A., I . A., BARMajor Gregory of the Military Intelligence Department, Shri
Harekrushna Mahtab, Adjutant Woods of the Salvation Army, and the
Revenue Commissioner representing the Orissa Government.
Major Hennessey, I understand from Thakkar Bapa, was quite
confident that he had the authority of the Raja of Talcher to sign the
pact. How the Raja can now refuse to endorse it is difficult to
understand.
But the mystery deepens when on recalls the terms of the sanad
under which the Raja holds Talcher. Here are the relevant clauses of
AT-LAW,

278

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the sanad issued to the small Orissa States by the present Viceroy on
26th February 1937 :
3.
State.
4.

That you shall do your utmost to suppress crime of all kinds in your
That you shall administer justice fairly and impartially to all alike.

5. That you shall recognize and maintain the rights of all your people
and on no account oppress, or suffer them in and way to be oppressed, and
that, in particular, you shall charge yourself personally with the welfare of the
aboriginal population of your State.
6. That you shall act in accordance with such advice as may be given to
you by the Agent to the Governor-General, Eastern States, or such other
Political Officer as may be vested with authority in this behalf by H. E. the
Viceroy.

Under Clause 6 of the sanad the Raja is bound to act in
accordance with such advice as may be given to him “by the Agent to
the Governor-General, Eastern States, or such other Political Officer as
may be vested with authority in this behalf by H. E. the Viceroy”.
The Raja has therfore no option but to carry out the wishes of
the Assistant Political Agent. The question is, why is there all this
delay in carrying out the pact? The interests of over 20,000 refugees
living on sparse food and practically without shelter are at stake.
Delay is not only dangerous; it is criminal.
RAJKOT , April 18, 1939
Harijan, 22-4-1939

354. TELEGRAM TO LORD LINLITHGOW
R AJKOT,

April 18, 1939
MAY

I

REMIND

YOU

OF

20,000

TALCHER

REFUGEES ?1

From a microfilm: Lord Linlithgow Papers. Courtesy; National Archives of
India

1
The Viceroy’s reply dated April 25 read: “. . . I am . . . most anxious to see a
satisfactory solution . . . without delay, and all possible assistance is being given
by my representatives in securing this.” Vide also the preceding item.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

279

355. TELEGRAM TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
R AJKOT,

April 18, 1939
R ASHTRAPATI S UBHAS BOSE
JEALGORA
CERTAINLY
STATEMENT

PUBLISH

CORRESPONDENCE1

UNNECESSARY.

WHICH

WOULD

RENDER

LOVE.

BAPU

The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939

356. TELEGRAM TO MULKRAJ
R AJKOT,

April 18, 1939
MULKRAJ
JALLIANWALABAGH MEMORIAL F UND
AMRITSAR
INVEST

AT

ONCE

BANKS

RECOMMEDED2

AT

THEIR

RATE.

From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

357. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
R AJKOT,

April 18, 1939
DEAR DAUGHTER,

I get your letter; but how can you know my predicament? How
do you expect me to send you a telegram, send you some [note],
when I cannot even go to sleep till 1 o’clock at night. Others do not
expect such things from me.
Why should I have to worry over your fast? You began it in the
name of God. He was watching over you. Was that not enough?
I am reasonably well. Some discomfort is there but I keep
cheerful. The rest from Sushila’s letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 417

1
2

280

Vide footnote 2, “Telegram to Amrit Kaur”, 17-4-1939
Vide “Letter to Mulkraj”, 5-4-1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

358. TELEGRAM TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
R AJKOT,

April 19, 1939
R ASHTRAPATI S UBHAS BOSE
JEALGORA
LEAVING

DEFINITELY

TWENTY-SEVENTH
HEMPRABHA

AM

INCREASING.
IN

FROM

HOPE

YOUR

IT

LETTERS

DISTRUST

SUSPICION

DIFFERENCES

OF

MAINTAIN
WOULD

YOU
BE

AND

SHOULD

UNFAIR

TO

UNDER
CARRY

OUT

YOU

WITH

TERMS
MUTUAL

OF

GROUPS.
FORM

CONTAINED

OF

FACE

BETWEEN

IS

CONTROL

SUGGESTIONS

IN

HAD
SINCE

WHICH

ATMOSPHERE

BOLDLY

SODEPUR.
ROY

FEVER

HELPLESS
THIS

OPINION

AT
DR.

BE

MANY

CALCUTTA

STANDPOINT.

WITH

WILL

FEEL
IN

STAY

INSISTED.

MEDICAL

UP

DESPITE

RESOLUTION

REACHING

MIGHT

ALWAYS

LAID

DEPARTURE.

PANT’S

HOLD.

HAS

SUGGESTION

YESTERDAY
BEFORE

MORNING.

DEVI

ANOTHER

TWENTY-FOURTH.

MARKED
I

STILL

COMMITTEE.
THE

VIEWS

IT
YOU

LOVE.

BAPU

The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939

359. TELEGRAM TO YESHWANTRAO HOLKAR
R AJKOT,

April 19, 1939
MAHARAJASAHEB HOLKAR
INDORE
HAD

LONG

PERSONAL

CHAT
LETTER.

WITH
THANKS

ADC

LAST

FOR

SENDING

NIGHT.

GAVE

HIM

HIM.

From a Copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

281

360. LETTER TO E. C. GIBSON
ANANDKUNJ, R AJKOT,

April 19, 1939
DEAR MR. GIBSON,

I am lying on my back with severe headache and slight
temperature which has up to now been diagnosed as gastric flu which
seems to be raging about in Rajkot and especially in the house in
which I am accommodated.
I came here on the 9th instant. It is the 19th today. A matter
which need not have taken more than a day has taken ten days.
Unfortunately, we hold different view about the cause. I become
confirmed in my opinion that Durbar Virawala is at the back of all
this delay. I have proof enough which may not hold water in a court
of law but it is enough for all practical purposes and certainly enough
for me. I have no grudge against Durbar Virawala. I would love to
convert him. It would be a triumph of non-violence if I could do so.
And I could, if I had your active co-operation. But I know you cannot
give it so long as you hold the very high opinion you do of his ability,
efficiency and straight forwardness.
I send you herewith copy of the latest letter1 from the Thakore
Saheb. It speaks for itself. If the proposition laid down in the letter
were to be acted upon, there would never be a committee formed in
terms of the Award of the Chief Justice of India. The whole plan laid
out in Delhi bids fair to be completely frustrated if you, as the local
representative of the Paramount Power, do not actively intervene. I
invite your attention to the fact that in the Thakore Saheb’s letter to
the Sardar dated the 12th January four out of the seven names were
accepted. In an Appendix to the voluminous papers attached to the
Thakore Saheb’s case, signed by Durbar Virawala as his political
adviser, occurs the analysis of all the seven names recommended by
the Sardar. Only two have been objected to because of their residential
disqualification. How is it that now suddenly the qualifications of all
but one have been challenged? And if I am to bear the burden that is
sought to be placed upon me, there will be no end to the preliminaries
and there will be no enquiry.
I do not like the idea of troubling you or seeking the
intervention of the Paramount Power. But I see there is no way out of
1

282

Vide footnote 1, “Letter to Chandan Parekh”, 14-4-1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the difficulty.
The Bhayats and Garasias Association has also taken up what I
consider to be a most unreasonable attitude. As soon as I read in the
papers that they wanted my so-called promise to be submitted to
impartial scrutiny, I wrote1 at once accepting the proposal. But as I
sensed danger of interminable delay I said the proceedings ought not
to interfere with the Committee’s work and that if their contention was
upheld, the Bhayats’ nominee would immediately be accepted and
one name withdrawn. The Association, however, would not listen to
my proposal. They would hold up the formation of the Committee till
the Judge was selected and his award was available. Acceptance of my
proposal would not have resulted in the Committee functioning before
the award but it would certainly have resulted in the case being
decided expeditiously enough. I have given the opinion that the Chief
Justice of India ought not to be troubled over the issue though I
should have no objection to Sir Maurice adjudicating if the
Government of India could be induced to invite him to do so and if
he accepted the invitation. I have suggested instead a Judge of the
Bombay High Court. I have no doubt that you could manage this
thing easily. I suppose the Judge could fly here tomorrrow or the day
after. I have not much to submit to him nor can the Bhayats have
much either. The Judge need not take long to give his judgement.
What I fear and suspect is that there is no desire anywhere to play the
game. You do not mind my thinking aloud before you. I would be
less than just to you if I suppressed my innermost thoughts whilst I
looked up to you as the local Crown Representative to see that the
Committee was properly set up and its work proceeded with, smoothly
and without delay.
I must leave Rajkot on the 24th instant by the 1.10 afternoon
train and hasten to Calcutta, thence to Brindaban. I would return here
at the earliest possible moment which cannot be before the 7th
proximo. Meanwhile Shri Dhebarbhai will be acting on my behalf.
But I hope that during the five days that I am here, much work will
have been done.
May I remind you that my fast was only suspended and if all
my efforts fail and no headway is made I must resume it? It won’t be
without serious reflection. I do not want to do so. I have not the
1

Vide “Letter to Ranjitsinh”, 17-4-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

283

physical energy for it. But a peremptory call of duty knows no
mundane difficulty. The matter is so serious that I would like you to
convey at least the substance of this letter to His Excellency. I am
loath to interfere with his much-needed rest. If you think that there is
substance in my complaint and that you have the will and the powers
to deal with it I would much rather that His Excellency were kept
undisturbed.
Of course I am at your disposal, if you think that a personal talk
is necessary; in that case you need not mind my fever. I will come. I
have an appointment with Dr. Ambedkar for half past eleven.
For the moment I am not replying to the Thakore Saheb’s
letter 1 .
From a copy: C.W. 7820. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

361. LETTER TO E. C. GIBSON
ANANDKUNJ, R AJKOT,

April 19, 1939
DEAR MR. GIBSON,

Thank you for your prompt reply. My fever is still rising.
Therefore I must not rebel against the good doctor. The fever went up
to 101.2 at half past twelve. I shall therefore hope to call on you
tomorrow at 2 p. m., if that hour is convenient.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C. W. 10179. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

1

The addressee, in his reply of even date, said: “I am very sorry indeed to hear
that you are ill . . . of gastric flu. . . I know how trying they are . . . I shall be very
glad to have a talk with you. . . Any time that suits you will suit me (preferably not
between 5 and 7 p.m.) but I hope you won’t think of coming unless your doctors
approve” (C. W. 10180).

284

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

362. TELEGRAM TO VIRCHAND PANACHAND SHAH1
R AJKOT,

April 20, 1939
VIRCHAND P ANACHAND
P ARISHAD
JAMNAGAR
SORRY.
REPRESSION.

SUFFER
NO

SILENTLY
PARISHAD

WITHOUT
IN

THIS

IRRITATION

ALL

CONDITION.

From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

363. LETTER TO E. C. GIBSON
ANANDKUNJ, R AJKOT,

April 20, 1939
DEAR MR. GIBSON,

This is the offer which you admitted as sporting, and which I
made at our interview. I must confess that it was born of despair. I am
tired of fighting unseen forces in Rajkot—a situation I have never
been obliged to face throughout my life. The offer is that Parishad
should withdraw from the proposed committee altogether and that the
Thakore Saheb should nominate his own committee in terms of the
Notification, that this committee should be formed at once and should
present its report to the Thakore Saheb within one month and four
days from its formation.
If the Constitution that will be framed by the committee is not in
terms of the Notification, the Rajkot Rajya Praja Parishad, represented
by the seven nominees, should have the right to dissent from it and the
Committee’s report, and the dissenting report should be submitted to
the Chief Justice of India as if the Parishad was represented on the
Committee in terms of the Award.
I had expected to send the note at once but as I told you my
offer might create consternation among the Parishad people and so it
did. The method I have adopted is a novel method. As I said in my
1

This was in reply to a telegram of even date from the addressee, who had
informed Gandhiji of the situation in Jamnagar.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

285

letter 1 of yesterday, the Parishad was entitled to have the terms of the
Chief Justice’s Award enforced by the Paramount Power. The
suffocating atmosphere made me suddenly think of the drastic
remedy I suggested to you. The offer I made to you carried no
reservation but I did not want to do violence to my colleagues and
therefore I gave time for discussion, telling them that it was open to
them to repudiate my offer, for I had no such absolute powers as I
arrogated to myself during our talk. I could have said, though I felt
like it when making the offer I did, I should consult my colleagues
before I gave my final word. I did not feel like taking that
precaution. Such was the strength of my conviction as to the
correctness of the position I took up. There seemed to me no way out
of the hopeless unreality of the situation. I am happy to be able to say
that my colleagues, though they are filled with grave doubts,
recognize the correctness of the position.2
From a copy: C. W. 10182. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

364. LETTER TO E. C. GIBSON
ANANDKUNJ, R AJKOT,

April 21, 1939
DEAR MR. GIBSON,

I have just received your note for which many thanks. I am not
aware of any amplification unless you regard the deprivation of
Parishad representation as such.
Of course I shall be glad to meet D. S. Virawala whenever he has
time to come to me. Perhaps you and he desire that we three should
meet. I am willing anyway.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C. W. 10184. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

1

Vide “Letter to E. C. Gibson”, 19-4-1939
In his reply dated April 21, the addressee said: “. . . you have given in fuller
detail and with certain amplifications the proposal which you outlined at the time of
our discussion yesterday . . .” Vide also the following item.
2

286

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

365. TELEGRAM TO MULKRAJ
R AJKOT,

April 22, 1939
S ECRETARY
JALLIANWALABAGH MEMORIAL F UND
AMRITSAR
ONE

LAC

NATIONAL

FIFTY
SIX

THOUSAND

CENTRAL

REST

PUNJAB

MONTHS1 .

From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

366. TELEGRAM TO MULKRAJ 2
R AJKOT,

April 22, 1939
S ECRETARY
JALLIANWALABAGH [MEMORIAL F UND]
AMRITSAR
I

APPROVE.

From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

367. STATEMENT TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA 3
April 22, 1939
We had a friendly conversation and lot of ground was covered.
We discussed several proposals.
The Hindustan Times, 23-4-1939

1

Vide also “Letter to Mulkraj”, 5-4-1939 and “Telegram to Mulkraj”,
18-4-1939
2
This was in reply to a telegram of even date from the addressee, who had
proposed some arrangement for the reinvestment of the Fund. Vide also the preceding
item.
3
According to the source, Gandhiji gave this statement “on behalf of himself
and Virawala”, after their discussion in the “evening”. Vide also the two following
items.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

287

368. ABSTRACT OF LETTER TO VIRAWALA
[April 23, 1939] 1
Mahatma Gandhi, in a letter to Mr. Virawala, declines to have the Reforms
Committee elected on the basis suggested by Mr. Virawala.
In the course of his letter, Mahatma Gandhi points out that if four out of the
seven seats are reserved for certain communities, then the present majority would be
converted into a minority.2

The Hindu, 24-4-1939

369. LETTER TO E. C. GIBSON
R AJKOT,

April 23, 1939
DEAR MR. GIBSON,

I had full five hours’ discussion yesterday with Durbar Shri
Virawala and the enclosed rejection of my sporting offer is the result.
The Parishad Committee hangs in the air. And the formation of the
committee promises to be still further delayed pending the
investigation of the meaning of my promise so-called, whereas my
consent to the reference to arbitration is conditional upon the
formation of the committee not being delayed.
I take it that if the question of determining the meaning of the
expression “State subjects” is referred to the Judicial Commissioner
the reference will be shown to my representative Shri Dhebarbhai and
that the Parishad will have the right, if necessary, to be represented by
1

Inferred from the addressee’s reply to this letter published in the source.
The source added that, in his reply, the addressee said: “I have received your
letter of today’s date, from which it is clear that the proposal discussed last night,
which was based on the principle that the members of the Reforms committee should
be elected, is not acceptable to you. . . Thakore Saheb feels that it is impossible to
accept the other proposal which we discussed (the reference here is to Gandhiji’s
proposal that the Thakore Saheb should nominate his own Committee and that the
Rajkot Praja Parishad, as represented by Sardar Patel’s nominees, should have the
right of submitting a dissenting report, if necessary, to the Chief Justice of India) . . .
His Highness has sent the statement showing reasons for eligibility of six persons
proposed on the committee. . . for examination; and if . . . any doubt exists, the
matter will be referred, as agreed by you, to the Judicial commissioner of Western
India States Agency. . . . ”Vide also the following item.
2

288

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

counsel. All this need not be necessary if the pure legal point is
referred to the Judicial Commissioner on a joint statement of the case.
Lastly, the question of remission of fines, etc., still remains and
is passed over.1
Yours sincerely,

[PS.]
I take it that the correspondence between us may be released for
publication.
From a copy: C. W. 10185. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

370. SPEECH AT PRAJA PARISHAD WORKERS’ MEETING,
RAJKOT2
April 23, 1939
As you know for the last fifteen days I have striven hard to find
a solution to the Rajkot tangle. But I am sorry to have to confess to
you that in this I have failed. I am most grieved over our failure to
arrive at a settlement with the Bhayats and the Mussalmans. But I have
the conviction, and I want you to share that conviction with me, that
our labour has not been wasted. Providence has its appointed hour for
everything. We cannot command results ; we can only strive. And so
far as I am concerned it is enough satisfaction for me to know that I
have striven my utmost to dicharge the duty that rested on me.
In making my ‘sporting offer’ to Mr. Gibson yesterday3 , I
know I was making a big surrender; I could have demanded that the
Thakore Saheb be made to implement his promise in full, and if I
had insisted on it, the Paramount Power would have probably been
forced to intervene.
But I felt that such a course, though legitimate, would under the
circumstances not be the best course for any of the parties concerned.
1

Vide also the two preceding items.
This appeared under the title “Heart-searching” in Harijan, which reported
only “a gist of Gandhiji’s talk” at the meeting held in the evening. The Harijan
version used here has been collated with the Gujarati test published in Harijanbandhu.
3
Harijanbandhu has “day before yesterday”. However, Gandhiji appears to
have made the “sporting offer” at an interview with Gibson in the evening of April
20. Vide footnote on “Letter to E. C. Gibson”, 19-4-1939; also “Letter to E. C.
Gibson”, 20-4-1939
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

289

And so I chose instead the alternative of putting your head into the
lap of the ‘enemy’.
Let me explain to you the working of my mind in making that
offer. I hold it to be an axiomatic truth that true ahimsa never fails to
impress itself on the opponent. If it does, to that extent it is imperfect.
All the time that I have been engaged in the Rajkot question, this
question has been forcing itself upon me: ‘Why has our ahimsa failed
to gain recognition from the State authorities ?’ In South Africa
whatever the Indians had won as a result of satyagraha did not leave
any ill-feeling behind it. For eight long years General Smuts fought
uncompromisingly against the claims of the Indian community. But
in the end he recognized the justice of the claims and became my
lifelong friend. He helped me a great deal even in London during the
Round Table conference and had he his way he would have helped
me to get everything. When the final settlement was arrived at in South
Africa he had said: “I on my part had inflicted severe hardships on
Gandhi’s men but they had borne them silently. How long could I
inflict severities on such people ?”
Do not believe that it is more difficult to win over Virawala than
it was to win over General Smuts. Time and again the question arises
in my mind: ‘Why should what was possible in South Africa be not
possible here? Why can’t Virawala say the same thing which General
Smuts had said?’ What was possible in South Africa should be
possible in Rajkot too. There we were a handful of Indians pitted
against the entire Boer population. Here numbers are on your side.
There our fight was against a Government and the governments are
always fettered by rigidity. But here you have only to gain entrance
into the heart of one man. Surely there must be something seriously
wrong about us and our ahimsa if we cannot do even that. I want you
to put your supreme effort into this. To say that there can be no
peace in Rajkot so long as Durbar Virawala is there, is to speak not the
language of ahimsa but of himsa. The attribute of ahimsa is to run
straight into the mouth himsa. If the cows had wisdom they would in
full understanding run straight into the mouth of a lion and if they
did so it is possible that the lion would lose the taste for cow’s flesh.
I have been holding a silent court of enquiry within myself.
How is it that I came to Rajkot on a mission of peace but have ended
by antagonizing Durbar Virawala and the State authorities? I had
banked upon the ancestral family relationship existing between me
290

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and the Thakore Saheb, but instead I had to seek the intervention of
the Paramount Power. ‘What a lapse from grace is this?’ I said to
myself. I feel crestfallen and humbled. Should I absolve the
Paramount Power altogether from its promise? Or should I confess
my folly from the house-tops? I have been thinking furiously on
these lines. But my self-confidence seems to have deserted me for the
moment. However, I leave the thoughts with you for what they are
worth to ponder and think over. Capacity to convert the heart of
Durbar Virawala is the acid test of your ahimsa as it is of mine.
The discovery I have made after introspection is this. No matter
what concessions you succeed in getting from the State authorities, it
is only to the extent they are the result of a true heart-conversion on
their part that you will be able to enjoy or digest them. But if you wish
to launch a successful satyagraha to win your rights, your speech must
improve. If you do so, your actions and general behaviour will take a
different form. Ahimsa is not the weapon of the coward. It is the
highest manly effort. It is the dharma of the brave. If you wish to be a
satyagrahi you should get rid of ignorance, indolence and the like.
You must cultivate constant vigilance. There should not be any trace
of inertia in you. Only then can ahimsa function. When you have
imbibed true ahimsa, your speech, action and general behaviour will
reflect love and willy-nilly your enemies will have to recognize it.
Let me explain my meaning further by an illustration. Yesterday
I was engaged for five hours in a talk with Durbar Virawala. He was
the same as before. But I had gone there with the dawn of a fresh
spirit, as a result of my heart-searching, upon me. My reaction to him
this time was different. ‘We are after all what nature has made us, and
it is no use quarrelling with nature’, I said to myself, and I tried to get
as much as I could to get under his skin, to view questions from his
own angle. I did not mince matters and even told him some home
truths. Gently, in my own language, I gave him a glimpse of his
crookedness. But there was no irritation on my part or resentment on
his. It was a different atmosphere. He said: “ It is my bad luck that I
cannot convince you of my inability to give you more than this”. I
replied; “ I agree that I am prejudiced against you. I am afraid of
you. But I am prepared to be locked up with you in a room till we
arrive at unanimity Please remove my fears.” Khan Saheb Fateh
Mohammad Khan was also present on the occasion. He also joined the
discussion and pressed Durbar Virawala somehow or other “ to find
a solution for the agitation. People are tired of it.”
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

291

I have not the time to share with you all the pleasant
recollections of this interview. But there was one thing in this interview
that galled me and to which I draw your attention. He had an unmixed
contempt for the Parishad people. I had noticed that before too but I
had laughed it away. But now it hurt me. Why should your satyagraha
excite his contempt of all things? I can understand ahimsa inspiring a
kind of fear, the sort of fear that a mother feels when her child gets
offended and goes to sleep hungry. But genuine satyagraha should
never excite contempt in the opponent even when it fails to command
regard or respect. This is not super-refinement on my part. Satyagraha is nothing if not a ceaseless quest after perfection. A satyagrahi
therefore turns the searchlight inward relentlessly to weed-out the
defects that may be lying hidden there still. Thereby he increases his
capacity to serve the cause he has espoused a thousand fold.
Tell me if this definition of ahimsa is beyond you and you are
free to choose your own path. I will render all possible help from
outside.
I have asked you always to rely upon your own inner strength
instead of banking upon outside help. But I now want you to go a step
further and wish to see a different kind of strength in you. you must
now cease to look for guidance from without. Satyagraha should
become to you an independent inspiration. It should be intolerable
for you and me both that you should depend in every little thing on
my advice. I am therefore going away, throwing the whole burden on
you. You must make a firm resolve that you will now arrive at a
settlement according to your inner light and conviction and that, too,
with Durbar Virawala, not without him. Now you will have to make
your choice between ahimsa and himsa. You may drop ahimsa if you
find that it does not suit you or is likely to make cowards of you. I
only wish that you should never become cowards. It is possible that
some day you will come to learn pure ahimsa from disciplined himsa.
But it is a dangerous condition if you, like Trishanku, keep on
hanging in mid air between himsa and ahimsa. The country is also
faced with this same problem as you are. You should solve it for
yourself immediately. If you cling to ahimsa, that ahimsa should not
be the one bequeathed by me but should orginate from independent
inspiration. But if you decide to follow the path of ahimsa, then you
should know that it will be an empty name unless it aims at the
conversion of the heart of the opponent.
292

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Let me offer you a few concrete suggestion in this connection.
If you accept the approach that I have indicated, I would like all the
seven of you, whom the Sardar has nominated, to go to Durbar
Virawala and tell him that you have decided to relieve me of all
responsibility in connection with Rajkot, that you would also like to
relieve the Paramount Power too of its responsibility in this behalf and
rely instead entirely on your capacity to induce him to implement the
Notification of December 26. Ask him to tell you as to what you
should do to win his heart. Hold yourself in readiness to drain to the
last the bitter cup of personal indignities and humiliations. It was only
when I had learnt to reduce myself to a zero that I was able to evolve
the power of satyagraha in south Africa.
Ahimsa must express itself through acts of selfless service of the
masses. I cannot think of a better symbol of it or medium for its
expression than the spinning-wheel.
Ahimsa is a science. The word ‘failure’ has no place in the
vocabulary of science. Failure to obtain the expected result is often
the precursor to further discoveries. It is in that spirit that you should
approach and pursue your present mission.
Harijan, 6-5-1939, and Harijanbandhu, 14-5-1939

371. TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
RAJKOT,
April 24, 1939
R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
JULLUNDUR C ITY
GOING

TODAY

TOLERABLY

CALCUTTA1

WELL.

WITH

BA

VIA

BOMBAY.

BOTH

LOVE.

BAPU
From the original: C. W. 3911. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur.

Also G.N. 7220

1
In Bapu’s Letters to Mira, Mirabehn explains that Gandhiji was going to
Calcutta “for negotiations with Fazlul Haq’s Ministry with regard to the political
prisoners who had been put in jail under the Bengal Ordinance”.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

293

372. TELEGRAM TO G. D. BIRLA
R AJKOT,

April 24, 1939
GHANSHYAMDAS BIRLA
C ARE LUCKY
BENARES
DR. BIDHAN
ANXIOUS
GOING

SUBHAS
MEET

CALCUTTA.

CONSENTED
MALAVIYAJI.
WILL

BREAK

MY

STAY

IMPOSSIBLE
ON

SODEPUR.
BREAK

MOST

JOURNEY

RETURN.

BAPU
From a copy: C. W. 7821. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

373. LETTER TO E. C. GIBSON
R AJKOT,

April 24, 1939
DEAR MR. GIBSON,

A thousand apologies for the enclosure referred to in my
yesterday’s letter1 having been omitted. I am practically on my back.
I had left the matter to one of my helpers. It goes herewith.
Yes, the procedure will naturally be left to the Judge. But the
parties can decide whether this is to be given on written pleadings or
by personal appearance. That is how I conceive the thing.
I shall respect your suggestions about release of correspondence.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C. W. 10186. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

374. LETTER TO MANEKLAL AND RADHA KOTHARI
ANANDKUNJ, R AJKOT,

April 24, 1939
CHI. MANEKLAL AND RADHA,

May Chi. Manu’s wedding pass off smoothly, and may they be
1

294

Vide “Letter to E. C. Gibson”, 23-4-1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

happy and be an ideal couple.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIII

375. LETTER TO VIJAYA GANDHI
ANANDKUNJ, R AJKOT,

April 24, 1939
CHI. VIJAYA,

1

Which birthday of yours will it be? English girls conceal their
age. Are you also doing something of that kind? Be that as it may.
May you live long and still remain young for ever ! But you must not
neglect spinning. You must do more spinning this year than you did
last year.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

376. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS 2
ON THE TRAIN TO BOMBAY,

April 24, 1939
Rajkot seems to have robbed me of my youth. I never knew that
I was old. Now I am weighed down by the knowledge of decrepitude.
I never knew what it was to lose hope. But it seems to have been
cremated in Rajkot. My ahimsa has been put to a test such as it has
never been subjected to before.
I have given fifteen precious days to have the Committee,
contemplated in the Award of the Chief Justice of India. But I seem
to be as far from it as ever. I have found unexpected difficulties in my
path. The Award was acclaimed throughout India as a complete
victory for the Sardar. But it has been effectively used against me for
accusing me of a breach of promise to the Muslims and the Bhayats.
1

Narandas Gandhi’s daughter-in law and wife of Purushottam Gandhi
This appeared under the title “I Am Defeated”. The statement was published in
The Hindustan Times and The Hindu on April 25.
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

295

The promise that the Thakore Saheb had made was on my return
from Delhi transferred to my poor shoulders. The plain meaning of
all I had said could only be that I should help the Thakore Saheb to
carry out his promise, though, according to the Award, I need not.
Whatever the reason might be, both the Muslims and the Bhayats
relieved the Thakore Saheb of the duty of fulfilment of the promise.
Failing to placate the Muslims and the Bhayats, I sent the
Thakore Saheb seven names of the Parishad. In reply I was called
upon to prove that six out of the seven names were Rajkot State
subjects. One would have thought that I would at least be given an
inkling of the objections. If every statement made by men presumed
to be fairly honourable could be challenged, it might take a year to
finish an inquiry into the facts of each case. But I have sent the
required proofs.
When I seemed to have come to the end of my resources and
my patience, I sent a letter of complaint to the Resident as the local
representative of the Paramount Power seeking his aid in terms of the
Viceregal assurances given to me. He invited me to an interview. And
whilst we were discussing the ways and means an idea flashed across
my mind that I should end the agony by forgoing the right of
nomination of members of the Committee, and so I made what I
thought, and the Resident admitted, was a sporting offer. It was that
the whole Com-mittee should be selected by the Thakore Saheb to
report in accordance with the terms of the Notification of 26th
December last, provided that its report should be shown to the
Parishad, and that if they found that the report did not carry out the
terms of the Notification, their dissenting note and the original report
should be sent to the Chief Justice for his decision. The Resident sent
my offer to Durbar Shri Virawala, but H. H. the Thakore Saheb has
turned it down.
Agonizing experiences of the fifteen days have resulted in my
making the discovery that my ahimsa should be voted down as failure
if the Thakore Saheb and Durbar Shri Virawala were to feel that they
had
to give anything under pressure from above. My ahimsa
demanded that I should remove that feeling. And so when the
opportunity came to me, I tried to assure Durbar Shri Virawala that I
took no delight in invoking the assistance of the Paramount Power.
Apart from ahimsa, my connection with Rajkot should impose that
restraint on me. I assured him that my spontaneous offer to
296

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Mr. Gibson was an effort in that direction. He immediately retorted:“But if you are not satisfied with His Highness’s Committee’s
report, you claim the right to scrutinize the report in the light of the
Notification, and if the Parishad dissents you want to have the report
and the dissent to be examined by the Hon. the Chief Justice of India.
Do you call this removing the feeling of pressure? Why not turst His
Highness and his adviser through and through? You may not get all
you want, but whatever you get will be charged with his goodwill and
will carry a promise of full delivery. Do you know what the Parishad
people have said about the Thakore Saheb and me? Is that the way of
a people desiring reforms from their Prince?” There was bitterness in
his speech and contempt for the Parishad people. But with the sudden
consciousness of my imperfect handling of ahimsa, instead of
carrying the blow, I recognized the force of his argument as showing
want of faith in the essential goodness of human nature and littleness
of my own belief in ahimsa. And so our conversation went on and
covered many proposals. But it was inconclusive. I was no nearer
solution of the tangle. Nevertheless, I parted with the feeling that we
had come to know each other better, and that in trying to woo Durbar
Shri Virawala I was on the right track.
And so I presented1 this new line of approach to my co-workers.
They had more than once told me that Durbar Shri Virawala was the
source of all the evil that had descended upon Rajkot and that his
removal would mean for them full swaraj. I had no difficulty in
showing them that what they were thinking of was good government,
not self- government. At this meeting, which only took place
yesterday, I told them that if they accepted my explanation of ahimsa,
they would have to set their heart not on getting rid of Drubar Shri
Virawala, but on converting him. This they could do only if they
would set about finding his good points and working at them. They
must develop infinite faith in the capacity of ahimsa to neutralize
every person of himsa. True ahimsa lay in running into the mouth of
himsa. If cows could be credited with intelligence, it is conceivable
that given a sufficient number of such cows who would run into the
tiger’s mouth, the latter would lose the relish for cow flesh and change
his nature. They must, therefore, shed their fear of Durbar Shri
Virawala and their disbelief in the power of ahimsa to achieve the
seemingly impossible.
1

Vide “Speech at Praja Parishad Workers’ Meeting, Rajkot”, 25-4-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

297

They listened to this (to them ) new doctrine with attention. I did
not ask them whether they were convinced. I hope they were. They
would quite legitimately have asked me: ‘Are you yourself so
convinced of the correctness of this extraordinary attitude you have
commended to us as to tear the Award to pieces and simply rely upon
the goodness of Durbar Shri Virawala’s heart?’ If they had asked this
question, I would have been obliged to say: ‘I have not yet found the
requisite courage. Ahimsa accrues only to the courageous.’
And so I have left empty-handed, with body shattered, hope
cremated. Rajkot has been to me a priceless laboratory. My patience
has been sorely tried by the tortuous politics of Kathiawar. I have
asked the workers to confer with Durbar Shri Virawala, to forget me
and Sardar Patel, and if they get enough to satisfy their least wants,
they may accept the offer without reference to either of us. I have told
Durbar Shri Virawala, ‘ I am defeated. May you win. Placate the
people by giving as much as possible and wire to me so as to revive
the hope which I seem to have lost for the moment.’
Harijan, 29-4-1939

377. POPULAR VIOLENCE IN RAMDURG
I have said not a word about Ramdurg up to now. I had a wire
from Dr. Hardikar not to commit myself till I had heard from him.
And Rajkot left me not a moment for any other work. I have only
now on the train read the report prepared by Shris Diwakar, Kaujalgi
and Hardikar. I have also a revealing note from Shri Diwakar. I have
studied Shri Ganga-dharrao Deshpande’s note on the tragedy. I had a
visit from Shri Munnavali, President of the Praja Sangh, and Shri
Magadi. The report of Shris Diwakar, Kaujalgi and Hardikar is a
dispassionate document and satisfactory in so far as it goes. This is its
conclusion:
In the end we feel that the officers have acted tactlessly to a great extent
and allowed the police to have their way. We believe that they could have
controlled the situation if they had acted a little more patiently and put the
workers of the Praja Sangh on their honour as they had done many a time. But
though there was provocation, we do not think that it was so great as to arouse
the brute in man and it must be laid at the door of the highly inflammable
temper of the people. They seemed to have readily believed the rumours and

298

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

got infuriated.
But there is absolutely no justification for any kind of violence even
under the greatest provocation. In fact, the greater the provocation the greater
is the opportunity and necessity for showing a non-violent spirit. That being
our ideal we cannot defend any the slightest violence under any circumstances.
The events only show that the Praja Sangh had no control over the forces of
violence which were hiding in the people. It is a matter for the deepest regret,
and this tragedy is sure to act detrimentally against all popular movements in
States. It is a clear warning to all workers in the field and everyone must
realize that before one feels sure that the people are rightly trained and
disciplined in non-violence it is unwise to begin any great mass movement.

A study of the evidence before me leads me to the conclusion
that whatever the provocation, the popular fury was wanton, cruel and
deliberate. Over two thousand villagers had collected with the set
purpose of wreaking vengeance. They were intent upon releasing the
President and the other prisoners. Congressmen cannot escape blame
for the savagery of the people. The villagers were having the wrong
lesson given to them. Ranpur in Orissa was the first finger-post.
Ramdurg is the second. No one has denied the fact that the Raja
Saheb of Ramdurg was a friend of the Congress. He deserved better
treatment. I am not just now concerned with the turth or otherwise of
the evidence on provocation. There are grave enough charges. But it
has never been the Congress policy to plead provocation, howsoever
grave, in justification of popular violence. We shall lose all if we play
with this fundamental provision of the Congress. I had remarked
before the Ramdurg outbreak that I smelt violence in the very air I
was breathing. I am very sensitive to the slightest exhibition of
violence or untruth. They are twins.
I am quite clear that the Provincial Congress Committees as well
as the Working Committee when it is formed must take strong
measures to purge the Congress ranks of violence in thought, word
and deed. What little I read of the public Press shows that there is
often a departure from truth and non-violence. How this evil can be
remedied I do not know. The Press managed or owned by
Congressmen might be amenable to moral control. I am, however,
inclined to think that the greatest mischief is done by Congressmen
working in the villages. It ought not to be difficult to bring these
under rigid discipline.
I suggest an impartial enquiry into the events. The Karnataka
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

299

Provincial Congress Committee should entrust it to a High Court
Judge. If the Raja Saheb will help, the task will be easy. But even if he
does not, there should be no difficulty in getting at the truth.
There is another untoward result of the Ramdurg movement. It
has taken communal turn. There are two parties, Brahmin and nonBrahmin. My own feeling has hitherto been that Karnataka had
remained fairly free from the curse. But the cuttings and papers that
have been sent to me show that the evil has gone deep enough to
demand an immediate remedy. I have been asked to offer guidance in
the matter. It would be presumptuous on my part to give any
guidance without a proper study on the spot of the tension. I can only
suggest that if there are enough Brahmins and non-Brahmins
interested in removing the tension, they should tour the affected area,
find out causes and deal with them. The tension is a symptom of the
growing spirit of violence in the country.
ON THE TRAIN TO BOMBAY, APRIL 24, 1939
Harijan, 29-4-1939

378. TELEGRAM TO G. D. BIRLA
BOMBAY,

April 25, 1939
GHANSHYAMDAS BIRLA
LUCKY
C ALCUTTA
AFTER
THAT

FULL
HE

DISCUSSION
SHOULD

NOT

SARDAR

AND

ATTEND

CALCUTTA

I

HAVE

DECIDED

MEETING1

BAPU
From a copy: C. W. 7822. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

1

300

Of the A. I. C. C. Vide also “Interview to “The Statesman”, 27-4-1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

379. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
ON THE TRAIN TO C ALCUTTA,

April 25, 1939
CHI. MIRA,

Well, I am going from the frying pan into the fire.1 What a test
for me ! You will have seen my Rajkot statement 2 . It gives you a
glimpse into my mental state. To be in Bombay was like breathing
fresh air—Bombay which I used to avoid.
I am on grape juice and glucose. That alone keeps the fever and
many complications down. I do not know how long I shall have to
prolong the fruit diet.
Your long letter is deeply interesting. You are making your way.
You will conquer difficulties if you keep your health.
Ba, Navin3 and Dhiru4 are with me. Kanam remained with
Ramdas. He was disinclined. He wept. But it was much the best. Ba
herself is none too well. I expect to reach Brindaban on 3rd and
Rajkot about 12th. I can come to the Frontier Province only after
finishing Rajkot.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6437. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G. N. 10032

380. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
ON THE CALCUTTA TRAIN,
April 25, 1939
MY DEAR IDIOT,

You won’t think I have neglected you. There was no time to do
anything else. My latest note5 on Rajkot will give you slight idea of
the torture I have gone through. And it is not yet over.
I have a nasty cough which won’t leave me. I am keeping
otherwise fit only by restricting myself to fruit juices. No milk. I am
keeping my strength remarkably well. Have no anxiety. The cough
does not interfere with my sleep.
1

Vide footnote on “Telegram to Amrit Kaur”, 24-4-1939
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 24-4-1939
3
Sons of Vrajlal Gandhi
4
ibid
5
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 24-4-1939
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

301

Ba is with me and so are Navin and Dhiru. They have made
wonderful progress. Amtul Salaam was in Bombay. She is going to
Ahmedabad.
Don’t expect more from me. I am washed out. I expect you in
Brindaban on 3rd May. The best route is for you to go to Patna, there
cross the river and take the train at Sonepur for Bettiah.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C. W. 3912. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 7221

381.INTERVIEW TO “THE STATESMAN”1
April 27, 1939
QUESTION: Had Mr. Gandhi come to Calcutta on a peace mission seeing that he
had advised Sardar Patel not to come to Calcutta?
ANSWER : Yes. The reason for Sardar Patel not coming was that it
was in the best interests of the country to absent himself from
Calcutta.
Q.

Had Mr. Gandhi found a way out of the conflicting demads?

A.. I have not come with a solution in my pocket. I have no
pocket. I cannot say what will be the result of my talks with Mr.
Subhas Chandra Bose. What is the use of forecasting when the result
will be known soon ?
Q.

Had Mr. Gandhi heard it said that Mr. Bose was an undesirable man?

I never heard that. He was elected by the Congress. He
could not be in the Congress so long if he was an undesirable man. I
have no reason to believe that Mr. Bose is “undesirable”.
A..

Q.

Has Mr. Bose shown a desire to be more accommodating since the Tripuri

A..

He is acting in accordance with certain principles he holds.

Q.

Can the latest note— 34 pages—from Mr. Bose form a basis of peace

vote?

talks?
A.. Thirty-four pages? I did not count them. The correspondence must form the basis of our conference.

1
The source reported that Gandhiji, “who was slightly ill and bore signs of
fatigue”, gave the interview “while travelling on the Bombay Mail between
Kharagpur and Calcutta”.

302

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Q.
Had Pandit Nehru reported to him on his recent talks with Mr. Bose at
Dhanbad?
A..

Yes.

Q.

Were they favourable?

A.

Always. All Congress people work for peace.

Q.

Would a final rupture with Mr. Bose divide the Congress?

Of course it would. But why should there be a rupture? I am
hoping for a settlement.
A.

Q.

Has it been the case that Mr. Bose’s orders have been disobeyed by
subordinate Congress bodies?

I do not know of single case of disobedience, and if I did, I
would be greatly surprised. He is the congress President.
A.

Q.
Was he, Mr. Gandhi, not responsible, indirectly, for this as, when during
his fast, Congress Ministries threatened to resign independently of directions from
Mr. Bose?

There could be no resignations without reference to the
President. There is no question of insubordination.
A,

Q.
Has the non-existence of the supreme Congress executive, the Working
Committee, for such a long time delayed Congress decisions on larger issues like
Federation, formulation of its policy and war?
A.. There has been some delay. The non-existence of the
Committee is a cause, and delay in that case is inevitable.
Q.

Is it true that during the Munich crisis the Committee was in continuous
session at Delhi to decide on Congress attitude to war?
A.,

Yes. We discussed thoroughly our policy of non-violence.

Q.

Can the present “tangle” be said to be weakening the Congress
bargaining power with the British?
A..

I should not say “bargaining” but “settlement”.

Q.

Since the Congress impasse there has been no Parliamentary Committee

to control the work of the Congress Provincial Ministries. Has this led to
independent action by the Ministries?
A..

Not to my knowledge.

Q.

What is the present machinery to give advice to the Ministries? Do they

ask for your or Sardar Patel’s advice?
A.

The machinery is the President. Sardar Patel’s or my

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

303

opinions are not asked for. I have been out of it since my retirement1
from the Congress.
Q.
Would the Central Congress be able to get the Congress Ministries to
work in the same spirit under a new Parliamentary Committee, when it is formed, as
of old?
A.

I see no reason why they should not.

Q.
Has it not been a good thing that the Provinces have regained
independence of action?
A.
They have not regained it. The President is there with as

much power as the old Board had.
Q.
Apart from purging the Congress of corruption, what would he suggest as
necessary to set up the Congress as a well-knit party organization?

The purging of corruption is the first indispensable condition to the smooth running of the Congress. Once the corruption is
banished the Congress will carry on its great work.
A.

Q.
Would it be better for the Congress to have a really democratic
constitution, or to be entirely subject to a leader?
A.
The Congress does not lack democracy. The Congress is
dem-ocratic.

Mr. Gandhi then gave the following special message to the Statesman readers :

I can assure them all that we are not going to discuss
personalities but policies. Mr. Bose discussed principles only in his
correspondence with me. So far as I recollect, there were no personalities or grievances in his communications to me. But I have vivid
recollections of seeing principles and policies in the letters.
Mr. Gandhi then repeated his Rajkot statement :
Ahimsa accrues only to the courageous and so I have left Rajkot emptyhanded with body shattered and hope cremated. I have told Mr. Virawala: “I am
defeated. May you win. Placate the people by giving as much as possible and
inform me so as to revive the hope which I seem to have lost for the moment.”
Rajkot seems to have robbed me of my youth. I never knew that I was
old. Now I am weighed down by the knowledge of decrepitude. I never knew
what it was to lose hope. But it seems to have been cremated in Rajkot.
Mr. Gandhi went on to say :

I am broken down. I am now conscious of old age. It was useful
when people said, “Hello, 70 years—no, 17”. Now I feel myself to be
even 80.
1

304

In October 1934
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Mr. Gandhi has developed a cough and, commenting on this, said:

I am a stranger to a cough. Yet this has been persisting for 15
days.
The reporter then asked Mr. Gandhi if there was going to be a war. His reply
was to the effect that the journalist would probably know more about that than he
himself. However, Mr. Gandhi went on to say in his opinion the best way for peace
was to disarm. [He said:]

If I could get the three great nations. Great Britain, France and
the U.S.A with a tithe of my faith in non-violence there would be no
war.
He did not agree that in the event of the nations disarming, Germany and Italy
would march into other countries and even take British colonies.

The people of Germany and Italy would not want war. Their
leaders would realize that too. The leaders dare not go to war. Peace
will reign in the universe. If I were a leading statesman in England, I
would shudder at the prospect of war.
At the close of the interview, Mr. Gandhi gave the following message:

I am fighting for peace, I shall die for peace, peace in the Congress, peace in the States, peace on earth and goodwill amongst men.
To set the seal upon that, if I feel the power, I am quite capable of
fasting unto death to prevent Western humanity, which is getting ready
to embark upon suicide on a scale hitherto unknown to the history of
the world.
Referring to his talks with Mr. Bose, he said:

All India hopes and I hope that there will be no rupture.
The Statesman, 28-4-1939

382. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
C ALCUTTA,

April 27, 1939
CHI. MUNNALAL,

I have read your letter. You should go away from Segaon for
some time. Perhaps that will give you peace of mind. I hope you will
not suffer the same fate as Janakiprasad did. Would you like to go to
Pondicherry? Or to Ramana Maharshi? I think you should do some
such thing. But if you don’t fell inclined to leave the place and go
anywhere, then live where you are and learn to be content.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8559. Also C. W. 7056. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

305

383. ‘AN INSULT TO INTELLIGENCE’
The following1 from a correspondent will be read with interest
and profit by those who oppose prohibition.
Harijan, 29-4-1939

384. TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
C ALCUTTA,

April 29, 1939
R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
MANORVILLE, S IMLA WEST
EXPECT
NIGHT.

YOU
YOU

BRINDABAN

THIRD.

LEAVING

CAN

PATNA.

FAIRLY

JOIN

HERE
WELL.

MONDAY
LOVE.

BAPU
From the original: C. W. 3914. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7223

385. LETTER TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
S ODEPUR

April 29, 1939
MY DEAR SUBHAS,

You have asked me to give you in terms of Pant’s resolution the
names for the Working Committee. As I have told you in my letters
and my telegrams, I feel myself utterly incompetent to do so. Much
has happened since Tripuri. Knowing your own view, knowing how
you and most of the members differ on fundamentals, it seems to me
that if I give you names, it would be an imposition on you. I have
argued this position at length in my letters to you. Nothing that has
1

Not reproduced here. The correspondent, who described the arguments advanced in favour of alcoholic drinks to be “an insult to intelligence”, had explained that
“the loss of revenues from liquor will be more than offset by increased revenue from
other sources”.

306

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

happened during the three days of closest conversation between us has
altered my view. Such being the case you are free to choose your
own Committee. I have told you, too, that you could discuss with the
ex-members the possibility of mutual approach and that nothing
would please me better than to know that you were able to come
together. Into what has happened since, I need not go. You and the
ex-members present will make the position clear before the A. I. C. C.
Only it has been matter of the greatest grief to me that a mutual
settlement has not been possible. I hope, however, that whatever is
done will be done with mutual Goodwill.1
With love.
Yours,

BAPU
A. I. C. C. File No. 1145, 1939. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

386. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S ODEPUR

April 29, 1939
MY DEAR IDIOT,

I hope you do not feel neglected. I have been sending you wires
which you must have received.
I have carefully gone through your notes of the interview with
G. It is a good account. We must now allow things to run their course.
You should not mind my being discredited or misunderstood. That is
no novel experience for me.
Since sending you the telegram 2 I find that my route may be
changed. And I see that you could get a direct train to Bettiah from
Lucknow. It is worth considering. I may send you another wire.
Sushila returns tonight. She must tell you all about my health.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C. W. 3913. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7222
1

According to a report in The Hindu, 29-4-1939, Subhas Bose read out this
letter at the A. I. C. C. meeting the same day, in the evening, before he announced his
resignation.
2
Vide “Telegram to Amrit Kaur”, 29-4-1939
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

307

387. A LETTER1
S ODEPUR, C ALCUTTA,

April 29, 1939
DEAR SISTER,

I learnt from Chi. Krishnachandra’s letter that your daughter is
no more and that you are grief-stricken. But why grieve over death?
One who is born must die. Some will die today, some tomorrow. That
is why the wise tell us that birth and death are in the hands of God. We
should remember it and put up with death. But the death of the dear
ones must certainly teach us to remember their virtues and also
emulate them.
May God grant you peace.
Your brother,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 4313; also S.G. 130

388. JAIPUR PRISONERS
The Jaipur Durbar communique on the treatment of Sheth
Jamnalal Bajaj and the other prisoners reads like a laboured defence
of the status quo. The question about Sheth Jamnalalji is simple. It is
admitted that he is locked up in an out-of-the-way place 2 where the
water is said to be ‘heavy’ according to the Indian notion. It is
admitted that the place is difficult of access. He has been given no
companion. Why this isolation? Is he a dangerous character? Is he an
intriguer? One can understand detention as he chose to defy the ban
on his entry into his own birth-place.
The Authorities know that Shethji is an ideal prisoner. He
believes in meticulous observance of Jail discipline. It is cruel to
isolate him as he has been isolated from the outside world. The
greatest want of prisoners is the companionship of their equals in
thought, manners and customs. I suggest that without much ado he be
transferred to a place which is easily accessible and healthy and where
he is allowed company.
1
This was presumably addressed to Krishnachandra’s mother;vide “Letter to
Krishnachandra”, 8-5-1939
2
Moransagar

308

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The special pleading with reference to the satyagrahi prisoners
in Lamba is much worse. They admit that the place selected for their
incarceration is an old snake-infested fort. But they point out that in
spite of the place being snake-infested no one has as yet been bitten
by the reptiles! Must the Jaipur Durbar’s cosnscience wait for snakebites before it is stirred to action? It should be remembered that these
pris-oners were transferred to Lamba because they had the
presumptuousness to hunger-strike for better treatment. The strike
would have continued but for my intervention.
The much larger question of the object of satyagraha still
remains unsolved. And yet it is not at all large. It is aimed at getting
the Praja Sangh recognized. The Durbar have laid down the
impossible condition of recognition. viz., that its officials should not
be members of any political organization out-side the State. Thus
Sheth Jamnalalji himself could not remain President of the Sangh
because he is connected with the National Congress. Satyagraha has
been suspended at my instance 1 in Jaipur as in many other States. It
would not remain suspended for ever. I entertain the hope that the
States concerned will placate the advanced and awakened section of
their people. And I suggest to the Jaipur Durbar that they are going
the wrong way by keeping them locked up even though their
satyagraha has been suspended. In any case what I must call the
inhuman treatment of the prisoners, including Sheth Jamnalalji, might
surely stop at once.
SODEPUR, April 30, 1939
Harijan, 6-5-1939

389. TELEGRAM TO DHARMENDRASINH2
C ALCUTTA,

April 30, 1939
H. H. THAKORESAHEB
R AJKOT
GRATEFUL

YOUR

WIRE 3 .

NOTHING

WILL

PLEASE

ME

1

Vide ”Discussion with Jaipur Satyagrahis”, 20-3-1939
This and the following item are extracted from “Rajkot Correspondence”.
3
Dated April 29, which read: “I am sincerely grateful to you for rightly
advising the leaders of agitation to approach me as a Ruler together with other
members representing various interests. ... If they do so, I assure you, I and my
officers will do our utmost to meet their legitimate and reasonable demands. ... My
ardent desire is to come to a settlement as early as possible. ...”
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

309

BETTER
THAN
TO
FIND
THAT
HAVE
COME
TO
HONOURABLE
ANY
OUTSIDE
INTERVENTION.
MY
FAIRLY
WELL.

YOU
AND
YOUR PEOPLE
UNDERSTANDING
WITHOUT
WIFE
AND
I
KEEPING

GANDHI

Harijan, 6-5-1939

390. TELEGRAM TO VIRAWALA1
C ALCUTTA,

April 30, 1939
DURBAR VIRAWALA
R AJKOT
I
SHALL
NOT
MISUNDERSTAND
YOU
AND
SHALL
HOLD
YOU
TO
YOUR
PROMISE
TO
COME
HONOURABLE
SETTLEMENT.
ASK
YOU
NOT
BE
ANGRY
DHEBARBHAI
WHO
IS
GOOD
MAN.
NEITHER
SARDAR
NOR
I
HAVE
ANY
DESIRE
INTERFERE
WITH
MUTUAL
HONOURABLE
SETTLEMENT
BETWEEN
HIS
HIGHNESS
AND
PEOPLE.
EXPECT
REACH
RAJKOT
ABOUT
TWELFTH
UNLESS
MEANWHILE
YOU SEND
ME
GOOD
NEWS.

GANDHI

Harijan, 6-5-1939

391. INTERVIEW TO SANTI ROY AND OTHERS2
S ODEPUR,

April 30, 1939
They pointed out to Gandhiji that the political prisoners were asked not to
start any agitaion till April 13 pending his negotiations with the Bengal
Government; the date had expired, but a large number of young men were still rotting
behind prison bars.

1

This was in reply to the addressee’s telegram of April 29, which read ; “Am
grateful for letter twenty-sixth. My statement being of prior date kindly request not to
misunderstand. Am doing utmost for settlement.... Dhebar going to Bombay consult
Vallabhbhai.... brings Vallabhbhai in again in spite of your advice to keep him
aloof. Most earnestly request Vallabhbhai not to interfere and delay settlement.... ”
2
This appeared as reported “in the course of a statement to the Press by Santi
Roy, Convener of Political Prisoners’ Release Day Committee, who along with
Niranjan Sen and Anukul Chatterjee had met Gandhiji”.

310

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

In reply, Gandhiji said that he quite remembered that the date had expired but
as Mr. Subhas Chandra Bose and Mr. Sarat Chandra Bose were doing their utmost in
this connection he could not do anything without consulting them. In course of the
talk, says Sjt. Santi Roy, Gandhiji incidentally remarked that the attitude of the
Bengal Government in this respect was “illogical”.

The Hindustan Times, 10-5-1939

392. NOTE TO PYARELAL
[April 1939] 1
Do not worry about it. That letter is there of course; but that
does not mean that we need not consider all the attendant
circumstances. What was the fate of Thakore Saheb’s2 letter? Virawala 3
presented a voluminous case. We can present one even more
voluminous if we want. Is there any doubt about it?
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

393. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
1.20 a. m., May 1, 1939
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

Such hard tapascharya4 as you desire to do is not to be
undertaken in haste. He who wishes to know what ahimsa is must first
learn to practise the yamaniyamas5 . That is no small matter. Do all
observe them with real sincerity? How many pray? How many spin
and card, or show love to their neighbours? How much love do we
show each other in Segaon? We learn the lessons of ahimsa and truth
from such seemingly small details. My rigidity also arises from my
imperfection. That is why I have so far tolerated the laxity of coworkers. Ponder over the difficult vows of yamaniyamas, shama6 ,
dama 7 , etc., mentioned in the verse cited by you.
1

The note is placed in the source among items of April 1939.
Thakore Saheb Dharmendrasinh of Rajkot
3
Durbar Virawala, Dewan of Rajkot State
4
Self-suffering as moral discipline
5
Rules of moral discipline and religious observances
6
Overcoming
7
Suppressing
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

311

We are shortly leaving for Brindaban.
Blessings from

BAPU
from a photostat of the Gujarati; G. N. 8563. Also C. W. 7049., Chimanlal
N. Shah

394. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
May 1, 1939
CHI. KANTI,

I am sending with this a copy of Ramachandran’s letter. I do
not know whether you wrote to him as I had advised. If you have not
written, do so now. It is your duty to pacify Ramachandran. Does
Saraswati write to him? You cannot treat that family as your enemy. If
you sincerely repent of your error, you will keep advancing. Your
obstinacy and ego ought to lose their excessive strength and Saraswati
should become mature. If you don’t write to me at all, I shall keep
worrying.
We are at the moment busy getting ready for the journey to
Brindaban.
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C. W. 7359. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

395. TELEGRAM TO U. N. DHEBAR
C ALCUTTA,

May 1, 1939
U. N. DHEBAR
R AJKOT
YOU

MUST

RESOLUTELY

NOT

FOLLOW

LOSE
OUT

YOUR

HEART.
OWN

YOU
PLAN

SHOULD
TILL

MY

RETURN1 .

BAPU
From a copy: C. W. 10187. Courtesy: D.B. Kalelkar

1

312

Gandhiji was going to Brindaban; vide the two preceding items.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

396. TELEGRAM TO U. N. DHEBAR
MOTIPUR,

May 2, 1939
DHEBARBHAI, V AKIL
R AJKOT
YOUR

WIRE.

PARISHAD

HAVE
PEOPLE.

CONSISTENTLY
DOING

I

CAPACITY

FROM

RETURNING

CO-OPERATE

SHOULD

YOUR

CAN

REACHED

KALIDASBHAI

YOU

WITH

ALL

NOT

WIRED

HERE.

FOR

WITH

YIELD

UTMOST

SHOULDER

BURDEN.

IF

FINAL

CERTAIN.

SETTLEMENT

WIRE

BRINDABAN

CHAMPARAN.

BAPU
From a copy: C. W. 10188. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

397. TELEGRAM TO VIRAWALA
BRINDABAN, C HAMPARAN,

May 3, 1939
DURBAR S HRI VIRAWALA
R AJKOT
YOUR WIRE 1 .
MYSELF
NOT

MY

TO

GUIDE

DHEBARBHAI

IT

THEY

DO

YOU

REGARD
BE

OTHER

SARDAR.

WHEN
IF

WHO

STATE

OUTSIDER.
PERSON

I

NOT

SEEK

GUIDANCE

SO

BE

OUR
THEY

PARISHAD

THEM

AS

KNOW

HE
WELL

REFUSAL
I

RELY

TERMS

ME
YOURS

DO

CONTEMPT

NOTIFICATION
FOR

THEIR
OF

AND

DHEBARBHAI
ME

WANT

ON

NOT

WITH

REPRESENTS
ENOUGH

WILL

AM

DESIRE

MY
BUT

TRIUMPH

PEOPLE

LOAFERS.
IN

MY

INDEPENDENTLY

BUT

TREAT

TOGETHER.

MEAN

PEOPLE

ACT

WILL

SUBJECT

READ

DOES

AND

MOREOVER

BE

TECHNIQUE.

PARISHAD

RESOURCES

OR

MUST
NEW

INTERFERE

THOSE

OWN

WIRES

DEVELOPING

MAY
BUT

AND
PUR-POSE.

SO
AND
NOT

IS

NO

IS

ONLY

I

ASK

1

Virawala’s telegram of May 3 read: “... It has been a painful surprise to His
Highness and myself to read the publication of your telegram to Dhebar stating that
he should resolutely follow out his own plan till your return. This telegram is
contradictory to your instructions for direct settlement between His Highness and his
people... ”
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

313

YOU

TRUST

TOO

MUCH

HIM

HE

AM

HIM.
ON

HE

HAS

SARDAR

MUST

REFER

TRYING

MAKE

COME

TO

RAJKOT

UPON

YOUR

BEING

JUST

PROMISE

TO

OUT

YOUR

BY

SLIGHTING

THEM

AS

HIM
BUT

HONOURABLE

ONE

OR
ONLY

DEFECT.

ME.

SARDAR

ME

IF

HE

SELF-RELIANT.
MY
AND
SEE

NOT

I

THROUGH
PEOPLE

BUT

LEANS
TOLD

MUST.

DON’T

COMING

GENEROUS

HE
HAS

AND

DEPENDS
CARRYING

SETTLEMENT
BY

I

WANT

NOT

TREATING

SUCH.

GANDHI
From a copy: C. W. 10190. Courtesy; D. B. Kalelkar. Also C.W. 7825.
Courtesy: G.D. Birla

398. SPEECH AT OPENING OF VILLAGE INDUSTRIES
EXHIBITION, BRINDABAN 1
May 3, 1939
BROTHER AND SISTERS,

Very few sisters have come, of course, but let those who have
come hear me. I have been told that a notice was sent out yesterday, in
the name of Prajapati Babu 2 though not actually by him. The notice
said that plague had broken out here and hence there would be no
meeting of the Gandhi Seva Sangh and no exhibition. There would
also be no provision for water, and even if there was, people should
not drink it. This notice was distributed by a friend here. One can
only call him a friend, for how could he be called an enemy? This led
to a fear that people perhaps would not turn up. They would think
that the exhibition had been postponed. It was suggested to me that it
might be advisable not to open the exhibition today but to postpone it
till tomorrow. I said the exhibition should be opened, even if only five
persons turned up. At least we have arrived. As you see, the
arrangements here have been made with a large audience in mind. I
had only a brief look at the exhibition. I could not see it thoroughly.
Doctors have prohibited me from making public speeches. Hence, I
1

The exhibition held at Kumar Bagh was organized by the Gandhi Seva Sangh.
Present on the occasion were Kasturba Gandhi, Rajendra Prasad, Vallabhbhai Patel
and Kishorelal Mashruwala, President of Gandhi Seva Sangh. The meeting was held in
the morning.
2
Prajapati Misra, Organizer, Gandhi Seva Sangh

314

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

shall not be able to say much. I was even advised not to come here.
But, having come here after so many years, I could not resist the
temptation of seeing you and speaking to you. It is now many years
since I first came to champaran. Many of you were not even born at
the time. Then also I had emphasized the point that you must put
your spare time to some use. In those days we had selected the loom.
We had no knowledge of the spinning-wheel then. We did not know
how to spin. Chhotelal1 , the man through whom this work was started,
was summoned from Kochrab. He was a very industrious man. He did
whatever work was entrusted to him. But even for him the task was
difficult. Poor Chhotelal is no more and his work has remained
undone. But though his work remained incomplete, it brought good
results. The atmosphere in those days was one of despair. People were
frightfully lazy. And the people of Champaran were inclined to be
lazy, too. They would sit round me and harass me. I would tell them
that they should learn some industry. And so Chhotelal was called.
But who would listen to poor Chhotelal? Chhotelal is dead, but his
work remains to be done. I am reviving for you Chhotelal’s sacred
memory.
That is why I am inviting you all to see the exhibition. It is not a
very big exhibition. I have not come out of it particularly inspired.
But it is a useful thing for Champaran. Let the people of Champaran
have an idea of the things that are being made. For instance, the use of
innocent leather. I call that leather innocent which does not involve
slaughtering of cattle. After the cattle are dead, they are split open and
their bones, their flesh, their hide, everything is utilized. A bhumihar2
Brahmin is carrying on this work. I was very happy to see that, when
nobody knew how to make string-gut, this man had made even that
and made it well. I even saw in the exhibition a tool for making taklis.
It is a small tool. It is not a big thing. He makes six or seven taklis in a
day and just manages to live. He may be making four annas a day.
Perhaps he is satisfied with that much. But how can I be satisfied? I
would like to give one anna for an hour’s work. But how to provide
work for all?They would have work when all of you think honestly
and start wearing khadi and realize that you have to serve
Daridranarayana. But this place is now flooded with textiles from the
1
Chhotelal Jain, who committed suicide on August 31, 1937; For an obituary,
vide “A Slient Co-Workers Gone”, 1-9-1937
2
Landless

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

315

mills of Japan, England and Ahmedabad. You buy that cloth thinking
it is cheap, while you find the khadi prepared by the poor expensive.
I can then only say that you do not deserve to live in India. You call
the things made by the rich cheap. My economics does not accept
this. If you realize this, You must know where your duty lies. My
economics consists in buying the things made by the poor people at a
higher price.
There are a number of such things in the exhibition. There is
paper from Nepal, the like of which you will find nowhere else in
India, or in the world. No other hand-made paper can compare with it.
It is like silk. It is worth seeing. You can use it for air-mail if you wish.
There is yet another thing. You can have a drink there. It is
called nira. There are millions of palm-trees in Bihar. This is a juice
extracted from those trees. It can be converted into liquor also. But
nira is not liquor. I have a Brahmin boy living with me. He has
devoted his whole life to it. It has no alcoholic content at all. Liquor
can be made from almost anything. It can be made from grape juice.
It can also be got from steeping rice and fermenting it. We can make
gur from nira which tastes like honey. It is better than the gur made
from sugar-cane. The sugar-cane gur is too sweet. This is much
better. You can make crores of rupees worth of such gur. Cane sugar
is a bad thing. It is not fit to eat. Gur is good. It provides salts. Gur is
never harmful for the system. Sugar is. I recommend that you should
go and see how gur is made from nira. People say that palm-gur is
intoxicating. This is a wrong impression. I suggest you should
definitely taste it. Doctors have recommended that I should take gur. I
take this same gur every day. But I am never tired of it. Sugar-cane
juice is very sweet. This is not so sweet. Nature has seen to it that it
cannot be processed in a factory. It is prepared in Andhra Pradesh
where palmyra trees grow in thousands. There are millions of these
trees in Bihar, and that gur could be prepared here as well. We can
completely eradicate our poverty through it. This is the only remedy
for our poverty.
You can see the exhibition by paying the entrance fee of one
anna. There is another thing worth seeing. They extract oil there.
There are many such things that can be produced in villages. If we
revived all those things, we would not become affluent but we would
be able to get rid of our poverty. Today we do not have enough to
eat. Women do not have enough clothes to wear. These things would
316

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

then be available. We would not get silver and gold and money. But
silver, gold and money are worth nothing compared to this wealth.
The nation which can produce things like these possesses real wealth.
Such a nation alone is truly prosperous. If you visit this exhibition
you will realize all this. Now that I have said this much, please take it
that I have opened the exhibition.
[From Hindi]
Gandhi Seva Sanghke Panchama Varshik Adhiveshan (Brindaban, Bihar) ka
Vivaran, pp. 2-4

399. SPEECH AT GANDHI SEVA SANGH MEETING,
BRINDABAN 1
May 3, 1939
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

You have just heard Kishorelalbhai. I do not intend to comment
today on the topics he has covered in his speech. Nor do I intend
doing so later. I would like to dwell briefly on the four or five
questions that were placed before me last evening. But even before I
proceed to do this perhaps if I recapitulate here what I have written
about Rajkot it will help to clarify my position today. I would like to
draw your attention to a point on which Kishorelal has dwelt in the
course of his speech. He has said that if we are truly non-violent, the
heart of the person who considers himself our enemy will, in the face
of our non-violence, gradually melt. It is in the very nature of nonviolence to rush into the jaws of violence. And it is the nature of
violence to rush forward to devour anything that comes its way. Nonviolent people cannot practise non-violence among themselves,
because they are all non-violent. The test for a non-violent person
comes when he has to face a violent person. I have assumed all this
from the beginning and I have been conducting various experiments
in non-violence in my own life. But I cannot say that I have always
been successful—successful in the sense of melting the heart of the
opponent. I even doubt if I have been able to carry on these
experiments exactly in accordance with my idea of non-violence. the
1
The fifth session of Gandhi Seva Sangh was held at Brindaban from May 3 to
7, 1939. The speech as summarized by Mahadev Desai, appeared under the title “The
New Technique” in Harijan, 13-5-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

317

realization that I had not been able to reach the point I had intended
came to me with added force in Rajkot.
I repeatedly asked myself the question why we had failed to
melt Durbar Virawala’s heart. The simple answer I got was that in our
dealings with him we had not been wholly non-violent. Even those
who considered themselves satyagrah is abused Virawala. I have
myself been saying things. I could not control the tongues of all. I
have no doubt been trying to control my own tongue. But I could not
control the tongues of my colleagues. Many satyagrahis do not even
realize that in giving tongue to such things we violate non-violence. It
is my laxity that I have ignored this. Take the Ali Brothers for
instance. Their tongues were sharp. I knew them intimately. Even
today I can certify that there was time when they never held back
anything from me. When we were touring in connection with the
Khilafat they used to tell me frankly whatever they had in their hearts.
Even if they had some terrible thought they would express it to me. I
still cherish many such sweet memories of them. Subsequently their
opinion of my non-violence and my love for Muslims changed
considerably. The bitter experiences of the later times have not
diminished the sweetness of our earlier relations. They created
considerable bitterness among Muslims with regard to truth and nonviolence. But I have forgotten all those things. There were other
collea-gues too who similarly used harsh words. They said what they
liked of opponents.
In short, I have not been as firm in this matter as I should have
been. So long as our people did not go beyond words I paid no
attention to what they said. I remained indifferent to violence in
speech. Later this became a habit and I even stopped taking notice of
it.
I suddenly saw a new light when I proposed to Mr. Gibson at
Rajkot that the Thakore Saheb should form a Committee of his own
choice. Even Mr. Gibson admitted that I had made a sporting offer.
Whatever I had been doing prior to that was self-evident in my life. In
trying to accomplish my purpose I even showed the British
Government there duty. I pointed out that it was its duty to protect its
subjects. That was the reason why I wired to the Viceroy. I did not beg
for anything from the British Government. I just made them do their
duty. But one great flaw in this was that I brought Government
pressure to bear on the Thakore Saheb, or say, Durbar Virawala. The
318

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

feeling came to me again and again that the experiment I was
conducting was fraught with risks. So I went to Mr. Gibson and told
him that the Thakore Saheb should form his own Committee. This
was a new thing for me and for the country. I acquired a new tool and
a new method. It was like changing my house.
But even today I am not prepared to tear up the Gwyer Award. I
wish to make use of it. Such is my weakness. But what am I to do? I
can only follow the dictates of my heart. But, if I can summon the
strength to obey the dictates of non-violence, I would tear to bits or
burn the Award. I should have reassured Virawala. I should have told
him: ‘See, I have torn up the Gwyer Award. I shall have nothing to do
with the British Government. If I have to resort to satyagraha now it
will be against you. And the experiment will be my sincere effort.
What would it matter even if I had to die in my attempt to convert the
Rajkot authorities? As yet I have not been able to persuade myself that
I do not want British help in the Rajkot matter. But this thing is
boiling inside me. Now Rajkot is for me the wonderful laboratory of
pure non-violence. My reason prompts me to conduct my experiment
in total non-violence in that very place. Let the world say I am mad.
Let people mock at me for throwing away a thing I had got with such
great difficulty. My reason says that is what I should do. The heart is
still not ready. This is my weakness. This means that there is still
something lacking in our non-violence. That is why our experiment in
Rajkot was not pure and did not succeed. The blame does not entirely
lie with Virawala. Let us see what he can do when we offer pure nonviolence, I cannot conduct such an experiment in pure non-violence,
just sitting here in Champaran. I shall have to turn Rajkot into my
laboratory. But right now my heart does not prompt me to do such a
thing. This is a sign of my weakness. There is no doubt that we are
making some mistake somewhere in the matter of Rajkot. We must
have the courage to correct that mistake.
What applies to Rajkot applies also to the Congress. There are
dissensions in the congress, and for these too we are responsible.
Those who call themselves Gandhians are not less so. I say to you
once again that you should not call yourselves Gandhians. It is
meaningless label. Call yourselves votaries of non-violence. Gandhi is
worthless—imperfect, a mixture of good and bad, strength and
weakness, power and impotence. Let your claim therefore be that you
pursue truth, are votaries of truth, you pursue non-violence, are
votaries of non-violence. That claim is sufficient. The term
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

319

‘Gandhian’ is meaningless. Non-violence does not contain any such
mixture. If you search your hearts from the point of view of nonviolence, you would realize that the responsibility of the rift within the
Congress lies with us and none else. Can you truthfully say that you
have followed non-violence within the Congress? Did you bare your
chests to the arrows of your opponents? Did you not try to turn and
shoot them in this direction and that? Did we welcome criticism from
others? No. We challenged it with our tongues. We were pleased when
other people criticized the critics. All this is a sign of violence. You
can say that so far I had not set such a harsh test. My words, too,
occasionally tend to be harsh. But the fault lies with me, not with nonviolence. You can also say that you have never claimed to have
followed non-violence to this extent. But this too is the fault of my
method of working. I have been somewhat lax in this regard. Let us
acknowledge these faults as our own and not ascribe them to nonviolence. Let us not bring non-violence to ridicule for faults which are
ours. Let us look upon the faults of our colleagues in the Congress as
bits of straw or as dust particles and get on with them; let us see our
own faults a mountains. Even if others consider us their opponents, let
us not consider them so. We are as much full of violence as they are.
It is the nature of a serpent to hiss. But we have taken a pledge of
non-violence. We wish to conquer that propensity of ours. We assert
that we shall protect, not devour, the Princes. We even talk of
converting them. But I am afraid that we talk of converting them. But
I am afraid that we talk of converting them because it has become a
fashion to do so. Deep in our hearts we do not believe in it. This is a
sign of violence in us. Truly speaking we do not have the slightest
hope that the Princes will ever be converted. We feel the same about
our colleagues in the Congress. I must frankly tell you that this is a
sign of violence, and it is precisely because of this that there is so
much dissension in the Congress.
This is what I am constantly thinking and that is why I am trying
out new technique with Durbar Virawala. Please believe me when I
say that I am not going to run away like a coward from the Rajkot
problem. I am not going to let down my co-workers thus. Nothing so
perverse will happen. If I do any such thing, you can take it that I
have lost my reason. I have certainly grown old. But there is not as yet
any evidence of mental decay. I am doing my work with great care. In
the last resort we are going to fight. But we shall have to change our
strategy. We shall have to revise the logistics of our forces. So I am
320

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

working to strengthen the position of our co-workers in Rajkot. I
have dwelt on this point at some length so that you may understand it.
I shall now say few things about the Sangh. From what I have
said you will understand the way my mind is working. I have a feeling
that we shall have to retrace our steps a little. I had said1 at Hudli that
we must expand our field a little, that we should also take part in
politics. But, even if we have plunged into politics, we must practise
non-violence in that field too. We must be very firm in this. Don’t
mind if on that account only twenty members are left in place of
today’s two hundred. I also find that the Sangh too is not free from
the faults which are in the Congress. The Congress is a big
organization, the Sangh is small. The evils that are found in the
Congress in a larger measure are to be found in the Sangh in a smaller
measure. There are mutual jealousies, quarrels and also conceit. I do
not see people working with one heart, one mind. I am not saying this
from personal experience. I do not even know all the members. I do
not recognize all the faces. I do not know the names of many. I do
not know where each of them comes from and what work he is doing.
I am saying this on the strength of the material I have received. It is a
pity that Jamnalalji is not present here today. He is connected with a
number of institutions. He keeps on telling me about his difficulties.
Why do we have to face so many difficulties in running institutions?
Why do all these faults creep in? If two hundred individuals could
work with one mind, one heart, we could, without mentioning any
particular worker, call any one of them and tell him, ‘Go to
Travancore and achieve success in the work there’. But Kishorelal
today does not have the courage to say this. He has to consider the
qualifications, temperament and inclination of each individual worker.
I am not saying all this to find fault with you. This speaks of the
shortcomings of all of us. It seems to me that we shall have to give
thought to this matter. We shall have to be more firm in the principles
and in observing the rules of our institution. If this leads to a
depletion in our membership, it cannot be helped. I have already
stated that the strength of satyagrahis lies not in numbers but in the
spirit, in other words, in God.
Hence it is that I expect every satyagrahi to have a living faith in
God. A satyagrahi possesses no other strength. One can derive
1

Vide “Letter to Hemprabha Das Gupta”, 25-1-1931

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

321

strength from God only if one has boundless faith in Him. How can
one ever offer satyagraha without such faith in God? Anyone who
says that he has no such faith in God should leave the Sangh and
forget about satyagraha. I would like to ask how many of you have a
living faith in the spinning-wheel. About the spinning-wheel, I have
said boldly and unashamedly that it is the infallible means to swaraj. It
is a unique symbol of non-violence. You may become a great expert
with the spinning-wheel, but your working at it would be futile if you
did not regard it as a symbol of non-violence. If we have a living faith
in the spinning-wheel we shall find in it immeasurable strength. I
regard the spinning-wheel as a greater symbol of non-violence than
civil disobedience. In civil disobedience there is a possibility of
jealousy and violence. But the spinning-wheel is faultless. Some
people may make fun of it. The spinning-wheel can evoke ridicule
but never violence. Even those who ply the spinning-wheel and ply it
with diligence and faith do not regard it as a symbol of non-violence.
Those who have entered politics do not regard it as a symbol of nonviolence. They ply it as a ritual. I have been lax in this respect too.
Now I am paying the price. I had expressed my faith in the spinningwheel way back in 1920. Now 1940 is approaching. I repeat on the
strength of my experience of twenty years that there is nothing so
effective as the charkha for demonstrating the power of non-violence
and winning swaraj. Today I have acquired knowledge also along with
faith. This combination of faith and reason has strengthened my
conviction. I stand by whatever I have written so far on the subject of
the spinning-wheel. I would once again tell those who want to be
satyagrahis but have no faith in the spinning-wheel that they should
forget about satyagraha.
Prajapati Misra said that spinning-wheels are being plied in five
villages. This is just a mockery. Why is not the spinning-wheel
plying in every home in Champaran? I can make fun of the
spinning-wheels plying in five villages, and if I so choose, I can also
make you cry. There is nothing very exciting even in the exhibition
here. Poor Laxmi Babu and Mathuradas are doing some spade work.
But how is that going to satisfy me? Bihar has so many wonderful
workers. Why is the charkha not plying in every house in Champaran?
When they realize that the spinning-wheel is a thing that can give them
extraordinary strength, the whole face of Bihar will be transformed.
But the few workers that are there are not enough. There are
thousands of women plying the charkha today—women to whom I
322

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

cannot pay a wage of eight annas. They do it for their bread. I do not
speak of those who do it for a living. I speak of those who will ply the
spinning-wheel, considering it a symbol of non-violence. The
spinning-wheel will transform the life of the individual who becomes a
votary of non-violence and truth. He will render an account of his
every minute. He will consider it sinful to waste time. God alone is
witness to one’s thoughts. But such a man will have no useless
thought in his mind. His speech will have a unique quality and
everything pertaining to him will have a divinity about it.
The spinning-wheel possesses all this power. But it is not selfevident. Outwardly the spinning-wheel is a lifeless object. It acquires
power from determination. Let us look at it with devotion. What is
there in clay? But if a devotee shapes a lump of it into a ball and
decides that Lord Shankara is residing in it, that same lump of clay
can become a Kamadhenu1 . What is there in mere clay? Another man
would just throw it away. Shankara does not reside in the clay. It is the
faith that is Shankara. What is in Ramanama? What is the secret of the
power it possesses today? Millions of people have uttered the name of
Rama with great faith. It is the power or their devotion. Thousands of
people are in the habit of repeating Ramanama. They derive no
benefit out of it, because they have no devotion in their hearts. In
Kaliyuga. even Ramanama can deceive. But the spinning-wheel can
never deceive. It will at least produce yarn. I have got hundreds of
people who would stand witness to the fact that even physical desire
loses its edge if one sits down to spin with determination.
Prabhashanker Pattani is dead. He was not a man who could have ever
deceived me. He had written to me that when he sat with the spinningwheel at night, he forgot all mundane affairs. The miracle of the
spinning-wheel was revealed to him. It is another matter if he could
not stick to it for good.
It was necessary to say this much in praise of the spinning-wheel
because it is the most important among all the weapons that we
possess. Let all of you make a resolution. That is why so much
emphasis is laid on it. That is the reason why it has become so
essential for the satyagraha of my conception. I wrote Hind Swaraj in
1909 2 . Its language may be crude but even today my pen is not
prepared to polish it. I had not seen even a single spinning-wheel at
1
2

A mythical cow that was supposed to give whatever was asked of her
The source has “1908

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

323

the time. Not only this, I had even confused a loom with a spinningwheel. That was exactly why I had mentioned the loom rather than the
spinning-wheel in that book. But I have continued to have faith in the
spinning-wheel right from those days. It has been for me a symbol of
non-violence from that time on. Today I have this much strength that
I can tell those who do not share this belief to quit. If those people
from Travancore or Mysore or Jaipur tell me that they do not believe
in such a thing, I would tell them that I cannot carry on the
satyagraha with their help. They may offer satyagraha on their own
responsibility, but I cannot help them.
Thus, I have presented this thing to you in a new form. Each
one of us has come here to perform a yajna for five or six days, to
purify his thoughts, and subject himself to rigorous introspection. He
will tell himself that judging by the language, he gave way to anger,
showed malice towards this or that person, betrayed the Sangh. Many
of those who realize their errors will voluntarily remove themselves
and serve the Sangh from outside, even as I am serving the Congress
from outside. I claim to serve the Congress more than I did when I
was a four-anna member. I have absolutely no doubt about it.
Similarly let some people serve the Sangh from outside. Let those who
choose to remain inside constantly examine their thoughts. All of us
are probably aware that some people have got into the Sangh who
have proved to be conceited and corrupt. We certainly cannot claim
that everybody who has got into the Sangh has got a stamp of purity.
I do hope some members of this kind will go out of their own accord.
They will be serving better from outside.
Let me now come to the circular 1 . I do not wish to find fault
with it. Whatever has happened has happened. Let the members of the
Gandhi Seva Sangh be in the Congress. Let Sardar, Rajendra Babu,
etc., be in the Congress. Let other members support them. It is their
business. But the Gandhi Seva Sangh as an institution should not get
involved in this. This is not within the purview of the Sangh. If the
members of the Gan-dhi Seva Sangh feel called upon to interfere in
1

The circular issued by Kishorelal Mashruwala explained that out of seven
Congress Working Committee members who recommended Pattabhi Sitaramayya for
the Congress Presidentship, six belonged to the Gandhi Seva Sangh and that the
members realized Gandhiji’s interest and involvement in the election only when he
declared (vide “Its Implications”) that he considered Pattabhi Sitaramayya’s defeat as
his own. The circular reminded the members of the Sangh that it was their primary
duty to stay together, sinking all differences. It also condemned the wild allegations
against Vallabhbhai Patel as false and mischievous vilification, adding that Gandhiji
found him absolutely irreproachable.

324

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

political matters let them do so on their own responsibility. But even
here it can only mean their carrying out the tenets of truth and nonviolence. We shall no doubt face defeat if we do not remain within the
limits of truth and non-violence. We cannot be party to all the things
that are permissible there, because, being members of the Sangh, we
become trustees of truth and non-violence. We can certainly allow
those members to function who enter politics carrying with them the
yardstick of truth and non-violence. But the function of the Gandhi
Seva Sangh is altogether different. The Sangh is not concerned with
what happened at Tripuri or who voted in whose favour. That is not
our field. That is the field of Sardar, or those who went to Tripuri.
So much for the circular. Let me now come to the corruption
within the Congress. The best remedy for the corruption is first for us
to become pure. Let us make the atmosphere as clean as we can
through our personal contact, because the Congress too wants to attain
independence with truth and non-violence. The Congress too is a nonviolent orga-nization and, if I can have my way, I would lay down
strict conditions for it. But the Gandhi Seva Sangh is not opposed to
the job of purifying the Congress. From one point of view the burden
of our heads is light and also heavy. Those of us who wish to shoulder
the burden of purifying the Congress may well do so. But that burden
does not fall on everybody. On the other hand, our responsibility is
very heavy because we have made ourselves the self-appointed trustees
of non-violence. Thirteen of our members are on the Congress
Working Committee. They will look after the task of purifying the
Congress. If they do not, they will be proved worthless.
I shall now take up the question of the spread of Gandhian
thought. Gandhian thought can hardly spread through books. Indeed
it will be propagated best through being lived. Truth and non-violence
are propagated in this manner. If we place a million books on one
side and a living example on the other, the value of the example will
be grater. Books are lifeless. I do not suggest that we should write no
books at all. We may write books and also publish newspapers if we
wish. But I want to suggest that they are not a necessary means for us.
Intellectual growth of a satyagrahi depends on his following his
principles. We go on repeating ‘ahimsa’, ‘ahimsa’ with our tongues
but do nothing to sharpen our intelligence. We have become
somewhat lethargic. The Gita says that there should be unity between
mind and heart. When the mind and the heart are untied, we become
unconquerable. The mind acquires the powers to solve all question.
We do not become non-violent simply because we do not hit
anyone. We indulge in violence through our thought and reasoning.
This is not a sign of a sharp intellect. Keeping ourselves alert is an
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

325

indication of sharp intelligence. When we are faced by an opponent,
we should understand his viewpoint. Let us see what Jayprakash there
is saying. There is an ocean of difference beween him and me. But
non-violence means that we must have the patience to listen to the
opponent. This is the characteristic of non-violence. This is what is
meant by rushing into the mouth of the enemy. A non-violent
person tells his opponent not to trouble himself too much for he is
going to him on his own. It does not mean that we should become
soft. We must keep our intelligence sharp. If we can, we should reply
to the arguments of our opponent. We should try to understand his
agruments from his point of view, and accept whatever may be
acceptable. if I try to understand the point of view of my opponent, it
does not mean that I have accepted everything he has said, or that I
have flattered him. If we train our mind thus, we can continue to
propagate truth and non-violence all through our life. This cannot be
done through a monthly or bi-monthly or quarterly. My co-workers
will tell you how carelessly young India used to be brouhgt out by
me. young India did serve a useful purpose. In the end it just died,
but satyagraha did not die. My work did not stop where Young India
ceased publication. A satyagrahi knows that he cannot depend on
external aids. Rather, He depends on inner strength. He who has faith
in God will go ahead with faith in himself.
It has also been asked what we should do in the face of
considerable opposition to Gandhian thought and the needlesss
poisoning of the minds in Maharashtra. I have already answered this
question. We should purify ourselves. If things are going wrong in
Maharashtra, let us kill Shankarrao Deo. If things are going wrong in
Karnataka, let us kill Gangadharrao. Do you agree, Shankarrao,
Gangadharrao?1 What more can I say in this matter?
I have been asked my opinion of the Aryasamaj satyagraha.
After much testing I must tell you what I feel about it. What is going
on in Hyderabad in the name of satyagraha is not dharma. Nor is it
being conducted for the defence of dharma. There is much fraud in
it. No one who believes in truth and non-violence can participate in it.
I have got enough evidence. I have passed it on to Guptaji. The poor
man had come to me. He is very much upset.
[From Hindi]
Gandhi Seva Sanghke Panchama Varshik Adhiveshan (Brindaban, Bihar) ka
Vivaran, pp. 7-5

1

326

They nodded their headsx in agreement.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

400. CABLE TO Y. M. DADOO1
May 4, 1939
DOCTOR DADOO
47 E NDSTREET
JOHANNESBURG
YOU
YOUR

HAVE
GUIDE

TO

SUFFER

NOT I.

THEREFORE

LET

GOD

ALONE

BE

2

GANDHI
From a photostat : C. W. 11353. Courtesy : E. S. Reddy; also South Africa’s
Freedom Struggle, p. 296

401. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
BRINDABAN, C HAMPARAN,

May 4, 1939
CHI. MIRA,

I hope you got my letter or letters(I forget). Khan Saheb is here
and will be till 7th. I leave on 8th for Rajkot via Benares breaking the
journey for the night in Benares to see Malaviyaji. How long I shall
have to be in Rajkot I do not know.
Khan Saheb told me you were happy and were doing your
work.
Here it is not all village work or village atmosphere. Plenty of
motors and city amenities. These jar on one. You will be surprised to
know that there is no mosquito to be found in this camp. This is due
not to man’s effort but nature’s disposition.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6438. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G. N. 10033
1
Leader of the Passive Resistance Committee in South Africa. “Who is
Dadoo?”, Gandhiji enquired later of Manilal, writing to him on June 25; vide “Letter
to Chhanganlal Gandhi”, 25-6-1939. For his acknowledgement of the identity of the
addressee, vide “Statement to the Press”, 4-4-1939
2
This was in reply to the addressee’s wire of May 2, 1939, which read :
“Union Government introducing interim bill tomorrow. Community resolved offer
satyag-raha. Expecting your blessings and guidance.”

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

327

402.

LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
BRINDABAN,

May 4, 1939
MY DEAR AGATHA,

This is just to tell you I have been thinking of you.
On the Federation1 , so far as I can see, it has receded into the
background. If it comes, it will be an imposition. If the governing
world in England really wants to part with power, much can be done.
I hope to send to A. Moore2 a longish letter in answer to his questions.
I shall send you a copy.
The war is a difficult question for me to tackle. I do not know
myself what advice I can give Congress.
The letter3 to Hitler has not yet formed itself. It won’t be long.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Love to all the friends.
From a photostat: G. N. 1507

403. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH4
BRINDABAN,

May 4, 1939
CHI. MUNNALAL,

Take Mathew to Nagpur and get him admitted to David’s
dispensary if possible. Why need you stay in Nagpur for three
months? Can’t he be treated in Wardha? If [you think] it is absolutely
1

The reference is to “Federation of India” embodied in the Government of
India Act of 1935.
2
Arthur Moore, Editor, The Statesman .
3
Vide “Letter to Adolf Hitler”, 23-7-1939.
4
The letter is damaged at several places.

328

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

necessary to stay, think how . . . and send me . . . at this address up to
the 8th . . . and after that wire at Rajkot . . .
[Blessings from ]

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 8561. Also C. W. 7050. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

404. LETTER TO P. G. MATHEW
May 4, 1939
MY DEAR MATHEW,

You have become a problem. I have ask [ed]1 Munnalal to take
you to Dr. David and see if you can be kept in Nagpur or whether
you can be kept in Segaon or simply sent to Nagpur for treatment.
You should be patient and not worry. Whatever happens has to be
suffered cheerfully. If you have any suggestion of your own don’t
hesitate to make it.
Love .
BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 1550

405. SPEECH AT TEACHERS’ TRAINING CAMP,
BRINDABAN 2
May 4, 1939
I should like to tell you what I saw today. First I visited the
exhibition.3 It is very good. They say in size it is one-fourth of the
Tripuri exhibition. The one-fourth that I saw pleased me immensely.
It does not mean that my happiness would have been four time as
much if I had seen the whole exhibition. In the Tripuri exhibition, the
major contribution was from the Jamia Millia of Delhi, while here they
have contributed nothing. Their contribution was indeed very large. I
was able to visit the exhibition today only for a few minutes. It is
certainly very large. If I had a whole day I would have seen the whole
of it and could have gained much. I would have seen to what point
1

Vide the preceding item.
The camp was organized by the All-India Talimi Sangh to prepare teachers
under the Wardha Scheme of Education.
3
This was organized by Ashadevi Aryanayakam to demonstrate the various
aspects of basic education.
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

329

they have taken basic education, how much they have succeeded in
planning education through a craft and how they correlate the craft
with other subjects.
I would like you to study this exhibition. Observe everything
very carefully. Let me give you only one example. We did not know
that a carding-bow made from munj grass can be so efficient. It is so
good that in some respects it is even better than the bow made of
catgut. For fine carding it is excellent. Every fibre of the cotton is
separated. Besides it is not harmful to health. Even a person like me
whose heart has become weak can comfortably card his cotton with it.
It is also nice to look at. No effort is required in plying it. One derives
only pleasure. This is just an example to show what progress we can
make in such small things. It is the invention of someone who has
devoted all his mind and inventive genius to it.
I should like you to study and assess the exhibition from this
point of view. There is no limit to the progress we can make. We are
not good teachers if we are not able to develop originality in us
through this kind of education. Education through a craft is the pivot
of basic education. You must cultivate your creative instinct to be able
to develop your mind through various crafts and teach innumerable
things by putting your creative genius and resourcefulness to use and
discover new things.
Today we are dependent on only two crafts. Let us take these.
We have found two men who could develop their minds through these
crafts. That is why Ashadevi and Aryanayakam could carry on their
work. We found Vinoba for the takli. And we have found another
gentleman to show us how one can develop one’s mind through
cardboard-making. These two men showed us how full of possibilities
the two crafts are. If you cannot do as they did you will never
develop creative instinct. If such men were not there neither Zakir
Saheb nor Ashadevi could have achieved anything. I would like you
to see the exhibition with a view to developing creative instinct
through this system of education. It is not our aim to teach industry
and handicraft in the traditional way. We want to make crafts a living
medium of education.
I then went to the school. I found the teacher quite intelligent.
All the boys were plying taklis. I claim that I know the science of the
takli, the charkha and the loom very well. Although I lack skill in
working them, I know much about them. I immediately noticed that
330

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

there was something wrong somewhere. Either the teacher himself did
not know how to spin on the takli or the boys were taught wrong. I
detected the flaw immediately. The boys were taking four times as
long over an operation that should take half a minute. They kept on
twisting the takli. when they drew the thread. That is not the right
method of drawing yarn. The yarn should get the twist as we draw it.
There is no need to give any further twist. The yarn instead of
becoming strong becomes useless if it is twisted even just a little more
than necessary. And also one can never increase one’s speed.
I also noticed a few more shortcomings which I do not mention
here. I have told Nayakamji that a teacher who is not doing well in his
craft should be considered useless, however intelligent he may be.
However much he may have read of the science of the charkha and
the loom, he is not fit to be a teacher if he cannot spin well. He
cannot even become a clerk. He is utterly useless. It is our claim that
the mind can be developed through a craft and that is our yardstick.
That is the central point of our scheme.
I will therefore first see the quality of the teacher’s yarn—
whether it is even or not, whether it is strong or not. If it has these
qualities I will say that he is a good artisan but if his proficiency in the
craft does not help him to develop his intellect, he will not have
originality. He will go on plying the charkha and the loom for
generations and never make any improvements. That has been the
history of India. That is so because there was no correlation between
the hand and the mind. Artisans never paid any attention to the
improvement of their tools and methods of work and those who did
mental work were not concerned with the crafts. So both lost their
creative instinct.
I will test the intelligence of the teachers also from this point of
view. They should learn their craft in this way and take pleasure in it.
The scheme will come to naught if teachers do not train themselves in
this manner. If it gets known that the scheme has failed in this manner,
the people will laugh at them. However, that is not what I am afraid of.
I will be satisfied only when I see that things are happening as I had
wished. If they are not, then even if the whole world praises us for our
work I will not be deceived. I am feeling apprehensive although the
basic education scheme is much admired today. The teachers
working under the scheme are feeling Jubilant. But maybe we are
deceiving ourselves. I should like you to learn the art of gaining
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

331

knowledge through a craft. That art and knowledge is a rare thing.
You must utilize your knowledge of B. A. and M. A. degrees to this end.
It should be your duty to make education, which is a dull and drab
affair today, a lively and fascinating subject. It is my claim that by the
method I have suggested a rare enlightenment will be produced.
To me intellectual education and bookish education are not the
same thing. In my opinion a man whose intellect is not correlated
with his hands is not intelligent. Would you call a man an authority on
the Vedas if he has memorized words from the Vedas and has learnt
by heart its commentaries? What I would ask is how far he has
assimilated the real meaning of the Vedas. His conduct will be an
indication. I have set before you the main idea behind this scheme.
[From Hindi]
Harijan Sevak, 8-7-1939.

406. TELEGRAM TO K. P. PILLAI
May 5, 1939
KAINIKKARA P ADMANABHA P ILLAI
KRISHNAVILAS, K UNNUMKUZHI
TRIVANDRUM
REACHING

RAJKOT

TWELFTH.

CAN

MEET

RAJKOT

AFTER

TWELFTH.

From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

407. ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS AT GANDHI SEVA SANGH
MEETING, BRINDABAN–I
May 5, 1939
Here are some questions received from Annada Babu. He says
he is asking the questions not for himself but for others.
Your statement 1 after Subhas Babu’s election has somewhat
changed the situation. Why did you not issue any statement at the time of the
election? Some people are of the view that the present situation would not have
arisen if you had issued a statement at the time of the election.
QUESTION:

ANSWER: It is true that I did not issue any statement. According to
Annada Babu that has changed the situation. What he means is that the
1

332

Vide “Statement to the Press”, 31-1-1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

situation would not have taken the turn it did if I had issued a
statement earlier. But the statement issued by Sardar Vallabhbhai and
others contained a small sentence which suggested that I too was
connected with it. Moreover, there was no particular occasion then. I
saw no need to issue a statement at the time. It became necessary
subsequently. It is a long story. I shall not go into it. It was not a
question of my having been sluggish. Nor was there any mistake in
explaining the situation to the country. I had conveyed to Subhas
Babu what I felt. That is the way I work. In the end all that remains is
for me to put up with any misunderstanding that may have arisen. If
there are any more questions from anyone on the point they will be
welcome.
Some people are under the impression that you were not in favour of the Pant
resolution. What was your reaction when you first knew about the resolution? Why
did you write to Subhas Babu that the more you thought of it the more you disliked it?
Kindly explain.

First of all, you are all aware that I was confined to bed at the
time. It is not my way to interfere in something with which I am not
concerned. That is why I remained indifferent to the developments at
Tripuri. So much so that I even avoided reading the newspapers in
those days. My mind was preoccupied with Rajkot. Someone reported
to me that Pantji intended to move some such resolution. I understood
at the time that the resolution would express confidence in the old
Working Committee. I stated that while expression of confidence was
all right I would have done something more if I was there. I had said
even at Wardha that if they had the courage they should bring a
motion of no-confidence against Subhas Babu. It would have been a
straightforward thing to do. If the delegates to the Congress felt that
they had made a mistake in electing Subhas Babu, this was the only
civilized way open to them. But probably the atmosphere was not
quite favourable then. I had a feeling that Subhas Babu would form
his own Working Committee. But that did not happen. Then it was
that the Pant resolution came up. All I heard was that the resolution
expressed confidence in the people who had gone out. I said if that
was all there was in the resolution it was all right. But I had nothing to
do with it. I saw the resolution later. Then followed an exchange of
letters with Subhas Babu. The letter to which Annada Babu has
referred is not before you. When I read the Pant resolution, I found
that it contained a suggestion that Subhas Babu should be guided by
me. I thoroughly disapproved of the idea. So much so that I refused
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

333

to do anything of the kind. I stuck to my refusal to the end. It is
possible that this may lead to some misunderstanding. I shall have to
put up with it. How can I do a thing which I consider wrong? I told
him that he should form a Working Committee of his choice,
formulate a programme and implement it. I would clear the
atmosphere if I could. If not, the work would go on and gradually we
would be able to change the atmosphere. That is why when at Calcutta
I was asked to name the Working Committee I found the idea
repugnant. There I had some material, in view of which I felt it would
be wrong to do so. Nobody had such material at Tripuri. Subsequent
exchange of letters further confirmed me in my opinion. Later on I
also came to know about the ill-feeling generated. How could I
announce any names under those conditions? It would be subjecting
Subhas Babu to coercion. Can the ship of the nation sail smoothly if I
subject Subhas Babu to coercion? It would be like sinking it. I said I
would not do it. I also said that if they wanted to have the old
members of the Working Committee back, they should consult among
themselves and if they were agreeable both sides could work together.
But I would not be party to imposing any names on Subhas Babu.
The more I think about that resolution, the more I dislike it. I cannot
serve the nation according to the terms of that resolution. However
much anyone may insist, I just cannot choose names for the Working
Committee. My doing so would be coercion against Subhas Babu.
And coercion is violence. How can I resort to it? I have told you of
my feelings as to the Pant resolution. Even if people think that I have
served the country well it surely does not give me the right to use
coercion against anybody !
What was the difficulty in giving the names when Subhas Babu himself had
agreed to accept any names you suggested?

What the question means is that through the Pant resolution
Tripuri ordered me to do a certain thing and ordered Subhas Babu to
do a certain thing. Subhas Babu was willing to do as ordered, then
why did I defy it? Where was the question of coercion in giving the
names for the Working Committee in pursuance of that order?
Seemingly the argument is attractive. But it is fallacious. Supposing
somebody were to come to me tomorrow and say that I had been
ordered to abuse him and hit him as I please? When there was such a
gulf between me and Subhas Babu, would it have been civilized
behaviour to inflict some names on him merely by virtue of that
right? Having a right surely does not mean that I should exercise that
334

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

right in utter disregard of my sense of proportion. If someone were to
behave with me thus I would not like it. Supposing tomorrow I am
given the right to abuse everybody, would it then become my duty to
exercise that right? There is a distincion between right and duty. The
exercise of right depends on one’s sense of duty. It is my duty to
follow dharma. I do not think only of my own importance. It is of no
consequence to me. I think in terms of the nation. I do what I
consider my duty.
Cannot your correspondence with Subhas Babu be published? If not, will you
please explain why?

At one stage it had been decided to publish the correspondence.
Later on, after Jawaharlal’s arrival it was decided to withhold the
publication. It was also decided that I should not issue any statement.
It would not be in the interest of the nation. In this my attitude was
that Subhas Babu should do only what suited him. This should be our
only attitude if we are non-violent. It is none of our concern to
publish any correspondence. We should withhold the publication as
long as we can. It becomes our duty to publish the correspondence
only when someone does something contrary to what he has written in
a letter. There is no such question here. That is why I have left it to
Subhas Babu. If any misunderstanding arises from the correspondence not being published, it will not bring any particular harm. The
other person will publish it when he thinks it is necessary to do so.
When it becomes ancient history, it will be abandoned.
Let me now come to Shankar Rao’s two questions. I shall take
up the second question first because it is related to the same topic.
You have mentioned in one of the letters to Subhas Babu that there are
fundamental differences between you and him. What are those differences ?

It would be better for me not to mention the correspondence
between us. That would make the explanation too long. I shall explain
the thing briefly. I think he still holds the view he had expressed at
Jalpaiguri. I saw that I could not associate myself with any part of it. It
includes giving an ultimatum to the Government. He holds that we
possess enough resources for a fight. I am totally opposed to his
views. Today we possess no resources for a fight. Today the whole
atmosphere is so steeped in violence that I cannot think of fighting.
How did the violent incidents take place at Ranpur in Orissa and
Ramdurg in Karnataka? Pantji could not control things at Kanpur. We
have no control at all over the Shias and Sunnis in Lucknow. There is
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

335

no limit to communal strife. We cannot carry on by controlling just a
handful of Congressmen. It had ever been our boast that the whole
country was with us. Today we are not able to control more than a
handful of people. Workers and peasants too were supposed to be
entirely with the Congress. We do not have the same hold among the
peasants of Bihar as we used to. Is this a situation favourable for
starting a struggle? There is a difference between the work of the
congress and that of the people who believe in violence. If today I am
asked to start the ‘Dandi March’, I have not the courage to do so.
How can we do anything without the workers and peasants? The
country belongs only to them. I am not equipped to issue an
ultimatum to the Government. The country would only be exposed to
ridicule. But Subhas Babu thinks that we are ready for the struggle.
This is a great and fundamental difference of opinion. We differ in
our ideas of the resources needed for the struggle. My conception of
satyagraha is not his. Is this difference of opinion not fundamental? I
cannot give out all these things to the Press right now, because it
would not do any good. I shall write about it when the time comes. So
much for the fundamental differences. It has been covered in our
letters also. I have put the matter to you simply. It has nothing to do
with personal differences.
The same is true of the corruption in the Congress. There the
difference between me and him is one of degree. He also agrees that
there is corruption. But he feels that it is not of such proportion as to
cause worry. But in my view, we shall not be able to do anything so
long as this corruption persists. For me there is no difference between
civil disobedience and office-acceptance. Both are part of the
satyagraha movement. Thus my point of view and assessment of the
situation are altogether different from his. He does not mean the same
thing by satyagraha as I do. Hence, sometimes even the difference of
degree becomes a fundamental difference. I have become so
impatient of the corruption prevailing in the Congress that I should
not hesitate to bury the organization if the corruption cannot be
removed. In a non-violent organization there can be no place for
some of the things that pass in a violent organization. The example of
a violent war cannot apply here. Now you will have understood what I
mean by fundamental differences.
Are not your differences with the socialists and Jawaharlalji also fundamental?
Would you take up a similar attitude with regard to them?

336

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

No. My differences with the socialists are of a different kind. Do
not confuse the two. They differ with Subhas Babu on the question of
giving an ultimatum to the Government. I do not know who exactly
sup-ports him on the point. That is why in spite of my having sharp
and even fundamental differences with the socialists my attitude
towards them is different. Moreover, we cannot put the socialists and
Jawaharlal in the same category. Jawaharlal does not lend his name to
any socialist group. He believes in socialism. He mixes with the
socialists and consults them. But there is considerable difference
between their methods of work. The differences between me and the
socialists are widely known. I believe in change of heart and in
working for it. They do not. They make fun of the spinning-wheel.
But even so the socialists are coming nearer to me every day. Or, you
may say that I am moving nearer to them. Or, that we are moving
nearer to each other. I cannot say how long it will continue. It is quite
likely that one day our ways will part. The same thing happened with
Subhas Babu. The Jalpaiguri resolution brought our differences to
the fore. There are certainly differences between Jawaharlal and me.
But they are not significant. Without him I feel myself a cripple. He
also feels more or less the same way. Our hearts are one. This intimate
relationship between us has not started with politics. It is very much
older and deeper. We shall leave it at that.
I shall come now to Gangadharrao’s question.
The socialists say that while you are tolerant and liberal, we others are
intolerant and narrow-minded. For instance you might be prepared to take them on the
Working Committee but we would not agree to it. What is the reason for this?

How can I say? How can I answer that? You should search your
own hearts for the reason. I can only say that in this matter you must
follow me. You must be as gentle of speech as I am. The socialists
come to me frowning, but they leave smiling. This does not mean that
I do not express to them my differences with them. I tell them frankly
what is in my heart. I do not flatter them, but try to enter their hearts. I
have faith in their honesty. I try to understand their point of view. I
find time to talk to them. You should treat them with the same
courtesy. I can go so far to help you.
Now one more question remains. But it is very important. Other
things are of only passing importance. You are all in Gandhi Seva
Sangh. I have read its constitution. It contains many things. You
believe in certain principles. If the question Annada raised had been
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

337

raised on the Congress platform it would have been a different
matter. But when it is raised on the Sangh platform I feel a little
grieved. Why should you entertain such doubts? The differences
between me and Subhas Babu are of a passing nature. But if this leads
to bad blood between us, the country will be ruined.
Differences of opinion should never lead to bitterness. You are
all believers in religious tolerance. I would suggest that you must
broaden the definition of religious tolerance. We must also include in
it the moderates and the radicals. We must see equality between the
moderates and the radicals. We should have respect even for those
who call themselves radicals. We must look at the views of the radicals
from their angle and those of the moderates from theirs. We should
see our dharma with our eyes and those of others with theirs. This is
religious tolerance. This means that we must emphasize the points on
which there is agreement between us. We should not stress the points
of difference. Just because I respect Islam and Christianity I do not
become a Muslim or a Christian. What I mean to say is that I respect
these religions as much as I respect my own religion. But I would not
be converted to either Islam or Christianity. What is the sense in my
reading the Koran or the Bible, if I remain intolerant? This is not the
correct meaning of the expression ‘religious tolerance’. In politics
too let us take our differences in the same light. Let us regard the
socialists too in the same way. If we take this attitude our differences
would be only temporary and we would try to end the quarrels as far
as possible. If we do not do so, we shall become narrow minded. We
shall get entangled in small quarrels. Man shapes himself after the
dharma he follows. If we forget larger issues and remember only the
small points which cause differences, the country will be completely
ruined.
Why is it so difficult to discover the points of agreement? The
royal road of non-violence consists of mutual trust and willingness to
understand another’s point of view with an unprejudiced mind. In this
connection I take up once again the matter of that circular 1 . I have
read it again. The central point in it is the same. The central point is
the Sardar. Many people have a feeling that the Sardar does not work
properly. Deep down in their hearts they feel that he has been unfair
in the cases of Nariman, Khare and Subhas. But they should frankly
1

Vide footnote 1, “Speech at Gandhi Seva Sangh Meeting, Brindaban”,
3-5-1939

338

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

express themselves. This is the inviolable dharma of the votaries of
ahimsa. This is our dharma in relation to the whole world. If we feel
distrust or anger for anybody, it is our duty to go straight to that
person and understand his point of view. We should remember two
statements from the Bible. In the matter of morality the word of the
Bible or any other scripture should be considered as authentic as that
of the Vedas. One of these statements is: “Agree with thine adversary
quickly” 1 and the other statement is: “Be ye angry, and sin not: let
not the sun go down upon your wrath” 2 . To me these utterances are
as precious as anything in the Vedas. This is the very root of ahimsa.
Indeed ahimsa has to rush into the mouth of himsa. If you feel that
the Sardar has been unfair to Subhas Babu, unfair to Nariman and
unfair to Khare, let me say that the blame for the Khare affair and the
Nariman affair lies with me. I am not saying this to protect the Sardar.
I am making a statement of fact. But it is now irrelevant. I call myself
a seeker of truth, a speaker to truth and a satyagrahi. I will not
therefore deliberately give support to those reso-rting to injustice. But
if you have anything against the Sardar in your hearts, you should go
and speak to him. If you are not satisfied with his explanation or if
there is still something rankling in your heart, it becomes your duty to
relieve the Sardar from the Sangh. Thereby he would not cease to
belong to the Gandhi Seva Sangh. I freed myself from the Congress
and continued to serve the Congress. Your relieving the Sardar from
the Sangh would not mean that you have become his enemies or he
has become your enemy.
What I say of the Sardar I say of everyone. We have Appa
Patwardhan here. He is a great mathematician. With the help of
mathematics he can explain the mechanism of the charkha in great
detail. He has faith in the charkha, he believes in khadi and ahimsa.
But supposing he begins to have doubts, he loses confidence in the
honesty of the members, must he then continue in the Sangh? Must
he necessarily cease to serve like other members of the Sangh simply
because he is no longer a member? Or because he cannot be a
member of the Sangh, does it mean that he is worse than the rest of
us? But when there is mutual distrust there cannot be any Sangh. Only
so long as we honestly believe that no one belonging to the Sangh can
deliberately act improperly will our path be easy. As soon as a doubt
1
2

St. Matthew,
Ephesians,

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

339

arises in our heart we must seek mutual explanations. I do not wish to
suggest that those who thus suspect the Sardar are bad while the
Sardar is good. I would never utter such a thing. I have merely
indicated the way. The Sardar himself has been saying that if there
are any suspicions concerning him he would not like to remain in the
Sangh. You may be aware that a few days ago there was a heated
exchange of words between the Sardar and Jamnalalji. Jamnalalji said
he would leave the Sangh. The Sardar said Jamnalalji had created the
Sangh. Why should he leave? Rather, he himself would leave. Then
both of them wanted to be relieved assuring they would continue to
work for the Sangh. But neither of them left because at heart they had
nothing against each other. Whatever misunderstanding was there, was
cleared. There was no question of bad blood. Similarly the Sardar is
seeking to be relieved today. If there is even the slightest suspicion
concerning him in our hearts we must drive it out. If a large number
of people have suspicions about him he must go out.
But there should not be a single person who has distrust about
any member. These things do not seem very important so long as they
are limited in extent. But if they become widespread the Sangh will
be destroyed. Then the conclusion to be drawn will be that in the
present age no organization of satyagrahis and votaries of ahimsa can
be formed. But it is my claim that it is very easy to organize those who
believe in truth. Im my life I have made special attempts to make a
collective dharma of truth and non-violence. But if distrust becomes
widespread in our organization, if, even at the end of fifty years, I
have to confess that the believers in truth and non-violence cannot be
brought together as an organization; then I shall declare it—confess it
shamelessly—and say that after fifty years I have come to the
conclusion that the unique idea I had developed in my life cannot be
worked through an organization, that it is not capable of being
organized. Then the Sangh will have to be discontinued. But today I
have hope in my heart. I consider it my supreme dharma to see truth
and non-violence organized .
Now I come to Deo’s first question. It is the principal question.
In what way are the constructive programme and non-violence closely related?
kindly explain.

If the constructive programme is not closely related to nonviolence, what else can be? Hindu-Muslim unity, removal of untouchability, prohibition and the fourth is charkha. The relation of the first
340

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

three items with non-violence is very clear. How can any-one who
believes in non-violence regard anybody as untouchable even for a
mo-ment? How can he allow his mind to degenerate by taking
alcohol? How can he have feelings of hostility against the Muslims or
any other religious group? There cannot be any mass satyagraha
unless all this is taken for granted. This is true for me and for Subhas
Babu. Even Subhas Babu cannot start a satyagraha unless these
conditions are fulfilled.
Now for the charkha. To me the charkha is the symbol of nonviolence. As I have already said, its basis is dedication. The same is
true of Ramanama. Ramanama has no independent power. It is not a
quinine pill, which has a power of its own. One may or may not trust
that power. It is as effective when A has malaria as when B has it. It
destroys mal-aria germs wherever they may be. Ramanama has no
such independent power. A mantra
acquires power through
dedication. Gayatri is a mantra for me. I have willed moksha through
it. For a Muslim his kalma is the mantra. There is a great difference in
a Muslim reading kalma and my doing so. When a Muslim reads
kalma he becomes a different man, because he has willed his moksha
through it.
The Charkha has no independent power that will give you
swaraj. But if I am resolved that I shall learn the lessons of nonviolence through charkha and secure swaraj through it, it becomes for
me a tangible means for attaining swaraj. The place that Gandhi Seva
Sangh has given to the charkha is not merely to provide a little money
to the poor. What is the economic necessity of having mass spinning
for half an hour? And where is the need for silence? After all, how
much are you going to spin in half an hour? The nation resolved in
1920 to attain swaraj through non-violent means. We have filled the
charkha with the power of that resolve. Since then this process has
been continuing. Impelled by that resolve we ply the charkha here.
The charkha is thus a symbol of the resolve of all of us—Hindu and
Muslim, rich and poor, young and old. What closer relation can I
point out? So long as every house does not have a charkha, so long as
there is not total prohibition, so long as there is no Hindu-Muslim
unity and complete removal of untouchability we cannot have the
mass satyagraha which Subhas Babu wants and which I also want. Till
then we cannot be fit for civil disobedience.
The right of civil disobedience will come only when we have
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

341

learnt willingly to obey the laws we ourselves have created. Today I do
not feel like telling Deo to go and offer satyagraha at Kolhapur, or
telling Ramachandran and Radhakrishna to start satyagraha in
Travancore and Jaipur. Two months ago I was willing to give them the
permission. Things which did not appear to me ugly two months ago
appear ugly to me now. That was why I had given permission to
Jamnalalji. But certain things to me have assumed today a greater
importance and greater value.
I discovered these things in the laboratory of Rajkot. The great
strength I acquired through that experiment brought very happy
consequences. I can make you laugh by describing things that
happened at Rajkot. I am drinking deep the elixir of the strength I
acquired at Rajkot. I am beginning to gain control over the
atmosphere. My task is becoming easier. I cannot get work out of
many people, because I have become more strict. But what does it
matter if I can only find five persons at Rajkot? I shall complete the
work with their help. If there are five persons, I can start my campaign
only with them. I had said in 1920 that we could start the work even if
there was only one true satyagrahi available, and we would definitely
be victorious. Probably Vallabhbhai will testify to this. It is my
endeavour to become such satyagrahi.
When the question of the Rowlatt Act arose I said that there was
a way out, but that I could not all by myself do anything. For I was an
imperfect satyagrahi. I might be able to do something if some people
joined me. Then Shankerlal came, Horniman, Sarojini, Jamnadas
Dwarkadas and Umar Sobhani—the poor man is dead now—all came.
I got support from all these people. It was such a conglomeration—
but it awakened India and added to my strength. I want warmth and
help from everyone. In trying to get co-operation from all and
organizing them I increase my own strength. My power of
introspection is increasing. I am a very selfish person. I do not
merely watch you when I give you time. I place much value on my
time. If I feel that by giving you time I would not be bringing some
benefit to myself I would not be doing any such suicidal thing. I give
you time because I find that I stand to gain something by doing so. It
is of no consequence to me whether you gain something or not. What
I am concerned with is whether I gain anything. I see if I am not
heading for a downfall. I do not give you time in order to entice you.
I only increase my strength. And my strength has increased that way.
I have reached the age of seventy years. But my powers have not
342

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

dimmed. I realize my responsibility. I would keep my vow, whatever it
may be. What does it matter if I am left alone? I did the same thing in
the Transvaal. I had taken a vow that I would give a fight to the Transvaal Government even if I was the only one to do so and win. The
concept of satyagraha was not even born yet. Millions of people can
thus be organized by a mere act of will. I have countless proofs of
this. What happened when we decided to have the hartal1 on April 6?
We had not organized anything. But people fasted and responded to
the call of hartal throughout the length and breadth of the country.
That was the beginning of swaraj for the country. That task was
accomplished by sheer determination. But because of lack of training
in constructive work it could not be continued. So long as you do not
value the constructive programme and are not convinced that civil
disobedience cannot be carried on without it, you will ever be
disappointed. The constructive programme may take time but there is
no other way.
We cannot make satyagraha complete without the constructive
programme. An atmosphere of non-violence cannot be created
without it. This is the only way of my working. That is why when
Surendra went to Gujarat I told him that if nobody wanted his services,
if nobody came to him he should think of the charkha and spin for all
the twenty-four hours. If we did it with a resolute mind that alone
would be an act of service. I have absolutely no doubt about it. My
conviction is becoming stronger and stronger day by day.
[From Hindi]
Gandhi Seva Sanghke Panchama Varshik Adhiveshan (Brindaban, Bihar) ka
Vivaran, pp. 30-40

408.

TELEGRAM TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
BRINDABAN,

May 6, 1939
S UBHAS BOSE
C ALCUTTA
RELEASE

CORRESPONDENCE.

LOVE.

BAPU

The Hindu, 13-5-1939.
1

In 1919, against the Rowlatt Bill

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

343

409. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
ON THE TRAIN,

May 6, 1939
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have received your two letters. Who told you about the
cabinet? I have not even heard the mention of Pu. ’s 1 name in that
connection. When the thing itself is not there, why talk about it? I have
not understood the purport of the second letter. I do not even know
what Pu. has done. Can you not have such things cleared up with V.2 ?
He will be knowing everything. You should understand that in public
life and in democratic functioning everyone has the experiences that
you have had. We must be made of sterner stuff.
I gather from Mahadev that you are not keeping good health. It
seems you are also having blood-pressure. In that case, you must take
rest. What has happened to Taramati?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

410. ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS AT GANDHI SEVA SANGH
MEETING, BRINDABAN–II
May 6, 1939
I have here some slips which the President has passed on to me.
One of them is from Appasaheb Patwardhan. I shall first deal with his
question .
QUESTION:

a living wage?

In what way can the members try to put into practice the principle of

3

°ANSWER : There is no harm in adopting any means which is
morally proper. One individual may take to carpentry for a living. He
can earn Rs. 15 from this work. Or, he can take to carding or
tailoring. A member of the Gandhi Seva Sangh would choose only

1

Presumably Purushottamdas Tandon
Vallabhbhai Patel
3
According to the source Gandhiji misunderstood the question and interpreted
“living wage” as work for a living.
2

344

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

those occupations which are available to thousands of people earning
their livelihood by doing manual work. But he will not work merely to
earn his livelihood. He is aware of the hardships people have to
undergo while earning their livelihood. But as far as he himself is
concerned, as he earns his livelihood he also renders some service.
Apart from these occupations, members can also supplement their
income through teaching. Anyone who requires more and who also
has Appa’s knowledge of mathematics can even become a professor1
. But these are exceptions as far as I am concerned. I would always
prefer manual work for a livelihood.
I am either unable to understand your theory of trusteeship or my reason
cannot grasp it. Will you kindly explain it ?

It is the same thing whether you are unable to understand it or
your reason does not accept it. How can I explain such an important
principle in a few minutes? Still I shall try to explain it in brief. Just
imagine that I have a crore of rupees in my possession. I can either
squander the amount in dissipation or take up the attitude that the
money does not belong to me, that I do not own it, that it is a bequest,
that it has been put in my possession by God and that only so much
of it is mine as is enough for my requirements. My requirements also
should be like those of the millions. My requirements cannot be
greater because I happen to be theson of a rich man. I cannot spend
the money on my pleasures. The man who takes for himself only
enough to satisfy the needs customary in his society and spends the
rest for social service becomes a trustee.
Ever since the idea of socialism became popular in India, we
have been confronted with the question as to what our attitude should
be towards the Princes and millionaires. The socialists say that the
Princes and the millionaires should be done away with, that all must
become workers. They advocate confiscation of the properties of all
these people and say that they should be given the same wages as
everyone else—from Rs. 5 to eight annas a day or Rs. 15 a month. So
much for what the socialists say. We too assert that the rich are not the
owners of their wealth whereas the labourer is the owner of his labour.
He is, therefore. from our point of view, richer than the rich. A
zamindar can be recognized as the owner of one, two or ten bighas of
land. That is to say, of as much as may be necessary for his livelihood.
1

Gandhiji has used the English term.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

345

We also want that his wages should not be higher than those of the
labourer, that he should maintain himself on eight annas a day and
use the rest of his wealth for the welfare of society. But we would not
take away his property by force. This is the most important point. We
also wish that the Princes and the millionaires too should do manual
work and maintain themselves on eight annas a day, considering the
rest of their property as national trust.
At this point it may be asked as to how many trustees of this
type one can really find. As a matter of fact, such a question should
not arise at all. It is not directly related to our theory. There may be
just one such trustee or there may be none at all. Why should we
worry about it? We should have the faith that we can, without violence
or with so little violence that it can hardly be called violence, create
such a feeling among the rich. We should act in that faith. That is
sufficient for us. We should demonstrate through our endeavour that
we can end economic disparity with the help of non-violence. Only
those who have no faith in non-violence can ask how many trustees of
this kind can be found.
You may say that such a thing can never happen. You may
consider it as something not in keeping with human nature. But I
cannot believe that you are not able to understand it or that your
reason cannot grasp it.
I fully endorse your view about varnadharma. But putting it into practice is a
really complicated matter. Will you please elucidate ?

Today castes have become mongrelized. Varnas have disappeared. In such a situation how should those believing in the varnas
proceed? This is what this question implies. Today there is only one
varna. Call it the Shudra varna. We cannot say Atishudra since we do
not believe in untouchability. We do not believe in a fifth varna.
Hence only the fourth varna, that is, Shudra is left. Let all of us
consider that we are Shudras. Then there will be no feeling of high or
low left. Envy and discrimination will automatically disappear. This is
the only thing that would be fitting in the prevailing atmoshpere.
Brahmins are a rarity these days. Who possesses learning which is
unique and will make for the welfare of the world? And where is the
man who will expect nothing for that learning? As for the Kshatriyas
there are none left in India. If there had been any, the country would
not have lost its freedom. India would not remain in her present
condition if great learning and great valour could be found here. So
346

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

far as the Vaishyas are concerned, Vaishyadharma is a varnadharma.
It is not merely an occupation to earn money. It is a duty, not a right.
They should use their wealth for the benefit of society. Many of the
occupations which the Banias follow are immoral. Earning too much
money is also immoral. Many of these occupations cannot be
included in varnadharama. This means that today even the Vaishyas
are not there. Only some money-grubbing professional people are
left. Three varnas have thus passed out. That leaves us the Shudras.
They possess no learning. They consider themselves slaves. They do
not serve with knowledge. That is to say, there are not really even
Shudras left in India. In other words, we cannot say that even one of
the four varnas is still extant. Even so, since we believe in
varnadharma, let us accept the dharma of service. Let us adopt
Shudradharma. This does not mean that we should discard learning.
We should acquire as much learning as we should. We should acquire
as much valour, that is, fearlessness as we can. We must develop
commerce and industries to the greatest possible extent. If we do all
these things out of a sense of service and devotion, true Brahmins,
Kshatriyas and Vaishyas may be born amongst us. Then there would
be no feeling of high or low among them. If we do something like
this something may happen in future. When such varnadharma
prevails, all the bickerings that go on in the name of communism,
socialism, Congressism, Gandhism, casteism, etc., would be over. Now
there are a few questions from Balubhai.
When shri Thakar and I started village uplift work, Gandhiji had laid down an
important condition, that the people of the area we want to serve should furnish us
free accommodation as a proof of their desire for our service. Now, I would go further
and lay down the condition that we should go only to those villages where people are
eager for village reforms and, when the time comes, the village leaders are prepared to
do physical work and spend money from their own pockets. Where the village leaders
are not co-operative, no improvement is possible—no matter how long the village
workers stay there. I would like to know how far this opinion of mine is valid.

There are many other social workers like Balubhai and Thakar
in Maharashtra. They were very optimistic when they first started
work. But now they say that however much they work, so much
poison has spread there that persons wearing Gandhi caps are looked
upon with contempt. Even the services of the people wearing Gandhi
caps are forsaken. It is possible to feel disheartened under these
circumstances. Many years ago Balubhai and Thakar had come to
consult me before starting their work. I had suggested to them that
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

347

one test of whether or not the villagers were keen about their services
would be that they should at least provide the material for building a
hut. Now Balubhai feels that this condition is not enough. He suggests
that some more conditions should be laid down. But I am not
prepared to go beyond this. This condition does not lay down a limit.
If the village people also give us food, why should there be any
objection from my side? I have only suggested the minimun
condition we should lay down. And we must consider it the
maximum. There is no need to go beyond this.
The same thing happened to me at Sevagaon. I asked the people
in the village whether I should shift to their village. Land was provided
by Jamnalalji. Our people are very courteous. They talked to me very
respectfully. But they said whatever they had to say. An old man came
to me and said: “You can come to Sevagaon. You will be doing us an
honour. But we shall not allow the untouchables to enter the temples.
You should not expect any such thing from us.” Despite this I went
there and have stayed there. If the people fulfil our one condition and
give us some place to stay we should not feel disheartened.
How long can poison last? The newspapers say all sorts of
things about the Gandhians, about me and about the Sardar. If we are
as they represent us, then they are right in saying what they do. We
must then confess everything. Why should they accept our services if
we are really that bad? They would not accept even medicine from
our hands. They would be having a lurking fear that we might give
them poison along with the medicine. If there is an unworthy motive
in our giving them medicine, they can refuse to have it saying they
would rather die. If someone comes to serve me but harbours a secret
wish to kill me in the end I would not trust such a man and tell him so.
If people really have such suspicions about us, we must remove them
by dedicated service. We must create confidence among the people
that our intention is only to serve, and we mean no harm to them. If
we turn back in disappointment in the face of their protests, then we
are not giving them even a chance to test our bona fide. The test for
us would be only when we persist in our work. If we stick on even
when they have burnt down our hut, then the wrong impression about
us will be removed. They will relent when they see that we are not
perturbed even when they burn our hut, beat us, abuse us or stop our
water.
The newspapers are publishing all sorts of things about us; but
348

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

why should we feel ashamed? Yes, we should feel ashamed of
whatever truth there may be in those reports, and should try to rid
ourselves of the blemishes. If we are not as evil as they paint us, why
should we be bothered? And, why should we be afraid of confessing
to anything evil that may be in us? If the Vividhavritta1 reports that a
particular person is a drunkard or this or that, whatever truth there
may be in the report should be admitted. The person concerned
should acknowledge that he does take a stealthy drink at night, and
occasionally indulges in sensuous pleasures. If we admit our faults
and know that they exist, there is a chance of our correcting
ourselves.We must tell the people that we have certain faults in us, and
would gradually overcome them. Escaping from a situation can never
be part of our code of behaviour. That is not the way a satyagrahi can
follow his duty. If our faith is complete, there is no reason to despair.
Now you may ask what you should do about a livelihood while
you are staying in the villages. Appa had asked the same question.
You should do manual work. You can sweep the approaches to the
village or do some other things, and maintain yourself on the few pice
you may earn. If you get foodgrains in lieu of money, you should
manage with that. You may not always get money from the Gandhi
Seva Sangh. What does it matter if your body is ruined? One who has
determination will face any hardships that may come his way and this
will bring him hope out of despair.
The next question is from Achyut Deshpande.
When a small clan in a Princely State claiming the right of conquest or
kinship with the ruler not only opposes the people’s fight for justice but helps the
ruler in crushing such a movement, even violently attacking those who participate in
the movement, the people come to have the same attitude towards it as towards the
ruler. Is this not natural? What can one do to heal the breach thus caused between two
sections of the population? Would it not be practicable for a time to ignore this
problem? Is it wrong to think that the problem would be more easily solved through
being ignored?

I have not been able to understand this question fully. But the
answer to what little I have understood has been furnished in the
discussion we have been having for the past two or three days. This
precisely is the reason why I have suspended the campaign in the
States and why I do not have the courage to start a countrywide

1

Marathi weekly published from Bombay.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

349

movement. Where there is a danger of ill will or violence being
generated it is our duty not to start any agitation. For it will not last. It
will create misunderstandings. People will stray into erroneous paths.
It will not be enough for us ourselves to be non-violent.
Take an example. I stay at Segaon. Suppose there is a snake
there. I will have to remove that snake from there and confine it to a
place where people will not feel endangered by it. Or, suppose there is
an outbreak of the plague somewhere. I go there to help. For myself I
depend on the protection of God. But should I, for that matter, go to
the people without bathing or washing myself? There is the risk of
people catching the contagion. My non-violent duty consists in my
going to others only after washing myself. Then suppose smallpox
breaks out in a village. A few among us do not believe in vaccination
and so do not get themselves vaccinated. Still they want to serve the
people. We are convinced that vaccination has failed. But it would not
be proper to be carriers of the disease among the people whom we
want to serve. Hence our non-violent duty lies in either getting
ourselves vaccinated or quitting the place. The lesser dharma of not
getting ourselves vaccinated disappears in front of this paramount
dharma. I was asked to give my view about the legislation concerning
vaccination in Bombay and Madras. I told Dr. Varki that those who
did not believe in vaccination should either leave the area or get
themselves vaccinated. This is ahimsa. In a way it is easy, in another
way it is not so easy.
Take another example. We have planted a small orchard at
Sabarmati. Monkeys come and pillage it. People feed these monkeys.
So they stay on there. You go to Mathura and Brindaban. There are
so many monkeys around that people cannot live in peace. But in the
adjoining cantonment area there is not a single monkey. It is not
ahimsa dharma thus to feed the monkeys. It is unjust to other people.
The same is true of our campaigns. Not only our opponents, but also
our supporters are full of violence. Other people want to destroy
swaraj altogether. This means that there is no real co-operation from
the people. If we launch a movement for swaraj they want to attack us.
If we insist on continuing satyagraha under such conditions we would
be postponing swaraj. The answer to the question is clear, Our small
groups of five or ten members should give up the idea of satyagraha.
We shall never be destroyed because we are ready to be destroyed. But
their opposition will die out. Those who oppose swaraj want to destroy
the poor. So they lose nothing if we continue our movement in an
350

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

atmosphere of violence, whereas the poor would be completely
ruined. We are prepared to be ruined ourselves but we do not wish the
poor to be ruined.
I am conducting the same experiment in Rajkot. That is why I
say that Rajkot has become my laboratory. I have suspended the
satyagraha there—or rather the civil disobedience. The word
satyagraha is not appropriate here. Today I have suspended civil
disobedience every- where and I am concentrating on constructive
programme, because it does not involve this kind of risk.
Bapu, part of my question still remains unanswered. You have just explained
that today, when there is so much violence in the air, there is a danger of communal
and other disturbances. Those who are in the movement may very well face beatings
and suffer hardships, but those who are not prepared for it should not be made to do
so. Hence civil disobedience should be suspended and we should concentrate on
constructive programme. All this is clear; but even while engaging ourselves in the
constructive programme, it is necessary to increase our strength and teach nonviolence to the people who want to join the movement. Now, suppose we want to
hold a meeting or take out a procession. Now this meeting or procession is harmless,
and there is no question even of violent words. Even then a section of the people
(such as Garasias in Rajkot, some Maharashtrians in Baroda, some Muslims in
Hyderabad) under the impression that we are not loyal to the Government and want to
harm that section loses its temper, abuses us and assaults us. Thus our movement
arouses anger in them and a wall rises between them and the supporters of the
movement. Under such circumstances, because there already is a lot of
misunderstanding, our attempts to arrive at a compromise or establishing closer
contacts with them will be like pouring oil over the flames.
Under these circumstances, am I correct in saying that instead of forming
Hindu-Muslim or Garasia and non-Garasia unity committees, and thus making vain
efforts at unity, it would be better and more practicable for us to keep off the whole
thing ?

Yes, that is correct.
This question has been asked by Moolchand Agarwal. He has
been putting questions to me over a long period of time.
There is no awakening among people on account of child-marriages, funeral
feasts, purdah and untouchability. But some people believe that we must concentrate
only on political work, for social-reform activities serve no purpose. They say that
social reforms will automatically follow once political rights are realized. Will you
kindly explain the place of social reforms in the work of nation-building ?

This is a much-delayed question. It should have been asked in
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

351

1920. In my view there is no special political field which is not related
to social reform. They are both interrelated. If we do not earnestly go
about the work of social reform, no political reforms are possible. I
would, therefore, give the first place to the work of social reform and
only the second place to purely political work, If there is such a thing.
I took help from the sanatanists, whether for Gujarat Vidyapith or for
the khadi work. But when they said that I should abandon my work
for the removal of untouchability I told them that I would rather do
without their help. The Mulji Jetha Market promised Rs. 35,000, but
on some such condition. I told them that they could keep their
money, I would do without it; but as for the removal of
untouchability, I wanted it immediately. Till today I have not received
the Rs. 35,000 from them. But the work for swaraj did not stop. It is
dangerous to allow such things to find a place in our hearts. Let us not
allow even such notions as ‘social’ and ‘political’ any place in our
thinking. Let us not hinder national progress.
It is true some sense of discretion will have to be shown. It
would not be proper to go and resort to satyagraha when someone in
our community calls people for dinner. It is enough if we avoid going
to that feast ourselves. There are so many areas of social-reform
activity that can go on side by side with political work. There too we
shall stick to non-violence. But satyagraha is a mighty weapon. It
cannot be used everywhere. Its use has to be limited.
Now, There is a question from Mahavir Prasad Poddar.
Should a person who has not been able to convince his family or neighbours
about sharing food with the Harijans be a member of the Gandhi Seva Sangh?

So long as he has not set right the behaviour of his family
members towards the Harijans or has not been able to do so he
cannot be a member of Gandhi Seva Sangh. Till such time as he has
not settled the quarrel at home, he should serve from outside. Must he
then go on quarrelling with the members of his family and his wife?
Should he beat his wife and turn her out of the house? Certainly not.
Let him not accept untouchability for himself. He should patiently put
up with the protests of his family. He should win them over through
non-violence. For him, his house itself becomes a laboratory. He
cannot come to Gandhi Seva Sangh till he has won over his wife
through love.
RADJALROSJMA NAKA: Should the path of satyagraha be considered closed to
those who do not honestly believe that only persons with faith in God should join

352

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

satyagraha, or to those who are socialists or atheists ?

I am sorry, but I shall have to say, ‘Yes’. God alone is the
strength for a satyagrahi. He wants to walk on his own legs. He does
not want a stick for support. He does not depend on any strength
from outside. Faith in God is an inner strength. Hence the path of
satyagraha is closed to those who do not accept this. They must take
the path of unarmed protest. They can even be non-co-operators. But
they can never be satyagrahis. Because anyone who does not believe
in God will be defeated in the end. Should I then admit that there can
be no victory through non-violence? On the contrary, I would say that
with non-violence there never can be any defeat. Faith in God is itself
the power behind non-violence. Hence we must put up with it even if
somebody feels hurt. But it should be made absolutely clear that this
path is not meant for the people who do not believe in God. There is
no other way. The socialists who do not understand my point of view
would say that I have worked out a trick for getting rid of them. I
cannot help it. I shall face even that charge. You may say that this will
keep out many gallant co-workers while hypocrites professing faith in
God but without any evidence of it in their practical life will get in.
But I am not talking about hypocrites. I am rather talking of those
people who are ready to sacrifice their all in the name of God.
Instead of asking me such a question you should have asked me
why I had been sleeping for the last twenty years. You should have
asked me why I have taken so long to wake up. I would plead guilty
to such a charge. I would only say that after all I am not a perfect
satyagrahi descended from heaven. I have not come with a readymade technique of satyagraha. Nor have I brought any book from
heaven to which I can refer and tell everything in advance. I am with
you in the midst of society. I place before you any new thing which I
may happen to discover through my experiments with and my
experience of satyagraha.
KRIPALANI: Does this mean that the non-believers like the Jains and Buddhists
cannot join the satyagraha movement?

If there are some Jains or Buddhists who do not believe in the
atman they cannot join satyagraha. But these people do believe in the
atman. And those who believe in the atman believe in God. Their
quarrel is only with a particular idea of God. I do not want any
disputation over it. A certain Jain even asked me at Rajkot. I gave the
same reply. He then remembered that the Jains too believed in Divine
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

353

Power. Anyone who accepts the existence of a Power that helps us in
all situations is not a non-believer. He is a believer in God. What does
it matter if he is a Jain or a Buddhist? But if some Jains and
Buddhists themselves say that they cannot join satyagraha because
they do not believe in God I shall not argue with them. I shall say
that they are right.
KRISHNAN NAIR:

What is the criterion for judging whether a person does or does
not believe in God? If an individual accepts God as a metaphysical probability but
not as a mysterious Power, will he be called an atheist ?

This is a subtle question. It is not even necessary to go so deep
into it. I do not insist that everybody should have the same idea of
God as I have and describe Him in the same vocabulary that I use.
There is no ready-made test to determine whether somebody does or
does not believe in God. Still, it is possible to test it. But this point will
be settled tomorrow,1 since today my time is over.
[From Hindi]
Gandhi Seva Sanghke Panchama Varshik Adhiveshan (Brindaban,Bihar) ka
Vivaran, pp. 50-9

411.

TALK TO RURAL RECONSTRUCTION WORKERS2

May 6, 1939
It is a tragedy that many of you should be coming from cities or
should be accustomed to life in the cities. Not unless you switch your
minds off the cities to the villages can you serve them. You must
realize that it is not cities that make India, but the villages, and that
you cannot reconstruct them unless you revive the village life with its
defunct handicrafts. Industrialization cannot bring life to the
moribund villages. The peasant in his cottage home can be revived
only when he gets back his craft and depends for his necessaries on
the village and not on the cities as he is compelled to do today. If you
do not grasp this basic principle, all the time that you give to rural
reconstruction work will be wasted.3 Build your villages anew. Infuse
new blood in villages which are in the grip of ruin. Save the teeming
1

Vide “Answeres to Questions at Gandhi Seva Sangh”, Meeting, BrindabanIII”, 7-5-1939
2
This is extracted from “Gandhi Seva Sangh–IV”. Mahadev Desai explains
that “the rural reconstruction workers were engaged by the Bihar Government”.
3
The rest of the paragraph is reproduced from Amrita Bazar Patrika.

354

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

millions who need your assis-tance.
There is one thing more that I would ask you to bear in mind.
Whoever wants to qualify himself for the service of the village must go
about with his mind and his eyes pure and must look upon every
woman as his mother or sister.
Harijan , 24-6-1939; also Amrita Bazar Patrika, 8-5-1939

412.

IS NIRA OBJECTIONABLE ?

Among the fourteen points that Parsi friends have raised against
the prohibition campaign, there occurs this strange passage :
Mahatamaji persuades the Parsis to drink nira. (sweet, unfermented
toddy), but the Parsis very well know the properties of nira. Moreover the
British Government had already tried this nira- drinking experiment free of
tree-tax, but it failed because nira produces cold, flatulence, diarrhoea, etc. The
experiment was already tried in Mahatmaji’s Ashram at Segaon and there fatal
results were pronounced.

I do not know what the Bombay Government tried. But I do
know what nira is doing and has done to those who are trying it. It is
wholly wrong to say that the experiment at Segaon Ashram failed and
that it produced fatal results. It has never been known to have
produced any of the bad results ascribed to it by the writer. On the
contrary nira is still being freely drunk by many in Segaon and that
with profit to their health. Moreover it is turned into syrup or gur, and
in that condition I and many others use it almost daily. As gur it is
sold in large quantities. It is better relished than sugar-cane gur
because of its being less sweet. As to the deaths that occurred in
Wardha, not in Segaon, the investigations have clearly showed that the
deaths were due not to nira-drinking but to cholera. Nothing has been
shown to establish any connection between the deaths and nira.
Supposing the patients had developed cholera without drinking nira,
would it have been right to say that cholera was induced by the
ordinary food that they had eaten? I may mention that several people
had taken in Segaon with impunity the same nira that had been taken
in Wardha.
If the thirteen other points are based on as weak a foundation as
this (No. 13) is, surely there is no case against prohibition. And I
make bold to say that the rest are no stronger. I have picked out the
thirteenth in the hope that my personal testimony may put the
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

355

opponents on their guard againt making statements they cannot
substantiate. Opposition based on reason must always command
respect. This one seems to me to lack that essential quality.
BRINDABAN, May 7, 1939
Harijan, 13-5-1939

413.

LETTER TO VALJI G. DESAI
May 7, 1939

CHI. VALJI,

If Chitre spins yarn worth Rs. 10, he will certainly get that
much. If he engrosses himself in the work, his problems will be
solved. The Wardha rates are the highest. I am ready to assess the
value of his yarn at those rates.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI VALJI GOVINDJI DESAI
GONDAL
KATHIAWAR
From Gujarati: C.W. 7484. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

414.

LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
May 7, 1939

DEAR DAUGHTER,

1

I received your letters. I also answered them. What can I do if
my letters do not reach you? Today I am sending you a telegram 2 as
well. I pass through Ahmedabad on the 12th on way to Rajkot.
Sushilabehn is of course with me and Mahadevbhai also will be there .
You are keeping well, I hope. I also had talks with Mridulabehn
about you.
I hope something has been settled about Qureshi.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 418
1
2

356

The superscription is in Urdu.
This was sent on May 8; vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 8-5--1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

415. LETTER TO LAKSHMI NARAYAN GADODIA
May 7, 1939
BHAI LAKSHMI NARAYANJI,

Balvantsinhaji is a member of the Segaon Ashram. He is devoted
to the cow. He has served the cow since his childhood. Please depute
someone to guide him to the dairy and also arrange for him to visit
the Government farm.
Has the dispute regarding the mosque been settled?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 2627

416. ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS AT GANDHI SEVA SANGH
MEETING, BRINDABAN–III
May 7, 1939
Let me begin with Radhakrishna’s question which I took up
yesterday1 but could not finish. The question about God had been
more or less dealt with. A discussion on it was going on. Shri
Krishnan Nair had raised a subtle point. But it does not allow much
scope for discussion. I am indifferent about the names or attributes
which a man may apply to God. I had made a general statement that
any man who had no faith in God could not stay a satyagrahi to the
end. What I had meant was that so long as the satyagrahi is not
convinced that there is some great subtle Power that would give him
strength in all situations, he cannot face tyranny, strife and
humiliations and sustain his non-violence. These days we do not
suffer anything which may be described as torture. Nobody places us
on burning coals or pierces us with needles. This would be the
extreme form of cruelty. But in the face of even such torture not to
have any malice against the torturer is non-violence. Man cannot show
such supreme non-violence in the face of such suffering relying on
his own efforts. So long as he does not have faith in some Power
and feel the presence of that Power behind him he will not have the
strength calmly to put up with such tyranny. This Power that thus
sustains is God. Not to bear any malice towards the tyrant even on
such occasions is another name of faith in God.
1

Vide “Answeres to

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

357

QUESTION: Can those persons who habitually wear khadi but do not spin nor
feel inclined to spin join the satyagraha movement ?
ANSWEER : No. Those people cannot be chosen for civil
disobedience. Listen carefully. I am talking about civil disobedience,
not satyagraha. Satyagraha is a universal term. Civil disobedience
requires special preparation. Satyagraha includes even constructive
programme. Those who do not spin can be satyagrahis, but they
cannot take part in civil disobedience.

What should we tell those who do not wear khadi but who feel for the
country—lawyers who are prepared to abandon their practice, men and women who
want to come forward selflessly to put up with hardships?

Millions of people cannot join civil disobedience. Civil disobedience is meant for those who have purified themselves and who have
learnt to obey laws in humility. Only they can determine which law
should be disobeyed and how and when. They willingly obey not
only the laws of the State but of all other organizations. They do so
not out of fear of punishment but deliberately out of a sense of duty.
That alone gives them the right to break laws. It is like taking a dose
of poison. If a man takes a dose of poison without proper knowledge
about it , he dies. The more I think the more I realize that civil
disobedience is no ordinary weapon. Everyone cannot use it.
Everyone can certainly insist on truth. All those who have joined civil
disobedience today are not people of this kind. Except those who are
qualified for civil disobedience other people do not offer real civil
disobedience. They indulge in angry, violent disobedience. Quite
likely they are all good men. Maybe they are better than we are. But
they do not fit into our pattern. Hence they should keep away.
What should be the criterion of complete faith in truth and non-violence? He
who has faith in truth and non-violence should wholly keep away from violence and
falsehood in his daily life. Under these circumstances, can someone in whose house
there is a business of foreign cloth or mill-cloth or who, in some way or the other,
helps in diverting Indian money out of the country, or who is harming the interests of
the country by some other act, be a satyagrahi? Should his professed faith in truth and
non-violence be accepted or should further investigation be made ?

In my view no person indulging in such practices can join civil
disobedience. Should he be kept out of civil disobedience or should
he be allowed to join? I have myself been rather weak on this point. I
have not exercised as much firmness as was necessary. I am facing the
consequences and the country is paying for it. Such a person cannot
358

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

join civil disobedience. He can be of help in other ways. What is the
point in investigating in the case of a person whose actions speak for
themselves ?
How should the character of a person be investigated?

This question has already been answered in the above
discussion.
What should be considered the limit of non-addiction? Should bidi, pan and tea
be regarded as addictions ?

It is a difficult question. I have drawn the line at taking of
intoxicants. He who takes intoxicating things suffers from intellectual
degeneration. How can he insist on truth? So in this matter the limit is
quite clear. But I have not the heart to get rid of a man who, though
he smokes, is a great devotee of God. I can take a bold stand in the
matter of prohibiting the use of opium, ganja, bhang, alcohol, etc. So
I have drawn the line at these things. I am a staunch enemy of tobacco
also. I do not like even tea. I feel disturbed when I see people chewing
pan the whole day. But this is my personal view.
Should one resort to fast and similar methods in jail in the face of inhuman
conduct—not necessarily humiliating—such as bad food and harassment?

In this matter it is difficult to lay down any rigid rule. A
satyagrahi is born to face all kinds of difficulties. He should not every
time be thinking of honour and humiliation. He who is over-sensitive
or is too delicate of body should not go to jail. As a rule, any person
who joins civil disobedience should be prepared to face all kinds of
difficulties in jail. He should not agree to anything which is opposed
to his self-respect and integrity. Those who have delicate hearts should
remain outside. Fasting normally should not be resorted to.
Once the satyagraha is launched, newspapers are stopped. Bulletins are
stopped. People joining prabhat pheris are liable to be arrested. Under these
conditions do you not think that propaganda would cease if no persons except those
who are permitted to be satyagrahis are allowed to join the prabhat pheris, distribute
bulletins or join any other activity which may be liable to lead to the arrest of these
persons?

I do not think the adoption of such a policy would lead to the
stoppage of all propaganda. So long as a few individuals go to jail,
their incarceration itself would mean a lot of publicity. I believe that
this is the true propaganda for civil disobedience. It does not matter
much if newspapers, bulletins and prabhat pheris are stopped. I have
seen that an attempt to continue these things anyhow involves the
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

359

danger of all types of persons being drawn into civil disobedience.
The Yeravda Prison became filled with people during the satyagraha
of 1931. I was able to meet a few of the detenus and freely talk to
them. They told me that good people had come in the beginning. But
those who came later looked like goondas. They broke jail rules, used
abusive language and indulged in physical fights. The question was
not what they did. The question was what they did not do. A boy may
get up, distribute a bulletin and go to jail. What purpose would be
served by carrying on the satyagraha with the help of such people? I
find lack of faith, lack of courage behind such questions. What have
we got to do with crowds of people? It is our belief that even if there
is one true satyagrahi, swaraj is bound to come. Why should we be so
impatient? Swaraj may come now or later.
Given the above conditions only very few people would be qualified to go to
jail. But what about those people who cannot fulfil those conditions and yet are
desirous of serving the country? What should they do?

This question has been already answered.
What should we do when people go to prabhat pheris without informing us or
do other propaganda work and get arrested?

We must keep on telling these people that they are harming the
cause of satyagraha by their actions. What can we do if they do not
heed us? Let us leave them to their fate. Some of them will go to jail.
Of those some will tender apologies and come out. Others would do
their terms of imprisonment. What can we do about them?
Propaganda is a means of public awakening. How will this be possible in the
absence of propaganda and demonstrations ?

If we are true and honest, true propaganda would go on even
when we have gone to jail. Let us not worry about the propaganda that
would be stopped. Propaganda is of two kinds: violent and nonviolent. There is no harm if the propaganda which consists in bitter
things being written and abuses being hurled against the adversary is
stopped. There is no need to do any propaganda from our side in the
face of violent propa-ganda against us. I am told that the newspapers
are showering abuses on me and the Sardar. They abuse others as
well. Should we bring out papers in order to retaliate and waste our
money, effort and time in it? Should we set up an organization to
explain our stand? How long can we go on answering every single
thing that may be said against us? A satyagrahi cannot do such a
thing. Such criticism is like a storm. Storms come and also
360

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

earthquakes. Let them come. They will go as they come. That storm is
worse then a natural storm. But why should we fight against it? It has
got to be faced. At the most, we may die trying to put up with it. We
shall continue our work with this resolve.
Following the Gandhi-Irwin Pact, people were permitted to collect salt for a
year. The Government has recently promulgated an order that it will be possible to
collect salt only within the limit of time it may fix from year to year. Till now people
could carry salt on their heads anywhere they chose. Now this facility has been
limited to the villages near the sea-shore, with the result that people are not in a
position to benefit from this facility. What should we do under these circumstances?1

In this matter I should frankly tell you that our own people are
responsible for this order. We have not abided by the restrictions laid
down under the Gandhi-Irwin Pact. Hence these excesses. They reap
what they sow. There are no such obstruction where people observe
certain conditions. Such things are happening because people have
started trading in salt.
Do you believe that the philosophy of the Aryasamaj encourages violence?2

I have never said that. What I say is that they consider the use of
both violence and non-violence legitimate even as an ordinary
sanatani Hindu does. According to them, it is wrong to remain nonviolent when it becomes one’s duty to resort to violence. We, on the
other hand, believe in only non-violent resistance. This is the
distinction between us.
But even you considered it a duty to have calves and dogs killed?3

Then you should say it does not lie in my mouth to talk of nonviolence. I would accept it. I shall agree. I am willing to pull my ears
for it. You are familiar with the cases of the calf and the dogs
incident. I have already said what I had to say in the matter.
A resolution about the Aryasamaj satyagraha in Hyderabad too
was shown to me. I had given my frank opinion in the matter. I had
made it clear that whatever I had said was not meant for the Press. In
my view, that satyagraha is not in keeping with dharma, nor is it
conducted in the spirit of dharma. Those who do not regard nonviolence as the supreme dharma can go only so far with non-violence.
Those who do not possess a non-violent outlook cannot offer non1

This was asked by A. Vedaratnam.
This was asked by Moolchand Agrawal.
3
Vide “The Fiery Ordeal”
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

361

violent satyagraha. I am conscious of the limitations of civil
disobedience. But it would not be right for me to issue any such
statements in the newspapers that may bring harm to somebody. I am
a worshipper of satyagraha. Why should I unnecessarily express my
views about something with which I am not concerned? Why should I
criticize everything that may be happening anywhere? This is not the
way of non-violence. I do not wish to indulge in such irrelevant
action. Of course, I do try to persuade my co-workers to give it up.
What is going on today does not add to the prestige of the Aryasamaj
or religion. I would appeal even to Sir Akbar Hydari that he should
change his attitude. I am doing everything that the duty of a friend
may demand. I am doing nothing more. The day I feel it is my duty
to make a public statement, I shall do so. But the members of the
Gandhi Seva Sangh should not go beyond the limits I have set.
Then there is one last point. Prajapati Babu has done much work
for this covention. But there has been much unnecessary expenditure
too. This is a blot on our work. There is gas-lighting here, even
electric lighting. At this rate there will be no limit left. We must fix
certain limits. On the other side arrangements about lavatories etc., are
not of the best. According to my conception of the Gandhi Seva
Sangh, this is not an annual celebration. This is an educational
institution for us. We should never forget that we have to proceed
every day in the direction of simplicity, a rural outlook, of sanitation
and cleanliness. We do not come here for having a celebration or an
excursion. This convention is a training camp for us. It provides us a
wonderful opportunity for introspection, for exchanging notes about
one another’s experiences and having training in restraint and
discipline. The accommodation and sanitation here should be so
perfect that even if we have to stay here for seven months instead of
seven days, we should not feel like going back. But after only six days
here I feel impatient to get away. Why should this be so? I have a fear
that if I do not run away from here soon the place will become more
unclean. Thus we have to work very hard, for we are still far away
from the ideal I have set.
The fact that people have turned up here in such large numbers
is an indication of their love. Expression of love is good up to a point.
But even in this there should be some restraint which is not to be
found here. This too is a matter of practice
I do not mean to say that nothing here is deserving of praise. I
appreciate good things. You have done much work, gone to much
362

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

trouble. But I do not have to praise, you for it. You have not done
these things in the expectation of praise have you? If you have done
these things for praise, my praise by itself would be the fruit of your
work. My job is to criticize. I cannot say how these shortcomings can
be overcome. I can only criticize. Sanitary conditions in our
conventions should be perfect. Arrangements about meals, etc., should
be clean and hygienic. Please take my comments in the right spirit.
Try to see that wherever this convention meets next year, these
shortcomings will not be there.
[From Hindi]
Gandhi Seva Sanghke Panchama Varshik Adhiveshan (Brindaban, Bihar) ka
Vivaran, pp. 63-9

417. SPEECH AT ALL-INDIA VILLAGE INDUSTRIES BOARD
MEETING, BRINDABAN
May 7, 1939
If, judging from the small attendance here, you and others
thought that the Village Industries Board was a failure it would not be
surprising. For the annual meeting of any organization, an attendance
of eighteen would be considered small. But I would not be surprised
or pained even if we had to manage with less, even fewer than
eighteen, or do wholly without them. This is what I feel about this
Board. We must keep its constitution and organization a little strict.
Too many people cannot be fitted into it. Many names were therefore
omitted because the rules were not being observed. Such an
organization as the Village Industries Board should be judged not by
its numerical strength but by the work it does. Of course it has not
done much work so far. But whatever little work has been done is
done thoroughly and after a few years you will see the deep effect of
that work. The office-bearers are sincere workers. I can assert that
they devote their entire energy to the work.
These days people’s eyes are fixed on the towns. So there is a
slackness in the work of the Village Industries Board. It is also
difficult in the present circumstances. Millions of the poor cannot
subsist on the little money they can get. We want to give them,
through village industries, sufficient for their maintenance. We have
taken up this activity with that aim.
The office-bearers of the Village Industries Board have faith
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

363

that the salvation of India lies in the salvation of the villages which in
turn depends on the revival of village industries and not on big
machinery. By effecting improvement in the old village industries we
can provide crores of rupees to the hovels of the poor.
You will find the Village Industries Board a very small organization compared to the Charkha Sangh1 . And compared to the latter the
work done by it is also very little. There is a reason for that. The
Charkha Sangh is many years old now. The method of its working is
now well established. Besides this, another reason for the successful
working of the Charkha Sangh is that they are concerned with only
one industry. But there are so many industries in villages. So the
Village Industries Board has to be concerned with many industries. It
is easier to become an expert in the work of the Charkha Sangh. In
the Village Industries Board we shall require many experts. Our
universities should produce experts who can scientifically bring about
improvements in the village industries. Today we do not get such
experts and therefore it is difficult to increase our activities. We have
to find our experts among the oil-men, carpenters, etc., in the villages.
They do not come from high schools and colleges. It is difficult to
achieve success on a large scale as long as we do not get men entirely
devoted to village industries who are at the same time intelligent
ghani 2 experts and paper-making experts. Now I would like to
associate these activities with ahimsa. This activity appears to be very
uninteresting. But the result is interesting if we have patience. I will be
happy if those who are members of the Gandhi Seva Sangh dissociate
themselves from politics and concentrate on the activities of the
Village Industries Board. You seem to be happy that the Working
Committee is full of Gandhians. But I am not happy about it. That has
increased our responsibility. We have become overburdened. What is
there in it to be happy about? Yesterday Rajendra Babu was telling me
that they were facing more difficulties and putting up with more
trouble because of our men, that Gandhians quarrelled among
themselves, contested elections against one another. This is hypocrisy.
This is madness.
The question before us is how we can save ourselves from this
kind of thing. My answer is that there is work to do in the Charkha
Sangh, in the Village Industries Board and in the Talimi Sangh.
1
2

364

All-India Spinners’ Association.
Oil mill.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Engage yourselves whole-heartedly in that work and hypocrisy will
disappear. Swaraj will come quicker through that work than through
elections. We cannot win swaraj through today’s politics. We have a
mountain of himsa before us. Many people today are quarrelling in
the name of Gandhi. One man says ‘I want to go;’ and another man
says ‘I want to go’. Such people make a laughing-stock of Gandhism.
If you wish to save yourselves from such things, you should withdraw
from politics. There are so many activities for you. If you engage
yourselves in these activities, the progress of both will be quicker.
In my opinion the Hindu-Muslim tension can also be removed
by these activities. If village industries are revived, millions of villagers
will get full wages. Here the interests of Hindus and Muslims do not
clash and both the communities will be saved from conflicts that
characterize politics. If the activities of the Village Industries Board
are carried on in such faith, we can never give them up. We will go on
working for all the twenty-four hours. That is why I told you in the
beginning that though this thing appears so small and unrewarding I
see nothing wrong in that. I only see good coming of it.
[From Hindi]
Harijan Sevak, 8-7-1939.

418.

SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, BRINDABAN1

May 7, 1939
Just a few decades ago, I never knew what Hindustan was nor did
Hindustan know what I was. I came to Champaran in 1917 with a view
to redressing the grievances of the peasantry who were mere toys in
the hands of the planters. I came here with my heart open and had no
other instrument for the fight except the armament of truth and nonviolence. Today you love me and adore me. I accept your loyalty with
gratitude. But there was nothing extraordinary in me. There was
sincerity and devotion in me to lift you up from the economic, social
and political morass. I only wish that you could also follow the
principles I follow. What I said to you in 1917 still holds good. The
indigo curse was removed because you were non-violent. You have
1

Amrita Bazar Patrika reported that the meeting, held in the afternoon, was
attended by about 50,000 people, and “a purse of Rs. 20,000 was presented to
Gandhiji on behalf of Champaran as a mark of its respect and loyalty to him”. A
short summary of the speech was reported by Mahadev Desai in Harijan, 20-5-1939.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

365

the same weapon at your disposal. The need for it greater today than
in 1917.
Do not idle away your time and do not waste the national wealth
through foreign purchases. Try to increase the national wealth
through the introduction of spinning-wheel which is the panacea for
all ills.
Have faith in yourselves. Approach the Congress Government
for what you want. Strive hard. Speak nothing but the truth. Always
be non-violent. Be ready for service and sacrifices. March ahead with
the mantra of ahimsa.
I am but a representative of the Daridranarayana. India is the
poor and humble abode of millions, famished, hungry and illiterate.
We have taken the vow to lift them up and give them food and
education and bring them happy and prosperous days. Do not neglect
the masses who are so many Daridranarayanas. Be ready to face
privations and destitution to serve them.
The money will be utilized for giving bread to the hungry and
clothes to the naked. The money will be spent for Champaran and its
neighbours. It is for the service of the Daridranarayana that the
money will be spent.
It pains me to hear the kisans resorting to violence. They fight
with zamindars. If you want to abolish zamindari, it is well and good.
Do so through non-violence. Why do you terrorize zamindars? Cooperate with zamindars and tell them that they were to serve the
tenantry. There should be no abuse, no filth, no violence, no beating
of amlas by kisans. you must learn to love one another. The
protection of ahimsa and its use will give you back what you have lost.
Muslims and Hindus should live in amity. They must live as brothers.
They must spin. They should cultivate tolerance and devotion for
service and sacrifice. If this is done, independent India is not a distant
possibility.1
I think it is obvious enough that Hindu-Muslim unity,
prohibition and abolition of untouchability are impossible without
non-violence. There remains only the spinning-wheel. How does it
become the symbol of non-violence? As I have already explained, the
essential thing is the spirit in which you regard it, the attributes you
1
What follows is reproduced from Gram Udyog Patrika, which reports that
Gandhiji then answered a question: “What is the relation between constructive work
and ahimsa?”

366

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

invest it with. It is not a quinine pill, which has certain inherent
properties in it apart from what you think about it. The spinningwheel has no such inherent property. Take the Gayatri Mantra. It
cannot have the same effect on non-Hindus as it has on me, nor can
the kalma have the same reaction on me as it has on the Muslims.
Even so the spinning-wheel in itself has nothing which can teach
ahimsa or bring swaraj. But you have to think it with those attributes
and it is transformed. Its obvious value is the service of the poor, but
that does not necessarily mean that it should be a symbol of nonviolence or an indispensable condition for swaraj. But we, since 1920,
connected the wheel with swaraj and non-violence.
Then there is the programme of self-purification with which the
spinning-wheel is again intimately connected. Coarse homespun
signifies simplicity of life and therefore purity.
Without the spinning-wheel, without Hindu-Muslim unity and
without the abolition of untouchability there can be no civil
disobedience. Civil disobedience presupposes willing obedience of
our self-imposed rules, and without it civil disobedience would be a
cruel joke. This is what came to me with redoubled conviction in the
laboratory at Rajkot. If even one man fulfils all the conditions, he is
capable of winning swaraj. I am still far from being that ideal
satyagrahi. I said the same thing at the time we met to organize a
satyagraha campaign against the Rowlatt Act. When it was started we
had only a handful of men, but we built up a considerable
organization out of that handful. As I am an imperfect satyagrahi I
want your co-operation. In the process of organizing and seeking
your co-operation. I myself grow, for my introspection never ceases.
Even the time I am now giving you is as much in my own interest as
in yours, or at least in my own interest, if not in yours. For as I
examine myself I am growing and evolving. No one is too old to
grow, certainly not I. In the Transvaal, satyagraha was born; but a few
thousands wielded it there. Millions have wielded it here. Who knew
that on the 6th of April 1919 millions would rise up like one man in
response to the call I had made from Madras? But the constructive
programme is essential for the ultimate success. Indeed today I think
we should be untrue to the nation if we did not fulfil the programme
of the spinning-wheel as a symbol of non-violence, no matter how
long it takes.
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 9-5-1939; aslo Gram Udyog Patrika, June 1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

367

419. DISCUSSION WITH RAJENDRA PRASAD AND OTHERS1
BRINDABAN,

[On or before May 8, 1939]2
You won’t count nearness to Patna an advantage. We
want to go to the village. Is Bihar going to drag us back?
GANDHIJI :

RAJENDRA PRASAD: Time is very short, the city affords various conveniences,
there would be less expenditure.

But that means that we change the policy we have been carrying
out for the last three years? Why not Brindaban itself?
Sonepur was discussed but it is a glorified village.

I want you in the heart of a village. Don’t emulate Haripura and
Faizpur. You should excel both in simplicity and in freedom from
splendour.
Visitors are a problem, especially in Bihar where we would have lakhs of
them.

You should make arrangements for them as the Aryasamajists
do. They ask everyone to come with their provisions, lanterns and so
on. They only provide them accommodation (under the trees) and
water. For this last no water-works are necessary. Whatever you do, do
not accept defeat and run to Patna. No need for electricity at all, and
as we meet in winter no fans would be needed. Start work from 8 to
11, and then from 2 or 3 to 7. A little winter’s sun would be more
agreeable than otherwise. No, you must try your best to change your
decision for Phulwari. Everyone must be asked to bring his or her
own lantern. You can say beforehand you can give so much and no
more.
Even so we should have to spend a lot on construction. We must afford protection against cold?

Why not use your grass for warmth both above and below?
There should be no need for cots excepting for the ill and the infirm.
1

This is extracted from “Gandhi Seva Sangh-IV” by Mahadev Desai, who
explains: “Rajendra Babu and other Bihar workers had discussion with Gandhiji on
the venue of the next Congress which is to be in Bihar. Phulwari Shareef, which is
only four miles from Patna and is said to have various other advantages, had
proposed.”
2
Gandhiji left Brindaban on May 8, 1939.

368

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

And we won’t get money. Both zamindars and kisans are against us. Gatemoney will be much less.

I do not agree. Have it somewhere but not near a city. And you
have had tube-wells here very cheaply.
We will have tube-wells, but we have to cope with the need of nearly 60,000
gallons per hour. But electric light may be dispensed with.

I hate it. We must not think in terms of illumination. Make the
place attractive in other ways during the day. Don’t copy what is bad.
No one will blame you if you have no fireworks and no illuminations.
You want cleanliness and simple wants satisfied. Give the simplest
food. But I agree that you must spend on water. Collect one pice per
head from each of the 70,000 villages and satisfy your needs. Then it
will be a Congress worth going to or seeing. Decide on the principle
of a village. I don’t mind where it may be, and you will gain strength
by getting every village to contribute its mite. Volunteer corps must
be enough and efficient. They must be experts in sanitation. No smell
and no dirt must be allowed. Organization of this must begin early.
The volunteer corps will cost us a good deal—probably Rs. 50,000.

I don’t mind it, but the ultimate benefit accruing will be great.
There should be no wastage in training. We may forget uniforms, etc.,
which go to waste, but the body of youth for our service is for all time
an asset of no mean value. Therefore don’t stint in water and
volunteers.
Even the simple huts put up here have cost a lot.

I hear so. But there must have been some mismanagement
somewhere if it has become so expensive.
Our problem is of rain which generally comes then. Patna would have been
convenient from that point of view. We could shift into pukka buildings in case of
need.

There is no escape from it now. Manage somehow. Don’t give
hot water, don’t give fruit, don’t give any delicacies. Give me the
contract for fruit. If anyone comes to me for it, I shall ask him to
return to Bombay.
Harijan, 24-6-1939.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

369

420.TELEGRAM TO VIRAWALA
[May 8, 1939] 1
WIRE2 .

YOUR

HAVE

STATEMENTS

ABOUT

A

MATTER.

MINOR

THAT

YOU

PRESSING

EXPECT

ME

BENEFIT

OF

RAJKOT

ON
IS

TURN
THAT

DESERT
TO

TWELFTH
FOR

BY

NEW
I

THE

NOT
HIS

COMRADES.

INSTANT.

PROPAGANDA.

INTO

A
TO

HIGHNESS.
MAY

FOR

THEREFORE
PRAY

IT

IS

IS
FACT

COME
YOU

LIGHT

MUST

YOUR

THAT

IS

ASPIRATION

INVITED
MY

ON

BUT

ME

SHOULD

MY

CONCERNED.

THE
NOT

PEOPLE

MY
I

USE

ALL

REMARK

WORRIES

BEING

NOT

MY

PARISHAD

WHAT

SHOULD

WITHOUT

MAY

WIRE

THE

REQUEST

RAJKOT
I

BASED

EXCUSE.
A

THE
REACH
THIS

FRIENDLY

APPROACH.

The Hindu, 10-5-1939 .

421.

TELEGRAM TO AMTUSSALAAM
BRINDABAN, C HAMPARAN,

May 8, 1939
AMTUL S ALAAM
HARIJAN ASHRAM, S ABARMATI
AHMEDABAD
WROTE

SEVERAL

AHMEDABAD

TWELFTH

LETTERS. 3
MORNING.

WELL.

PASSING

THROUGH

LOVE.

BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 419

1

From the Indian Annual Register, 1939
Dated May 5, 1939, which read: “Your wire of third. I wonder what led you to
suggest that I did not give proper treatment to Parishad people. All my sincere and
bona-fide efforts to get their co-operation have failed as Dhebar differed from all who
met on fourth . . . My personal view and appeal to you . . . is that . . . you should
come to Rajkot only when invited by His Highness and not before. Your coming now
will prejudice direct settlement. Let Sir Maurice Gwyer’s Award have its natural course
without any outside interference including yours if settlement fails.”
3
Vide “Letter to Amtussalaam”, 7-5-1939
2

370

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

422. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 8, 1939
CHI. MIRA,

I have both your long letters. Both are important.
I had a long chat with Khan Saheb. He has doubts about
Kishanchand’s scheme. He said he won’t be happy about anything till
I was in the Frontier Province. You will therefore go slow. If
Kishanchand can secure Khan Saheb’s approval and goodwill without
using my name, by all means go on with your or his project. Let there
be the clearest possible understanding. We may not rush things.
We go today to Benares to see Malaviyaji, we leave on 10th for
Bombay, leave Bombay on 11th for Rajkot, go to Ahmedabad on 3rd
June for Working Committee; leave Ahmedabad on 7th for Rajkot or
Frontier.
I am well and have stood the strain well. I expect Sushila has
been giving you details about my health.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6439. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G. N. 10034

423.

LETTER TO MIRZA ISMAIL1
AS AT R AJKOT,

May 8, 1939
DEAR FRIEND,

How I wish I could accept your very kind invitation. But Rajkot
still holds me. And as soon as I finish Rajkot, I am bound to go to the
Frontier Province. You will therefore please excuse me and plead for
me before His Highness too.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G. N. 2181

1

Dewan of Mysore State.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

371

424.

LETTER TO RAVINDRA R. PATEL
BRINDABAN,

May 8, 1939
CHI. RAVINDRA,

I got your letter. Personally I like your decision to settle there.
If you take proper interest in the work you will learn much there.
You should know that there is no shame at all in earning money by
honest means.
I hope you are leading a studious life. Don’t let a single
moment be wasted.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 7456

425.

A LETTER

[May 8, 1939] 1
I am merely going on a pilgrimage. If his2 health is all right, I
will talk a little about Hindi. The rest you will have to attend to. If you
think it necessary to send any wires, you may do so.
It will all depend on how I fare in Kashi.
I shall be reaching there tomorrow at 1 p.m. and will spend the
night there.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 7972

426.

LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
May 8, 1939

CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

You will have got my letters. I had sent a letter3 for Mother too.
Do help Lilavati to the extent you can but do not reduce the
time devoted to carding.4
Why not get Hari’s wife treated at the leprosy hospital there?
1
2
3
4

372

From the reference to “Kashi”, where Gandhiji arrived on May 9.
Madan Mohan Malaviya’s; vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 4-5-1939
Vide “A Letter”, 29-4-1939
Vide “Letter to Lilavati Asar”, 11-5-1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I have written1 about Mathew. It was by mistake that Mahadev
directed that no post should be sent there. Now a telegram has been
sent. The newspapers should come to you, so also the mail and you
can then forward the things you think worth forwarding. Social
activity is as necessary as individual activity. Each one of us is unique
as an individual but we are also social beings. If there is no society we
too are nothing. That is why it is our dharma to take part in
community prayers and community yajnas.
Today we leave for Kashi, then on to Bombay and from there to
Rajkot. Jayabehn will go straight on to Wardha with someone.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 4317. Also S. G. 77

427.

LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
May 8, 1939

DEAR DAUGHTER RAIHANA,

I got your sweet letter. Even my defeat is my victory, is it not? I
lost to Virawala but I am now trying to win him over. Yes, I must say
that in all my life I had never experienced such despair. But has not
Manilal Nabhubhai said that “Among lacs of disappointments there is
eternal hope hidden”? So there is no reason for you to feel
disheartened. My faith in God will ever be with me.
You and Saroj are a unique pair ! Saroj is at one place and you
at another. Yet you can write on behalf of both !
Yes, you have the privilege to fully open your heart to me. It is
even your duty. Many salutations from me to Mother. We leave for
Rajkot today.
Love and blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: S. N. 9673

1

Vide “Letter to Munnalal G. Shah”, 4-5-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

373

428.

LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
ON THE WAY TO BENARES,

May 9, 1939
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,

I purposely restrained myself from troubling you whilst you
were touring and taking part-holiday.
Many thanks for your prompt reply1 about Talcher. The
condition there defies analysis. One day hope rises high and then it is
dashed to pieces. It is not now the Raja’s plighted word, it is that of
the represe-ntative of the Paramount Power that is being weighed. The
people won’t understand the fine distinctions as to when an official
speaks with authority and when he speaks without. I know you are
watching and feel confident that you will see that the people of
Talcher are freed from harassment well before the rains begin.
The very simple affair of Jaipur still hangs fire. I just understand
that some prisoners have been discharged. Civil disobedience having
been discontinued there seems to be no cause for keeping any
prisoners and that too in a snake-infested old fort. Nor is there any
meaning in keeping Sheth Jamnalalji practically in solitary
confinement, the cause for his detention having disappeared. The
authorities were afraid that he was entering Jaipur State to promote
civil disobedience. And the demand of the people is less than
elementary. They would be satisfied if they have the guarantee of civil
liberty. I should have thought that Jaipur would present no difficulty.2
Lastly, Rajkot. The Award has been a halter round my neck.
This situation has taxed and is still taxing all my resources. I am
applying what appears to me to be a new and difficult technique.
Though I am not giving up the support of the Paramount Power, I am
keeping it as much as I am able in the background and am trying to
woo Durbar Shri Virawala. On going back to Rajkot from Delhi I saw
that I had a mountain of difficulties to face owing to the Award itself.
They are all still there. And they are piling up. But I see that even for
decency’s sake I must not run to you or your representative on every
pretext. I shall come when I must. Meanwhile, I shall try to woo
Durbar Shri Virawala and see if I can get anything approaching the
1
2

374

Vide footnote 1, “Telegram to Lord Linlithgow”, 18-4-1939
Vide also“Jaipur Prisoners”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Notification of the Thakore Saheb. If you have leisure you will watch
what is happening in Rajkot. I must say that my experiences of the
working of the political department are not happy. I observe that the
Viceroy, no matter how strong he may be, is not powerful enough to
carry out his intentions even as the Congress President is not with his
voluntary departments. You will not mind the comparison. A
knowledge of our little difficulties enables me to send out my
sympathy to you instead of blaming you for what appear to me to be
innumerable pin-pricks.
Having wandered in Calcutta and Brindaban, an out-of-the-way
village in Champaran, I return to Rajkot hoping to reach there on 12th
instant. 1
I am.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm: Lord Linlithgow Papers. Courtesy: National Archives of
India

429.

A MESSAGE
[On or After May 9, 1939]2

I observe that Senapati Bapat is reported to have said that I
approved of his plan of drowning himself because India had not
attained swaraj within the time stipulated or expected by him. When I
saw the report I gave no credence to it. But I am overwhelmed by
correspondents asking me whether I was consenting party and, If I
was, on what grounds. I must say that I have no recollection
whatsoever of having approved of the contemplated step. I do
remember his having discussed the proposal among many other
things. But I cannot conceive of my consenting to anybody drowning
himself for the sake of winning swaraj. If I have any influence over
Senapati Bapat I would urge him not to take the fatal step, assuming
that he is correctly reported. I would urge him and his disciples to live
for swaraj and embrace death when it comes to them naturally and in
due course.
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

For the Viceroy’s reply, vide “Letter from Lord Linlithgow”, 15-5-1939
Gandhiji had scribbled the message on the back of a telegram dated May 9,
1939, which was addressed to him.
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

375

430.

TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
KANTI,

May 10, 1939
R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
C ARE DEPUTY C OMMISSIONER
LUCKNOW
READ.

UNDERSTAND

COUGH

BETTER.

DECISION

WRONG

UNNECESSARY.

HOPE

LOVE.

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3915. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7224

431.

LETTER TO HABIB KESHAVJI
May 10, 1939

BHAI KESHAVJI1 ,

I have preserved your letter of August 13, 1938. I came upon it
while looking through some old letters in the train.
You are right. The problem here is a difficult one. But please
believe me I am the same man that I was there. Even today I would
lay down my life if thereby I could bring about Hindu-Muslim unity.
I did fast once for 21 days. My efforts are continuing.
What shall I write about the conditions there? Since I cannot
guide you brothers [there] from this distance, I merely watch the
developments helplessly.
Do write to me. May God bless you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C. W. 979. Courtesy: Habib Keshavji

1

A South African Indian. He had in his childhood met Gandhiji in South

Africa.

376

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

432.

TELEGRAM TO MIRABEHN
BOMBAY

May 11, 1939
MIRABEHN
C/ O P REMIER
P ESHAWAR
ACT

ACCORDING

GOING

RAJKOT

MY

LETTER 1

POSTED

FROM

BRINDABAN.

TONIGHT.

BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6441. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G. N. 10036

433.

LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
BOMBAY,

May 11, 1939
CHI. LILA,

Your complaint is justified. I have not been able to write to you
as often as I should have done. I shall be more careful henceforth.
Jaya must have reached there safely. Mahadev is accompanying me.
Pay careful attention to your study. In that lies your good. Don’t
mind Mathew having left. Learn what English Krishnachandra can
teach you. 2 Hari’s condition is a pitiable one. Ba will stay here for
four or five days for her treatment and then join me at Rajkot. Keep
on writing to me.
Ask Jaya to give me an account of her experiences.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9377. Also C.W. 6652. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

1
2

Vide “Telegram to Amtussalaam”, 8-5-1939
Vide also “Letter to Krishnachandra”, 8-5-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

377

434.

LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
BOMBAY,

May 11, 1939
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

I have your letter. Yes, it would be good if you could rid
yourself of your fondness for books. You can certainly purchase on
my behalf any religious book you may need, but for the rest you
should seek your brother’s help. What I mean is: have just one book.
Draw all your wisdom from that one book. What better do you need
than the Ramayana, the Gita or Ishopanishad?
Balkrishna’s fever causes concern. Sushila will write about it.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Mahadev will remain with me.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 4314. Also S. G. 76

435.

INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS1
May 11, 1939

To one of the Pressmen who enquired about his health Gandhiji said:

I am so so. I can’t say my cough has left me.
QUESTION:

What is your next step with regard to Rajkot?

GANDHIJI: Naturally

it would be to take up the threads where I left
them and where they are left.
Knowing that the last words of the sentence were significant, one of the
Pressmen repeated: “Where you left them and where they are left?” Gandhiji clarified
the words without delay.

You are all aware that something has happened between the time
I left Rajkot and the present moment.
1
The source says: “Resting on a cot covered with khadi in a spacious room in
Birla House, Mahatma Gandhi received a batch of Pressmen this afternoon, with a
pleasant smile on his face, remarking with a twinkle in his eye: “Here comes the
gang.’ In spite of a strenuous journey last night, Mahatma Gandhi looked
exceedingly fit and cheerful. He was busy reading a bundle of letters as the pressmen
were ushered in. They squatted on the ground close to the cot and started the process of
“pumping’, as Gandhiji referred to the interview.”

378

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

He referred to the discussion of the scheme of reforms between the State
people’s representatives and the Rajkot authorities. He added :

This scheme has not yet been found acceptable to the Praja
Parishad.
It was asked if this scheme of reforms suggested by Durbar Virawala did not
amount to a breach of promise made by the Thakore Saheb in his Notification of
December 26 last, according to which the conferring of the widest powers on the
people had been promised.
Mahatmaji replied in the negative. He said that Durbar Virawala was not
offering anything in terms of the December Notification. It was an independent offer.
There was no question of a breach of promise as it was a scheme under discussion
between the two parties. If the parties concerned accepted it, it would be a mutual
settlement.
Q.

Are the terms of reference suggested by Durbar Virawala in his telegram
to you on the question of representation of Muslims and Bhayats on the Reforms
Committee acceptable to you?
G.

No.

Referring to this query further, he said that the complainants and he would
present their cases to the Chief Justice. Pleadings would contain prayers of parties.
Gandhiji added :

Perhaps they are [seeking] a way to avoid any terms of
reference.1
You have had enough for the day.
The Bombay Chronicle, 12-5-1939.

436.

LETTER TO SHARDABEHN G. CHOKHAWALA
May 12, 1939

CHI. BABUDI,

We arrived in Rajkot today. I got your letter. You shouldn’t
worry. Don’t let yourself rust. Do prepare for the Kovid examination.
Give the help asked of you. Go prepared for lessons every day so that
you can teach well. Procure a book of Hindi grammer. The text to be
taught would be a prescribed one, so you should have no difficulty.
1
Here the source says that as “the Pressmen were just settling down to the
interview in right earnest”, Mahadev Desai reminded them of the strenuous journey
Gandhiji had and he suggested “that it was better the interview was cut short.”

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

379

For the present I shall have to stay in Rajkot. In June I shall have
to go to Bombay for two or three days.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C. W. 10011. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

437.

SPEECH AT PRAJA PARISHAD WORKERS’ MEETING,
RAJKOT1

May 12, 1939
I wonder why my statement of 24th April should have
perturbed some of you. I said nothing new in it. It was a summary of
what I had told3 you in detail just before I left Rajkot.
So far as Vajubhai4 and his colleagues’ statement is concerned,
let me tell you I have rather liked it inasmuch as it has served to bring
out in clear relief the fundamental differences between his group and
me. The Council of Action, it is stated, was constituted by the Parishad
for the specific purpose of conducting the civil disobedience fight.
Now that it has been called off sine die, its function has lapsed. I can
quite understand the objection to negotiating a settlement in its name.
But I am not conducting the negotiations in the Council’s name.
Let me explain my own position in this matter. When the Award
was first announced, under the exultation of the moment I allowed
myself to say that the result of my Rajkot fast had exceeded my
expectations. But I now find that the Chief Justice’s Award has
become a halter round my neck .
I did not come here at your invitation. I came here because
Rajkot is the home of my childhood and because I felt I would be
able to keep its Ruler to his promises. In the various steps which I have
taken since my arrival here, I had been guided solely by my inner
2

1

This is extracted from “New Light” by Pyarelal, who had summarized the
speech “for the sake of brevity”. Pyarelal says: “. . . Gandhiji had learnt that . . .
some Parishad workers . . . felt perturbed at the idea of negotiating a settlement with
Durbar Virawala. . . A few. . . had declared their disbelief in the philosophy of
‘converting your enemy’. Some others were of opinion that . . . the December 26
Notification should be insisted upon. Gandhiji elucidated his own position . . . within
two hours of his arrival in Rajkot . . . ”
2
The source, however, has “23rd”; vide “Statement to the Press”, 24-4-1939
3
Vide “Spech at Praja Parishad Workers Meetng, Rajkot”, 23-4-1939
4
Vajubhai Shukla.

380

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

light and the logic of circumstances. Nobody is under any obligation
to join me in my present experiment. Anybody who feels differently
from me is perfectly free to go his way, and if the people of Rajkot
decide to carry on the fight by following different methods, I would
not mind it. I am humble enough to know that there may be a
different way and a better way than mine of doing a thing. In no case
do I want to see our people turn into cowards.
I welcome too the suggestion about calling the Parishad and
obtaining its mandate with regard to the future lines of action. But I
would like you not to shut your eyes to the realities of the situation. I
am trying the delicate and difficult technique of negotiating a
settlement with Durbar Virawala by appealing to the better self in him,
while at the same time I am pursuing the stages contemplated in the
Award. The Rajkot issue is not so simple or superficial as it might
appear at first sight. Behind it are ranged other and powerful forces.
Eighteen days have elapsed since I discussed1 with you the new
line of approach to the Rajkot question. The passage of time has
confirmed my opinion. I confess I was guilty of impatience when I
wrote to Mr. Gibson2 about the interminable delays and to the
Bhayats 3 about their suggestion to refer to the Chief Justice the
meaning of my assurance to them. Such impatience reflects little
credit on my ahimsa. My legal position was correct. But ahimsa does
not go by legal rights.
I have now realized that I must be content to plod on with
infinite patience. It is no mango trick that can be performed in the
twinkling of an eye. It calls for a more potent force even than civil
disobedience, viz., the application of the active principle that lies at the
core of ahimsa. This is the new light that I sense I have seen. I see it
but dimly. And I am therefore unable to define it.
I should very much like, if I could, altogether to give up the
shelter of the Award before proceeding with the work of appeasing
Durbar shri Virawala. But that requires courage, fearlessness and
ample faith. If I had these, I should not hesitate to plunge into a
blazing fire. But such faith cannot come by mechanical means. One
must wait and pray for it. I had no idea of what jail life was like when
I launched on satyagraha in South Africa. But once inside the prison
1

Vide “Speech at Praja Parishad Workers Meeting, Rajkot”, 23-4-1939
Vide “Letter to E. C. Gibson”, 19-4-1939
3
Vide “Letters to Ranjitsinh”, 17-4-1939
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

381

it become to me like a palace, a sanctuary, a place of pilgrimage,
where I learnt things which probably I would not have outside.
If I had to act only for myself, I would not probably have
hesitated to take the plunge. But as a custodian of the people’s
interests I wonder if I should run any risks. Thus has conscience
turned me into a coward and I am vacillating between doubt and faith.
My ahimsa tells me that I must tear up the Award. But the
reason is not yet fully convinced. ‘What is the meaning of not seeking
aid from the Paramount Power,’ I argue to myself , ‘when you are
trying to secure the co-operation of Durbar Shri Virawala and the
Thakore Saheb? Are they not all parts of one and the same system?’
Thus I am caught in the net of my own reasoning. All this I know is a
sign of lack of faith on my part.
I cannot, while there is this conflict between the head and the
heart within me , offer to take you along with me or be of much use to
you as a ‘guide’. I have no set theory to go by. I have not worked out
the science of satyagraha in its entirety. I am still groping. You can
join me in my quest if it appeals to you and you feel the call.
A representative is bound to consult his principals and take his
instructions from them at every step. But a physician cannot afford to
do so regarding his patients. He must be guided solely by his instinct
and vary his treatment according to his reading of the symptoms as
they might develop from moment to moment. He cannot accept
dictation of the patient. I stand in a dual capacity in relation to you. I
am your spokesman whom you have also accepted as your physician.
You must implicitly follow the treatment laid down by your physician
so long as you have faith in him. If he no longer commands your
confidence, you must appoint in his place another who does.
Only a prospective mother knows what it is to carry, The
onlookers notice her illness and pity her. But she alone knows the
travail. It is I who have conceived satyagraha. Mine alone, therefore,
must be the travail and the suffering. I am not joking. I am in
dreadful earnest. I shall enter the fiery gates and pursue my mission
even if I am the only person left to do so—I am resolved to try and
exhaust every resource of satyagraha to convert Durbar Virawala. If I
succeed, you will all share the fruit. If I fail, the responsibility will be
entirely mine and what I do will in no way affect you.
When I was little child, there used to be two blind master
performers in Rajkot. One of them was musician. When he played on
his instrument, his fingers swept the strings with an unerring instinct
382

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and everybody listened spellbound to his playing. Similarly there are
chords in every human heart. If we only know how to strike the right
chord, we bring out the music.
Durbar Virawala in no exception to the rule.
Have I set Durbar Virawala completely at his ease? Have I
applied truth and ahimsa only in my dealings with him? Have I not
threatened him with the Award?
We want to set up democracy in Rajkot. A born democrat is a
born disciplinarian. Democracy comes naturally to him who is
habituated normally to yield willing obedience to all laws, human or
divine. I claim to be a democrat both by instinct and training. Let
those who are ambitious to serve democracy qualify themselves by
satisfying first this acid test of democracy. Moreover, a democrat must
be utterly selfless. He must think and dream not in terms of self or
party but only of democracy. Only then does he acquire the right of
civil disobedience. I do not want anybody to give up his convictions
or to suppress himself. I do not believe that a healthy and honest
difference of opinion will injure our cause. But opportunism,
camouflage or patched-up compromises certainly will. If you must
dissent, you should take care that your opinions voice your innermost
convictions and are not intended merely as a convenient party cry.
Today our democracy is choked by our internecine strife. We
are torn by dissensions—dissensions between Hindus and Mussalmans,
Brahmins and non-Brahmins, Congressmen and non-Congressmen. It
is no easy task to evolve democracy out of this mobocracy. Let us not
make confusion worse confounded by further introducing into it the
virus of sectionalism and party spirit.
I value individual freedom but you must not forget that man is
essentially a social being. He has risen to this present status by
learning to adjust his individualism to the requirements of social
progress. Unrestricted individualism is the law of the beast of the
jungle. We have learnt to strike the mean between individual freedom
and social restraint. Willing submission to social restraint for the sake
of the well-being of the whole society enriches both the individual and
the society of which one is a member.
Harijan, 27-5-1939.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

383

438.

INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA
R AJKOT,

May 12, 1939
Gandhiji said that he was deeply grieved that the Union Government seemed to
have no finality about their policy 1 in respect of Asiatics. Their past declarations
were being disregarded and some of the recommendations made by their own
Commission were also being set at naught.
There was no wonder, he said, that a section of British Indian settlers in South
Africa resented this policy, and in despair were thinking of resorting to civil
disobedience. He could only hope that wiser counsels would prevail and that the
Union Government would retrace their steps and respect the rights acquired by British
Indian settlers.2

The Hindu, 13-5-1939.

439. TALK WITH PRAJA PARISHAD WORKERS3
R AJKOT,

[On or after May 12, 1939] 4
The statement I made on leaving Rajkot correctly represented
my state of mind. The views I expressed are, if anything, stronger
today. I own that I was impatient. The Award which was a tainted fruit
made me impatient. That impatience was a slur on my ahimsa. It was
that impatience that made me say to the Bhayats and Mussalmans that
I was not prepared to wait for Sir Maurice Gwyer’s Award on their
reference, the work of the Committee must go on. There was no
committee then, but impatience made me speak so.
There is no doubt in my mind that the Award must be
renounced. How can I woo Durbar Virawala and also keep the sword
of the Award hanging over his head? But where is the courage? The
faint-heartedness is unworthy of a satyagrahi who must have nothing
but faith in God to sustain him.
Harijan, 27-5-1939.

1

Vide footnote 2, “A Letter”, 7-4-1939
Vide also “Message to Indians in south Africa”, 23-5-1939
3
The talk is extracted from “A Momentous Decision” by Mahadev Desai, who
explains: “. . . on May 12. . . in a personal letter to Durbar Shri Virawala . . . Gandhiji
mentioned ‘the double game’ he was playing and . . . he loathed it. . . he lost no
opportunity of thinking aloud before co-workers.”
4
ibid
2

384

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

440. LETTER TO DR. GOPICHAND BHARGAVA
R AJKOT,

May 13, 1939
DEAR DR.. GOPICHAND,

Please fix up with T. Bapa about the donation referred to by
you.
Yours ,

BAPU
DR. G OPICHAND BHARGAVA, M.L.A.
LAHORE
From the origin al: Dr. Gopich and Bharga va Papers . Courte sy: Nehru
Memori al Museum and Librar y

441.

LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
R AJKOT,

May 13, 1939
CHI. JAMANALAL

I heard about your having been taken to Jaipur. Improve your
health fully. The weight should not go down any furhter. You must
eat fruit in sufficient quantity. Don’t eat anything between meals. You
may take some Ayurvedic medicines if you wish. Write to me at
Rajkot. For some time now I shall have to stay here. You needn’t
worry about things here. Mahadev is with me. He is keeping well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 3003

442.

LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
R AJKOT,

May 13, 1939
CHI. PRABHA

I have your letter. You did a very good thing in visiting the
patient. Do keep me informed from time to time. Write to him that I
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

385

often inquire after his health. Take proper care of your health also.
Sushila will write to you in detail about it. Her health has gone down
considerably .
Ba is in Bombay and will come here after four or five days. I am
well. The nights are cool here, and so we don’t feel the heat very
much.
The struggle will drag on. There is no cause for worry.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 3532

443.

LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
R AJKOT,

May 13, 1939
DEAR DAUGHTER,1

I have your letter. It was for your own good that I did not bring
you up to Viramgam. For your sake I drank the mango juice you had
prepared even though I had no desire for it. What can I do if you go
on fidgeting unnecessarily? You have no faith either in God or in me.
Your heart is full of misgivings which consume you. You are always
in a harassed state. I tell you, you must do the work you have been
doing. You will gain everything through it.
I am quite well. There is no cause to worry about the HinduMuslim problem.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G, N. 416

1

386

In the source, the superscription is in Urdu.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

444.

TELEGRAM TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL1
R AJKOT,

May 13, 1939
S ARDAR VALLABHBHAI
BHAVNAGAR
DUMB-FOUNDED.
OTHERS

WELL.

GOD

WILL

AWAITING

GUIDE
FURTHER

US.

NANABHAI2

HOPE

PARTICULARS.

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

445. LETTER TO AMBALAL SARABHAI
R AJKOT

May 14, 1939
DEAR BROTHER,

I have your letter. I have known Juthabhai for many years. He
is industrious. He is honest. If you want him to handle large amounts,
I would suggest that you start entrusting him with responsibility little
by little. I have no idea about his ability to handle large amounts.
I fully endorse Juthabhai’s charitable activities. But I do not
personally collect money for all my colleagues. In many cases, I give
them the responsibility of collecting money. This has brought good
results. They get the training. They gain respect independently, and
my burden of raising funds becomes lighter.
Saralabehn met me in Bombay.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujara ti origin al: C. W. 11127. Courte sy: Sarabh ai Founda tion

1
This was sent on hearing about an unsuccessful attempt on Vallabhbhai
Patel’s life in Bhavnagar.
2
Nrisinh prasad Kalidas Bhatt.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

387

446.

INTERVIEW TO TRAVANCORE NATIONAL
CONGRESS DEPUTATION1
May 13/14, 1939

The deputationists first explained to Mahatmaji in detail the changes
introduced by the Government in the electoral system of Travancore.
Mahatmaji said that he understood the system as it existed and also the present
change, and asked :

Is this all that you have to discuss with me?
Mr. Kainikkara said that they would like to discuss everything concerning the
political situation in Travancore.
GANDHIJI: Do

you know the charge against you?

KAINIKKARA:

We know there is a great deal of misrepresentation about us and
that we are under a cloud.
G. It is said that your organization, the Travancore National
Congress, is a bogus organization, that you are not an independent
body and that you are an instrument of the Government. What do you
say to this?
KAINIKKARA: We repudiated the charge. We need only say that most of us in the
Travancore National Congress have been in the political field from the days of the
Non-co-operation Movement. That cannot be said of many of the members of the
State Congress.
G. If that be so, what have you to say regarding the treatment of
the lady, Miss Annie Mascarene? Why is it that Sir C.P. Ramaswami
Aiyar refuses to enquire into that matter?
KAINIKKARA: Regarding Miss Mascarene, we do not wish to say anything. We
would rather not discuss her . . . . We could not demand an enquiry for we know from
actual experience the outrages perpetrated by the followers of the State Congress . . .

Mahatmaji asked us whether therefore we are justifying all the arrests, etc.,
made by the Government.
KAINIKKARA: We are not. Some arrests may be right and some may be wrong.
But how can we throw the whole blame on the Government? It is well-known that
Chengannoor is a State Congress stronghold. There . . . huge banyan trees were cut
1

Extracted from a report of the statement which, according to the source, was
issued by the deputationists, Kainikkara Padmanabha Pillai, M. L. A., Kottoor Kunjukrishna Pillai, M. L. C., and K. P. Kayyalakkal, “with the approval of Gandhiji”. E.
John Philipose of Travancore State Congress was also present.

388

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

down to obstruct traffic, and culverts and bridges were broken . . . Can it be said that
none of the State Congress workers saw this? . . . Why did they not at least help to
find out the culprits? . . . It may be better for Sir C.P. Ramaswami Aiyar to institute
an enquiry . . . but we who know the actual facts by experience cannot make the
demand.
G. Do you say that it is the measures adopted by the Government
that re-established peace?
KAINIKKARA : No. You did it. Peace was established with the stopping of civil
disobedience. If civil disobedience were to be started again all the disturbances would
recur.
G. Then you admit that, at the worst, the mistake on the part of
the State Congress was that they had no control over their followers.
KOTTOOR : No, not only that. Their first fault
is that they started civil
disobedience without assuring themselves of their control. Their next fault is that
they did not stop it even when they found their real position, and their gravest fault is
that they never seriously checked their followers for the fear that they would lose
their followers . .

Then Mahatmaji asked us what our fundamental difference was with the State
Congress.
We told him that we had been demanding Responsible Government for the last
twenty years . . . At that time, the Christians opposed the demand for Responsible
Government. In 1932, the Christian-Ezhava-Muslim agitation for communal
representation gave a new turn to Travancore politics. . . Now that the legislature is
decidedly based on communal representation and the Christians dominate the
communal clique, they are demanding Responsible Government.
G.

Therefore you question the good faith of the Christians.

KAINIKKARA :

We do.

At the beginning I put a sharp question about you. Now I put
another question about them. We are trying to reach the truth.
G.

KAINIKKARA :

Yes, we do question the good faith of the Christians.

G. Suppose they agree to nationalize the legislature, then what
objection do you have?
KAINIKKARA :

Then we have no objection.

On the next day we met at 8 p. m. after prayers. . . . Mahatmaji then explained
the position of the State Congress as he had understood it. He said that the State
Congress, including the Christian section in it, was not anti-national. The far-seeing
Christians, even those that might have been at one time communal, have seen that
communal arrangement and pacts will not serve them in the end. He illustrated it by
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

389

the experience of the Muslims in Bengal. He said that therefore the sinister motives
that they alleged against the Christians were not real and the State Congress was
national and would be prepared to nationalize the constitution of the legislature.
Mr. Philipose explained that the attitude of the Christians in the State
Congress was entirely national. He also said that the organization was not communal
and that all communities were in it.
KAINIKKARA : It is enough that we make our position clear and definite, Our
position is this: We object to communal representation and Responsible
Government going together. We insist on the reorganization of the legislature on
purely national lines. By nationalizing we mean the removal of nominations and
reservations and the application of a common principle in respect of franchise,
delimitation and system of voting.

That is reasonable. Now my task will be to wait for the others.
How I wish to have at least one of you with me till they arrive.
G.

KOTTOOR : But Mahatmaji, you have not told us your opinion about the change
in the voting system.
G. It

does not very seriously concern me. For, after all, it does not
solve the difficulties.
KOTTOOR:

I hope, however, that you do not consider the change anti-national.

The position is this. The arrangement that subsisted was antinational. You think that by this change at least one evil is removed.
But in my view what is left is still anti-national . The whole thing must
be changed. It must be made national.
G.

PHILIPOSE :

It would be good, if it came before the elections.

KAINIKKARA

: We have no illusions about Responsible Government coming

within three weeks.
G. Let

Responsible Government take its own time. If the present
anti-national system could be changed before that, even that would be
a great thing.
Mr. Kayyalakkal said that for the last many years they, the Ezhavas, had been
trying to remove social and religious inequalities. Realizing that temple-entry alone
could solve the problem, his brother-in-law, Mr. T. K. Madhavan, placed the matter at
Gandhiji’s feet. By the grace of H. H. the Maharaja and the blessings of Mahatmaji,
they had got it now. Now Gandhiji must bless them and help them to live as one with
the rest of the Hindu and to contribute their share for the prosperity and well-being
of the Hindu community as a whole.
G. Blessings you always have in plenty. Help I have given. Now
you have to help yourselves.

390

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Just then the clock struck and Gandhiji smilingly said: “The curfew tolls”, and
Mr. Kainikkara completed, “the knell of parting day”. Gandhiji repeated :

Yes, exactly, the knell of parting day.
The Hindu, 2-6-1939.

447.

LETTER TO AKBAR HYDARI
ANANDKUNJ, R AJKOT,

May 15, 1939
DEAR SIR AKBAR,

I have to acknowledge your kind letters of 11th and 25th
ultimo.
As you are aware, during the eighteen days before the 12th
instant, Calcutta and Brindaban in Champaran claimed my attention. I
was unable to see the Aryasamaj friends during those days. But they
waylaid me on the 10th as I was journeying back to Rajkot. This
accounts for the unavoidable delay in acknowledging and dealing
with your important letters. I don’t propose to go into the past nor
into the replies the Aryasamaj friends have favoured me with.
The minimum requirements of the Aryasamajists are:
1.
Absolute freedom for the practice and preaching of the
Vedic religion and culture, with due regard to the feelings of the
followers of other faiths.
2. Full freedom for starting new Aryasamajas and building of
new Aryasamaj mandirs yajnashalas, havankundas and the repairing
of the old ones without obtaining any premission from the
Ecclesiastical or any other department of the State.
Your letters lead me to think that you have no serious objections
to conceding these. If my reading is correct, why wait for the reforms
or the establishment of the ecclesiastical court? You will considerably
enhance the cause of peace, if you could possibly make the suggested
gesture. The Aryasamajist civil disobedience will then stop at once.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 8016

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

391

448.

LETTER TO BHAVANRAO SHRINIVASRAO PANT1
R AJKOT,

May 15, 1939
DEAR RAJA SAHIB,

I do hope that things are shaping well. Transition stages are
always difficult. You have taken a long step. But the heart does not
always keep pace with the intellect. I would urge you therefore never
to doubt the wisdom of the step taken by you. Let the things go
forward, even though they may seem to go too fast.
I see you are going to Badrinath. I hope you will have a happy
time there from the spiritual standpoint.
Yours sincerely,

THE RAJA SAHIB OF AUNDH
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

449.

LETTER TO VIJAYABEHN M. PANCHOLI
R AJKOT,

May 15, 1939
Nanabhai had given me news of you. I am glad that you have
gone there and that Manubhai 2 is with you. Do come here on your
way back. But don’t be impatient. Ba is not here at present.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G, N. 7111. Also C. W. 4603. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

450.

LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
R AJKOT,

May 15, 1939
DAUGHTER AMTUL SALAAM,3

I sent you a letter 4 from here. You saw what happened in
Bhavnagar?5 The lesson it has for you is that you must stay in
1
2
3
4
5

392

Alias Balasaheb Pant Pratinidhi.
Addressee’s husband.
In the source Gandhiji had added here: “Harijan Ashram”.
Vide “Telegram to Vallabhbhai Patel”, 14-5-1939
Vide “Telegram to Vallabhbhai Patel”, 14-5-1939

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Ahmedabad and do the work of service. That will result one day in
Hindu-Muslim understanding.
I am all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 420

451. A NOTE
May 15, 1939
This is a foolish letter. You will rid yourself of this foolishness if you
do some work. It is improper to stay on here. It is uncivilized to hang
around at other people’s homes. Please go away.
M. K. GANDHI
From the Hindi origin al: Pyarel al Papers . Nehru Memori al Museum and
Librar y. Courte sy: Belade vi Nayyar and Dr. Sushil a Nayyar

452. TALK WITH PRAJA PARISHAD WORKERS 1
[May 15, 1939] 2
What is it that prevents me from throwing the Award overboard?
It is not only faint-heartedness but it smacks of diplomacy. If I want
Durbar Virawala to act on the square I must relieve his fears too. Why
should he have to remain in fear of the Paramount Power and not do
what he can of his own free will? I am talking so much of ahimsa, but
I am not walking fearlessly into the mouth of himsa. A satyagrahi
seeks no adventitious aid—not of worldly forces, not of the
Paramount Power. He deals directly wih his opponent and wins him
by love and utter self-surrender to God. The very difficulty of
implementing the Award, the very fact that it has proved a Pandora’s
box shows that God wants me to throw it away, however seemingly
fruitful of future good it may be. God seems to be speaking to me in
strident tones; ‘Your victory was no victory. Throw it away !’ You
want me to go on with the work of the Award, because it belongs to
1

The talk is extracted from “A Momentous Decision” by Mahadev Desai, who
narrates it in sequence with Gandhiji’s talks to “his co-workers”; vide “Talk with
Praja Parishad Workers”, 12-5-1939. By way of introduction Mahadev Desai explains
that “in three days, Gandhiji had advanced a few more steps”, presumably, after he
arrived in Rajkot on May 12.
2
ibid
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

393

you. But how can I go on with it when my courage fails me, my hands
are shaking and I am faltering? It is a moral issue with me. The
consciousness of the wrong of the initial step I took oppresses me and
I cannot go on with it, however much you may want me to go on with
it. What will you do with such a halting, faltering general? I must
throw the Award overboard and you in your turn may throw the
general overboard.
Harijan, 27-5-1939

453. TALCHER
Talcher promises to be much worse than Rajkot. In Rajkot it was
the Ruler’s word that was broken. In Talcher it is the Paramount
Power’s. In Rajkot the State atrocities were not the subject of scrutiny.
In Talcher the sorry condition of the numerous refugees is almost
everything. Hence delay is criminal and may mean loss of one year’s
crop to several thousand cultivators. The other relief promised by the
Political Agent, Major Hennessey, relates to paltry things so far as the
Ruler of Talcher is concerned but they are serious enough for the
people.
It has been whispered to me that I have been guilty of injustice
to Major Hennessey and hence to the Paramount Power by attributing
to them breach of promise; for, it is said, Major Hennessey promised
nothing, he merely undertook to convey to the Ruler the wishes of the
people concerned. It is further said that even if it is proved that he
made any such promise he did so without authority.
I cannot admit either of the pleas. Major Hennessey signed the
document without any reservations. Shri Harekrushna Mahtab
described the tragedy with a wealth of detail which compels
conviction. He has been an eye-witness of the events narrated by him.
So far as I am aware Major Hennessey himself has never denied or has
not been given an opportunity of denying the allegations made about
him.
There seems to be no doubt that the Ruler of Talcher is in no
mood to do justice to his people unless he is made to act according to
the sanad I have already reproduced 1 in these columns. The
representative of the Paramount Power can even require the smaller
1

394

Vide “The Tragedy of Talcher”

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

States of Orissa to perform acts in the interest of their people. Can
there be any doubt as to the necessity of redressing every one of the
injustices mentioned in the memorandum signed by Major
Hennessey? Indeed redress has been long overdue. Why is the Ruler
being humoured by the Political Department in his wholly
indefensible attitude? Why is the welfare of several thousand refugees
being lightly regarded? Is not the prestige of the Paramount Power
being used to sustain the admitted evils? Surely there is something
radically wrong somewhere in all this.
R AJKOT, MAY 16, 1939.
Harijan, 20-5-1939.

454. TELEGRAM TO KANTHI
May 17, 1939
KANTHI
K. P. C. C. M EMBER
HUBLI
MY

WRITING

CAN

PERMIT

NO

COERCION.

From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

455.

STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1
R AJKOT,

May 17, 1939
I said2 at Calcutta on the 24th ultimo that Rajkot had proved a
laboratory for me. The latest proof of the fact lies in the step I am
now announcing. After an exhaustive discussion with my co-workers I
have come to the conclusion at 6 o’clock this evening that I should
renounce the advantages accruing from the Award of the Chief
Justice.
I recognize my error. At the end of my fast I had permitted
myself to say that it had succeeded as no previous fast had done. I
now see that it was tainted with himsa. In taking the fast I sought
immediate intervention of the Paramount Power so as to induce
fulfilment of the promise made by the Thakore Saheb. This was not
1
This appeared under the title “Confession and Repentance”. The statement
was also published in The Hindustan Times and The Hindu of May 18.
2
Vide “Popular Violence in Ramdurg”. Gandhiji was on his way to Calcutta.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

395

the way of ahimsa or conversion. It was the way of himsa or coercion.
My fast to be pure should have been addressed only to the Thakore
Saheb and I should have been content to die if I could not have
melted his heart or rather that of his adviser, Durbar Shri Virawala.
My eyes would not have been opened if I had not found unexpected
difficulties in my way. Durbar Shri Virawala was no willing party to
the Award. Naturally, he was in no obliging mood. He therefore took
advantage of every opportunity to cause a delay. The Award, instead
of making my way smooth, became a potent cause of angering the
Muslims and Bhayats against me. Before the Award we had met as
friend. Now I am accused of having committed a breach of promise,
voluntarily and without any consideration, made by me. The matter
was to go to the Chief Justice for decision as to whether I was guilty of
the alleged breach of promise. The statements of the Muslim Council
and the Garasia Association are before me. Now that I have taken the
decision to renounce the Award, there is no occasion for me to answer
the two cases. So far as I am concerned, the Muslims and Bhayats can
have anything the Thakore Saheb may be pleased to give them. I must
apologize to them for having put them to the trouble of preparing
their cases.
I owe an apology to the Viceroy for the unnecessary strain I
have put upon him in my weakness. I apologize to the Chief Justice
for having been the cause of putting him to the labour which had I
known better, he need not have gone through. Above all, I apologize
to the Thakore Saheb and Durbar Shri Virawala. So far as the latter is
concerned, I must also own that, in common with my co-workers, I
have harboured evil thoughts about him. I do not here pause to
consider whether the charges made against him were true or not. This
is not the place to discuss them. Suffice it to say that the way of
ahimsa was not and had not yet been applied to him.
And let it be said to my discredit that I have been guilty of
playing what may be called a double game, i. e., hanging the sword
of the Award over his head and wooing him and expecting him of his
own free will to advise the Thakore Saheb to grant liberal reforms.
This method I admit is wholly inconsistent with ahimsa. When
all of a sudden I made what is known as a sporting offer to Mr.
Gibson on 19th April, I discovered my weakness. But I had not the
courage then and there to say, ‘I do not want to have anything to do
with the Award.’ Instead I said,‘Let the Thakore Saheb appoint his
own Committee and then the Parishad people will examine the report

396

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in terms of the Award, and if it is found defective it can go to the
Chief Justice.’ Durbar Shri Virawala detected a flaw and very
properly rejected the offer, saying: ‘You are still hanging the Award
over my head and want to become a court of appeal over the Thakore
Saheb’s Committee. If such is the case, you must take your pound of
flesh and no more’. I saw the force of his objection. I told him, too,
that I lacked the courage then to throw the Award overboard, but I
would still plead with him to come to terms with the people as if the
Award was not in existence and as if the Sardar and I had also
withdrawn. He promised to try. He tried in his own fashion but not
with a large heart. I do not blame him. How could I expect large
heart when he knew my faint-heartedness in clinging to the Award?
Only trust can beget trust. I lacked it myself. But at last I have
regained my lost courage. My faith in the sovereign efficacy of
ahimsa burns brighter for my confession and repentance.
I must not do an injustice to my co-workers. Many of them are
filled with misgivings. My exposition of ahimsa is new to them. They
see no cause for my repentance. They think that I am giving up a
great chance created by the Award. They think too that as a political
leader I have no right to play fast and loose with the fortunes of
75,000 souls, maybe of the whole of the people of Kathiawar. I have
told them that their fears are unjustified, and that every act of
purification, every accession of courage, adds to the strength of the
cause of a people affected by a movement of satyagraha. I have told
them, too, that if they regard me as the general and expert of
satyagraha, they must put up with what may appear to them to be my
vagaries.
Having now freed the Thakore Saheb and his adviser from the
oppression of the Award, I have no hesitation in appealing to them to
appease the people of Rajkot by fulfilling their expectations and
dispelling their misgivings.
Harijan, 20-5-1939.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

397

456. DISCUSSION WITH MAHADEV DESAI1
[May 17, 1939] 2
MAHADEV DESAI: How was it wrong to ask the Paramount Power to intervene?
You did not insist on the letter of your vow. Otherwise you might have said you could
not break the fast until your demand was satisfied. But you were content with the
arbitration of the Chief Justice. Even so in 1918 3 when you fasted during the
Ahmedabad labour strike you did not insist on the 35 percent increase in wage but you
contented yourself with the mill-owners consenting to an arbitration. In fact, if the
Thakore Saheb had yielded to your demand without the intervention of the Paramount
Power, he might have charged you with having coerced him. But here the arbitration
which was the result of the fast ought to have been given [to] you even without the
fast.

GANDHIJI: You

are right. But why don’t you see that in 19184 the
arbitration was offered by the mill-owners? If the Thakore Saheb had
offered arbitration of his own accord, it would have been splendid.
But here I appealed to the Paramount Power. That is why the
arbitration has been infructuous. I had no business to be impatient.
Instead of waiting on God and allowing my fast to work itself I sought
outside aid. It was a grave blunder.
But why not wait until Sir Maurice Gwyer gives his decision on the new
reference? Let not the Mussalmans and Bhayats have the pretext of saying you fought
shy of the Chief Justice’s decision.

Why must I wait to take the right decision? It cannot await a
moments’s delay. I know that the reference is mischievous and we
must win. That might give greater value to the renunciation. But I am
not renouncing the Award in order that the world may acclaim the act.
By no means. I am freeing myself from a terrible oppression . I have
made my decision and am feeling free as a bird.
Harijan, 27-5-1939.

1

The discussion is extracted from “A Momentous Decision”. Mahadev Desai
explains that they had the discussion after the statement to the Press “was ready. . .
and before it was typed”; vide the preceding item. Vallabhbhai Patel was also present.
2
ibid
3
The source, however, has “1917”
4
ibid

398

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

457.

TALKS WITH CO-WORKERS, RAJKOT1

[ Afrer May 17, 1939] 2
I proved myself of little faith. If I had staked my all on my faith
in God and on the efficacy of my fast in melting the Thakore Saheb’s
and Durbar Shri Virawala’s heart, the worst that could have happened
would have been my death. But it would have been a worthy death.
And if the Thakore Saheb and Virawala had not let me die, they
would have come to me as friends and given me what I wanted. In any
event the result would have been better than the breach of my faith in
God and making Durbar Virawala my enemy by appealing to the
Viceroy to intervene and even to turn him out. I am amazed at my
own folly in thus antagonizing him and still expecting to convert him.
His own generosity is, I think, out of proportion to the provocation I
had given him.
My hands are shaking and my steps faltering.
The very possession of this Award has made me a coward, and I
am afraid if I were to retain it, it would make cowards of you too. A
satyagrahi does not depend for his strength on external means. His
strength comes from within, from his reliance on God. God becomes
his shield when he throws down all his earthly weapons. But if he were
to hide a fire-arm in his pocket, his inner strength would go and he
would cease to feel invulnerable. The Award was very like a fire-arm
in the pocket of a votary of ahimsa like me. It stood between me and
my God. It shamed me and made a coward of me. I have thrown it
away as Christian did his load of sin, and I am feeling again free and
invulnerable and one with my Maker.
You ought to understand and appreciate the rejection of the
Award. It was well-nigh impossible for you to have (to use the legal
language) that decree executed. I could have got it done, but at the
cost of enormous labour and time and the legal talent that I still
possess. Meanwhile your energies would have been rusting, and your
hands would have been crippled. You would have learnt nothing from
1

The talks are extracted from Mahadev Desai’s first three articles serialized
under the title “The Decision and After”. The first four paragraphs are reproduced from
the first article of the series, the last four from the third of the series, and those in
between from the second.
2
Gandhiji had taken the “decision” to renounce the Gwyer Award on May 17,
1939; “ Statement to the Press”, 17-5-1939
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

399

the skill with which I should have been tackling the fresh hurdles that
were being daily placed in my way. I have saved you from the
burden of my sin. You are, at worst,‘as you were’. if you want
foolishly to march to jail, you are now free. Only you must not look
to me. I can carry you forward along my own lines. It may be that I
am unfit to lead you. You can then discard me, and you have every
right to do so. You may not tolerate a general who changes his
tactics every now and then. But if you will have me, you must have me
on my terms.
I have not yet known a general who has not altered time and
again the plans of his campaign and made eleventh-hour alterations in
his orders. The ordinary fighting soldier knows nothing of these
plans. In fact they are closely-guarded secret unknown to all but the
general himself. That is why Tennyson wrote those immortal lines—
"Theirs not to reason why, theirs not to make reply, theirs but to do
and die”. But these words apply, if you please, to a satyagrahi army
more appropriately than to the ordinary army. For a military general
may change his plans in view of the changing situation every day. A
military strategy depends on the changing tactics of the enemy. The
satyagrahi general has to obey his inner voice, for over and above the
situation outside he examines himself constantly and listens to the
dictates of the inner self. But both in satyagraha and military warfare
the position of the soldier is very nearly the same. He knows no rest,
no certainty of movements, the only certainty for him is to face heavy
odds and even death. His promise to be under discipline and to obey
the general’s command applies even during the period of suspension
of hostilities. But I have not asked for this kind of discipline. I have
always tried to carry conviction to my co-workers, to carry their
hearts, and their reasons with me. I shall go on doing so always, but
where you cannot follow, you will have to have faith. In ordinary
warfare one soldier cannot reason why. In our warfare there is enough
scope for reasoning, but there is a limit to it. You will go on arguing
until you are convinced, but when no conviction comes, you must fall
back on faith.
There is now the way of negotiation open to you, but if you
cannot think of it, it is open to you to fight. In fact if I had not cast
away the Award, the fight would have been long delayed. I have saved
you a few months. But you can overthrow my leadership and be free.
From the point of view of satyagraha there is nothing but good
coming out of the decision. A general is none the worse for
400

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

realization of his weakness and for atoning for his sin. In fact sin,
ignorance, weakness are synonymous, and in asking for the Viceroy’s
intervention and clinging to the Award I was guilty of all the three.
When a general purifies himself as I have done, far from weakening
his army he adds to its strength enormously.
There should not be the least little suspicion in your mind that
Durbar Virawala cannot be converted, no matter how non-violent you
may be. Do you mean to say that he is the concentrated essence of
evil in Kathiawar? Let me assure you that we in his position might
have done no better. Every one of us is a mixture of good and evil. Is
there not plenty of evil in us? There is enough of it in me and I
always pray to God to purge me of it. The difference that there is
between human beings is the difference of degree, and you must
always try to place yourself in the position of the man you are about
to judge. Virtue lies in discovering the best in your opponent and in
appealing to it.
This depends on individual workers cultivating non-violence in
thought, word and deed, by means of a concentrated effort in the
fulfilment of the fourfold constructive programme. Maximum of
work and minimun of speech must be your motto. In the centre of the
pro-gramme is the spinning-wheel—no haphazard programme of
spinning, but scientific understanding of every detail, including the
mechanics and the mathematics of it, study of cotton and its varieties,
and so on. There is the programme of literacy. You must concentrate
exclusively on it, and not talk of any other thing. The work should be
systematic and according to time table. Don’t talk of politics—not
even of non-violence—but talk to them of the advantages of literacy.
There is prohibition of drink and intoxicating drugs and of gambling.
There is medical relief by means of the propagation of simple rules of
hygiene and sanitation and elementary preventive measures, and of
cheap home remedies and training intelligent village folk in these.
There should not be one house in Rajkot with which you have
not established contact from the point of view of pure service. You
have to cultivate the Mussalmans, serve them unselfishly. There are the
Harijans. Establish living contact with them.
All this constructive work should be for its own sake. And yet be
sure that it will develop the quality required for non-violent
responsible government. That is how I began my work in South
Africa. I began with serving them. I did not know myself that I was
training them for civil disobedience. I did not know myself that I was
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

401

so training myself. But you all know what happened in the end.
This constructive programme may go on endlessly. Why should
you be tired of it? Do you know the Hundred Years’ War in England?
If they fought for a hundred years, we should be prepared to fight for
a thousand years, inasmuch as we are a continent. That we will have
given our contribution to the fight for freedom, will be our reward
That is the mass constructive programme I want you to do, and
that is the basis of the training for the non-violence of the brave. It is
whole and indivisible, and those who do not believe in it wholeheartedly must leave me and work according to their own lights.
Q. If the situation is different, if the people in a State are to a man ready to
offer the utmost they can?
A. Then I would say to them: “Be reduced to ashes’. But that
will be on one condition, viz., that you have reached the state of nonviolence of my description. If I can have that assurance, I would say
that though it is unequal battle you may fight single-handed in spite
of opposition from the Paramount Power and the States. I would be
the last person to cool the zeal and ardour of the people.
Q. But would it not suffice if the workers were pledged to carry out the
programme and carried it out faithfully?
A. Hardly. For you have to give a visible demonstration of the
fact that the whole of the State obeys your discipline. You want
responsible government for all, not merely for the workers.

Gandhiji gave two instances. In 1922 he was sent to jail. He gave express
instructions 1 to the effect that there should be no hartal, no demonstrations, work
should go on as usual. A Secretary of State had described the situation in his derisive
way: “When Gandhiji went to jail not a dog barked”. But Gandhiji accepted it as a
compliment and said that he was responsible for the quiet that prevailed. The people
had literally carried out his instructions. Another instance: In 1921 there were the
riots in Bombay. Gandhiji declared a fast until the rioters came to their senses.2 Mian
Mahomed Haji Jan Mahomed Chhotani was then living. He had complete control on
the mischievous element, and he said to Gandhiji: “Please break the fast. I know these
men, they are under my control and I assure you they will be quiet.” Gandhiji said:

You should be able to say that with regard to all whether they
belong to your party or not. To acquire that control the people should
1
Vide “Letter to M. R. Jayakar”, 10-3-1922 and “Interview to Indulal Yagnik”,
11-3-1922
2
Vide “Appeal to Bombay Citizens”, 19-11-1939

402

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

fulfil the constructive programme in all its details. Non-violence has
failed in exact proportion to the failure of the charkha. There are
other items—prohibition, Hindu-Muslim unity, removal of
untouchability. It is difficult to submit individuals to the test in these
items. There is room for self-deception. Not so in the matter of the
wheel. The work can be measured from day to day.
You have to take up the programme with apostolic zeal. I cannot
give you a new programme. Civil disobedience is for the few who are
saturated with the spirit of non-violence and are ready for the utmost
sacrifice. Constructive programme is for all. It is to be accepted by all
actively and not as a lip profession. It has got to be worked or not
worked. Khadi is worn or not worn. Let this fourfold programme be
the acid test of your followers. Otherwise of course don’t the cinema
companies and cigarette sellers have a large enough following? Don’t
be deluded by those who gather about you and shout ‘ Inquilab
zindabad’ 1 or swear at someone or other.
Banish all idle thoughts from your hearts and concentrate only
on the thoughts you must have. You will thus obtain marvellous
control over yourselves and others. A good man’s thought never goes
in vain. Thought-control means maximum of work with minimum of
energy. If we had that control, we should not have to put forth the
tremendous effort we do. Non-violent action does mean much silent
work and little speech or writing. These will always be necessary
because thought- control is not an easy thing. Nevertheless we have to
cultivate that habit if we will have non-violence reigning supreme in
this land and if we are to have responsible government through
unadulterated non-violence.
CO -WORKER

: Whether we stand the test or not, you alone can say, not we.

No, I cannot presume to say that. If you can affirm
that you have living faith in God, no matter how you define God, it
should be enough. You believe in some principle, clothe it with life,
and say that it is your God and you believe in it. I should think it
enough. I fasted apparently with complete faith in God. But instead of
God I called the Viceroy to my aid. The satyagrahi has no other stay
but God. For the moment my faith in God was dead.
GANDHIJI:

Q.

But then an atheist like Bradlaugh2 may have the capacity to sacrifice all.

1

“Long live the revolution.”
Charles Bradlaugh (1833-1891), English free-thinker and radical who became
known as a free-thought lecturer under the name of “Iconoclast”.
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

403

But you would rule him out as a satyagrahi?
A. I am afraid I would. Such a man is worthy of my reverence;
but such a one would himself say he is not a satyagrahi of my
definition. But I may be doing an injustice to his memory. I never had
the privilege of meeting him. He might have had a living faith in an
indefinable, self-acting Power whilst he declared himself an atheist.
Harijan, 3-6-1939, 10-6-1939 and 17-6-1939.

458.

INTERVIEW TO STEEL1
R AJKOT,

[After May 17, 1939] 2
STEEL:

What is your idea of independence?

GANDHIJI : By independence I mean complete withdrawal of
British power from India. It does not exclude partnership between two
nations enjoying equal independent status and terminable by either at
will. It need not be different from Dominion Status. But perhaps
Dominion Status won’t be a happy term to use for a continent like
India which is ethnologically and politically different from other
Dominions like South Africa. Canada, Australia etc. But perhaps this
term is as elastic as the English Constitution. And if Dominion Status
could be so defined as to cover a case like India and if India could
come to an honourable agreement with England, I would not quarrel
about words. If British statesmen feel it convenient to use the word
Dominion Status about India rather than any other, in order to
describe that honourable agreement, I will not quarrel.
S. But there are elements in the Congress like Subhas Bose and his group who
want absolute independence outside the British Empire.
G. It is only a question of terminology. I won’t admit
any
difference between Subhas Babu and myself on this point though we
may use different language. Supposing such free and equal
partnership as I have postulated were feasible, Subhas Babu won’t say
‘No’ to it. But today if such a proposition were put to him, he will
probably say, as he well may, it is ruled out for him. For he would say

1

Of The New York Times. The interview appeared under the title “No Quarrel
about Words” by Pyarelal.
2
From steel’s concluding question and Gandhiji’s answer to it, it is evident
that the meeting took place after Gandhiji had renounced the Gwyer Award on
May 17.

404

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the British are not likely to yield so easily as some might think. If he
talks to me like that, I won’t combat him but would say that I prefer to
use the language that I use as being more suited to my temperament
and my faith in the essential identity of human nature.
Gandhiji’s interviewer next wanted to know if there were any negotiations
going on between him and the authorities in connection with the ‘Federation’.
G. None whatsoever. All suggestions to this effect that one sees in
the Press are mere figments of imagination. The present Viceroy is
not made that way. He does not believe in doing things secretly. He
puts all his cards on the table and likes taking the public into his
confidence. At any rate that is my impression. I think he does believe
that no cause is damaged by open negotiation.
But I feel certain that the 'Federation’ won’t come whilst it is not
acceptable to the Congress or the Mussalmans or the Princes. I am
inclined to think that the British statesmen wont’t impose Federation
upon an unwilling and dissatisfied India, but will try to placate all
parties. That, at any rate, is my hope.
It would be first-class tragedy if it is imposed upon India. The
federal structure cannot be brought into being in the midst of
sullenness and opposition. If the 'Federation’ is not wanted by any of
the parties, it would be the height of impudence to force it.
S.

What is the alternative?

The alternative may be to offer something that would be
acceptable to all or either of the three parties.
G.

S.

But you do not believe with Subhas Bose that the best alternative would
be to issue an ultimatum?
G.
That is the fundamental difference between Subhas Babu
and myself. Not that the ultimatum is in itself wrong, but it has to be
backed by an effective sanction and there are today no non-violent
sanctions. If all the parties come to an honourable understanding, an
effective sanction could be easily forged.

Referring next to the communal situation, Mr. Steel asked whether, in
Gandhiji’s opinion, the Hindu-Muslim situation was getting worse.

Apparently yes, perhaps. But I have every hope that
ultimately we are bound to come together. The interests that are
common to us and that bind us together are so tremendous that the
leaders of both the sections must come to terms. Force of
circumstances will compel them to do so. That we appear to be
farthest apart from one another today is a natural outcome of the
awakening that has taken place. It has emphasized the points of
G.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

405

difference and accentuated prejudices, mutual suspicions and
jealousies. Fresh demands that are coming into being every day with
the new leadership have further made confusion worse confounded.
But I hope out of chaos order is going to emerge.
S.
Are not the differences between the Muslim League and the Congress
unbridgeable?
G.

The differences are insubstantial.

S.
You think the time is not ripe for an ultimatum; what then should the next
move be?

To put our own house in order. Immediately we have done
that and brought the various elements together, we should be ready.
G.

S.

What help do you expect from the U. S. A.?

I expect a lot of help from the U. S. A. by way of friendly
criticism, if it must be criticism. What I find today is that it is either
excessive praise of Indian effort of hopelessly unenlightened
criticism. Your Press has made very little effort to enlighten American
opinion on the right lines.
G.

S.

Does your renunciation of the Award imply an abandonment of effort?

G. By no means. On the contrary, having eased myself of the
burden of error, I feel as light as a bird and freer to continue my
effort to solve the problem of the Indian States.
Harijan, 24-6-1939.

459. LETTER TO ANNAPURNA
R AJKOT,

May 18, 1939
CHI. ANNAPURNA,

I got your loving gift quite a few days ago, but have not been
able to write till now. May you live long and prove yourself a good
woman. I wear the Kachha 1 sent by you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 9425

1

406

Underwear.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

460. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
R AJKOT,

May 18, 1939
CHI. NIMU,

I got your letter only today. I have only a few minutes to spare
and I give them to you. As for Kanam, he is here and is flourishing.
Ba came the day before yesterday and brought him. They could not
manage him in Bombay. For one thing, he is full of pranks, then he
has also got the bad habit of extracting money from people. Ramdas
therefore decided to send him away with Ba. He will not be a burden
here. Kanu will look after his education.
I have discussed the matter with Ramdas. He is unable to decide.
For the present, he will remain where he is. He is thinking of going to
Bhavnagar after some time. All that I want is that you should complete
your studies. Sumi must have fully recovered now.
I might now be able to leave Rajkot in a few days. You must
have seen my statement 1 . The nights here are quite fine. The heat
during the day is also not unbearable.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujara ti origin al: Mrs. Sumitr a Kulkar ni Papers . Courte sy: Nehru
Memori al Museum and Librar y

461. LETTER TO SUMITRA GANDHI
May 18, 1939
CHI. SUMI,

I got your letter. You have deformed your handwriting. Write to
Kanam. Will the sores caused by small-pox remain? Write to me
regularly. Segaon is almost deserted these days.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujara ti origin al: Mrs. Sumitr a Kulkar ni Papers . Courte sy: Nehru
Memori al Museum and Librar y

1

Vide “Statement to the Press”, 17-5-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

407

462.

DISCUSSION WITH KASTURBA GANDHI1

GANDHIJI (smilingly) ;

[May 18, 1939] 2
But why would you not plead my case?

KASTURBA: But how can I? I do not myself understand.

But you must understand. You remember the time in South
Africa when you were dying and the doctor said you would not live
unless you took chicken broth?
Oh yes, I remember.

Well, if you do, don’t you also remember that though I allowed
you to do as you liked you said you would prefer to die but you
could not take chicken broth?
Yes.

That was because you were firm in your faith in God. You knew
that God would keep you if He so willed, but that you would not care
to live by breaking your vow not to touch meat.
Yes.

Even so I should have fasted until the Thakore Saheb and
Durbar Virawala had come to me relenting and saying, ‘Please break
your fast. We are going to fulfil our promise’. Instead I wavered. I
thought I must seek the aid of the British Government, lest I should
die. It was a sin. And if I got the Award by committing the sin, I must
give up the fruit of sin.
But Thakore Saheb and Virawala are placing obstructions in the way. If they
were not doing so, the Award would work all right and there would be an end to all the
trouble. They are so obstreperous.

They are so, because of my initial blunder. I irritated them and
I have no right to expect better treatment from them. It is not they
1

This is extracted from “A Momentous Decision”. Mahadev Desai explains:
“Gandhiji’s aged sister, ignorant and unlettered but a devout soul, was terribly
perturbed over the decision and was disconsolate as she had heard someone say that
Gandhiji had been defeated. The news had come to Kasturba with a shock; she also
perhaps shared the sister’s feelings. She pleaded with Gandhiji to console the aged
sister.”
2
According to Mahadev Desai, the discussion was on “the next day” after the
one he had with Gandhiji on May 17; vide “Discussion with Mahadev Desai”,
17-5-1939

408

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

who are putting the obstacles. It is God acting through them who is
putting the obstacles. It is God who has thus opened my eyes and
shown me the way. And the sooner I wash my hands of the sin the
better. Don’t you think so?
Yes. But what of the repressive ordinances, the fines, etc.? We have given up
everything and they are still going on as usual.

What does that matter? We have to do our duty, trusting them to
do theirs. Why don’t you see that because I failed in my duty and
was impatient to reap the result of my fast or to break it soon that God
has punished me thus? But I am not defeated. Tell sister there is no
defeat in the confession of one’s error. The confession itself is a
victory.
Harijan, 27-5-1939.

463.

TALK WITH A CHILD1

[On or after May 18, 1939] 2
GANDHIJI: The Award was a cobra. And when we have a cobra in
the house how do we feel?
CHILD: We are afraid.

Well then so long as the Award was there both Durbar shri
Virawala and I were afraid of it, and were trying to dodge it. But It
would not be dodged. I have gently put it out of the house and we are
both now free from fear.
I see that it was necessary to discard the Award, but what have we gained?

Is it a small gain to have been rid of a venomous cobra and thus
rid of fear? It was a cobra in the house. We can now live in the house
like a happy family. Durbar Shri Virawala and I not only sought to
dodge the cobra but we used to shun each other. We at least meet
each other now as friends !
But what is it worth? What is there in Durbar Shri Virawala to draw out?

What is there in you? Well, if there are any virtues in you, even
so there are in Durbar Shri Virawala. And if I hug you as my own
child, why should I not hug Durbar Shri Virawala as a member of the
family? I know you; I do not know Durbar Shri Virawala. But we
have to be friends with him and to make the best of the virtues that he
surely has. As you have atman in you, even so has he. Indeed there is
1

& 2 This talk is extracted from “The Decision and After—I”. Mahadev Desai
explains: “As much light was shed on the situation by his talk with a child the other
day as was done by his talks with Kasturba [vide the preceding item]. The child had
no doubt about the rejection of the Award. But he was wondering what we had gained
by the rejection.”
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

409

no human being but has something valuable in him, some quality of
the atman, if we can but observingly distil it out.
But what are we to do after the cobra is gone? With the cobra seems to have
gone even the house—all that we had won.

No, nothing else is gone. The Notification is still there. And we
are the wiser for the experience of the past three months. I had taken
a wrong route, I have retraced my step. We thought that we could
achieve much by hard swearing. We know that it had a contrary result.
We have examined the quality of our ahimsa. It was poor. We had
made enemies of our opponents. We have to win them by love, and
the way is now clear for us. Our fight for freedom is not over. It
cannot be over. But we are now free to carry it on in a better
atmosphere and with cleaner weapons.
Harijan, 3-6-1939.

464.

MESSAGE TO INDIAN MERCHANTS’ CHAMBER

[On or before May 19, 1939] 1
May the new habitation of the Indian Merchants’ Chamber
prove a blessing to the whole of India. I have many pleasant
recollections of Lalji Naranji2 . I am glad his memory is being
honoured.
The Hindu, 20-5-1939.

465. ABSTRACT OF LETTER TO PRESIDENT, RAJKOT
STATE MUSLIM COUNCIL
[On or before May 19, 1939] 3
A moral question cannot be decided by a third person. It can
only be decided by one’s own conscience.
Gandhiji adds that what was to be decided by the Chief Justice was their claim
to secure a right based on Gandhiji’s words. Now there remained nothing for them to
claim, inasmuch as he had renounced the Gwyer Award itself.
As for the charge of breach of promise, Gandhiji says that, if he had the least
suspicion of having committed a breach of promise, they would not have had to go to
an arbitrator. He was fully aware of what he had said. All that was however now a
matter of the past.4

The Hindu, 20-5-1939.
1

The message was reported under the date-line “Bombay, May 19”.
A commercial pioneer.
3
The letter was reported under the date-line “Rajkot, May 19”.
4
In his reply, the addressee said: “We regret to note that you have dexterously
evaded the important points raised in our letter . . . issue of ‘breach’of a promise
given to Muslims cannot be ignored.”
2

410

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

466.

TELEGRAM TO TANZEEM-UL-MOMININ1
[On or after May 19, 1939] 2

MY

CONSCIENCE

DAY

EXCEPT

CLEAR.

MONDAY

DEPUTATION

BEFORE

CAN

COME

ANY

TWENTY-FOURTH.

From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

467. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
RAJKOT,

May 20, 1939
MY DEAR AGATHA,

Don’t say I have neglected you. I was in travail and could not
write letters, etc. Now that the burden is off my mind I can think of
writing to you and other co-workers.
About Federation don’t expect much from me. I am where I
was. In practice there is no essential difference between, say, Subhas
and me so far as opposition is concerned. In theory, I suppose, there
is.
About the States my opinion is in a flush. The latest Rajkot
statement 3 may assist you somewhat.
My position in the event of war would be personally no
participation. What course the Congress will take, it is difficult to say.
You will probably know it before this reaches you.
Talcher is shaping badly.4 Charlie is distressed if not disgusted.
There has been a betrayal. Let us hope the Viceroy will see it through.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 1508

1

& 2 The telegram was in reply to the one dated May 19, 1939, from the
Tanzeem, an association of Muslims, which sought an interview with Gandhiji to a
deputation of Shias in connection with the Shia-Sunni trouble that broke out in
Lucknow on April 7, when about 600 Shias were arrested for publicly reciting
Tabarra. According to The Hindustan Times, 24-5-1939, a deputation consisting of
the “President, Secretary and members of the Executive Committee of Tanzeem”
arrived in Rajkot on May 23. Vide also “A Letter”, 23-5-1939
3
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 17-5-1939
4
Vide also “Talcher”
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

411

468. LETTER TO KISHANSINH CHAWDA
R AJKOT,

May 20, 1939
BHAI KISHANSINH1 ,

I am feeling a little lazy after the agony of the last few days. I
am therefore dictating the letters lying in bed.
I got your letter. I am not surprised at what you tell me. But it is
a mark of a non-violent man that he will not hurt even a violent
person. The latter will either change or destroy himself through his
own violence.
The future alone will show what the result of my experiment is.
You should not have helped Harilal. He has lost all sense of
shame. He begs for help from everybody, and spends the money on
drink. His habit of begging could perhaps be pardoned if he used the
help well.
Weren’t you saved by God? May you live long now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C. W. 9835

469. TALK TO CO-WORKERS2
[On or after May 20, 1939] 3
Have I ever in my life been guilty of flattery? Have I ever
resorted to flattery even in Public interest? I declared years ago that I
would not sell truth and non-violence even for the freedom of my
country, and I have repeated it many times since. Would he who said it
resort to flattery? When Durbar Shri Virawala invited me to go to the
palace, he even said that I had justified my claim to be as the father of
the Thakore Saheb, that the latter would gladly come and see me, but
that he would be happy if I went there. He said I need not attend the
Durbar which was to be held, but that he would ask the people to wait
a while to see me when I went there. I saw what he meant, but I was
1

A Gujarati writer.
The talk is extracted from “The decision and After—I”. Mahadev Desai
explain s that some of the Parishad workers were angry with Gandhiji for attending the
Durbar at the palace. According to Gandhi—1915-1948 : A Detailed Chronology,
Gandhiji attended the Durbar on May 20, 1939.
3
ibid
2

412

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

determined to attend even the Durbar if he had so desired. I would
have attended it even if he had told me that it was in celebration of the
Thakore Saheb’s victory and my defeat. I had offended him by
having secured the Award over his head, and I owed it to him to wipe
out the offence by attending the function. It was a debt I owed and I
was in honour bound to repay it with interest. He might have asked
for even an act of humiliation from me, and I might have done
anything short of sacrificing my sense of self-respect or honour. But
he asked me to do nothing of the kind. The invitation was natural and
polite. The Durbar was held to announce the repeal of repressive
legislations, etc. and the formation of the Reforms Committee. He who
atones for sins never calculates; he pours out the whole essence of his
contrite heart. I may tell you that my atonement is not yet over. I
know that I am speaking in a language that is beyond you, but if you
have had even a slight glimpse of true ahimsa, you should feel that all
that I am doing now is the most natural thing for me.
A non-violent fight is sharp as the edge of the sword, sharpened
on the whetstone of the heart. A straight fight in an equal battle takes
some bravery; but braver is he who, knowing that he is fighting an
unequal battle, knowing that he would have to sacrifice 95 as against 5
of the enemy, faces death. That is why we still extol the prowess of
Pratap and Shivaji. But a satyagrahi risks all and offers of himself a
willing and pure sacrifice. Without the will and the purity the sacrifice
is nothing worth. I assure you that what I have done is what every true
satyagrahi ought to do. “Whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile,
go with him twain. ”
Harijan, 3-6-1939.

470. LETTER TO PRITHVI SINGH
R AJKOT,

May 21, 1939
MY DEAR PRITHVI SINGH1 ,

I was delighted to receive your letter. I did receive the previous
letter, and I have been in correspondence with Shantilal about your

1
A revolutionary, who surrendered to Gandhiji after absconding arrest for 16
years; was sent to jail but later got discharged; vide “The Old Revolutionary”,
25-9-1939.

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

413

book 1 . There is a hitch about the book being released for publication.
I think there is no hurry about it.
I see that you have finished one year, and am glad that you have
gained considerable inward experience. You must have seen from my
recent writings how much value I attach to spinning as an aid to the
growth of the spirit of non-violence, that is to say when spinning is
done as a symbol of non-violence. Mechanically considered too, a
person who spins for hours together, takes delight in it, will not be
easily ruffled. He is able to meditate all the while he is spinning,
provided his wheel is in perfect order, when the music of the wheel is
an aid to contemplation. And he is no spinner who has no control
over his wheel. I do wish that your second year is commenced with the
resolution to achieve perfection in spinning as an aid to the
development of non-violence. Your experience and experiment will
help me considerably, as I believe you to be accurate in reading your
own heart. Not many are able to do so. Men are more self-deceived
than deceiving.
I am glad you like my first statement2 on Rajkot. Now you have
before you the second3 . It was a difficult statement, but now the whole
burden is off my shoulders.
Mahadev is now completely restored, and is with me. jamnadas
is at Bombay.
With love,
Yours,
BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 5634. Also C. W. 2945. Courtesy: Prithvi Singh

471. ABSTRACT OF LETTER TO KHENGARJI SAVAI4
[ Before May 22, 1939] 5
Gandhiji, it is stated, has pointed out in his letter that the satyagraha
conducted by the Cutchi Prajakiya Parishad was suspended at his instance, but he has
since come to know that there has been interference in the day-to-day activities of
the Parishad.
Gandhiji hopes that better counsels will prevail and steps will be taken to ease
the present tension.

The Hindu, 22-5-1939.
1
2
3
4
5

414

The addressee’s autobiography, Kranti Pathka Pathik, written in jail
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 24-4-1939
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 17-5-1939
The addressee was the ruling chief (Maharao) of Cutch.
The letter was reported under the date-line “Cutch-Bhuj, May 22”.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

472 THE JEWISH QUESTION
The Managing Editor of Jewish Frontier, published at 275
Seventh Avenue, New York City, was good enough to send me a copy
of the March number of the magazine with the request that I should
deal with its reply to my article1 on the Jews in Germany and Palestine.
The reply is very ably written. I wish I had space for reproducing the
whole of it. The reader will, however, find the main argument
reproduced 2 in this issue of Harijan.
Let me say that I did not write the article as a critic. I wrote it at
the pressing request of Jewish friends and correspondents. As I
decided to write, I could not do so in any other manner.
But I did not entertain the hope when I wrote it that the Jews
would be at once converted to my view. I should have been satisfied if
even one Jew had been fully convinced and converted.
Nor did I write the article only for today. I flatter myself with
the belief that some of my writings will survive me and will be of
service to the causes for which they have been written. I have no sense
of disappointment that my writing had not to my knowledge
converted a single Jew.
Having read the reply more than once, I must say that I see no
reason to change the opinion I expressed in my article. It is highly
probable that, as the writer says, “a Jewish Gandhi in Germany, should
one arise, could function for about five minutes and would be
promptly taken to the guillotine”. But that will not disprove my case
or shake my belief in the efficacy of ahimsa. I can conceive the
necessity of the immolation of hundreds, if not thousands, to appease
the hunger of dictators who have no belief in ahimsa. Indeed the
maxim is that ahimsa is the most efficacious in front of the greatest
himsa. Its quality is really tested only in such cases. Sufferers need not
1

Vide “The Jews”
In his reply entitled “We Are Treated as Subhumans : We Are Asked to be
Superhuman”, Hayim Greenberg had said: “. . . the spiritual leader of young India . . .
blames us for not exhibiting the heroism of militant pacifism in those lands where
Jews are persecuted . . . he accuses us of following an aggressively nationalist . . .
policy in Palestine and of a desire to deprive the Arabs of their fatherland . . . I cannot
avoid the suspicion that so far as Palestine problem is concerned, Gandhi allowed
himself to be influenced by the anti-zionist propaganda being conducted among
fanatic pan- Islamists. . . . ”
2

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

415

see the result during their lifetime. They must have faith that if their
cult survives, the result is a certainty. The method of violence gives no
greater guarantee than that of non-violence. It gives infinitely less. For
the faith of the votary of ahimsa is lacking.
The writer contends that I approached the Jewish problem
“without that fundamental earnestness and passionate search for truth
which are so characteristic of his usual treatment of problems”. All I
can say is that to my knowledge there was lack neither of earnestness
nor of passion for truth when I wrote the article. The second charge of
the writer is more serious. He thinks that my zeal for Hindu-Muslim
unity made me partial to the Arab presentation of the case, especially
as that side was naturally emphasized in India. I have often said that I
would not sell truth for the sake of India’s deliverance. Much less
would I do so for winning Muslim friendship. The writer thinks that I
am wrong on the Jewish question as I was wrong on the Khilafat
question. Even at this distance of time I have no regret whatsoever for
having taken up the Khilafat cause.1 I know that my persistence does
not prove the correctness of my attitude. Only it is necessary for
everyone concerned to know where I stand today about my action in
1919-20
I am painfully conscious of the fact that this writing of mine will
give no satisfaction either to the Editor of Jewish Frontier or to my
many Jewish friends. Nevertheless I wish with all my heart that
somehow or other the persecution of the Jews in Germany will end
and that the question in Palestine will be settled to the satisfaction of
all the parties concerned2 .
RAJKOT, May 22,1939.
Harijan, 27-5-1939.

473. WITHDRAWN
In Harijan of December 24 there is a long report of my talk 3
with missionary friends from Tambaram on non-violence and the
world crisis. When during the talk I took the illustration of the Jews, I
am reported to have said:
It is true that the Jews have not been actively violent in their own persons.
1
2
3

416

For Gandhiji’s view on the Khilafat.
Vide also the following item.
Vide “Discussion with Christian Missionaries”, 12-12-1938

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

But they called down upon the Germans the curses of mankind, and they wanted
America and England to fight Germany on their behalf.

On reading the last sentence a dear friend wrote to me a fiery
letter and challenged me to produce my authority for my remark. He
said that I had been hasty in making the statement. I did not realize
the importance of the rebuke. I did, however, want to produce support
for my statement. I put Pyarelal and later Mahadev on the search. It is
not always an easy task to find support for impressions one carries
when speaking or writing. Meanwhile I received a letter from Lord
Samuel supporting the contradiction of the friend referred to above.
Whilst I was having the search made I got the following letter from Sir
Philip Hartog:
May I take the opportunity of saying that I agree with what my friend Mr.
Polak and Lord Samuel tell me they have written to you about the attitude of the
German Jewish refugees, of whom I have myself seen hundreds since 1933? I have
never heard one of them express publicly or privately the desire for a war of
vengeance against Germany. Indeed such a war would bring further misery to the
hundreds of thousands of Jews still in Germany as well as untold suffering to millions
of other innocent men and women.

I put greater diligence in my search. The searchers were not able
to lay hands on any conclusive writing. The manager of Harijan put
himself in correspondence with the Editor of the Jewish Tribune,
Bombay, who sent the following characteristic reply:
This is not the first time that I have come across the imputation made against
Jews that they urge countries like England and America to go to war against Germany
on account of its persecution of Jews. Jews have never urged the democracies to wage
war against Germany on account of its persecution of the Jews. This is a mischievous
lie that must be nailed to the counter. If there is a war, Jews will suffer more than the
rest of the population. This is a fact gleaned from the pages of history. And the Jew is
a great lover and advocate of peace. I hope you will refute any such allegation that is
made against them.

In the face of the foregoing weighty contradictions now
enforced by the Editor of the Jewish Tribune and of the fact that I
cannot lay my hands on anything on the strength of which I made the
challenged observation, I must withdraw it without any reservation. I
only hope that my observation has not harmed any single Jew. I know
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

417

that I incurred the wrath of many German friends for what I said in all
good faith.
RAJKOT , May 22, 1939.
Harijan, 27-5-1939.

474. MESSAGE TO INDIANS IN SOUTH AFRICA1
R AJKOT,

May 23, 1939
It has been a matter of grief to me that the Union Government
have not respected their own agreement regarding their treatment of
British Indians. There has been a policy of progressive stringency in
their anti-Asiatic drive. One had hoped that what is known as the
Smuts-Gandhi Agreement of 1914 was the last word in this matter. It
was also hoped that with virtual restriction of Indian immigration,
there would be progressive amelioration in the condition of domiciled
Indians. But that hope was dashed to pieces. Much deterioration has
taken place since. There have been Round Table and other
conferences, agreements have been reached, but never has any finality
been felt by the Indians. Evidently the Union Government would not
be happy till they have either driven away Indians whom they have
given legislative protection or reduced their status to such an extent
that no self-respecting Indian would care to remain in South Africa. I
have therefore not discount-enanced their reported decision to fight
this latest menace of segregation through civil resistance, if necessary.
There must be perfect cohesion and union among the Indians who are
divided into groups. And their resistance will be vain if they are not
resolute in self-suffering. Public opinion in India including that of
Europeans will, I hope, back the Indians in their unequal fight and call
upon the Indian Government to exert its influence with the Union
Government. Lastly, I appeal to the best mind of South Africa to see
that simple justice is not denied to the Indian settlers who have done
no wrong to the country of their adoption.2
Harijan, 27-5-1939.

1
This appeared under the title “The Latest Menace”. The message was also
published in The Hindu, 24-5-1939.
2
Vide also “Interview to Associated Press of India”, 12-5-1939

418

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

475. A LETTER1
R AJKOT,

May 23, 1939
DEAR FRIENDS,

I am sorry that you had to come all the way from Lucknow with
regard to the Shia-Sunni trouble. You have asked me to study the case
and give you my opinion on it. Though I am ill able to shoulder any
further burden, I cannot resist your appeal. I shall try to find out from
the other party also what their side is and give my opinion as early as I
can. However my wish will be that some mutual adjustment would be
possible and I shall be absolved from the necessity of giving my
opinion.2
From a copy: Pyarelal papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

476. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK3
R AJKOT,

May 23, 1939
CHI. PREMA,

I got your letter only today. Immediately after reading it I
passed it on to Narandas. I had read about Deo in the papers. The
remedy is patient endurance and time. You need not even reply to the
charges, nor attend their meetings. If Deo had not attended the
meeting, Dr. Khare would not have got so excited. If the opponent is
not present, the critic finds no interest in abusing him.
I see no need for you to give up associating with Deo. So long
as the hearts of both of you are pure and your association is
exclusively for service, I see no necessity at all for you to give up Deo
1

This was presumably addressed to the office-bearers of the Tanzeem; vide
“Telegram to Tanzeem-ul-Mominin”, 19-5-1939
2
For Gandhiji’s opinion, vide “Letter to President, Tanzeem-ul-Mominin”,
Before 4-8-1939.
3
In Bapuna Patro—5 : Ku. Premabehn Kantakne, the addressee explains that
Dr. Khare, after resigning from the Central Provinces Ministry, had gone to Poona
and made a public speech criticizing the Congress and Shankarrao Deo, who was then
a member of the Congress Working Committee, with such vehemence that the
audience got infuriated and manhandled Shankarrao Deo. The next day Shankarrao Deo
addressed a public meeting. Dr. Khare’s followers tried to disrupt the meeting by
hooting. They questioned also the character of the addressee and the propriety of her
relations with Shankarrao Deo.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

419

or change your work. Maybe it is necessary for you to change your
outward behaviour. That is for you to judge. I might be able to judge
if you were to see me and I could have a heart-to-heart talk with you.
I am hoping to arrive in Bombay on the 2nd.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10399. Also C.W. 6838. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

477.

SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, RAJKOT1

May 23, 1939
I have come here to give an account of myself. I want to render
account not before the Parishad alone, but before all the people of
Rajkot belonging to all groups.
I came to Rajkot with no good thoughts about Mr. Virawala. I
believed that the Thakore Saheb had broken his promise and from
within I was prompted to undertake the fast. But my mind weakened
and the very next day I wrote to the Viceroy for intervention. Now I
see that it was an act of sin. Its outcome was the Award, and its
consequences are known to you. As time went on, I realized my error
and immediately renounced the Award.
I believe I have opened a new page in the history of Rajkot by
my repentance and by the frank admission of my failure. In this I
require your help. I cannot go on single-handed. If the ruler and the
ruled both join hands and do their duty, this apparent failure would
turn into a victory. This necessitates unity among the people.
Unity is the root of strength and progress. The Parishad must
embrace and convert every section of the people. Some may not join
hands with the Parishad owing to their weakness and others due to
differences of opinion, even then they are with us.
I want the Parishad people to realize the implications of ahimsa.
Ahimsa trusts the opponent, ahimsa does not attribute motives, it
harbours no evil thoughts as I did in the case of Durbar Shri Virawala.
Whether he really answered to the description that was being given of
him or not, was beside the point. I shamed my ahimsa by suspecting
him; whereas if I wanted to convert him, my love for him should have
1

420

The meeting was held in the evening at Arya Chowk.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

increased every day. If I had to use harsh words for him, they should
have been such as I might have used only for my father, mother, wife
or son. And you behaved no better. The Parishad workers put no
curbs on their tongue and indulged in unrestrained language. You
have now to begin a new chapter. You must bid good-bye to this
inclination to indulge in unrestrained language. You have to
understand ahimsa as you have not understood it before. Ahimsa
means that you have to trust those whom you have come to regard as
untrustworthy. Unless you do so, you can never convert them.
Mahadev Desai and Mohanbhai who have been having daily talks with
Durbar Shri Virawala tell me that his attitude has undergone a
complete change. Don’t tell me that this change may be only
momentary. The momentary change may well become permanent
some day. Ahimsa has no limits, and patience too has none. We lose
nothing thereby. What I did lose was when I allowed my ahimsa or
soul to be besmirched. I began the process of self-Purification by
discarding the Award. That Process is still going on and it was for me
but a step in the process to attend the Durbar.1
If you want to follow me you must have the faith that you could
enter into the heart of your adversary by ahimsa. If you are true and
confident of yourself, you may not think ill of Mr. Virawala. If you
do, your ahimsa is not perfect. I ask you to have trust in me who has
been a devotee of ahimsa for over fifty years.
Gandhiji referred to the anomaly of the State issuing another notification
continuing the ban on the newspapers which he considered illegal and painful to the
people. Gandhiji advised the people not to be disheartened over such matters. He
asked them to stop reading papers which indulged in violent language, and advised
them to boycott them if they embarrassed the cause by using such language, He also
appealed to the press to refrain from writing anything which might increase
bitterness. Gandhiji appealed to the State also to have faith in the good sense of the
people. He added:

There is not a single person in the whole world who does not
deserve our love. To achieve unity of soul is the greatest purushartha.2
I wish both the Ruler and the ruled in Rajkot may arrive at an
understanding and thus become happy. I wish your administration to
be such as to make it ideal. The late Thakore Sir Lakhajiraj has laid a
1
This paragraph is extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “The Decision and After—
I” in Harijan.
2
Goal of human life

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

421

strong foundation on which you can easily build an ideal structure.
I hope the [Reforms] Committee would work on the basis of the
Notification No. 50 of December last. As for me, I have laid down all
my weapons. Hence I can only make a request. I advise the Parishad
workers to give full co-operation to the Committee and place before
it their evidence and aspirations. I am still groping in the dark. I have
not yet sufficiently found light. When I am fully enlightened I will
place my programme before you and guide you, if you would want
my guidance. Otherwise I will remain in my humble home.
Gandhiji said that there must be some Muslims as well as Bhayats present at
the meeting. They had said a lot of things and bitter, too, about him.

However, I would wish they would carry my message. What
brought me to Rajkot to make peace?
Replying himself, he recalled that he was closely connected with Rajkot and
its ruling family. He was brought up in Rajkot. His father had served as Dewan in the
State and lastly he was closely connected with the late Thakore Sir Lakhajiraj who had
considered him as his guru.
The Hindustan Times, 24-5-1939, and The Hindu, 24-5-1939

478.

LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
ANAND BHUWAN, R AJKOT

May [23] 1 /24 , 1939
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,

I thank you for your letter2 of 15th instant.
Without wishing to enter into any controversy, I would like to
say about Talcher that the whole of the evidence supplied by Shri
Harekrushna Mahtab and enforced by Miss Agatha Harrison and
others goes to show that, so far as the known facts go, there was the
clearest possible belief that Major Hennessy was acting with authority.
But whatever the fact may be, I hope that the poor ryots would not
have to suffer long.
But the main purpose of this is to tell you formally what you
must have seen from my public statement 3 , that I was obliged, for
conscience’s sake, to renounce the Gwyer Award. It took me some
time to detect that I had erred in asking Mr. Gibson4 to send you the
1
2
3
4

422

From the last sentence of the letter
Vide “Letter From Lord Linlithgow”, 15-5-1939
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 17-5-1939
Vide “Letter to E. C. Gibson”, 4-3-1939

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

wire of 4th March. And having detected the error, I took further time
to summon courage enough to throw away the obvious advantages of
the Award and all it meant. But at last I saw that even though I was
acting for the public, I must discard a gain which from a moral point
of view had appeared to me to be unlawful. Fast I have held too sacred
a weapon to be used lightly. I betrayed unworthy weakness—a sure
sign of violence—when instead of allowing the fast to run its course I
invoked your assistance. From that moment it ceased to be a spiritual
act. I would see nothing wrong in seeking your assistance if I was
fighting along purely constitutional lines. Indeed the rich experiences
I have gained during my travail show that if the Paramount Power is to
do its legal duty it is bound to take a much more active part than it has
hitherto taken about the rights of the ryots in the States. But this is by
the way. My object just now is to apologize to you for all the trouble I
caused you by my weakness. And may I ask you also to convey my
apology to Sir Maurice Gwyer for the labours that he had to go
through for delivering his Award? I know that the correct procedure
for me was to let you have me recantation before the world knew
anything about it. But I was having daily talks with Durbar Shri
Virawala through Mahadev Desai. Every hour’s delay added to my
agony. I was dying to put myself right with him. I could accept
nothing until I had disengaged myself from what I have stigmatized as
a double game. And then too there has been delay in sending you this
apology as my dealing with the aftermath of the recantation with my
weak body left me little time for composing this letter. I wanted some
leisure for it. I stole it partly last night and the rest this morning.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm: Lord Linlithgow Papers. Courtesy: National Archives of
India

479. LETTER TO CHANDAN PAREKH
R AJKOT,

May 24, 1939
CHI. CHANDAN,

Why did you fall ill? Take the medicine suggested in the letter
which Sushila is writing to you. But make this change in it. What you
are suffering from is not dysentery but an infection which you have
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

423

contracted here.1 To cure it you should live for some time only on
fruit juices and glucose. The fruits should include pineapples,
pomegranates, musambis, oranges and grapes. Take about 50 ounces
of juice and 2 to 4 ounces glucose. If you do this you will be able to
keep up your strength. If you cannot drink this quantity of juice, you
may drink less. If you think that the quantity of glucose also is too
much, take less. Put a mud-pack of clean earth on the abdomen at
night, cover it up with a piece of dry cloth and then wrap a piece of
khadi round it. Remove the khadi piece when you wake up at night.
Keep me informed. Get well soon.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C. W. 951. Courtesy: Satish D. Kalelkar

480. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
R AJKOT,

May 25, 1939
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

Balkrishna is not going away for years and I shall be back only
by the middle of July. Therefore there would have been no harm even
if you had accompanied Balkrishna. Anyway your decision was good
enough. Balkrishna’s going is taking so much time that very soon it
may get cold there and then it will be no use going. Anyway whatever
is deemed best should be done. I must know soon about it.
About the books for you I said what I did after full thought.
Sushila is laid up with fever.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
We reach Bombay on the 2nd and thence to the Frontier
Province around the 5th.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 4316

1

The addressee explains that conditions in Rajkot were so bad that most of the
workers accompanying Gandhiji were stricken with one disease or another.

424

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

481. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
R AJKOT,

May 26, 1939
MY DEAR IDIOT,

Of course I will give you the time you may need for explaining
all you wish. But you must cease grieving. Weeping and brooding
over injustices done to oneself is no virtue, it is definitely a vice. It is
better cheerfully to submit to injustices than even unwittingly to do
any injustice to anyone.
I forgot to tell you that P. was better after my severe talking to
him. Only boundless love can cure him of his malady. I lack it. I lose
patience with him as with no one. Have I ever told you that somehow
or other I never spoke to Chhotelal or Pyarelal without losing temper?
The wonder to me is that Ch. never resented my explosions. He is
gone. I feel responsible for his suicide. My harsh treatment of P. when
I discovered his love for Y. must be held to be unforgivable. Had I
treated him sympathetically things would have taken a different turn.
As it was, I had practically banished him to Orissa. My ahimsa failed
me. But neither Ch. nor P. ever complained. On the contrary they
read love in every act of mine. If Mahadev has time he must tell you
what I mean.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C. W. 3655. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6464

482. LETTER TO SHARDABEHN G. CHOKHAWALA
R AJKOT,

May 26, 1939
CHI. BABUDI ,

How did you fall ill? Did you make a mistake about food?
Shakaribehn must have called on you. You may keep her there as
long as you wish.
Sushilabehn has fallen ill. She has low fever and diarrhoea.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

425

We will leave this place on the 1st and reach Bombay on the 2nd
morning. We shall have to stay in Bombay for three days. If you wish
to stay with us during those days, join us at Surat. You will have got
well by that time.
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 10012. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

483. LETTER TO SHAMALDAS GANDHI
R AJKOT,

May 26, 1939
CHI. SHAMALDAS 1 ,

Can’t you improve the language of Janmabhoomi? If you
accept the policy of ahimsa, it is very necessary that you should make
a conscious effort to change your language. If ahimsa is to find its
way through the violence that is spreading all around, the newspapers
which believe in ahimsa must transform themselves completely. Think
over this. I don’t wish that you should do anything for my sake, but if
you are sincerely convinced of what I am saying, make the change.
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 5802

484. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
ANANDKUNJ, R AJKOT,

May 26, 1939
CHI. PRABHA,

I have your letter. Sushila is having fever. Nothing more
remains to be done for that student. However please ask or write to
Rajendra Babu about the matter. Tell him that it is not your job to
collect money for them.
It is certainly good that you are having medical treatment.
1

A nephew of Gandhiji and editor of Janmabhoomi, a Gujarati daily published
from Bombay
426
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Sushila thinks that you must get your private parts examined by a
woman doctor. Without such examination it will not be possible to
prescribe the right treatment. Get yourself examined, therefore. Do
continue milk and fruit. It would be very nice if you come to Segaon
when I return there. We shall be starting from here on the 1st. After
staying there for three or four days, we shall go to the Frontier
Province. Kanti is here, and of course Saraswati too. Amtul Salaam is
in Ahmedabad. Ba’s health is all right and so is mine.
What have you done about your plan for studying?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3513

485. TELEGRAM TO CANTONMENT ASSOCIATION
R AJKOT,

May 27, 1939
C ANTONMENT ASSOCIATION
ALLAHABAD
TELL BRIJMOHAN

HIS FAST

UNWARRANTED.

HE

SHOULD

BREAK

IT.

From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

486. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
R AJKOT,

May 27, 1939
CHI. KANTI,

Your letter too seems thoughtless to me. There is anger in it
also. There is arrogance given in your manner of asking for
forgiveness. But then how can you change your nature? Do you
consider your marrying in this way a marriage? You are deceiving
yourself by believing so. How many people you have hurt by your
action you do not know, and you do not feel sorry for that. It seems
even the sorrow you expressed before me was momentary. However
one cannot swallow what one has spat out. If you would release me, I
am ready to be released. I am sure you will continue to receive money
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

427

from Devdas. At present you get it through me. But it would suit me if
he sends it directly to you. Your writing to me that I should forget
you shows your impertinence. You know that I cannot forget you.
Yes, the hopes which you had encouraged me to build on you seem to
have been shattered. No matter how much you slight me, I will not
cease to be your well-wisher. Wake up and shed your cruelty, be
straightforward and humble, learn gentleness and get rid of the poison
in you. Look upon all those who flatter you and please you by their
sweet words as your enemies. You have hurt a good many people.
Don’t pride yourself on having made Saraswati your slave. Think of
the pain caused to Ramachandran.
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7360. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

487. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
R AJKOT,

May 27, 1939
CHI. AMRITLAL,

I had received the letter regarding Bal. I got Kaka’s wire. I think
the problem is over now. I shall be in Bombay from the 2nd to the 5th
at any rate. It may perhaps be possible to meet during those days.
God alone knows whether I shall get the time. From Bombay to the
Frontier Province.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10788

488. LETTER TO MANU SUBEDAR
May 27, 1939
BHAI SUBEDAR,

1

I got your letter. You have suggested a very difficult way. It
seems almost impossible to harmonize mutually contradictory points
of view and run the Government. It is one thing to do justice to all
points of view and be generous to those holding the minority view, but
1

428

An economist
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to include all parties in the Ministry seems another matter altogether. I
have made no attempt at all to study the working of the different
Ministries and do not know their problems. All the same I intend to
put your suggestion before the Bombay Ministry. But before doing
that I intend to put your letter before Sardar. You do not object to
that, do you? I will not proceed further before I hear from you.
Vandemataram from

M. K. GANDHI
From Gujarati: C.W. 5803

489. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
May 27, 1939
BAPA,

I have read the cutting sent by you. Will they let me set right the
affairs of the Comilla Ashram? Bengal politics are in a curious state.
They wouldn’t eat themselves nor let others eat. In such circumstances
what can one do?
The Talcher chapter1 has become complicated. Let me see.
Vandemataram from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1183

490. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
R AJKOT,

6.20 a.m., May 28, 1939
MY DEAR IDIOT,

This is the fourth letter I am writing without the break of a day.
I can’t feel happy till I have convinced you that we are all authors of
our own misery. If we have imbibed the first principle of ahimsa we
must learn to put up even with real injustices from dear ones and that
without grief. We do nothing strange when we require felt love. But
our love becomes potent when we rejoicingly suffer felt injustice. This
really resolves itself into what I started this letter with, that justice
and injustice have no existence apart from our feeling. I want you
1

Vide “Talcher”

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

429

therefore to imbibe this first lesson of ahimsa and assure me that there
will be no more of weeping or harbouring secret and silent sorrow and
grief. If you cannot learn this from me, you will learn nothing.
Love.
TYRANT

[PS.]
7.30 a.m.
Khurshed has written to you about Women’s Congress. I would
favour the idea, if it appeals to you.
From the original: C. W. 3656. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6465

491. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
R AJKOT,

May 28, 1939
CHI. MANILAL,

This note will be brought by an old client of mine, Shaikh Farid.
He had a store in Pietermaritzburg. He has to go there because of the
death of his brother. But he doesn’t know anybody now in
Pietermaritzburg. Ascertain his need and introduce him to somebody
if you can or do whatever else may be necessary.
Blessings from
BAPU

S HRI MANILAL GANDHI
“INDIAN OPINION”
P HOENIX
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4896

492. LETTER TO H. L. SHARMA
R AJKOT,

May 28, 1939
CHI. SHARMA,

When did we ever decide that I was to answer you each time you
wrote? I was so tied up that I had no alternative. My health is good.
430

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

We set out from Rajkot on the 1st. We shall be in Bombay till the 5th
or 6th and then on to the Frontier Province. How did you get the
stomach trouble and what did unboiled milk have to do with it?
Some books on physiology, etc., had been ordered for you.
Send me the titles and other details. How useful did they prove to
you? A worker at Segaon needs similar books.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsh,
between pp. 279 to 280

493. LETTER TO RANJIT
May 28, 1939
BHAI RANJIT,

I have your letter. In the West, boys in many schools take their
bath completely naked. Perhaps in your school they are imitating
some of their ways. If that is so, it should not be considered sinful.
The whole question deserves careful thinking. You should try to
ascertain more facts.
Blessings from
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

494. TELEGRAM TO MIRABEHN
R AJKOT,

May 29, 1939
MIRABEHN
C ARE MANGALSAIN BANKERS
ABBOTABAD
HOPING

LEAVE

BOMBAY

SIXTH

JUNE.

BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6443. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 10038

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

431

495. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
R AJKOT,

May 29, 1939
CHI. MIRA ,

Your letter arrived today after unexpected absence. But I was
not worrying. There is enough here to occupy me. Heat is your
enemy. Stenches and crowds add to the difficulty. From your
telegram I infer that you are safely in Hazara. I hope it is cooler or
rather less hot there. I expect to get away on 6th from Bombay for the
Frontier Provice. But God disposes.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6442. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 10037

496. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
ANANDKUNJ, R AJKOT,

May 29, 1939
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,

It is perfectly true that you do not get justice. I cannot myself
manage to write. I have asked Kanu. I have tried numerous arrangements, but when I myself am lax how can I blame anybody else? I will
see if I can be regular now.
I have been trying to do what I can about the problem there.1 It
will be good if I get regular reports from there. Do you think the
movement will go on well?
What does the fact that you didn’t get permission for even one
assistant indicate? I had thought that it would be child’s play for
Manilal to secure such permission.
I am all right. We leave this place on June 1 and go to Bombay.
After four or five days there, we go to the Frontier Province.
The rest if someone writes.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4897

1

The reference is to the South Africa Union’s policy of segregating Indians;
vide “Message to Indians in South Africa”, 23-5-1939
432
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

497. LETTER TO VINODINI AND SAMYUKTA GANDHI
R AJKOT,

May 29, 1939
CHI. VINODINI AND SAMYUKTA1 ,

I have your joint letter. I am glad that you wrote to me. You
must follow the doctor’s advice. But the real support is Ramanama.
That is the only true remedy. I will arrive in Bombay on the 2nd.
I am not writing separately to Jaya. She must be regaining
strength.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./III

498. TO PARSI FRIENDS
Parsi friends continue to favour me with their letters, some of
which do not err on the side of politeness. Some are affectionate and
so simple that they believe me to be capable of performing wonders.
Among these writers there is one who writes with a lacerated heart and
sends me cuttings which contain palpable falsehoods. He asks me to
appeal to the Parsis with a view, at least to purging the opposition of
indecency. The language used in the cuttings is not translatable. The
families of those who have incurred their ill-will have not been left
alone. Vulgarity is too mild a term for characterizing some of the
writings. One writer uses language of violence which certainly brings
him within penal laws. But the writers have no fear of the law. The
writings before me are in fair sample of ‘civil’ liberty. I call these
writings terrorism of minorities. One writer has given the prohibition
campaign of communal turn and has not hesitated to say that
Congress Hindus have plotted to ruin the Parsis !
Surely abuse is no argument. Let the Parsis who are interested
opposing prohibition carry on whatever agitation they like. But let it
be decent, non-violent and within bounds.
Must one hundred thousand Parsis hold up an overdue reform
which promises to bring a ray of hope in the dungeons of the
labouring population which far outnumbers the whole of the Parsi
1

Daughters of Jaisukhlal Gandhi, a nephew of Gandhiji

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

433

population? Every legitimate ground of complaint has been removed
by Dr. Gilder. No Parsi whose health requires the use of spirituous
liquors will be deprived of them. If Parsi religious rites really demand
the use of the fiery liquid, they shall be supplied. Then there is the
economic question. Many poor liquor dealers will be hard hit by the
deprivation of their means of livelihood. I understand that the
Ministers are taxing themselves to devise some legitimate method of
dealing with them. But it will surely be very difficult, if not impossible,
for them to do anything, if the wild ferment is kept up and terrorism
short of physical violence is applied. Not that the Ministers should not
do justice because of terrorism, but it incapacitates them for taking
effective action. For instance, it is necessary for the heads of the Parsi
Panchayat to confer with the Ministers and in consultation with them
think out a plan whereby prohibition in Bombay can be inaugurated
with the least possible hardship.This can be done only if all parties
recognize that prohibition has come to stay.
My correspondents have asked me to use my influence with the
Ministers for withdrawing their measure. They should know that I
have my limitations. If I have any influence, it is due to my never
crossing the boundary line. Let all concerned know that I have never
interfered with the Congress Ministers although many of them have
been and are my valued co-workers. Having withdrawn from the
Congress, it would ill become me to interfere with their work. The
very purpose of my withdrawal would be defeated. What is more, I am
most interested in prohibition. No one in India perhaps knows its
beneficial effect as well as I do and therefore no one feels its necessity
as keenly as I do. I have seen with my own eyes people otherwise sane
lying in the gutter. Having indentified myself with labour, I know
what ruin drink has brought to the homes of labourers given to drink.
I know that they will not touch liquor if it was not within reach. We
have contemporaneous evidence that drinkers themselves are in many
cases asking for prohibition. Have I not my eldest son who was
intelligent, brave, patriotic and capable of sacrifice, and who has been
ruined by the drink habit and who is today lost to his parents and lost
to society and exists on the misplaced charity of generous donors?
This is not an exception. It is a typical case, as I can say from a
knowledge of sons of persons in the so-called higher walks of life. As
I write these lines, illustrations of unimpeachable authenticity crowd
on my memory. I can therefore only ask my Parsi correspondents and
others like them in return to help the Ministers in their noble and
434

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

philanthropic mission; for I feel convinced that whatever may be said
for or against Congress Ministers about their popular measures, their
prohibition programme, if they are able to put it through to the end,
will go down to posterity as unquestionably the noblest measure of all.
It is no vote-catching device. Prohibition is an integral part of the
programme of national self-purification. Twice has it been demonstrated what was possible in the shape of closing of liquor shops even
through voluntary efrort. Let the great Parsi community, men and
women, discarding the unbecoming vituperation, rise to the occasion
and help the great reform movement which, if it succeeds, will not
only enrich India morally and materially but will serve as an impetus
to similar effort in the Western world. Many eyes outside India are
watching this experiment anxiously and prayerfully.
I grant that many Parsis drink moderately and without any
visible bad effect. That is an argument not for opposing prohibition
but for ensuring that they get their drink if it is proved to be a medical
necessity. They should be patriotic enough to recognize that as
against their limited experience is the universal exprience of the
deadly effect of the drink habit.
R AJKOT, May 30, 1939

Harijan, 3-6-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

435

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I1
COLD-BLOODED BREACH OF A SOLEMN COVENANT
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel issued the following statement on January 25th:
It is with the deepest regret that I have to announce resumption of the struggle
in Rajkot which seemed to have ended so happily. Resumption has become a duty in
order to vindicate the honour of the State and the self-respect of the people of Rajkot.
The public will recall that the settlement announced in the Rajkot State
Gazette of 26th December was a result of discussions between the Thakore Saheb and
his Council consisting of Sir Patrick Cadell, Rao Saheb Maneklal Patel and Shri J.
Jobanputra. The discussions which took place on the evening of December 25th
lasted for nearly eight hours ending at 1.42 a.m. On the day of the settlement the
Thakore Saheb gave me the following note:
AMARSINHJI SECRETARIAT, R AJKOT STATE,

December 26, 1938
It is agreed that seven members of the Committee mentioned in Clause 2 of the
State announcement of today’s date are to be recommended by Sardar Vallabhbhai
Patel and they are to be nominated by us.
(Sd.) DHARMENDRASINH
THAKORE SAHEB, R AJKOT
It should be remembered that I had gone to Rajkot at the Thakore Saheb’s
invitation.
Soon after the settlement Sir Patrick Cadell retired....
I must state with the greatest reluctance that the Thakore Saheb has been ill
served by those who have eaten his salt. Among the worst of these advisers has been
Durbar Virawala who has ruined the State and drained it empty by his hopeless
mismanagement. He has cast a spell over the Thakore Saheb which the latter cannot
resist even if he would. It was he who brought Sir Patrick Cadell. When the latter
realized that Durbar Virawala was the evil genius of the State, almost his first act was
to have him banished from Rajkot with the help of the Agency. Sir Patrick Cadell
might not have been obliged to leave if he had not traded upon his prestige as a
member of the ruling race. Durbar Virawala would not brook the presence of a Dewan
who had brought about his banishment.
1

436

Vide “Speech at Meeting of Peasants”, 29-1-1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Though he was banished he pulled the wires from Bagasra. His son Bhojvala
and his nephew Valeravala are still with the Thakore Saheb. Realizing that he could
not successfully resist the contemplated settlement, he played the role of a friend and
seemed to assist the settlement. Soon after the settlement, when Sir Patrick Cadell
was about to go, Durbar Virawala found himself in Rajkot and began his operations
which have never ceased. The Resident’s note and the Political Agent’s note will be
read with interest.
I needed a few days to enable me to select, in consultation with those who were
in charge of the movement, seven names of the committee that had to be given in
terms of the settlement. I sent the following seven names on the 4th January:
1. Shri Popatlal Dhanjibhai Malaviya
2. Shri Popatlal Purushottam Anada
3. Shri Mullan Valiji Abdulalli
4. Dr. D. J. Gajjar
5. Shri Jamnadas Khushalchand Gandhi
6. Shri Vrajlal Mayashanker Shukla
7. Shri Uchharangray Navalshanker Dhebar
Notification of the appointment of the committee should have followed at
once. But nothing happened for some days.
On the 28th December there was a consultation between the Resident and the
Thakore Saheb-in-Council. I have authentic notes of that interview taken by one of
those present. The remarks made by the Resident about the Congress and me will be
read with interest. He could not conceal his dislike of the settlement, the Congress or
me.
It seems that the Resident and Durbar Virawala are responsible for the breach
of the solemn undertaking the Thakore Saheb gave to his people As evidence of
Durbar Virawala’s influence over the Thakore Saheb, the letter of thanks received by
me from him makes interesting reading.
It is necessary to compare the present one-sided arbitrary notification with the
one which was issued in terms of the settlement. The second notification cancels four
of my nominees. It also cancels the terms of reference and is vague, whereas the first
was precise. The former contemplates publication of the report before the 31st
instant and effect being given to it by the Thakore Saheb. The latter fixes no
time-limit for the report.
Before the last announcement I received a letter from Rao Saheb Maneklal
Patel. It is noteworthy that whereas that letter had accepted four of my nominees the
notification has only three. To this I sent a reply in Gujarati of which the translation
will be found.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

437

I had heard so much of Durbar Virawala’s influence on the Thakore Saheb and
his interference that I had to say in my said letter that Durbar Virawala could not in
any event be accepted on the committee. I wanted no loophole left.
This flagrant breach of a solemn settlement leaves but one course open before
the people of Rajkot. It now remains for me to invite the people of Rajkot to resume
the self-chosen course of suffering for vindicating their liberty and saving Rajkot and
the Thakore Saheb from utter ruin. It is best to anticipate and provide for the worst.
The worst that can happen is frightfulness of the extreme type, including torture not
unknown in Kathiawar and setting up of internal quarrels. Of the latter we have
evidence in inspired agitation from some Muslim brethren. We have to show them by
our conduct that they have at least as much to gain as the rest of us by settled
government under their own control. Rajkot has been made bankrupt through
hopeless mismanagement and corruption. These dissensions, if they persist, can
prolong the struggle, never defeat the end in view, if the people at large cohere, show
capacity for enduring suffering, no matter how great or protracted, and also show
capacity, in spite of pecuniary losses, for going through the items of non-violent
non-co-operation. On no account must students take part in civil disobedience or
strikes. They can and should do constructive work if they believe in it. They can by
house-to-house visits alleviate suffering which is bound to be inevitable as the
struggle proceeds.
Non-violence has to be observed in thought, word and deed. It has to be
observed as well among co-workers as with opponents and neutrals, as well in the jail
as outside it. The measure of our non-violence will be the measure of our success. We
must have faith in the possibility of our non-violence turning the Thakore Saheb’s
face in the direction of his people. Today he is a Ruler in name only; it must hurt
every one of his people to find the young Prince committing a deliberate breach of
the solemn covenant he made with his people.
I have said seemingly bitter things about Durbar Virawala. But truth has to be
sometimes bitter and harsh. I have said nothing that I do not believe about him. We
must love him in spite of his glaring blemishes and expect our love to convert him
and those who are working under his influence and direction.
I am sorry the Resident resents my intervention and the influence of the
Congress in shaping the policy and programme of the people of Rajkot. The people
of the States have always been guided by the Congress. They owe allegiance to it.
Indeed in the early stages the Princes also looked to the Congress for its support. The
Congress adopted the policy of non-intervention in the sense of direct participation
in the matters affecting questions arising between the people and the Princes. This
was nothing but recognition of the limitations of the Congress. But when the people
became conscious of their strength and were prepared to suffer, the Congress would be

438

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

untrue to its mission if it failed to help them to the best of its ability. As for poor me
I happen to have been a President of the Kathiawar Rajkiya Parishad and as such owe a
duty to the people of Kathiawar as also to the Princes and dare not refuse help when
they need it. In Rajkot the people in the first instance and then the Ruler sought my
assistance which I claim has been unstintingly given. I fail to see anything wrong in
this or to be resented by the Resident or the Imperial Power. This is a question which
it would incidentally be Rajkot’s proud privilege to be the cause of having decided.
For the time being the civil resistance will be confined to Kathiawaris only.
The people of Kathiawar are so inter-related that for practical purposes it would be
difficult to exclude any Kathiawari from participation on moral grounds.

THAKORE SAHEB’S LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
AMARSINHJI SECRETARIAT,
RAJKOT STATE,
December, 1938
MY DEAR SARDAR VALLABHBHAI,

Thanks for your note received just now.
I shall be-delighted if you come and have tea with me at 5 p. m. today.
We shall then discuss the present question in presence of my Council
Members.
Yours sincerely,
DHARMENDRASINH

LETTER FROM SIR PATRICK CADELL TO THAKORE SAHEB
AMARSINHJI SECRETARIAT,
RAJKOT,
October 1, 1938
YOUR HIGHNESS,

I yesterday asked you to allow me to see you not later than 8 o’clock. I had
affairs of great importance to talk about. I suggested this late hour though
inconvenient to myself, in order to suit you. You sent your Private Secretary to tell
me that you would see me at 8.30. I was present at that time and was told that you were
in your bath. I waited till 9 o’clock, and was told that you might be another quarter or
half an hour late. I then left.
I now write to inform Your Highness that I have no intention of allowing

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

439

myself to be treated in this grossly discourteous manner. I had no idea when I left
England to help you that you would be capable of such behaviour. I cannot allow it to
be continued.
I had intended to tell you last night that in any case the present situation
cannot go on. The condition of affairs in the State is very serious. Many of the
complaints against the State are based on your behaviour. It is believed that you
spend too large a share of the State’s revenue, that most of your expenditure is on
unworthy objects, and that you take no part in the administration of the State. I do
not wish to make any reference at present either to the amount of money you spend,
or the way you spend it. But it is certainly true that you take no part in the
administration and show no interest in the welfare of your people. This is all the more
noticed because it is so different from the system which your father followed. It is not
fair to your officers to expect them to bear the burden of repressive methods while you
do nothing. You must take some share. I therefore propose to you the following
action.
(1) I understand that you are to take part in the yajna ceremony at one, and
perhaps two, of the temples this evening at 7.30. If there is time for you to agree to
this, I request that after you have done this, you will drive through the city and that
you will allow me to accompany you.
(2) The Huzur Office is closed today as it is a holiday, but it is open on
Monday. I suggest that you should promise on your word of honour to come to the
office on Monday, not later than 6 p.m. to hear petitioners for about an hour.
I am sure that these two actions will have a good effect in the city.
I must also make a third request.
(3) Whenever I have to see you on any day, you will promise to see me on that
day not later than 7.30 p.m. and you will promise on your word of honour not to be
more than a quarter of an hour late.
If you are unable to accede to these suggestions, I shall be obliged to inform
the Hon. the Resident that I cannot carry on and that 1 propose to return to England as
soon as possible.
If I have to do so, I fear that this may have unfortunate consequences both for
your State and for yourself. I can assure you that the Government of India are not
likely to look with favour on your conduct. I should be sorry if you were to suffer, but
I cannot continue if Your Highness behaves like this.
I should be obliged if you would let me know before 5.30 this evening whether

440

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Your Highness agrees to drive through the city this evening and to allow me to
accompany you.
Yours sincerely,
PATRICK CADELL

LETTER FROM THAKORE SAHEB TO SIR PATRICK CADELL
Confidential

RANJIT VILAS PALACE,
RAJKOT,

October 2, 1938
DEAR SIR PATRICK,

I am exceedingly sorry to receive your letter of yesterday, and I must say that I
do not like the tone of it. I cannot accept that the complaints against me are based on
facts. The present agitation is only a wave spread by the Congress for the initiation
of responsible government in the States, and I believe that to be the reason why they
have selected Rajkot in Kathiawar, as they have done with Mysore, Travancore, etc.,
as States in which people already enjoy greater share of public liberties.
It was with a view to put down the situation that I had requisitioned your
services I have still a wish to smoothen your task as much as possible and will come
to the office any day at my convenience after Dasera.
I strongly object to your remarks that if you have to go it may have
unfortunate consequences both for my State and myself, and that the Government of
India are not likely to look with favour on my conduct. In this connection I must
definitely let you understand that it is I who has appointed you as my Dewan, and that
if as a result of any disagreement with you I have to ask you to be relieved, neither the
Hon. the Resident nor H. E. the Viceroy will have any cause to look upon me with
disfavour. Whatever information you may be able to gather with regard to my State
and myself is made available to you because you enjoy my confidence, and I need
hardly say that you cannot utilize any of my State records without my permission, and
much less against myself. Any information which the Hon. the Resident has thought
it necessary to receive about anything relating to my State has been sought for
through my Dewan, only if I am agreeable to give it. I might also tell you that I have
done nothing to lose any share of the confidence which I enjoy both with the Hon.
the Resident and H. E. the Viceroy to its fullest extent. I would therefore wish you to
reconsider your decision and express your agreement to act in a manner consonant
with my dignity and policy.
Yours sincerely,
DHARMENDRASINH

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

441

LETTER FROM THAKORE SAHEB TO SIR PATRICK CADELL
RAJKOT,
October 16, 1938
DEAR SIR PATRICK,

You are, I am sure, fully aware of the present situation. It has not been
improved in any way and so far as I can see it is getting worse every day and has
reached a climax by now. The other day when we called a meeting we agreed to give
the people certain concessions, but it failed to ease the situation and bring about any
desired result. I am myself getting convinced that we failed to take proper steps at the
proper time, which should have removed my anxiety. The situation, in short, is
decidedly getting out of control and adding immensely to my troubles. The agitation
is getting more and more intense with little hope of its being brought under control
in the near future. My people feel and are led to believe that you have been sent by the
Government and that I have lost the position which I had hitherto enjoyed. They now
refuse to extend to me the same love and loyalty which they used to extend before
your arrival. Nay they even seem to think and carry the impression that not I but you
are the Ruler.
I should say that though this feeling is not created by you but I must say that
anyway it is there which they are not in a mood to shake off obviously. Diwali
holidays are drawing nearer and Ijaras must as usual be given but the people have
boycotted them. They are further determined to boycott sales of grain also, and it is
possible that no sale of grain could be made this year due to their non-co-operation.
This would mean a financial ruination of the State and a crisis which had better be
imagined than stated. This state of things, I feel, I, as the Ruler, am bound to prevent
at any cost or sacrifice in the interests of the State and its subjects.
The people, as you know, have now adopted a defiant attitude and are suffering.
I must, therefore, see that this unfortunate situation must be thoroughly eased and
some sort of definite settlement should be arrived at between them and me at the
earliest possible opportunity. I feel I am unable to do anything in this matter so long
as my people do not recognize me as their de facto Ruler. As a well-wisher of the State
you would also wish and agree that such state of things should not be permitted to
continue any more. It is therefore my bounden duty to see that I must have my
position as the real and benevolent Ruler re-established in the eyes of my people, in
order that I may be able to carry conviction and settle with them and win their love
and confidence.
I had asked D. S. Virawala to know your views in this matter. He tells me that
he saw you on the 13th instant and you told him that in your view the fight should be

442

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

continued as long as the State’s finances would permit and we should see whether they
or we would ultimately win.
Besides, your letter dated 1st October 1938 gives me to understand that in so
far as you are concerned you are definitely of the view that I am myself, more or less,
the cause of these troubles. I have denied the charges by my reply. Considering the
allegations made in your letter and your attitude, I have little doubt in my mind that
we would not be able to pull on together in the interests of my State and its subjects
and also my rights, dignity and position of the Ruler, as nobody realizes the
extremely disastrous situation more than I do.
It is my definite desire to myself settle the domestic dispute between my State
and its subjects as early as possible and before the Diwali holidays. This would not,
in my view, be possible unless we part at the earliest. This is a very unfortunate
position and no one would be more sorry than myself, but it could not be helped as
the interests of myself and my State are at stake. I need hardly assure you that it is not
my desire to make your position awkward in any way, and hence I leave it to you to
decide how you should arrange to leave and retire, as I am anxious to see that just as
you came as a friend you should also part as a friend. I had engaged your services for
six months certain and hence I am instructing the State Treasury to pay your salary
accordingly. I am also instructing Mr. Bhat, the Revenue Secretary, to relieve you at
your convenience.
Yours sincerely,
DHARMENDRASINH

LETTER FROM E. C. GIBSON TO THAKORE SAHEB
Confidential

THE RESIDENCY,
RAJKOT,
October 26, 1938

D. O. No. C/134-38
MY DEAR THAKORE SAHEB,

You will remember that on the evening of October 16th you wrote to inform
me that you desired to dispense with Sir Patrick Cadell’s services and you enclosed a
copy of the letter which you already sent to him. On the following morning we had a
discussion. I then strongly advised you to reconsider the matter and to refrain from
taking a step which from every point of view must inevitably be very prejudicial to
the interests of your State and yourself. I also pointed out that when, on August 25th,
you wrote to me asking me to obtain the necessary sanction to Sir Patrick Cadell’s
appointment, you stated very definitely that the appointment was to be for a
minimum period of six months in the first instance. On this understanding I referred
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

443

your request to the Political Secretary to His Excellency the Crown Representative’s
approval of the proposal.
I need not repeat here the views which I explained fully when we discussed the
matter on October 17th and again on October 22nd. After our discussion on October
17th, as you are unwilling to accept the advice which I offered, I forwarded to the
Political Secretary a copy of your letter of October 1 6th.
When we met on October 22nd I told that I had been instructed to inform you
that His Excellency the Crown Representative trusts that in the interests of your State
and yourself you will lose no time in reversing the action taken by you. Since then I
have been hoping to hear that you have accepted and acted upon this advice. As
however I have received no intimation from you to this effect, I write to ask you
kindly to let me know as soon as possible the action you have taken in the matter
since I saw you on October 22nd.
Yours sincerely,
E. C. GIBSON

LETTER FROM THAKORE SAHEB TO E. C. GIBSON
Confidential

October 2, 1938

MY DEAR MR. GIBSON,

I am very thankful for your confidential D. O. C/134-38 dated 26th instant.
In view of the desire of His Excellency the Crown Representative and your
earnest advice and recommendation, I have decided to continue Sir Patrick Cadell in
my service, although I maintain that the constitutional aspect of this question is in
my favour.
I am very anxious that proper steps should be taken as soon as possible and
have decided to form a strong council consisting of Sir Patrick Cadell and two of my
officers to carry on the State, so that peace and tranquillity and respect for law is
properly maintained.
At the time of my interview with you on the 17th instant you approved of my
suggestion of forming a council. Accordingly I have decided to have one of the
following members in charge of the departments shown against their names:
Ist member and Vice-president: Sir Patrick Cadell: 1. Law and Justice, 2.
Political, 3. Finance, 4. Police and 5. Praja Pratinidhi Sabha and Municipality.
2nd member: Rao Saheb Maneklal C. Patel: 1. Finance, 2. Industries, 3.
Revenue, 4. P. W. D. and 5. Bardashi.
3rd Member: Mr. Jayantilal L. Jobanputra: 1. Medical, 2. Jail, 3. Education
and 4. Stables and other unspecified departments.

444

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

As regards the future steps to be taken to control the present situation, they
will be decided by the council with my approval and in all other important questions
the above procedure is to be adopted.
I will issue detailed instruction hereafter. I think the formation of such a
strong council will remove my anxiety about the present situation, which is
increasing day by day.
On hearing from you, I shall inform Sir Patrick Cadell accordingly.
I am so sorry for the trouble I gave you in the matter.
Yours sincerely,
DHARMENDRASINH

LETTER FROM E. C. GIBSON TO DURBAR VIRAWALA
THE RESIDENCY, R AJKOT,

November 25, 1938
MY DEAR VIRAWALA,

Thanks for your letter. I did hear when I returned to Rajkot this morning that
you were here, and I must say that I was very much surprised to hear it. I should have
thought that if Mr. Anantrai Pattani wanted to see you he could have asked you to go
to Bhavnagar or could himself have gone to Natwarnagar which is, I believe, much
nearer to Bhavnagar than Rajkot is. I cannot understand why he felt it incumbent on
him to make this extraordinary request, and I certainly think that it is a pity that you
complied with it after the advice I gave you. I can understand that you were reluctant to
come here. These long journeys must be very bad for your health at a time when you
require rest and quiet for recuperation after your long illness. I am glad that you are
feeling better today, and I strongly advise you to take more care of your health in
future.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,
E. C. GIBSON
VALA SHRI VIRA MULU,
TALUKDAR OF NATWARNAGAR , R AJKOT

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

445

LETTER FROM POLITICAL AGENT TO DURBAR VIRAWALA
Personal

RAJKOT,
November 29, 1938

DEAR VALA SHRI,

Your personal letter of yesterday. I am sorry Col. Aspinall thought the journey
had been trying to you, particularly as you told me you were feeling so unwell after it.
I was naturally extremely surprised, after your assurances that you would see
nobody in Rajkot pending a reply to my reference to the Hon. the Resident, to learn
that you had been to the Palace.
I can only assume that you will realize that, in your own interests, this was
hardly wise, and that you will, pending your return to Natwarnagar, not again depart
from the attitude you had offered to adopt, i. e., complete aloofness from local affairs
and not to meet anybody.
I trust that you have now completely rested and will not suffer from your return
journey to Natwarnagar tomorrow.
Yours sincerely,
C. K. DALY

LETTER FROM THAKORE SAHEB TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
AMARSINHJI SECRETARIAT,
RAJKOT STATE,
December 27, 1938
MY DEAR VALLABHBHAI PATEL.

I am very thankful to you for coming to Rajkot.
I appreciate very much the way in which you helped me in ending the impasse.
I think you are fully aware by now that Dewan Saheb Virabhai has been most
loyal to me and my State. All along his career he has done his best for the good of my
people.
In safeguarding the interests of myself and my State he had to suffer also.
Now I request you to do your best to remove any misunderstanding existing in
the minds of my people against him.

446

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I shall feel very thankful for the same.
Yours sincerely,
Dharmendrasinh
THAKORE SAHEB, RAJKOT

EXTRACTS FROM NOTES OF TALKS AT THE RESIDENCY
December 28, 1938
Present: The Hon. Mr. Gibson,
The Thakore Saheb,
Sir Patrick R. Cadell,
Rao Saheb M. C. Patel,

Members of the
State Council

Mr. Jayantilal L. Jobanputra
The Hon. Mr. Gibson started by saying to the Thakore Saheb to the effect that
the agreement made by him had stirred up all the Princes. He would like to know how
Vallabhbhai Patel had come to Rajkot and whether he was invited by him.
THAKORE SAHEB : He had come of his own accord and asked for meeting me,
and I had invited him to tea.
MR. GIBSON: Well, he is a very unreliable man. You know that the
Government of India’s wishes were that no outside interference should be allowed. By
settling with him, you have lost sympathies of your brother Princes and the
Government. Although the Government of India do not mind what you do, you have
erred in settling through Patel. Even amongst the Congress workers, Mr. Patel is the
most untrustworthy. However, as it appears from the Notification, the wordings of
the settlement are not so bad but for the words “widest possible powers” which are
capable of any interpretation. It may mean that you will be reduced to a figurhead. On
the strength of these words, they would demand full responsible government at the
very start and you will find yourself in a very awkward situation.
THAKORE SAHEB: No, I have only appointed a committee.
MR. GIBSON: Yes, but who will appoint the members of the committee? And

the report as received has to be given effect to.
THAKORE SAHEB : Well, Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel will suggest names.
MR. GIBSON: That is it. That means Congress workers, who will demand full
responsible government in view of the words “widest possible powers”.
SIR PATRICK: How is Mr. Patel to suggest names? Are we to write to him?
THAKORE SAHEB : No, he will send names.
MR. GIBSON: In one of the clauses, you have agreed to give full effect to the

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

447

report. That is very bad. You have given up your cards.
As regards the appointment of the President of the Reforms Committee, Mr.
Gibson asked the Thakore Saheb as to who will be the President of the Committee.
THAKORE SAHEB : Durbar Virawala.
MR. GIBSON: No, he cannot come.
THAKORE SAHEB : Why ? He will come after his leave period is over.
MR. GIBSON: No. He is a talukdar. He cannot come. I would not let him come

now.
THAKORE SAHEB : No. He can come after Sir Patrick has gone.
MR. GIBSON: That will be seen after Sir Patrick is gone.

RAJKOT GAZETTE NOTIFICATION
RAJKOT DARBARI GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY,
Saturday, January 21, 1939
NOTIFICATION
NO. 61 OF 1938-39
As observed in the Notification No. 50, dated the 26th December ‘38, we are
hereby pleased to appoint the following seven gentlemen, representing all important
interests in the State, to work along with the three officers of the State, whose names
will be announced hereafter, to work on a committee to draw up, after proper
investigation, a report recommending to us a scheme of reforms with a view to
associating the people more closely with the administration of the State:
I. Mr. Popatlal Purushottam Anada, President, P.P. Sabha,
2. Jadeja Jivansinhji Dhirubha,
3. Sheth Dada Haji Valimohmed,
4. Mr. Popatlal Dhanjibhai Malaviya,
5. Mr. Mohanlal M. Tank, President, Municipal Corporation,
6. Dr. D. J. Gajjar, and
7. Sheth Haptubhai Abdulali.
The Committee is expected to submit its report after full and thorough inquiry.
DHARMENDRASINH
THAKORE SAHEB, R AJKOT STATE

448

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

LETTER FROM MANEKLAL PATEL TO
VALLABHBHAI PATEL
Confidential

RANJIT VILAS,
RAJKOT,
January 12, 1939

DEAR SARDAR SAHEB,

I am desired by H. H. Thakore Saheb to acknowledge receipt of your letter of
the 4th instant, recommending the seven names to be nominated by him to the
proposed Reforms Committee.
You must have learnt from the newspapers that the names suggested by
you were already out by the time your letter was received by His Highness, He regrets
that it should have been so, because such an exposure places you and His Highness in
somewhat awkward position.
While H. H. would very much wish to select all the names suggested by you,
you would also appreciate that he cannot ignore the requests made by important
classes of his subjects, and should see that the committee consists of such persons as
would command the confidence of all important groups of his subjects. In fact, His
Highness has received representations from the Bhayats and Muslim Council and a
petition from the Depressed Class, and has therefore desired me to write to you as
under.
While here, you very rightly said to H. H. that you did not know who the real
leaders were and therefore postponed suggesting names until after you had consulted
others.
His Highness approves of the gentlemen numbered 1, 2, 4 and 5.
While number three owns immovable property and resides here since about 40
years and is a respectable citizen, he could hardly be expected to be useful with
independent opinion to work on a committee of this nature.
You would agree that the Mahomedans form a very important unit and are now
too well organized to be ignored so lightly. In their representation submitted as a
result of the unanimous resolution of the Muslim Council, they have requested that
three out of seven should be Mahomedans. This demand of theirs is of course
unreasonable, but including the Bohras they should be given two seats and the
President of their Council should be one of them. In view of your vast experience in
British India, you will appreciate that if their legitimate request were not met, they
may make a row and may create unhealthy atmosphere, which we all wish to avoid.
There is no doubt that we all want a committee which would represent all sections of
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

449

the people, be impartial and work harmoniously and with sagacity.
As regards numbers six and seven, it appears that they would not come strictly
within the scope of the definition of the “subject” as referred to in the notification.
Mr. V. M. Shukla was neither born in the State nor has he been staying within
the jurisdiction of the State since his birth for as many as about forty years.
Possession by his ancestors of some property in Sardhar Pati does not entitle him,
according to the definition, to be considered as a Rajkot State subject. He is neither
born, nor domiciled, nor naturalized in the State.
As regards Mr. U. N. Dhebar, His Highness feels that the same objection would
come in the way. As is understood, he originally belongs to the Jamnagar State and
his father spent the major portion of his life in Bombay. He himself is said to have
received his schooling in Rajkot and was residing in the Civil Station when he started
practice as a pleader. He has been living within the State limits since about two years.
He has also purchased land in the State last year. His Highness feels that he should
restrict his nomination to the definition, so as not to create any ill-feeling amongst
other leading gentlemen, who have always been recognized by the State, since the
time of the late Thakore Saheb, as leaders of the public.
It may also be brought to your notice that the Bhayats have also approached
His Highness, and very rightly,with a request that at least one of them should be on
the committee, as they represent a very important and considerable unit in the State.
His Highness therefore considers it essential that one of them should be on the
committee.
It is His Highness’s wish, as you will readily understand, that the committee
should consist of the best brains who would also be representative of all important
classes of his subjects.
If any suggestions are to be made in the light of what has been said above, His
Highness will then declare the personnel of the committee, inclusive of three
officials besides the President of the committee.
Yours sincerely,
M. C. P ATEL

LETTER FROM VALLABHBHAI PATEL TO
MANEKLAL PATEL
CAMP, B ARDOLI,

January 15, 1939
DEAR SHRI MANEKLAL PATEL,

I have your letter of the 12th instant. It has pained me. It is indeed regrettable
that the names I proposed were published, but it is not always possible to keep

450

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

anything private in which a number of persons are concerned. And then in spite of
publication, alteration can certainly be made therein if there are valid reasons.
I am afraid I cannot accept your recommendation regarding the names of
Bhayats and Mussalmans on the committee. There was a definite intelligible object
behind the settlement entitling me to suggest the names. That object would be
frustrated if I were to accept your recommendation. The names have been suggested to
achieve the object which can be fulfilled only by having on the committee men of
integrity holding particular views. The seven members whose names I have suggested
will surely bear in mind the interests of Bhayats and others. More than this may not
be expected.
I regret you have seen fit to object to certain names on the ground of their not
being State subjects. But you have a right to do so; If on further consideration you
should adhere to the view that Shri Dhebazbhai does not come within the definition,
rather than argue with you I am prepared to withdraw his name and to suggest instead
the name of Shri Gajanan Joshi Vakil. I maintain that Shri Vajubhai Shukla comes
within the definition.
H. H. the Thakore Saheb’s notification can only mean that the chairman of the
committee had to be from the committee of ten, and I must say that Darbar Virawala
may not be appointed chairman. He has sent me word that he does not intend to hold
any office, but in order to avoid any possible accident I have thought it proper to
mention this.
I cannot help saying that the appointment of the committee has been greatly
delayed. Their report has got to be published by the 31st January. I therefore hope
that the committee will be appointed immediately on receipt of this letter. If
unfortunately the appointment continues to be delayed, there is every fear of the
struggle being resumed by the people. I must also add that I have in my possession
copies of correspondence that has taken place between H. H. the Thakore Saheb and
Sir Patrick Cadell, and of the summary of an interview with the Resident. If the
settlement breaks down, I am afraid it will be my duty to publish, in public interest,
these and other documents in my possession. But I hope I may have to do nothing of
the kind, and the committee will be appointed and begin work immediately.
May I expect a wire from you in reply?
Yours sincerely,
VALLABHBHAI PATEL
Harijan, 4-2-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

451

APPENDIX II
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA’S STATEMENT ON RAJKOT 1
NEW DELHI,
February 1, 1939
1. Attention has been drawn to Mr. Gandhi’s statement to the Press in regard
to the recent events in the Rajkot and Jaipur States.
2. In the case of Rajkot, Mr. Gandhi states that “an honourable understanding
arrived at between the Thakore Saheb-in-Council and Sardar Patel, representing the
people, has been undone by the Resident”, and he expresses the opinion that “it is
the duty of the Viceroy to ask the Resident in Rajkot to restore the pact.”
3. The facts are that the Thakore Saheb-in-Council reached an agreement with
Sardar Patel that a committee should be appointed to investigate and make
recommendations for constitutional reform. The terms of this agreement were
published on December 26, in the State Gazette. The number of official and
non-official members who were to serve on the committee were stated in this
announcement. No further indication was given as to the committee’s composition or
the basis of its selection. It appears that simultaneously a private exchange of letters
took place between the Thakore Saheb personally and Sardar Patel, to which no
publicity was given. In this correspondence, the Thakore Saheb wrote to Sardar Patel
as follows:
AMARSINHJI SECRETARIAT,
RAJKOT STATE,
26-12-‘38
It is agreed that seven members of the Committee mentioned in Clause 2 of the
State Announcement of today’s date are to be recommended by Sardar Vallabhbhai
Patel and they are to be nominated by us.
(Sd.) DHARMENDRASINH,
Thakore Saheb, Rajkot
The Thakore Saheb claims that this letter was intended to leave him at liberty
to accept or not the names put forward by Sardar Patel. Sardar Patel contends that its
intention was to bind the Thakore Saheb to accept whatever names he put forward.

R EFORMS C OMMITTEE P ERSONNEL
Of the names put forward by Sardar Patel, the Thakore Saheb accepted three. In
1

452

Vide “Statement to the Press”, 31-1-1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the interests of securing adequate representation for the Mohammedans and the
Bhayats in the State, both of which parties submitted their claims to be represented,
he found himself unable to accept the remaining four names. On his instructions, his
Minister so informed Sardar Patel. Sardar Patel, however, in his reply, did not address
himself to the merits and refused to acquiesce in the Thakore Saheb’s proposals for
the representation of the interests mentioned above, and merely intimated that he
would be content with nothing less than the names which he had put forward
irrespective of the considerations advanced by the Thakore Saheb, in acting as he has
acted of his own free will. The Resident has no knowledge of the correspondence
which had passed and was not a party to it.
Mr. Gandhi’s suggestion is that the Thakore Saheb should now be required to
accept a different construction which Sardar Patel has placed on his letter. It would
clearly be most improper to bring pressure on the Thakore Saheb to accept a
construction which he evidently did not intend and is not now prepared to accept.
Mr. Gandhi states that the Resident is reported to be resorting to “organized
goondaism”. Mr. Gandhi has not indicated the source of this report, which has no
foundation whatever in fact.
In the case of Jaipur, the Jaipur Government will no doubt issue whatever
statement they see fit in answer to Mr. Gandhi’s observations.
The Hindu, 2-2-1940

APPENDIX III
RESIGNATION LETTER OF CONGRESS WORKING COMITTEE
MEMBERS 1
[February 22, 1939]2
DEAR SUBHAS,

We were all deeply pained to hear of your illness. It was not to be thought that
you should come to Wardha at the risk of your health. We hope that you will be soon
restored to complete health.
We have thought over the recent events carefully and have also read your
various statements in connection with the Presidential election. Your unfortunate
illness and the consequent cancellation of our meeting deter us from expressing our
views on your statements.
It should be sufficient at this stage for us to say that we, the undersigned, feel
it our duty to tender our resignations as members of the Working Committee, and we
1
2

Vide “Letter to Subhas Chandra Bose”, 5-2-1939
From Brijkrishna Chandiwala’s Delhi Diary

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

453

hereby tender the same. We feel [sic] to choose your Cabinet that represents your
views.
We feel that the time has come when the country should have a clearcut policy,
not based on compromise between different and incompatible groups of the
Congress.
It is but right, therefore, that you should select a homogeneous Cabinet
representing the views of the majority. You may trust us to give you all possible
co-operation in matters where we see eye to eye with you in the policies that you may
put before the country. In order to allay public suspense, we are sending this letter to
the Press.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/- ABUL KALAM AZAD
SAROJINI NAIDU
VALLABHBHAI PATEL
RAJENDRA PRASAD
BHULABHAI DESAI
PATTABHI SITARAMAYYA
SHANKARRAO DEO
HAREKRUSHNA MAHTAB
KRIPALANI
ABDUL GHAFFAR KHAN
J AMNALAL BAJAJ
J AIRAM DOULATRAM
The Hindustan Times, 23-2-1939

APPENDIX IV
STATEMENT OF SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE 1
I have read the statement of Mahatma Gandhi on the recent presidential
election with all the attention that it deserves. It grieves me to find that Mahatma
Gandhi has taken it as a personal defeat. I would respectfully differ from him on this
point. The voters, that is the delegates, were not called upon to vote for or against
Mahatma Gandhi. Consequently the result of the contest does not in my view and in
the view of most people affect him personally.
1

454

Vide “Letter to Subhas Chandra Bose”, 5-2-1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Much has been said in the Press during the last few days about the Right and
Left wings in the Congress. Several persons have interpreted the result of the election
as a victory for the Leftists. The fact is that I placed before the public two main
issues, namely, the fight against Federation and free and unfettered choice for the
delegates in the matter of choosing their president. These issues must have greatly
influenced the voting, and over and above these, the personality of the candidates
might have had some effect. In the circumstances, I feel that while analysing the
significance of the election we should not draw on our imagination nor should we read
into it more than it contains.
Assuming for argument’s sake that the result of the election implies a victory
of the Left, we should stop to consider what the Leftists’ programme is. For the
immediate future the Leftists stand for national unity and unrelenting opposition to
the Federal scheme. In addition to this, they stand for democratic principles. Leftists
will not take the responsibility of creating a split within the Congress. If a split does
come, it will come not because of them, but in spite of them.
Personally I am definitely of the opinion that there is neither reason nor
justification for a split within the ranks of the Congress. I, therefore, earnestly hope
that there will be no occasion now or in the near future for the so-called minority
party to non-co-operate with the so-called majority party. I need hardly add that I
shall try till the last to avert a split whenever any such likelihood appears before us.
A certain amount of apprehension has been caused in the minds of many as to
the policy which people like myself will follow in future. Let me make it quite clear
that there will be no violent break with the past in the parliamentary or in the
extra-parliamentary sphere. So far as the parliamentary programme is concerned, we
shall only try to implement our election pledges and our parliamentary programme
with greater speed than in the past. In the extra-parliamentary sphere, we shall
endeavour to rally all our strength and resources for combating Federation and for
pushing on towards purna swaraj. And we shall, of course, act in accordance with the
principles and policy of the Indian National Congress.
In this connection I should also like to say that I have on some occasions felt
constrained to differ from Mahatma Gandhi on public questions, but I yield to none in
my respect for his personality. If I have understood him correctly, he too would like
to see people think for themselves, even though they may not always agree with him.
I do not know what sort of opinion Mahatmaji has of myself. But, whatever his view
may be, it will always be my aim and object to try and win his confidence for the
simple reason that it will be a tragic thing for me if I succeed in winning the
confidence of other people but fail to win the confidence of India’s greatest man.
The Hindustan Times, 5-2-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

455

APPENDIX V
SRI RAMANA MAHARSHI’S COMMENTS ON GANDHIJI’S
DESCRIPTION OF HIS STATE OF MIND1
The Maharshi referred to the following passage of Gandhiji’s in the Harijan of
the 11th instant:
“How mysterious are the ways of God ! This journey to Rajkot is a wonder even
to me. Why am I going, whither am I going? What for? I have thought nothing about
these things. And if God guides me, what should I think, why should I think? Even
thought may be an obstacle in the way of His guidance.
“The fact is, it takes no effort to stop thinking. The thoughts do not come.
Indeed there is no vacuum—but I mean to say that there is no thought about the
mission.”
He remarked how true the words were and emphasized each statement in the
extract. Then He cited Thayumanavar in support of the state which is free from
thoughts:
“Bliss will reveal itself if one is still. Why then is this illusory yoga practice
? Can it (i. e., bliss) be revealed by directing the intellect in a particular way?”
D. Is not what Gandhiji describes the state in which thoughts themselves
become foreign?
M. Yes. It is only after the rise of the ‘I’ thought that all other thoughts arise.
The world is seen after you have felt “I am”. The ‘I’ thought and all other thoughts had
vanished for him.
D. Then the body-sense must be absent in that state.
M. The body-sense also is a thought whereas he describes the state in which
“thoughts do not come”.
D. He also says, “It takes no effort to stop thinking”.
M. Of course no effort is necessary to stop thought whereas one is necessary
for bringing about thoughts....
D. Gandhiji adhered to Satya (Truth) so long and won realization of the Self.
M. What is Satya except the Self ? Satya is that which is made up of sat. Again
sat is nothing but the Self. So Gandhiji’s Satya is only the Self....
The Upanishadic Text is the eternal Truth to which everyone who has realized
owes his experience. After hearing the Self to be the Brahman the person finds the
true import of the Self and reverts to it whenever he is diverted from it. Here is the
whole process of Realization.
Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi, pp. 734-9
1

456

Vide “Letter to Mahadev Desai”, 27-2-1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX VI
LETTER FROM DHARMENDRASINH 1
AMARSINHJI SECRETARIAT
RAJKOT STATE
March 3, 1939
MY DEAR MAHATMA GANDHIJI,

I received your letter yesterday and noted the contents with greatest regret. As
you have already been assured that the Notification No. 50 which I published on 26th
December will stand good, the suggestions you make regarding personnel of the
Committee are not in accordance with the terms of that Notification, and I do not feel
justified in accepting them or your other suggestions. The responsibility of ensuring
that the Committee shall consist of suitable members truly representative of various
interests of the State rests on me as Ruler of Rajkot, and it is a responsibility of
which I cannot divest myself. In the best interests of my State and my people it is
impossible for me to allow anyone else to have the final decision in a matter of such
vital importance. As I have previously assured, it is my earnest hope that the
Committee may be able to start work in a calm atmosphere at the earliest possible
moment so that there may be no delay in introducing such reforms as may be found to
be necessary
Yours sincerely,
DHARMENDRASINH

Harijan, 11-3-1939
APPENDIX VII
LETTER FROM E. C. GIBSON2
THE RESIDENCY, R AJKOT,
March 6, 1939
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

I telegraphed what you wrote in your letter of March 4th to His Excellency the
Viceroy and have now been instructed to convey the following message from His
Excellency to you:
1

Vide “Letter to Dharmendrasinh”, 2-3-1939, “Statement to the Press”,
3-3-1939, “Talk with First Member, Rajkot State Council”, 3-3-1939, “Statement to
the Press”, 3-3-1939, “Telegram to Amrit Kaur”, 3-3-1939 and “Statement to the
Press”, 4-3-1939
2
Vide “Letter to E. C. Gibson”, 6-3-1939
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

457

I was very glad to receive your message today and am sorry indeed that you
did not communicate with me before taking your present decision. The two points
which, from the papers you sent me, I thought you were principally interested in were
(a) alleged misconduct by police, etc.,
(b) alleged breach of undertaking by Thakore Saheb of Rajkot.
I trust that your own investigations satisfied you that there is nothing material
under the first head. As regards the second, which is, I gather, now your chief
difficulty, you will, I am sure, be glad to know that the Thakore Saheb has [to] preside
over the Committee. That I will readily arrange, and it will, I take it, meet what I have
no doubt is your chief anxiety, viz., to ensure fair play in the fulfilment of the
Thakore Saheb’s Notification of December 26th. But in any case I should like myself
to talk things over with you as soon as possible and I hope, therefore, that you will
come and see me as soon as may be convenient to yourself.
I expect to arrive in Delhi on the morning of Monday the 6th, and will be very
glad to see you at any time after that if you will let me know. I hope myself that
through personal discussion between us such misunderstanding as may exist will
admit of being cleared; and on personal grounds, too, I should greatly deplore any
decision on your part, as arising out of such misunderstanding, to continue a fast
which cannot but be a great strain on you.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C. W. 10138. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

APPENDICES VIII
LETTER FROM E. C. GIBSON1
THE RESIDENCY, RAJKOT,
March 7, 1939
MY DEAR MR . GANDHI,
I wired your reply to the Viceroy yesterday and am now instructed to convey
the following message to you from His Excellency:
Thank you very much for your message which I have just received. I
understand your position. It is clear from what you tell me that what counts
with you essentially in this matter is your feeling that there has been a breach
of faith. I realize that doubts may be entertained as to the meaning which
should be attached to the Thakore Saheb’s Notification, as amplified by his
subsequent letter to Sardar Patel, and it seems to me that the best way in which
1
Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 6-3-1939, “Telegram to Shankerlal
Banker”, 6-3-1939, “Letter to Lord Linlithgow”, 15-3-1939 and “Telegram to Subhas
Chandra Bose”, 2-4-1939

458

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

these doubts can be resolved is to refer their interpretation to the highest
judicial authority in the land, that is to say, the Chief Justice of India. I would,
therefore, propose with the consent of the Thakore Saheb, which I understand
is forthcoming, to consult this high authority as to the manner in which the
Committee should be composed in accordance with the terms of the
Notification and the Thakore Saheb’s letter referred to above. After this the
Committee would be set up accordingly and it would further be provided that
should any difference subsequently arise between the members of the
Committee as to the meaning of any part of the Notification on which they
were to make their recommendations, this question would also be referred to
the same high authority whose decision would be final. I fully believe that
this, combined with the Thakore Saheb’s assurance that he will carry out the
promise contained in his Notification, and with my own assurance that I will
exert my influence to see that he does so, will be sufficient to allay any
apprehensions which have assailed you and that you will join with me in
feeling that every precaution has been taken to ensure fair dealing and that you
will allay the anxiety of your friends by abandoning any further strain upon
your health. As I have already told you I shall be very glad to see you here and
discuss matters with you so that any misapprehensions may be removed.
Yours sincerely,
E. C. GIBSON
From a copy: C. W. 10140. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar. Also Harijan,
11-3-1939

APPENDICES IX
DISCUSSION WITH AGATHA HARRISON 1
March 5, 1939
I raised the question of “next steps” and asked what was being done to explore
a way out of the impasse. Since the correspondence that was passed between the
parties concerned, it would appear that nothing was being done officially—the
general opinion being that any move now must come from Delhi.
In answering, Gandhiji took up the question of the Sardar. He said if there was
definite proof given to him by an impartial enquiry that the Sardar had employed
dishonourable means to obtain the Thakore Saheb’s consent to the agreement he
would repudiate the Sardar and drop his demands. He spoke of the character of the
1

Vide “discusstion with Agatha Harrison”. The talk has been extracted from
the notes made by Agatha Harrison.
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

459

Sardar and said he was not a diplomat and was often misunderstood. We then dropped
this matter and went on to the main question of the conditions that would enable him
to break his fast.
I asked Gandhiji if Zetland’s statement in England and the Viceroy’s here
changed the situation in any way. If in view of these statements the Paramount Power
undertook responsibility for seeing the agreement was implemented, and appointed a
Committee without reference to the Present controversy on personnel, would this
satisfy him?
Gandhiji said “Yes”; if the Paramount Power gave the assurance that they
would see he got the constitution in terms of the December 26th Notification and
selected a Committee he could accept, he would not insist on the personnel named in
his letter to Thakore Saheb. But this assurance would have to be given publicly and in
writing.
Alternatively, Gandhiji suggested that he would, with a nominee of the
Thakore Saheb’s choice, who was trusted and respected, undertake to draft a
constitution. If any points of difference arose they could be referred to an umpire.
I asked Gandhiji if, in the event of some move being made as above, he would
drop the point he made in his letter to Gibson yesterday for the removal of Virawala.
He replied this was possible, if the Paramount Power made itself hostage, not only for
the production of the constitution in terms of the December 26th agreement, but also
that the recommendations of the Committee would be carried out in full.
From a copy: C. W. 10193. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

APPENDICES X
LETTER FROM S. SATYAMURTI TO MAHADEV DESAI 1
NEW DELHI,
March 20, 1939
MY DEAR MAHADEO,

I told Mahatmaji that I would send him a note on the amendments to the
Congress constitution. I am sending that note herewith. I also want that, on the lines
we discussed this matter when we last met at Birla House, you should place before
Mahatmaji my views on the urgent and important need of the anti-Hindustani
agitation in Madras being met by the Government of Madras. I recognize that the
agitation is factitious, is unreal in the sense in which it is fighting for something
which it need not fight for and is being exploited by unscrupulous persons against the
Ministry. At the same time, I am of the opinion, which you expressed in the columns
of the Harijan, that from the point of view of truth and non-violence compulsion in
1

460

Vide “Letter to Jawahralal Nehru”, 20-3-193
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

any matter of this kind might well be postponed for the present, and till public
opinion is more universally in favour of it. If a conscience clause were granted, I am
sure that not more than ten percent will take advantage of it, and only in some
districts, and that ten percent may be soon reduced to one percent by continuous and
vigorous propaganda. As a matter of fact, the Madras Government have made a
concession in that students taking up Hindi are not compelled to sit for an
examination. This, I think, practically takes away the value of compulsion; rather I
would insist on an examination passing which will alone enable a student to be
promoted to a higher class, and we may give this conscience clause.
Moreover I do not like the use of the Criminal Law Amendment Act1 in view of
our definite election pledge that the Congress stands for the repeal of all repressive
laws. This Act was placed on the Statute Book by the fiat of the Governor-General
against the express wishes of the Indian Legislative Assembly. This matter is very
urgent, and I should like you to place it before Mahatmaji before he leaves Delhi. If he
wants to discuss it further with me, I shall be glad to discuss it with him.
There is just one other matter of extreme urgency which I am sure is already
exercising Mahatmaji’s mind. The present deadlock in the Congress ought not to be
allowed to continue. The Working Committee must be formed and formed at once.
There are several provinces in which the Congress work is at a standstill and the
Working Committee starting functioning alone will solve all these provincial and
other problems. I hope that Mahatmaji will be able to get Srijut Subhas Chandra Bose
to nominate the members of the Working Committee according to his wishes. But if
there be any difficulty in the matter, I suggest that a very early meeting of the AllIndia Congress Committee may be summoned, which according to the constitution is
entitled to meet the new situation and will meet it by appointing a Working
Committee recommended by Mahatmaji.
I am sending you this letter just now and I shall be at Birla House this evening
(Monday, 20th) at 6.30 p. m. Any other hour between 5.30 and 8 p. m. will suit me.
Please send a line in reply per bearer who will wait for the same, to meet you and have
a few words with you. I trust you will find it possible to meet me at that time.
With kind regards,
Yours very sincerely,
S. S ATYAMURTI
SJT. M AHADEO DESAI
From a photostat: C. W. 10888. Courtesy: C. R. Narasimhan

1

Of 1908, under which certain associations were declared unlawful

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

461

APPENDICES XI
LETTERS FROM SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE 1
J EALGORA P. O.,
March 29, 1939
MY DEAR MAHATMAJI,

I received your letter of the 24th instant from the train, along with the
enclosures.
Firstly, my brother, Sarat, wrote to you on his own. You will see from his
letter that he got your telegram on his return to Calcutta from here and then he wrote
to you. If he had not got your telegram, I doubt if he would have written.
There are, of course, certain things in his letter which echo my feelings. But
that is a different matter. The main problem appears to me as to whether both parties
can forget the past and work together. That depends entirely on you. If you can
command the confidence of both parties by taking up a truly non-partisan attitude,
then you can save the Congress and restore national unity.
I am temperamentally not a vindictive person and I do not nurse grievances. In
a way, I have the mentality of a boxer, that is, to shake hands smilingly when the
boxing-bout is over and take the result in a sporting spirit.
Secondly, in spite of all the representations that I have been receiving, I take
the Pant resolution as it has been passed by the Congress. We must give effect to it.
I myself allowed the resolution to be moved and discussed, despite the ultra vires
clause in it. How can I go back on it ?
Thirdly, there are two alternatives before you: (1) Either to accommodate our
views with regard to the composition of the new Working Committee, or (2) to insist
on your views in their entirety. In the case of the latter, we may come to the parting
of the ways.
Fourthly, I am prepared to do all that is humanly possible for me to expedite
the formation of the new Working Committee and the summoning of the Working
Committee and A. I. C. C. But I am so sorry that it is not possible for me to come to
Delhi now. (Dr. Sunil has wired to you this morning on this point. I got your
telegram only yesterday.)
Fifthly, I was surprised to learn from your letter that the A. I. C. C. office had
not sent you a copy of Pant’s resolution. (This has since been done.) I was still more
surprised that the resolution had not been brought to your notice till you came to
Allahabad. At Tripuri, the air was thick with the rumour that the resolution had your
fullest support. A statement to that effect also appeared in the daily Press while we
were at Tripuri.
1

Vide “Letter to Subhas chandra Bose”, 24-3-1939 and “Letter to Subhas
Chandra Bose”, 2-4-1939

462

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Sixthly, I have not the slightest desire to stick to office, but I do not see any
reason for resigning because I am ill. No President resigned when he was in prison for
instance; I may tell you that great pressure is being brought to bear on me to resign. I
am resisting because my resignation will mean a new phase in Congress politics
which I want to avoid till the last. I have been attending to urgent A. I. C. C. work
during the last few days.
I shall write to you again tomorrow or the day after.
I am progressing. I hope your blood-pressure will soon be down again.
With pranams,
Yours affectionately,
SUBHAS
PS.
This letter is not exactly a reply to yours, I have just jotted down the points
which were in my mind and which I wanted to convey to you.
MAHATMA GANDHI
BIRLA HOUSE
NEW DELHI
J EALGORA
March 31
MY DEAR MAHATMAJI,

I saw your telegram1 to Sunil which you sent in reply to his long telegram
regarding my health. When you wired suggesting my going to Delhi, I thought it best
to let the doctors speak out their mind on the subject. So Sunil wired you.
I have been pondering over the various points in your letter of the 24th
instant to me (from the train) and your letter to Sarat of the same date and over the
situation in general. It is really unfortunate for me that I fell ill at such a critical time.
But events have so moved in rapid succession that I have not had a chance of quick
recovery. Besides, both before Tripuri and after, I have not been treated in certain
influential quarters (there is no reference to you at all in this—let me make it clear)
with the consideration that was due to me. But there is no reason for me to resign on
account of my illness. As I stated in my letter2 of yesterday (my second letter to you),
no President, to my knowledge, resigned when he was in prison, even for a long time.
It may be that I shall have to resign after all, but if that takes place, it will be due to
quite different reasons.
I think I said in my second letter that though pressure was being brought to
bear on me to resign, I was resisting. My resignation would mean the beginning of a
new phase in Congress politics which I want to avoid till the last . If we come to the
1
2

Vide “Telegram to Dr. Sunil Bose”, 25-3-1939
Dated March 29 above

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

463

parting of the ways, a bitter civil war will commence and—whatever be the upshot of
it—the Congress will be weakened for some time to come and the benefit will be
reaped by the British Government. It is in your hands to save the Congress and the
country from the calamity. People who are bitterly opposed for various reasons to
Sardar Patel and his group, still have confidence in you and believe that you can take a
dispassionate and non-partisan view of things. To them you are a national figure—
above parties and groups—and you can, therefore, restore unity between the warring
elements. If for any reason that confidence is shaken—which God forbid—and you are
regarded as a partisan, then God help us and the Congress.
There is no doubt that there is today a wide gulf between the two parties (or
blocs) in the Congress. But the gulf can yet be bridged—and that by you. I cannot
say anything about the mentality of our political opponents. Tripuri has given us a
very bad experience of them, but I can speak for our side. We are not vindictive and we
do not nurse grievances. We are prepared to “forgive and forget”—as they say—and
join hands once again for the sake of the common cause, viz., the political and
economic emancipation of India. When I talk of ‘our side’, I exclude the official
Congress Socialist Party. We discovered for the first time at Tripuri what a small
following the official Congress Socialist Party had. The Congress Socialist Party has
now split—the rank and file and several provincial branches having revolted against
the official leaders, because of what is called their vacillating policy. A large section
of the Congress Socialist Party will move with us in future, in spite of what the top
leadership may do. If you have any doubts on this score, you have only to wait and
see.
The letter of my brother Sarat to you shows that he is feeling very bitter. This
I presume, is due largely to his experiences at Tripuri, because he had no such feeling
when he left Calcutta for Tripuri. Naturally, he knows more about the happenings at
Tripuri than I do, because he could move about freely, meet people and obtain
information. But though I was confined to bed, I got enough information from several
independent sources regarding the attitude of responsible circles politically opposed
to us, to make me feel thoroughly sick of the whole affair. I may say further that when
I left Tripuri, I felt such a loathing and disgust for Congress politics as I have not
done for the last nineteen years. Thank God, I have got over that feeling now and
have recovered my composure.
Jawahar in one of his letters (and possibly Press statements) remarked that the
A. I. C. C. office had deteriorated under my presidentship. I resent that remark as
unfair and unjust. He did not perhaps realize that in trying to damn me, he has damned
Kripalaniji and the entire staff. The office is in the hands of the Secretary and his staff
and if it deteriorates, it is they who are responsible for it. I am writing to Jawahar at
length on this point. I am mentioning this to you because you have said something

464

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

about the interim administration in your letter to Sarat. The only way in which we can
help the office is to appoint a permanent Secretary at once, even if there is delay in
appointing the rest of the Working Committee. But if the Working Committee is
going to be appointed soon, we need not appoint the General Secretary in advance.
I shall be grateful if you could let me know your reaction to Pant's resolution.
You are in this advantageous position, that you can take a dispassionate view of
things provided, of course, you get to know the whole story of Tripuri. Judging from
the papers, most of the people who have seen you so far seem to belong to one
school—namely, those who supported Pant's resolution. But that does not matter.
You can easily assess things at their proper value, regardless of the persons who visit
you. You can easily imagine my own view of Pant's resolution. But my personal
feelings do not matter to public considerations. As I have said in a previous letter,
whatever one may think of Pant's resolution from the purely constitutional point of
view, since it has been passed by the Congress I feel bound by it. Now, do you regard
that resolution as one of no-confidence in me and do you feel that I should resign in
consequence thereof? Your view in this matter will influence me considerably.
Perhaps, you are aware that at Tripuri it was given out by those who were
canvassing in support of Pant's resolution that telephonic conversation had taken
place with Rajkot and that resolution had your full support. A report to that effect
appeared in the daily Press also. It was further given out in private conversation that
nothing short of that resolution in its entirety would satisfy either you or your
orthodox followers. Personally, I did not and do not believe in such reports, but they
undoubtedly had their vote-catching value. When Pant's resolution was shown to me
for the first time by Sardar Patel, I suggested to him (Rajen Babu and Maulana Azad
were also there at the time) that if certain changes were made, the resolution in the
amended form would be passed by the Congress unanimously. The amended form of
the resolution was also sent to Sardar Patel, but there was no response from his side.
Their attitude seemed to be not a word, not a comma, should be changed. I suppose
Rajkumari Amrit Kaur has handed over to you the amended form of the resolution. If
the object of Pant's resolution was to reiterate faith in your principles and your
leadership and guidance, that was provided in the amended resolution, but if the object
was to avenge the result of the presidential election, then of course the amended
resolution did not suffice. Personally, I do not see how Pant's resolution has enhanced
your prestige, influence and authority. One hundred and thirty-five votes were cast
against you in the Subjects Committee, and in the Open Session, whatever interested
parties may say, my information from various independent sources is to the effect
that, in spite of the neutrality of the Congress Socialist Party, at least 800 votes, if
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

465

not more, out of about 2,300 1 were (would have been ?) cast against you. And if the
Congress Socialist Party had voted as they did in the Subjects Committee, then the
resolution would have been defeated. In any case, the result of the voting would have
been problematical. With slight changes in the resolution not one vote would have
been cast against the resolution and your leadership would have had the unanimous
support of all Congressmen. Your prestige before the British Government and before
the whole world would have gone up like a shot. Instead, your name and prestige were
exploited by those who wanted to wreak vengeance on us. Consequently, instead of
enhancing your prestige and influence, they have dragged it down to an unimaginable
depth—for the whole world now knows that though you or your followers managed to
get a majority at Tripuri, there is in existence a powerful opposition. If matters are
allowed to drift, this opposition is bound to gain in strength and in volume. What is
the future of a party that is deprived of radical, youthful and progressive elements?
The future is similar to that of the Liberal Party of Great Britain.
I have said enough to acquaint you with my reaction to Pant's resolution. I
shall now be grateful if you kindly let me know what your reaction is. Do you approve
of Pant's resolution, or should you rather have seen it passed unanimously in an
amended form on the lines that we had suggested?
There is one other matter to which I shall refer in this letter—that is the
question of our programme. I submitted my views to you on February 15, at Wardha.
What has happened since then has served to confirm my views, to justify my
prediction. For months I have been telling friends that there would be a crisis in
Europe in spring which would continue till summer. The international situation as
well as our own position at home, convinced me, nearly eight months ago, that the
time had come for us to force the issue of purna swaraj. Unfortunately for us and for
the country, you do not share our optimism. You are obsessed with the idea of
corruption within the Congress. Moreover, the bogey of violence alarms you.
Though I am at one with you in your determination to root out corruption within the
Congress, I do not think that, taking India as a whole, there is more corruption today
than before and, so far as violence is concerned I feel sure there is far less of it today
than before. Previously, Bengal, the Punjab and the United Provinces could have been
regarded as the hope of organized revolutionary violence. Today there is much more
of the spirit of non-violence there. And, speaking for Bengal, I can say with full
authority that the province was never more non-violent during the last 30 years than
today. For these and other reasons we should lose no time in placing our National
Demand before the British Government in the form of an ultimatum. The idea of
ultimatum does not appeal to you or to Pandit Jawaharlal. But in all your political
1

466

The Crossroads version has “2200”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

life, you have given any number of ultimatums to the authorities and have advanced
the public cause thereby. The other day at Rajkot you did the same thing. What
objection can there be, therefore, to submitting our National Demand in the form of
an ultimatum? If you do so and prepare for the coming struggle simultaneously, I am
sure that we shall be able to win purna swaraj very soon. The British Government
will either respond to our demand without a fight—or, if the struggle does take place,
in our present circumstances it cannot be a long-drawn one. I am so confident, and so
optimistic on this point, that I feel that if we take courage in both hands and go
ahead, we shall have swaraj inside of 18 months at the most.
I feel so strongly on this point that I am prepared to make any sacrifice in this
connection. If you take up the struggle, I shall most gladly help you to the best of
my ability. If you feel that the Congress would be able to fight better with another
President, I shall gladly step aside. If you feel that the Congress will be able to fight
more effectively with a Working Committee of your choice, I shall gladly fall in line
with your wishes. All that I want is that you and the Congress should, in this critical
hour, stand up and resume the struggle for swaraj. If self-effacement will further the
national cause, I assure you most solemnly that I am prepared to efface myself
completely. I think I love my country sufficiently to be able to do this.
Pardon me for saying that the way you have been recently conducting the States'
people's struggle does not appeal to me. You risked your precious and valuable life for
Rajkot and, while fighting for the Rajkot people, you suspended the struggle in all
other States. Why should you do so? There are six hundred and odd States in India and,
among them, Rajkot is a tiny one. It would not be an exaggeration to call the Rajkot
struggle a flea-bite. Why should we not fight simultaneously all over the country and
have a comprehensive plan for the purpose? This is what millions of your
countrymen think, though out of personal reverence for you, they may not say so
openly.
In conclusion, I may say that many people like myself cannot enthuse over the
terms of the Rajkot settlement. We, as well as the Nationalist Press, have called it a
great victory but how much have we gained? Sir Maurice Gwyer is neither our man nor
is he an independent agent. He is a Government man. What point is there in making
him the umpire? We are hoping that his verdict will be in our favour. But supposing
he declares against us, what will be our position? Moreover, Sir Maurice Gwyer is a
part and parcel of the Federal Scheme we have resolved to reject. In the case of a
conflict with the British Government, if we decide to have a High Court Judge or a
Sessions Judge as umpire, we can always have a settlement with the British
Government. But what shall we gain from such a settlement? Further there are many
people who fail to understand why after the interview with the Viceroy, you should be
waiting in Delhi. Perhaps, in view of your weak health a rest was necessary before
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

467

undertaking another long journey. But to the British Government and its supporters it
may appear as if you are attaching too much importance to the Federal Chief Justice
and thereby enhancing his prestige.
My letter has become too long, so I must stop here. If I have said anything
which appears to you to be erroneous, I hope you will pardon me. I know you always
like people to speak frankly and openly. That is what has emboldened me in writing
this frank and long letter.
I have been progressing steadily, though slowly. I do hope this will find you
better and your blood-pressure much lower.
With respectful pranams,
Yours affectionately,
SUBHAS
The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939; also Crossroads, pp. 134-40

APPENDIX XII
LETTER FROM DHARMENDRASINH 1
PALACE RAJKOT,
April 10, 1939
DEAR MAHATMA GANDHIJI,

I am in receipt of your letter of 9th instant. You are right in supposing that I
should wish for the inclusion in the Committee of the four gentlemen who were
appointed by me to represent the Mahomedan community, the Bhayats and the
Depressed Classes. I consider it to be of the utmost importance that these
communities should be effectively represented and these particular representatives
were selected after the most careful consideration. At the same time the expedient
suggested by you, viz., the enlargement of the Committee merely to give Mr. Patel's
nominees a majority, is hardly now practicable. What now has to be done is to take
action in fulfilment of the terms of my Notification No. 50 dated 26th December
1938, in the light of the Award of the Hon'ble the Chief Justice of India who has
observed that the Notification restricts the members of the Committee to ten. As
stated above it is certainly most essential that the important Mahomedan and Bhayat
communities should, like other communities, have proper representation. It was with
this object in view that I included in the list published in my Notification No. 61
dated 21-1-1939 the names of two suitable representatives of Mahomedan community
and one of Bhayats. That you shared this view is clearly evident from the assurances

1

468

Vide These letters are extracted from “Rajkot Events”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

which you gave to the deputations of Mahomedans and Bhayats which came to see
you on February 28th and the letter you wrote to the President of the Garasias'
Association on March 11th. These assurances were, as you will remember, to the
effect that the representatives already nominated on their behalf would certainly be
included in the Committee. In view of these assurances I have no doubt that you will
advise Mr. Patel to include these names in the list of seven non-official members
who, in accordance with the Chief Justice of India's decision, are now to be
recommended by him.
I also earnestly hope that the name of Mr. Mohan Madan will be included in
his list as this gentleman, besides being a representative of the Depressed Classes,
has for seven years been the elected chairman of the Rajkot Municipal Corporation
and is obviously a person who should be on the Committee.
I am sure you will agree that the matter of primary importance is not to secure a
majority for any particular party but to ensure that a really representative Committee,
effectively representing the various interests in the State, may now be set up
consisting of persons fully qualified to undertake the very responsible duties which
will devolve on them.
I am awaiting Mr. Patel's recommendations and when I have received them, I
shall appoint the three official members, who will of course have the right to vote,
and decide who shall be the President of the Committee.
Yours sincerely,
DHARMENDRASINH
Harijan, 22-4-1939

APPENDIX XIII
LETTER FROM SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE 1
J EALGORA,
April 6, 1939
MY DEAR MAHATMAJI,

In one of your letters to Majdada, my brother Sarat, you suggested a heart-toheart talk between the leaders of both parties with a view to clearing the ground for
united action in future. I think it is a magnificent idea, and I am fully prepared to do
my best in this matter, regardless of what has happened in the past. Will you kindly
let me know if you would like me to do anything in this behalf and if so, what?
Personally, I feel that your influence and personality could achieve much in this
endeavour to bring about unity. Will you not make one last supreme effort to bring

1

Vide “Letter to Subhas Chandra Bose”, 10-4-1939

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

469

everybody together before we give up all hope of unity? I would beg of you once
again to remember in what light the country still regards you. You are not a partisan
and people, therefore, still look up to you to bring together all the warring elements.
I have been pondering deeply over the advice you have given me regarding the
formation of the Working Committee. I feel that your advice is a counsel of despair. It
destroys all hope of unity. It will not save the Congress from a split—on the
contrary, it will make the path safe for such a contingency. To advise a homogeneous
Cabinet in the present circumstances will mean advising the parties to part company
now. Is that not a terrible responsibility? Do you feel quite sure that joint work is
impossible? On our side we do not think so. We are prepared to do our best to "forgive
and forget" and join hands for the sake of the common cause and we can look up to
you to bring about an honourable compromise. I have already written and spoken to
you that the composition of the Congress being what it is—and there being no
possibility in the immediate future of any remarkable change—the best course would
be to have a composite Cabinet in which all the groups would be represented, as far as
possible.
I understand that you are against this idea of a composite Cabinet. Is your
opposition due to grounds of principle (viz., joint work is impossible in your view),
or is it because you feel that the "Gandhi-ites" (I am using this expression in the
absence of anything better, and you will please pardon me for doing so) should have a
larger representation on the Cabinet? In the latter case, please let me know, so that I
may have an opportunity of reconsidering the matter. In the former case, please
reconsider the advice you have already tendered in the light of what I am submitting in
this letter. At Haripura, when I suggested inviting the socialists to serve on the
Cabinet, you told me distinctly that you were in favour of my doing so. Has the
situation changed so materially since then as to induce you to insist on a
homogeneous Cabinet?
You have referred in your letters to the two parties being so “diametrically
opposed”. You have not amplified the point and it is not clear if the position you
refer to is based on programme or on personal relations. Personal relations are in my
view a passing phenomenon. We may quarrel and fight, but we can also shake hands
and make up our differences. Take, for instance, the Swarajist episode in recent
Congress history. As far as I am aware, after a period of opposition the relations
between Deshbandhu and Pandit Motilalji with yourself became as sweet as humanly
possible. In Great Britain, the major parties can always join hands and work on the
same Cabinet when an emergency arises. In Continental countries like France every
Cabinet is normally a composite Cabinet. Are we less patriotic than Britishers and
Frenchmen? If we are not, then why cannot we have composite Cabinets functioning
effectively?

470

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

If you think that your opposition is based on programme, etc., rather than on
personal considerations, I should like very much to have your view in this matter.
Wherein do you think that our programmes differ, and that too so fundamentally, that
joint action is not possible? I know that we have certain differences—but, as I wrote
to my ex-colleagues of the Working Committee in reply to their letter of resignation,
our points of agreement are, in my view, more numerous than our points of difference.
I still adhere to this view—Tripuri notwithstanding.
You have said in one of your letters in connection with my idea of an
ultimatum on the issue of swaraj that there is no atmosphere for non-violent mass
action. But did you not have non-violent mass action in Rajkot? Are you not having
it in some other States also? These States’ peoples are comparatively untrained in the
practice of satyagraha. We in British India can claim more experience and training—
comparatively speaking at least. If the States’ peoples can be permitted to resort to
satyagraha in their struggle for civil liberty and responsible Government, why not we
of British India?
Now take the National Demand resolution passed at the Tripuri Congress with
the support of the Gandhi-ites. Though it has beautifully vague phrases and several
pious platitudes, it has, in a certain sense, much in common with my idea of an
ultimatum and preparing for the coming struggle. Now, do you approve of this
resolution? If you do, then why cannot you go a step further and accept my plan?
I shall now come to Pandit Pant's resolution. The important part of it (last
portion, I mean) contains two points: Firstly, the Working Committee must
command your confidence—implicit confidence. Secondly, it must be formed in
accordance with your wishes. If you advise a homogeneous Cabinet, and such a
Cabinet is formed, one could perhaps say that it has been formed “in accordance with
your wishes”. But could it be claimed that it commands your confidence? Will it be
open to me to get up at the meeting of the A. I. C. C. and tell the members that you
have advised the formation of a homogeneous Cabinet and that the new Cabinet
commands your confidence? On the other hand, if you advised the formation of a
Cabinet which does not command your confidence, will you be giving effect to the
Pant resolution—will you be doing the right thing, from your point of view? I would
beg of you to consider this aspect of the question. If you take cognizance of the Pant
resolution, you will not only have to communicate your wishes regarding the new
Working Committee, but you will, at the same time, have to advise the formation of
such a Committee as will command your confidence.
You have not yet said anything as to the merits of the Pant resolution. Do you
approve of it? Or would you rather have had a unanimously passed resolution, more or
less on the lines suggested by us which would reiterate faith in your principles and
confidence in your guidance, without the controversial clauses? Then, again, what is

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

471

the President's position regarding appointing the Working Committee after this
resolution was passed? I am again asking this question because the present
constitution is practically your handiwork and your opinion in the matter will carry
great weight with me. There is another question, in this connection, which I have
been asking you. Do you regard this resolution as one of no-confidence in me? If so, I
shall resign at once and that too unconditionally. Some papers have criticized this
question of mine in my Press statement on the ground that I should decide for myself
what the significance of the resolution is. I have sense enough to give my own
interpretation, but there are occasions when personal interpretations would not be
one's sole guide. Speaking quite frankly, I feel that my stand has been justified by the
result of the Presidential election. I have now no desire whatsoever to stick to office
for one day, unless I can thereby advance the public cause, as I understand it. The
hesitation or the delay that has arisen on my side is because it is not so easy to
decide. Among my supporters there are two schools of thoughts: one holding that I
should strive to the last to maintain unity: the other holding that I should break off
negotiations at once, as being a hopeless effort, and tender my resignation. The latter
have been bringing great pressure to bear on me, but I am resisting. I want to be clear
before my own conscience that I have striven till the last to preserve unity within our
ranks. Moreover, I know what my resignation will mean in the present circumstances
and what its consequences will be. I should add here that the first school—viz., those
who want me to exhaust all possibility of a compromise—believe that you will be
able to take a thoroughly non-partisan view of things and thereby bring the two
parties together.
I must explain further why I say that I shall resign automatically if you feel
that Pant's resolution signifies no-confidence. You know very well that I do not
follow you blindly in all that you say or believe, as so many of my countrymen do.
Why then should I resign if your opinion is that the resolution signifies noconfidence? The reason is plain and simple. I feel it as galling to my conscience to
hold on to office if the greatest personality in India today feels—though he may not
say so openly—that the passing of the resolution should automatically have brought
in my resignation. This attitude is perhaps dictated more by personal regard for you
and your opinion in this matter.
Perhaps, as some papers suggest, you have an idea that the Old Guard should be
put back into office. In that event I would beg of you to come back to active politics,
become a four-anna Congress member and assume direct charge of the Working
Committee. Pardon me for saying so, and I say this without meaning offence to
anybody—there is a world of difference between yourself and your lieutenants, even
your chosen lieutenants. There are people who will do anything for you—but not for
them. Will you believe me when I say that at the Presidential election even some

472

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Gandhi-ites in several provinces voted for me against the direction of the Old Guard?
If your personality is not dragged into the picture, I shall continue to have their
support—the Old Guard notwithstanding.
At Tripuri, the Old Guard cleverly dropped out of the picture and more cleverly
pitted me against you. (But there was no quarrel between yourself and myself.)
Afterwards they said that Tripuri was a great victory for them and a defeat for me. The
fact of the matter is that it was neither a victory for them nor a defeat for me. It was a
victory for you (without any cause of a fight with you at all) but a Pyrrhic victory—a
victory purchased by a certain loss of prestige.
But I am digressing. I wanted to appeal to you to come forward and directly and
openly conduct the affairs of the Congress. This will simplify matters. Much of the
opposition against the Old Guard—and opposition there certainly is—will automatically vanish.
If you cannot do this, then I have an alternative suggestion to make. Please
resume the national struggle for independence, as we have been demanding, and begin
by delivering the ultimatum to the British Government. In that event, we shall all
gladly retire from our official positions, if you so desire. We shall gladly hand over
these positions to whomsoever you like or trust. But only on one condition—the
fight for independence must be resumed. People like myself feel that today we have an
opportunity which is rare in the lifetime of a nation. For that reason we are prepared
to make any sacrifice that will help the resumption of the fight.
If till the last you insist that a composite Cabinet is unworkable and a
homogeneous Cabinet is the only alternative before us and if you want me to form a
Cabinet of my choice, I would earnestly request you to give me your vote of
confidence till the next Congress. If, in the mean time, we fail to justify ourselves by
our service and suffering, we shall stand condemned before the Congress and we shall
naturally and quite properly be kicked out of office. Your vote of confidence will mean
the vote of confidence of the A. I. C. C. in the present circumstances. It you do not
give us your vote of confidence—but at the same time ask us to form a homogeneous
Cabinet—you will not be giving effect to Pant’s resolution.
Once again I would beg of you to let me know if your opposition to a
composite Cabinet is due to considerations of principle or to the fact that you should
like the Old Guard to have a larger representation on the Cabinet than I suggested in
my first letter to you, dated the 25th March.
Before I close this letter, I shall refer to one or two personal things. You have
remarked in one letter that you hope that, whatever happens, “our private relations
will not suffer”. I cherish this hope with all my heart. May I say in this connection
that if there is anything in life on which I pride myself, it is this that I am the son of a
gentleman and as such am a gentleman? Deshbandhu Das often used to tell us, “Life is
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

473

larger than Politics.” That lesson I have learnt from him. I shall not remain in the
political field one single day if by doing so I shall fall from the standards of
gentlemanliness, which are so deeply ingrained in my mind from infancy and which I
feel are in my very blood. I have no means of knowing how you view me as a man—in
a way, you have seen so little of me. And my political opponents have carried so
many tales against me to you. In recent months I have come to know that for the last
few months I have been the victim of a subtle but sinister propaganda carried on
against me from mouth to mouth. I would have brought this matter to your notice
long ago, but I could not get sufficiently tangible evidence of what was being said and
by whom. Latterly, I have come to know much as to what has been said, though I am
still in the dark as to who exactly the propagandists are.
Once again I have digressed. In a letter you expressed the hope that in
whatever I did, I would “be guided by God”. Believe me, Mahatmaji, all these days I
have been praying for only one thing, viz., for light as to the path which would be
best for my country and my country's freedom. I have asked for strength and
inspiration to completely efface myself—should the need and occasion arise. It is my
firm conviction that a nation can live only if the individuals composing it be ready to
die for its sake whenever it is necessary. This moral (or spiritual) hara-kiri is not an
easy thing. But may God grant me the strength to face it whenever the country's
interests demand it.
I hope you will maintain your improvement. I am progressing steadily.
With respectful pranams,
Yours affectionately,
SUBHAS
The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939

APPENDIX XIV
THE WAY OF SATYAGRAHA 1
At the end of five days' heart-to-heart talks with the Muslim friends, often
continuing till midnight, and shorter talks with the Bhayats and having failed with
them, Gandhiji put his signature to the letter2 to the Thakore Saheb submitting seven
names of the Sardar's representatives. His hand shook as he did so. He never dreamt at
that time that within thirty-six hours of the despatch of his letter, his faith in God and
ahimsa would be put to test. Ever since his arrival here on his mission of peace,
Gandhiji had made it a point to hold daily the congregational evening prayer on the
1
2

474

Vide “Statement to the Press”,16-4-1939
Vide “Letter to Dharmendrasinh”, 14-4-1939
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Rashtriyashala grounds. The practice was kept up during the fast.
On the evening of the 16th instant a report was brought to Gandhiji that the
Bhayats and Mussalmans of Rajkot were going to hold a black-flag demonstration at
the evening prayer. There was also a report that a garland of shoes had been got ready
for the occasion. He made light of the fears of those who brought the report. He had
full faith in the Mussalman and the Bhayat leaders who had friendly discussions with
him during the last five days. But in case the worst came to the worst he would
welcome it. Accordingly, he gave peremptory instructions that anybody approaching
him, no matter with what intent, should be given free access and not obstructed in any
way.
He motored as usual to the Rashtriyashala prayer ground. Almost
simultaneously with it the demonstrators, too, numbering about 600, arrived on the
scene with black flags and placards bearing inscriptions some of which were highly
offensive. They lined the fence enclosing the prayer ground from the main road. The
Sardar happened to be away at Amreli that day and so missed the show.
Gandhiji bowed to the demonstrators, as is his wont, before he sat down to
prayer, which was conducted as usual. All the time the prayer was going on, the
processionists kept on an unseemly demonstration of shouting and yelling. The
creation of disturbance at the prayer time under the very eyes of the Bhayats and
Mussalman representatives who had sat with him in conference only the other day
was for him the "unkindest cut of all". The prayer over, he rose to go. The
demonstrators had by now begun to pour in through the entrance of the narrow
passage leading to the prayer ground. Gandhiji, instead of going by car as usual,
decided to walk through the crowd so as to give the demonstrators full chance to say
or do to him whatever they pleased. At the entrance the crush was too great to allow
further progress. The pushing and jostling by the demonstrators at the rear on either
side of the gangway was growing apace. The dust and the din added to the confusion.
Friends tried to form a protective cordon. But Gandhiji waved them off. “I shall sit
here or go alone in their midst,” he told them. All of a sudden he was seized by an
attack of indescribable pain in the region of the waist, and felt as if he would faint.
This is an old symptom in his case that seizes him whenever he receives an acute
mental shock. For a time he stood in the midst of that jostling crowd motionless and
silent, his eyes shut, supporting himself on his staff, and tried to seek relief through
silent prayer, a remedy that has never failed him on such occasions. As soon as he had
sufficiently recovered, he reiterated his resolve to go through the demonstrators all
alone. He addressed a Bhayat, who stood confronting him and who, he subsequently
learned, was besides a police officer in plain clothes, “I wish to go under your sole
protection, not co-workers'.” Some Bhayats had already noticed his condition. They
now bade the rest to make way for him, and leaning on the shoulder of the Bhayat

VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

475

friend in question, Gandhiji walked to the waiting car. “This is the way of
satyagraha,” he remarked as the car drove off, “to put your head unresistingly into the
lap of your ‘enemy’, for him to keep or make short work of just as he pleases. It is
the sovereign way, and throughout my half a century of varied experience it has never
once failed me.”
Two Mussalman representatives from the Civil Station came to see him soon
after, according to previous appointment. “You were less than fair to yourself and to
us in exposing yourself to such a risk. Anything may happen in a motley crowd,”
they remarked to him with reference to the happenings of the evening.
Gandhiji in reply described to them how such risk-taking had become a part
and parcel of his life. There were at least half a dozen occasions in South Africa and in
India when he had risked his life like that, and he had never regretted doing so. In all
cases the assailant or the would-be assailants had ended by becoming his friends. “But
should the worst happen after all,” he concluded, “what privilege can be greater for a
satyagrahi than to fall with a prayer in your heart for those whom you wanted to serve
but who under a delusion took you for an ‘enemy’?”
PYARELAL
RAJKOT, April 18, 1939
Harijan, 22-4-1939

APPENDIX XV
LETTER FROM RANJITSINH 1
April 17, 1939
DEAR MAHATMAJI,

I have received your letter written on the morning of the 17th instant. I have
understood from your letter that you have seen the handbill issued by the Rajkot
Bhayats’ and Garasias’ Samiti and you have felt the allegations about breach of
promise as serious.
The remedy that you have suggested is that all such cases should be referred to
an arbitrator for his decision. May I suggest to you, in this connection, that your
letter dated the 11th March be referred to Sir Maurice Gwyer for interpretation? If you
agree to arbitration in this matter, I venture to submit that we can hardly find a person
better fitted to act as an arbitrator than Sir Maurice Gwyer. If you accept my proposal I
shall make all arrangements in this behalf, and let you know at the earliest
1
Vide “Letter to Ranjitsinh”, 17-4-1939. This appeared as “a correct rendering
in English of the correspondence”. The superscription and the subscription are
reproduced from The Hindustan Times.

476

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

opportunity.
If you had explained beforehand your object in going on foot instead of
proceeding by car to the leaders of the procession, they would have certainly listened
to you. You need not have the least cause for suspicion in this respect. On the
contrary, all our activities are and shall ever be non-violent and peaceful. If anybody
has implanted in your mind any suspicion that we contemplate any physical injury to
you, I assure you that it is absolutely out of place. I go further and say that if you or
anybody else are under any such impression, 50 or 25 volunteers from among our
Bhayats and Garasias will remain with you during the whole of your stay in Rajkot.
The reference made in the Rajkot Bhayats’ handbill to the Congress instead of
to the Praja Parishad is only a slip of the pen. Wherever the word “Congress” is, it is
used for the Praja Parishad. We have received the printed appeal sent by you.
Yours,
RANJITSINH
The Hindu, 19-4-1939; also The Hindustan Times, 19-4-1939

APPENDIX XVI
LETTER FROM LORD LINLITHGOW1
VICEREGAL LODGE, S IMLA,
May 15, 1939
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

Many thanks for your friendly letter of 9th May which I appreciate all the
more because I realize the pressure under which you have been working and the fact
that you were writing on the train. Let me thank you, too, for leaving me free from
business so far as you are concerned during my holiday.
2. I have read with interest what you say about the three problems you
mention, and I think it is only courteous that I should say a word or two to you about
the position as I see it at the moment, though I do so merely to put you in possession
of my point of view, and not for a moment because I want to trouble you to comment
on what I say, or because I think we could usefully enter upon prolonged
correspondence about these cases.
3. I have been watching events in Talcher very closely. I am satisfied myself
that the Assistant Political Agent, when he interviewed the refugees in Angul, made it
clear that he was not in a position to give them any promises or come to any
agreement. That, however, is now past history, and as you will have heard, the Raja
1

Vide “Letter to Lord Linithgow”, 9-59-1939 and “Letter to Lord Limithow”
23-24-1939
VOL. 75 : 30 JANUARY, 1939 - 30 MAY, 1939

477

recently made an announcement which appeared to me satisfactorily to meet the
remaining grievances of any importance of which the refugees complained. I am no
less disappointed than you are that this should have failed to produce the desired
result, but further enquiries have been set on foot and I hope that the trouble will soon
be at an end.
4. As regards Jaipur, you will no doubt have heard that conversations have
recently taken place between the Jaipur authorities and Seth Jamnalal Bajaj, and here
again I hope that a suitable solution of the difficulties will soon be forthcoming.
5. As regards Rajkot, I have been very sorry to learn of the difficulties with
which you have to contend. Owing to the various conflicting interests involved, the
matter appears to have become highly complicated, but I hope that in the absence of
any other solution, the Committee will be set up without any further considerable
delay. I understand that the question whether certain of the Sardar's nominees are state
subjects has now been decided by the Judicial Commissioner, and that the only other
preliminary point to be settled is whether the assurances which you gave to the
Muslims and the Bhayats were conditional or unconditional. I understand that it has
been agreed that this should be referred to an independent judicial authority, and that
it now remains only to decide who the judicial authority is to be and what should be
the precise terms of reference. I will, I need not assure you, continue to watch
developments in Rajkot with close attention.
6. I do not in the least misunderstand your sympathetic reference, and we both
of us have our troubles! But it is only fair to say I have no misgivings as to the
loyalty of the Political Department in carrying out my instructions.
With all good wishes,
Yours sincerely,
LINLITHGOW

From a microfilm: Lord Linlithgow Papers. Courtesy : National Archives of India

478

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

