1. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM D. SARAIYA
February 10, 1932
CHI. KAKU,

I got your letter written in a beautiful hand. You have plenty of
things to write about. Even if you give an account of what you did
during the last year, you will have enough material. You should
regard spinning as yajna and do it regularly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 2807. Courtesy: Purushottam D. Saraiya

2. LETTER TO VALJI G. DESAI
February 10, 1932
BHAISHRI VALJI,

I got the packet sent by you. I will look into the translation at
least, as and when I get time and let you know when I finish it. I have
already replied1 to your previous letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7419. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

3. LETTER TO VANAMALA N. PARIKH
February 10, 1932
CHI. VANAMALA,

You get five marks for your handwriting. You will get eight if
you leave space between the words and use a good pen. Why does
man have no root? A man carries his root wherever he goes. A tree
has its root under the ground because it comes out of the ground.
Man is born from his mother’s body, and his root also comes out with
him at the time of his birth. One may say that the navel is his root. If
1

Vide “Letter to Valji G. Desai”, 3-2-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

1

this is not clear to you, show this letter to Premabehn and ask her to
explain its meaning to you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5764. Also C.W. 2987. Courtesy:
Vanamala M. Desai

4. LETTER TO NARAYAN M. KHARE
February 10, 1932
CHI. PANDITJI,

I got Barve’s book. I will dip into it when I get time.
Your explanation about the first doubt is quite correct. I have
felt that that is the implication of Chapter XVII. Ultimately one has to
rely on faith. We see again and again that what seems to be the truth to
one does not often appear so to others. However, to follow truth as
one sees it is like walking on the razor’s edge. Anyone who tries to do
so ought to remain wide awake and rigidly follow all the rules and
restrictions. The lazy, the licentious, and the hypocrites can claim no
right to act according to their view of truth. That privilege belongs
only to the sadhak, the seeker after truth.
As for the second doubt, I think that the sadhak will not trouble
himself with deciding what is and what is not for general good. He
would say that he was not interested in the question, and that universal
good lay in truth since truth was the supreme Being. While all other
names of God suggested only one aspect of His, truth signified His
perfect essence, so that a person who opposed truth could never
accomplish anybody’s good. Truth necessitates harmony of thought,
speech and act. That is, one must follow truth as one sees it and always
be faithful to it in thought, speech and action. But a false notion is
widely prevalent among us. We are not always bound to answer a
question asked by anyone. There is no violation of truth in refraining
from giving an answer. To keep silent when it is one’s duty to reply to
a question amounts to telling a lie. For example, if my father asked
me whether I had stolen a piece of gold, I would be bound to answer
the question. However, if even my father asked me whether somebody
had stolen a thing, I would not be bound to answer. If, therefore, I did
not reply, I would not be telling a lie. I remember the chapter in
2

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Gitarahasya1 . I did not agree with the suggestion in it. If you tell a lie
under force of circumstances, you are certainly not telling the truth.
There never can be an occasion when one must tell a lie. If there can
be such an occasion, then it would follow that the principle of
following truth in speech and action wasimperfect. There can be no
exception to a principle, and hence there can be no atonement for
untruth spoken knowingly. Or the only possible atonement would be
never to do so again. Atonement is possible only when some error is
committed in ignorance. I think that this answers your second
question too. Ask again if anything is still left out.
I have not revised this letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 222. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn
N. Khare

5. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
February 10, 1932
CHI. SHARDA,

What you have written is as good as saying that you like
pakodas but not chapatis. But a person whose body acquires such a
tendency should be considered diseased. A healthy person will never
be able to satisfy his hunger by eating pakodas. He would ask only
for bread. The same is true about the Gita. Once your mind has
awakened, you are bound to like the Gita. You must think that there is
something still lacking so long as you cannot like the Gita. But I, who
prepare such recipes, should also be blamed. My prescription of the
Gita for you is defective and that is the reason why you are not able to
absorb it. What is the remedy?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9944. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

1

A commentary on the Gita by B. G. Tilak

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

3

6. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
February 11, 1932
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter which consoles me. Those who believe in
God’s guidance just do the best they can and never worry. The sun
has never been known to have suffered from overstrain and yet who
slaves with such unexampled regularity as he! And why should we
think that the sun is inanimate? The difference between him and us
may bethat he has no choice, we have a margin no matter how
precarious it may be. But no more speculation of this sort. Suffice it
for us that we have his brilliant example in the matter of tireless
energy. If we completely surrender ourselves to His will and really
become ciphers, we too voluntarily give up the right of choice and
then we need no wear and tear.
I have just commenced almond paste instead of milk. I was daily
decreasing the quantity of milk because it was not suiting me. It may
be that while I am resting, I do not need animal proteid. I am simply
trying. Therefore, if you have more almond paste we had in London,
please bring the bottles with you. Just now I am flourishing on dates,
tomatoes and almond paste, of course with lemon and honey water
twice during 24 hours. It is too early yet to say how I shall fare
without milk. I shall not do anything consciously to injure my health,
much as I would love to give up milk altogether.
There may be no time for you to tell me when you come,
therefore let me know by letter how you washed the woollen blankets.
Did you soak them in cold water or warm and how long? How much
Lux did you use, in how much water? I propose to use powdered
Apana soap. I am in no hurry.
I take it that you share my letters with the Ashram and that you
get from the Ashram what may be worth knowing.
I had a letter directly from the Privats. They seem to have
thoroughly enjoyed their stay and I am glad.
Do you ever meet Manilal our host and his wife?
If you meet Pyare Ali tell him or send him word not to send any
more dates. I have about 20 lb. from Jerajani. Moreover what Pyare
Ali gets are old dates and, therefore, they are weevily.
4

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

My love to Damodardas and his people.
Love from us both.
BAPU

[PS.]
The accompanying for Nargis. I have heard from Agatha
Harrison. She says that Percy Bartlett and Hyam and a university girl
are coming.1 I forget the names. But perhaps you have heard from her
too. I have Devi West’s letter written to Ba.
From a photostat: C.W. 9504, Courtesy: Mirabehn

7. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
February 11, 1932
2

CHI. MANUDI ,

I got your letter. You should serve aunt. You are no longer a
child. You are grown-up and can understand things. Aunt has looked
after you with great care and shown you much affection too. I would
not even know how to show such affection. You should also take care
of your [body] and acquire good knowledge. The heap of
picture-cards for you is growing bigger. Write to me from time to
time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1510. Courtesy: Manubehn
Mashruwala

8. LETTER TO MANSHANKAR J. TRIVEDI
February 11, 1932
CHI. MANU,

I did think of writing to you earlier. But even here I take up
some work, and for its sake I postpone doing whatever else I can
afford to.
I suppose you are thinking hard what you should do but there is
1
These three English Quakers were to visit India “on an independent mission
of conciliation”.
2
Daughter of Harilal Gandhi

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

5

no reason for worrying. Your duty now is to complete your work
there. Study as hard as you can without impairing your health. You
should learn the wisdom of the swan. Do you ever read Tulsidas? It is
very useful to read him regularly. His work contains this verse:
All things in the world,
Both living and non-living,
God has created a mixture of good and evil.
The sage will, like the swan,
Accept the milk of goodness
Leaving out the water of evil.

In the same way you should accept the good which you see
there and keep away from the evil. Moreover you are there as India’s
representative and should always represent what is good in the
country. Keep away from the evils of India even for the sake of the
country where you are. Ever since I came to know you at the Sassoon
Hospital, I have never imagined you capable of any evil.
You must have now learnt German quite well. Write to me about
your studies, your health and your companions.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
You of course know that Sardar is here with me. He sends his
blessings.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1004

9. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
February 11, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

Champa seems to be pining to come and see me. Let her come
next week. I hope Ratilal will not prevent her.
I got yesterday the post sent by you. It did not include a copy
of “Ashram Samachar”. Moreover, the second sheet of your letter
was torn at the bottom. It was not torn here. Try to recollect if it was
torn there. I also don’t find a separate letter from Ranchhodbhai.
I could not discover here why you did not get the letter to
Chanchalbehn and to the widow who had lost her son, namely, Nos. 1
6

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and 22. They are certainly not with me. It is possible that, while the
letters were being examined in the office here, these two slipped out
and were lost. Henceforth I will try to send a list of names and
numbers.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
After I had written this, I got your second post. Since Champa is
calm, she need not come, if she doesn’t wish to.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8209. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

10. LETTER TO RAMACHANDRA N. KHARE
February 11, 1932
CHI. RAMBHAU ALIAS RAMACHANDRA KHARE,

Bravo! You have found a good argument. Since all others write,
why need you? If everybody argued in that way, I would get no
letters. Can’t I also argue similarly? The correct reasoning, however, is
this. If we do our duty, others also will do theirs some day. We have a
saying to the effect: “If we ourselves are good, the whole world will
be good.”
Have you now completely overcome the habit of fibbing?
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 290. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare

11. LETTER TO JAISHANKAR P. TRIVEDI
February 11, 1932
BHAI TRIVEDI,

I wished to write to Manu earlier but could not write all these
days. Whenever you wish, you may come and see me on a day fixed
for visitors. It will always be possible to include you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1003
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

7

12. LETTER TO PUSHPA S. PATEL1
February 11, 1932
CHI. PUSHPA,

I have your letter. But I could not place you. Give me full
particulars of yourself and tell me your age too.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 3979

13. LETTER TO MANIBEHN N. PARIKH
February 12, 1932
CHI. MANIBEHN (PARIKH),

If the pain in the ear has increased so much, did you consult
anybody? I think you should get the ear examined once. If Haribhai2
cannot understand the cause after examining it, you should pay a visit
to Bombay. There are some good ear specialists there. Dr. Jivraj will
take you to one.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5964. Also C.W. 3281. Courtesy:
Vanamala M. Desai

14. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
February 12, 1932
CHI. MANGALA (DARLING),

I got your letter. You must learn to avoid even the few mistakes
which you make in reciting the Gita verses. Otherwise you
1

Although Gandhiji mistook the identity, the addressee was in fact Pushpa S.
Patel, as is evident from the letter to her dated March 5, 1932; vide “Letter to Pushpa
S. Patel”, 5-3-1932. The misunderstanding was due to her letter being written in
unusually good Hindi.
2
Dr. Haribhai Desai

8

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

will cease to be ladki and will remain a lakdi for ever.1
Where does Kamu2 live? How is her health?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4075. Also C.W. 39. Courtesy:
Mangalabehn B. Desai

15. LETTER TO MATHURI N. KHARE
February 12, 1932
CHI. MATHURI,

I will forgive you everything except writing a bad hand. You
should write each letter [in a word] as neatly as you draw a picture.
Gajanan is there to help you. If you ask him he will teach you how to
do so. It is a sort of game. You need not spend much time
inpractising. You should practise only for a short time every day.
Tripathibhai’s3 Manu used to practise while lying ill in bed. He was in
bed for one whole year.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 263. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare

16. LETTER TO SHANTA S. PATEL
February 12, 1932
CHI. SHANTA,

Why should you feel shy because Sardar is here? Is it because
he is Sardar or because he is a Patel? If for the former reason, how
long can you escape him? And as for being a Patel, he is no more
one. Those who mix with Bhangis belong to all communities.
You have given plenty of news. Write whatever comes into
1

Vide also “Letter to Mangala Patel”, 30-1-1932
Presumably Kamalabehn Patel, addressee’s elder sister
3
Perhaps a slip for “Trivedibhai’s”. The reference is to Manushankar, son of
Jaishankar P. Trivedi, who was ill in 1930.
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

9

your head. And see that you don’t fall ill. If you surrender everything
to God, you will not fall ill.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4064. Also C.W. 15. Courtesy:
Shantabehn Patel

17. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
February 12, 1932
CHI. PARASRAM,

I have your letter. I am glad that Vimal’s1 head has been shaved
clean. It does not seem, at least from here, that there is anything about
your Hindi teaching that deserves special notice. If you can attract all
to the study of the Ramayana 2 you shall have gained two purposes at
one stroke.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: C.W. 4967. Courtesy: Parasram Mehrotra. Also G.N.
7490

18. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
February 13, 1932
DEAR. BOYS AND GIRLS,

There is one thing which I noticed in English children but miss
in those at the Ashram. Most of you cannot think what to write in a
letter. This should not be. In this respect English children are smarter.
I cannot say with certainty whether or not children outside the Ashram
are like you. You should overcome this weakness.
So many things happen every day around you that, if you
properly observe them, you would be able to write enough to fill
pages. Why then should you be unable to think of anything to write
about when you sit down to write to me? One can write all that one
did, saw and thought during a day. You can say in a letter why you
1
2

10

Addressee’s younger son
Gandhiji presumably meant Ramacharitamanasa by Tulsidas.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

felt happy or unhappy on that day, as the case may be. You may also
say what good thoughts or bad ones came to you on that day. It is
possible that you are not sure whether you can write about these
things in a letter. If so, let me tell you that you need have no such
doubts. You can write just as you would talk to me. I shall now see
what progress you make next week. Letter-writing also is an art. All
our art springs from devotion to truth. Anyone who sits down to write
a letter with the thought that he would write pure truth and pour out
his love, is bound to write an interesting letter, since truth itself is God.
There will always be art in anything we do or say or write with truth as
witness and as object of our worship.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8936. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

19. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
February 13, 1932
DEAR SISTERS,

Your nest is now almost empty. However, I write down in these
letters, as I remember them from time to time, the things that I thought
worth noting. As these letters are preserved, they may be of some use
perhaps when you reassemble in future.
You have heard the name of M. Rolland. He is a great European
writer and a saintly man. I went to see him. He has a sister who also
may now be regarded aged, like him. She has remained unmarried
with the sole purpose of helping her brother. The language of the two,
the brother and the sister, is French. Rolland does not know English,
but the sister does. One may say that the sister has merged her identity
in her brother’s. She looks after Rolland’s needs in every respect. She
works as his secretary and also as interpreter when Englishmen come
to see him. Rolland has delicate health, and the sister guards it too.
Though such examples of renunciation are rare in this world, we do
come across them in the West. If there are any in our country, I do not
know about them. By linking up celibacy with moksha we have made
it rare, and it has also, therefore, become difficult to observe. On the
other hand, in the West women observe it of their own free will for the
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

11

sake of service to parents or a brother or some other cause, and they
find it easy to observe. I wish to draw two lessons from this. One, the
observance of brahmacharya for any selfless purpose is good, and
two, its observance is perfectly easy for anybody who has, like
Rolland’s sister, a concrete reason, for his self-imposed task leaves
such a person no time at all. Besides these two, there is of course the
particular lesson that women have to learn from this example.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8935. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

20. A LETTER
February 13, 1932
CHI.,

This is what I mean when I say that I think of God every
moment. During waking hours there is no time when I am not aware
that God dwells within and observes everything. This awareness is
intellectual and has been achieved through long practice. I do not say
that my heart has such awareness, since I do not think that I am free
from all fear. I do feel afraid of snakes, etc. Even though I look upon
death as a friend, I also see deep-seated within me the desire to live. It
seems that I love life and also that I would be ready to die. These two
feelings together are strange, and because of this weakness I do not
think I can say that my awareness of God is a matter of the heart also.
That the intellect accepts that He dwells in the heart is another matter.
One who actually feels the presence of God in his heart would be
wholly free from blind attachment to the body. I can see that I have
not reached that stage, and yet so complete and firm is the intellectual
acceptance of this idea that I also feel it is slowly sinking into the
heart. I cannot go further than this. . . .1
I trust you are no more rigid about food. It is necessary to take
fruit along with milk, and preferably fresh fruit. A small quantity of
uncooked leafy vegetables also should be included. Tomato and
lettuce are considered good. There is a science of diet too, and it
should not be disregarded. We know that our food ought to be sattvik,
1

12

Omission as in the source
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

but we have to learn from experience which food can be considered
sattvik. It is not necessary that one’s food should have all the
characteristics of sattvik food mentioned in the Gita.1 Experience
shows that we need fire very little. Personally, I am certain in my mind
that it is sufficient that our food is ripened by the sun. All that I wish
to say is that we should give the body what it requires from among the
things which are acceptable to us.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8938. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

21. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
February 13, 1932
You have just transcribed the Hindi letter. Didn’t Parasram
dictate it to you?
Ramarajya means rule of the people. A person like Rama would
never wish to rule. God calls Himself a servant of his servants.
You may certainly wear shorts and a shirt when doing exercise
or when cooking or doing many other things. Do you massage your
body?
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8964. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi Also C.W. 9906.
Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala.

22. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
February 13, 1932
CHI. PREMA,

I got your letter. Whenever a letter from me is delivered late to
you, you should examine the postmark and let me know the date
[of its clearance].
To what term has Kisan been sentenced? Where is she kept?
You can certainly open the trunks. If they contain books, they
1

Vide “Discourses on the “Gita” “

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

13

must be taken out and kept in the right places, and, if they contain any
other material, all the items will have to be listed and properly
disposed of. If you do not know what to do about them, send the list
to me. I will then be able to tell you what to do. Even if some of the
books belong to other people, it does not matter. If they bear the
names of their owners, they can easily be kept separately from the
others. If they bear no names there will be no harm if the Ashram
stamp is put on them. If, afterwards, these books are claimed by any
persons, they should be handed over to them. Our duty is to take all
possible care of the books while they are in our possession.
Which statement of mine did you interpret to mean that,
according to me, the Ashram had nothing to do with education? My
view is this: literary education—formal education—is given a
secondary place in the Ashram. That is why the Ashram could not be
made a Vidyapith. But such education is certainly useful and
necessary, and that is why the Vidyapith was established. The Ashram
and the Vidyapith supplement each other. Because of this limitation
of its sphere of activities, the collection of books in the Ashram should
be restricted.1 The Vidyapith can have no such restriction. The
restrictions on it relate to its internal experiments. The Ashram has a
big name and certain extravagant notions have come to be formed
about it, so that it receives books on all kinds of subjects and in many
languages. The Vidyapith is the right place where they can be
preserved. The Ashram, on the other hand, should have only such
books as relate to the subjects which we study. What books fall in this
class, you and others can easily decide. Whenever you cannot decide
you may consult me. Personally, however, I don’t see what difficulty
you can experience in this matter. After so many years of the
Ashram’s existence, we should be able to tell immediately what kinds
of books we generally require. If at any time we require some other
books, we can take advantage of the collection in the Vidyapith. We
should not regard the Ashram and the Vidyapith as two independent
institutions. Their spheres of activity are different, but the two have
much in common between them and that area is gradually expanding.
If you do not understand any point in this, ask me again.
I am sure I do not consciously refuse to hear or observe
1

The addressee had objected to the transfer of books to the Vidyapith as this
would be so much loss to the Ashram.

14

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

anything against a person about whom my views are formed.1 I always
hear what others say, but my views may not change. I think it would
be wrong for anyone to change, quickly, views formed after careful
observation. It would, of course, be obstinacy never to change them.
Hence, that too would be wrong. But there should be a sound reason
for changing such a view. Often I require the evidence of proved
facts. I cherish this nature of mine, which has saved me from many
dangers and kept my relations with people unclouded by suspicion.
You are, therefore, free to ask me what you like. You will not get
such an opportunity again.
The distinction you have made is correct.2 The writer of articles
in Young India is one person, and the man whom the inmates of the
Ashram know intimately is another. In Young India, I might present
myself as one of the Pandavas, but, in the Ashram, how can I help
showing myself as I am? I am, moreover, a votary of truth and can
make no attempt consciously to hide my weaknesses. Hence, the
Kauravas dwelling in me make their presence felt in one way or
another. Haven’t you said that a conflict is always going on in me
between the divine and the demoniac? I feel, however, that the
Kauravas are being vanquished. But one cannot yet be positive about
that. As Solon 3 has said, the final judgment about a man can be
expressed only after his death. I have known cases in which crores
were reduced to a cowrie in a moment. I have, therefore, no pride in
me at all. And what does pride avail one?
Remember that I do not revise the letters after writing them.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10272. Also C.W. 6720. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

1

The addressee had made this charge against Gandhiji.
The addressee had stated that Gandhiji the writer in Young India appeared to
be on a much higher plane than Gandhiji the man who had human limitations.
3
An ancient Greek philosopher
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

15

23. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

February 13, 1932
CHI. SHANKERLAL,

I have your letter.
If you think it is proper, write a letter to Ramanathan pointing
out the faults in his thinking. Maybe it is our duty to write to him,
considering he has served us for so long. Let him misuse if he must
what we write to him. This is only a suggestion.
The weaver Ramji1 writes that he does not have any yarn.
Narandas may have mentioned this to you. But since he has written to
me, I am drawing your attention to it.
Are you able to meet Gulzarilal? His wife is perhaps there with
him. How is his physical condition? Does he get the food his body
needs. Who is now in his place?
We are both keeping well. I have given up milk for the time
being as it does not suit me. Instead of that, I am taking roasted and
ground almonds which I had brought from England. It keeps me in
good health. It remains to be seen whether or not the weight is
maintained.
You must be having information about Mridula’s health. Let me
know how she is.
There was a note from Anasuyabehn. I have not written to her
separately.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 32727

24. LETTER TO DURGA DESAI
February 14, 1932
CHI.,

Tell Mahadev that the lucky ones get ‘C’ class, and that the
unfortunate get ‘A’ class even if they ask for ‘C’. But we should
accept whatever class we are awarded and learn what we can from our
1

16

Ramji Badhia
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

life as a prisoner in that class. Those whose minds run after comforts
and luxuries may bother themselves with the distinction between ‘A’
and ‘C’. Those who find their happiness in self-denial should seek
opportunities to practise it in all circumstances. The field for such
opportunities is unlimited. One should not seek self-denial which will
tear apart the skin on one’s back. Such self-denial is forbidden. Let
him remember the following two shlokas:
Those men who, wedded to pretentiousness and arrogance, possessed by
the violence of lust and passion, practise fierce austerity not ordained by
Shastras. 1
They, whilst they torture the several elements that make up their bodies,
torture Me to dwelling in them; know them to be of unholy re-solves.2
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8934. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

25. LETTER TO PADMA
February 14, 1932
CHI. PADMA,

I got your letter. The Bhowali sanatorium is very near the place
where you stay. I would advise you to get yourself examined there. Is
there anybody there to help you? Is Joshiji3 there? It is rather
surprising that there is no one there who can teach the Gita. Is
Shantilal there? He is bound to know it. However, I don’t worry about
this. Nor need you. You should first get back your health.
I hope you know that Maitri and Durgi have gone to Darjeeling
for some time. Sarojinidevi should of course stay with you. That is
perfectly in order. Shila must be growing into a big girl now. Do you
take care of her?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6129. Also C.W. 3481. Courtesy:
Prabhudas Gandhi

1

Bhagavad Gita, XVII. 5
Bhagavad Gita, XVII. 6
3
Presumably Chhaganlal Joshi, who was in Almora for some time.
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

17

26. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Night, February 11/15, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got both your packets. The fact that Ramji does not get yarn
means, does it not, that we are short of it. Is the position likely to be
the same at other places too? You alone can explain this.
I think you know that Madanmohan Bauhra wishes to come
here for my darshan. Read my reply to him.
The problem of Budhabhai and Parvati seems a difficult one.
Personally, I feel that they should live separately for some time. If you
agree with this suggestion, try for it. If something else occurs to you,
write to me. Does Parvati behave properly in the Ashram? Does she
observe the rules?
You are being tested fairly well, it seems.
February 12, 1932
You have to carry a fairly good burden on account of the dairy.
You are strong enough for that and transfer the burden to God, and so
I don’t worry. It will be enough if Parnerkar can live there quietly.
Let him do what he wishes.
My views about the orchard should be treated as those of a man
without experience in that field. That is, unless they are confirmed by
an expert, count them as no better than deserving to be thrown into
the river Sabarmati.
Get some news about Prabhudas. If it is necessary, as his
guardian, write to the authorities where he was sentenced to and
inquire in which jail he is kept. Send to him at the address of that jail
Dr. Talwalkar’s letter regarding his health.
Mirabehn had written to me directly and I, too, have replied1 to
her directly. I have asked her to send that letter to you.
Totaramji should be examined by Haribhai for his piles. Does
he suffer from constipation?
With whom do they intend to keep Dhiru in Palanpur? What
about Vimala?
Send to the Japanese writer permission to translate Young India
1

18

Vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 11-2-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

articles after informing Jivanji1 .
If Jairamdas’s letter contains nothing objectionable, it can
certainly be sent to me.
Afternoon, February 15, 1932
I don’t ask you in every letter to convey the Sardar’s blessings
or regards to all. But you should assume that he sends them with every
letter. There are 68 letters this time, besides the talk on the Gita and
this letter to you. A list is attached herewith, so that, if you do not
receive any of the letters, you and I will know which.
Blessings from

BAPU2
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8203. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

27. LETTER TO PHILIP HARTOG
February 15, 1932
DEAR FRIEND,

I am sorry I was unable, owing to circumstances beyond my
control, to fulfil the promise I gave you about my statement 3 on the
condition of primary education in India during the pre-British time.
Immediately on my landing I entrusted the research to Advocate
Munshi, a member of the Bombay University Senate, and two other
educationist4 friends. But they too like me find themselves civil
resistance prisoners. I had asked Advocate Munshi to put himself in
direct touch with you. But his arrest came so soon after mine that I
hardly think he could have corresponded with you. As I am permitted
to carry on non-political correspondence, I have now asked Prof.
Shah to test my statement and give you the result of his test. As I
found in you a fellow-seeker after the truth, I was most anxious to
give you satisfaction either by confirming my statement or
withdrawing it as publicly as I had made it. I thought that I would tell
you what I had done in pursuance of my promise.
1

Jivanji Dahyabhai Desai, printer and publisher of Navajivan
For the text of the Gita discourse (Ch. XVII) which followed, vide “Letters on
the Gita”,14-2-1932.
3
On October 20, 1931, at the Royal Institute of International Affairs; vide
“Speech at Chatham House Meeting”, 20-10-1931
4
The source has “educational”.
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

19

As I have not your private address by me, I am sending this to
you under care India Office.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 9410. Courtesy: India Office Library

28. LETTER TO NIRMALA H. DESAI
Silence Day [On or after February 15, 1932] 1
CHI. NIRMALA (AUNT),

What sort of a girl you are that you complain of absence of
letters from me while you yourself do not write. Did Durga convey
my message to Mahadev? How is she? Ask her to write to me. How is
Bablo 2 ?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9461

29. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
February 16, 1932
DEAR MAJOR MARTIN,

In continuation of my letter 3 to Major Bhandari and in
confirmation of our conversation of today, what I need is the human
touch with the co-workers who are not known to political fame and
who have been brought to Yeravda. I have specially in mind Messrs
Chhaganlal Joshi, Surendranath, Somabhai and my son, Ramdas.
They, I know, are in the batch that was first sent to Yeravda. I need
scarcely say that I have no desire to have any political discussion with
them. And I can have no idea whatsoever of interfering with jail
discipline.
As the matter has been now hanging for some time I would
thank you to expedite it as much as possible.
Yours sincerely,
Home Department, Government of Bombay, I.G.P. File No. 9
1

From the reference to the “message to Mahadev” to be conveyed by Durga
Desai (vide “Letter to Durga Desai”, 14-2-1932), the letter appears to have been
written on the Silence Day subsequent to February 14.
2
Narayan Desai, son of Mahadev Desai
3
Vide “Letter to M. G. Bhandari”, 5-2-1932

20

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

30. LETTER TO RAMANANDA CHATTERJEE
February 16, 1932
DEAR RAMANANDA BABU,

I have duly received the Golden Book 1 . What treasures of love
have you poured into it? I gave two hours to it straightway. Thank
you for thinking of sending it to me here. Had I got it outside, I
would not have been able to go beyond opening it and laying it down
with a sigh.
Yours sincerely

M. K. GANDHI
From the original: C.W. 9502. Courtesy: Santa Devi

31. LETTER TO TRIVENI J. MEHTA
February 18, 1932
CHI. TRIVENI,

I got your letter. There is no fixed mould for education. It
consists in the purity of one’s love. A mother spoils her child if she
regards it as hers. If, instead, she brings it up as a trust received from
God, the child soon learns to behave well. I am writing on this subject2
in today’s letter for the women. Read it and think over it. Instead of
paying attention to the weaknesses of others, we should try to become
better ourselves.
Blessings from

BAPU
S MT. T RIVENI JAGJIVANDAS MEHTA
S ABARMATI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 70. Also C.W. 8941. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

1
2

The Golden Book of Tagore; vide “Letter to Ramananda Chatterjee”, 6-2-1932
Vide the following item.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

21

32. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
February 18, 1932
DEAR SISTERS,

Regardless of your number, someone among you should still
shoulder the responsibility and keep your Association going. Prayers
should continue without any change. I should regularly get a letter on
behalf of all the women. Otherwise I, too, am likely by and by to get
tired of writing. Who among you has charge of my letters and
preserves them?
I will write today about a school that struck me as a wonderful
institution. One or two men and one or two women run it jointly.
They believe that even the dullest child responds to the law of love.
And, accordingly, they have taken in hand the work of educating
abandoned orphans who have become practically mindless. The
school is run according to certain principles which their teacher has
discovered through experiments in the method of love. These men
and women have dedicated their lives to such children, who do not
know that they are destitute and have no parents. They are brought up
in open air and sunshine; the building they live in stands on spacious
open ground. They are cured chiefly with the help of music. They
make some slow artistic movements to the accompaniment of music,
and even become absorbed in them. The women teachers treat the
children as their own. They have their meals with the children, keep
them cheerful and busy in games the whole day and gradually bring
them out of their stupor. These kind-hearted men and women have
been carrying on this experiment for the last three or four years only.
This wonderful school is situated very near to where Mr. Horace
Alexander lives. Seeing the school, I bowed my head in reverence and
wondered what love could not do. It can make the dumb speak and
the lame climb a mountain.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./III. Also C.W. 8947. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

22

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

33. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
February 18, 1932
CHI. MANGALA,

I got your letter. I may not give you full marks, because no
examiner does. But according to me you deserve full marks. I should
really learn from you. Always write as beautifully as you did this time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4076. Also C.W. 40. Courtesy:
Mangalabehn B. Desai

34. LETTER TO MATHURI N. KHARE
February 18, 1932
CHI. MATHURI,

I get your letters regularly. But I hope you will satisfy my wish.
Learn the alphabet carefully with Gajanan’s help and then write to me
in a beautiful hand. Won’t you do this?
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 262. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare

35. LETTER TO PUSHPA S. PATEL
February 18, 1932
CHI. PUSHPA,

I got your letter. You have also improved your handwriting well
enough. And now you play on the harmonium. Must I come there
and hear you play? But who knows how many years you will take to
learn to play so well that one would enjoy hearing it? Must both of us
remain here till then?
What do you say?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3980. Also C.W. 26. Courtesy:
Pushpabehn N. Naik

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

23

36. LETTER TO VANAMALA N. PARIKH
February 18, 1932
CHI. VANAMALA,

Take this a letter for you in your own strip of paper. When you
have no ruled paper, you should rule a sheet with your own hands.
When you see Narahari, tell him that I was glad he asked for and
got class ‘C’. I lay down one condition, however. He should take care
of his health and not fall ill again. See that you learn now to write a
letter properly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5765. Also C.W. 2988. Courtesy:
Vanamala M. Desai

37. LETTER TO VIDYA R. PATEL
February 18, 1932
CHI. VIDYA,

I got your letter. If you cannot think what to write in your letter,
take Premabehn’s help. In a few days you will learn to write a very
good letter. I am very glad that you feel happy there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 9421. Courtesy Ravindra R. Patel

38. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
February 18, 1932
CHI. SHARDA,

You have raised a correct question. You are sure that beating
necessarily involves violence but it is not so. Supposing somebody has
been bitten by a snake and is about to faint. In that case he will have
to be fed even if it means beating him. This is no violence because this
beating is inspired by love and is for the good of the patient.But
supposing I have an ill feeling for you in my mind but do not beat
you for want of an opportunity. Such an ill feeling is violence. The
origin of violence lies in our own minds.
24

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You can have cod-liver oil massage even if you have never taken
it orally.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9945. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

39. LETTER TO KASHI GANDHI
February 18, 1932
CHI. KASHI,

I have your letter. You need not at all worry about Prabhudas.
God has looked after him and will do so still. After meeting him, let
me know all the facts. Probably you know that I had sent to
Prabhudas my replies to some questions I had received concerning
Krishna.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33088

40. LETTER TO KAPILRAI MEHTA
February 19, 1932
CHI. KAPIL ,

I was glad you wrote to me. I was wondering where you were. I
would advise you not to become the least impatient but to take
complete rest and build up good health. Don’t be in a hurry to start
eating cereals, but go on living on milk, curds and fruit for some more
time. You should also eat lettuce and some raw tomatoes. By raw I
mean not unripe; I mean fully ripe but uncooked tomatoes. And write
to me from time to time.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Tell Nanabhai1 that I often think of him and the Dakshinamurti2
people.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3977. Also C.W. 1598. Courtesy:
Kapilrai Mehta
1
2

Nrisinhprasad Kalidas Bhatt
An educational institution in Bhavnagar

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

25

41. LETTER TO LAKSHMIBEHN N. KHARE
February 19, 1932
CHI. LAKSHMIBEHN,

I have again been writing letters to the women, but who is in
charge of the work now? Why don’t you write [to me]? The class
which was started ought not to be given up. The women who are still
there should decide to continue it and you should then let me know. It
is you who should take up this burden.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 279-a. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare

42. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
February 19, 1932
CHI. PREMA,

Your letter was very good. I was glad that you wrote quite
freely.
This is my reply to your criticism1 . I must hear what the persons
concerned have to say in their defence. Only after that can I express
my opinion in each case. In a general way, however, I can say that,
whenever some freedom was permitted, it was done not as a privilege
but as a matter of necessity. I have formed the impression that those
who permit themselves any freedom do so not out of lethargy but
because their bodies, or say their natures, demand it. We ought not to
sit in judgment over others. We may not even be aware of the effort
they make [to follow the rules]. This does not mean that such persons
have no imperfection in them. If they did not have any, why did they
join the Ashram at all? They are not hypocrites. There is a great error
in believing that everyone should or can do what one does. If I tried
to lift a weight which Hariyomal2 can, I would die that very moment.
Similarly, it would be wrong of him to envy me my weakness.
Many have said that people deceive me. I don’t say that no one
deceives me, but the number of such persons is certainly not large. I
1
Regarding inmates of the Ashram allowing themselves freedom from one or
other of the Ashram rules
2
A strong man from Sind who worked on the Ashram farm

26

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have observed that many persons cannot, when they are away from
me, keep up the standard of behaviour which they preserve when I am
there. Some even leave me for this reason. There are many such
instances and that is why I have been accused of possessing a kind of
magnetism.
But this is not likely to satisfy you or others. Nor have I said this
to defend myself. I have only explained my attitude. The real
position, however, is this, and I have held this belief for many years.
The deficiencies of the Ashram reflect my own. I have told many
people that they cannot know me by meeting me. When they meet me,
I may even impress them as being good. Even if I am not good,
people would believe that I was because I am a lover of truth. My love
of truth casts a momentary spell over people. In order to know me,
people should see the Ashram in my absence. There would be no
error and no injustice to me in believing that all its deficiencies are a
reflection of my own deficiencies. It is but true that I have drawn the
crowd which has gathered in the Ashram. If, though living in the
Ashram, they have not been able to overcome their weaknesses but
have, on the contrary, developed more, the fault is not theirs but mine.
The imperfection of my spiritual striving is responsible for this state
of affairs. Nor is it that I do not observe or know about my
shortcomings. All that I can say is that they are there despite my best
efforts to overcome them. And, moreover, I am convinced that,
because I am ceaselessly striving to improve the Ashram, it has not, on
the whole, fallen altogether from its ideal. I derive some satisfaction
from the thought that every one of the three Ashrams which I
established served or has served its immediate aim. I will not, however,
deceive myself or anybody else with this comforting thought. I wish
to travel far and there are hills and valleys to be crossed on the way. I
am resolved, however, to continue the journey. And I rest in peace in
the knowledge that there is no defeat in the quest for truth.
It is true indeed that the Ashram has not been able to attract the
learned class. The reason is that I don’t regard myself as a learned
man. The few learned men who were drawn to the Ashram joined it
not in order to pursue their learned callings but to receive and nurse
something else altogether. They [are] seekers after truth. The quest of
truth may be undertaken even by the illiterate, by children and by
theold, by women and by men. Literary education sometimes serves as
the golden lid which covers the face of truth. I do not, by saying this,
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

27

condemn such education, but only put it in its proper place. It is one
of the means [in the pursuit of truth].
We have selected most of the prayers from Sanskrit because it is
chiefly Hindus who joined the Ashram. We have no aversion to
prayers in other languages. Don’t we use such prayers occasionally?
If, instead of a large number of Hindus, a large number of Muslims
had joined the Ashram, prayers from the Koran would be recited
every day and I would even join such prayers.
Does this answer your doubts? Does it satisfy you? If it does not,
ask me again and again. I shall not get tired. I wish to satisfy you.
Don’t get tired.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10273. Also C.W. 6721. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

43. LETTER TO MATHURADAS PURUSHOTTAM
February 20, 1932
1

CHI. MATHURADAS ,

I am glad that you have gone to the Ashram. I wrote that to
Kamu many years ago. Doctors are now gradually coming to the
conclusion that all diseases have one common cause and that,
therefore, their main remedy also should be one. If anybody
disregards modifications of that one remedy, that would not do him
much or any harm. It might be said that the disease was not cured. But
what even if the disease is cured? Surely the body does not become
immune to death. Hence, if anybody sticks to only one remedy with
faith, he commits no sin.
This is also true about spiritual maladies. The cause is always
one, and that is the ego. The remedy also is one—giving up the ego,
that is, reducing oneself to a cipher. How will one who is a cipher
steal? How will he tell a lie or commit adultery? The very questions
you have asked spring from ignorance. Let us take just one example.
Of course you do not steal in the ordinary sense, but you are right in
thinking that your lack of control in eating is a form of stealing. The
remedy for this kind of stealing and the ordinary kind must be the
same, that is, to give up the habit, to stop eating what you should not.
1

28

Mathuradas P. Asar, an expert carder and khadi worker of the Ashram
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

But who is it that eats such food? The ego-self. Once that has
vanished, the other self, though eating, will not be eating and will only
give the body its wages. There will be no more question, then, of
indulging the palate. Probably you will accept all this with your
reason, but it will have meaning only if it sinks into the heart. We live
in the Ashram and seek good company, sing bhajans, etc., daily, in
order that this truth may sink into the heart. Some day we shall find
what we are seeking. In other words, our malady in the form of the
ego will be cured. From this you should be able to deduce all the
answers, and if you cannot, no matter how much I write and explain,
you will not feel satisfied. Ask me again and again till your doubts are
resolved.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3753

44. LETTER TO HARI-ICHCHHA P. KAMDAR
February 20, 1932
CHI. HARI-ICHCHHA,

I got your letter. You have become careless about your
handwriting. You ought not to have. Because you are married you
should not forget what you have learnt; on the contrary, you should
improve yourself. Forget your grief over Arvind 1 . Such separations
are inevitable so long as we live in the body, and we ought to bear
them.You may write to me whenever you wish to, and, so long as I can
see visitors, you can certainly come. Do come. I don’t know how long
I shall continue to see visitors.
Blessings from both of us. We are both faring well.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7469. Also C.W. 4915. Courtesy:
Hari-ichchha S. Kamdar

1

Addressee’s son, who died an infant

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

29

45. LETTER TO SHIVABHAI G. PATEL
February 20, 1932
CHI. SHIVABHAI,

I have your letter.
There is not the slightest doubt that if we condone or take direct
or indirect advantage of the untruth spoken or practised by a person
with whom we associate, we become party to his untruth. It is for this
reason that Tulsidas advises us to seek the company of the good.
However, in practical life we cannot always live up to the ideal. We
have to bear with our co-workers. We may consider the circumstances
in each case and act within the limits of our capacity. We ought not to
join where untruth is being deliberately practised, but having once
found ourselves in a certain situation, it may not be possible to force
ourselves out of it. Where the situation is ab initio permeated with
untruth, we have of course the weapon of non-co-operation. Surely, it
cannot be claimed that no one practises untruth in the Ashram. Still,
we do not close down the Ashram, nor do we condone untruth; but we
bear with our associates and strive to advance further every day.
Nobody in this world can do more than this.
Have you come to know about the new method of spinning the
takli? It is being practised at Wardha. One can draw 160 rounds in
half an hour by following it. Why should your diary include anything
other than your own daily activities? If necessary, you may give up
recording even these.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9508. Also C.W. 424. Courtesy:
Shivabhai G. Patel

46. LETTER TO VITHALDAS JERAJANI
February 20, 1932
BHAI VITHALDAS,

I got your letter. Take rest till your body has completely
recovered its strength. Do not be in the least impatient. The reason
why khadi sales have gone down this time is as clear as daylight. But
30

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

do not worry over that. “It is useless to sorrow over what God
ordains.” 1
Sardar is very well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9778. Also C.W. 2808. Courtesy:
Purushottam D. Saraiya

47. LETTER TO LAKSHMI JERAJANI2
February 20, 1932
CHI. LAKSHMI,

Your handwriting is certainly good. Why don’t you write in
ink? The service you are giving to Jerajani [in his illness] is the best
preparation for your future life.
Blessings from

BAPU
S JT. V ITHALDAS JERAJANI
S ASAVANE
DISTRICT ALIBAG
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9778. Also C.W. 2809. Courtesy:
Purushottam D. Saraiya

48. LETTER TO RAMESHWARLAL BAZAJ
[Before February 21, 1932] 3
BHAI RAMESHWARLAL 4 ,

I have your letter. I hope you received the letter I sent through
Miss Lester.
My health is perfect. These days I do not take milk. I usually
take almond paste, dates and tomatoes. I take an occasional papaya.
The government have put no restriction on my diet. The weight is 106
pound. It was the same outside. There is no need to send anything
1
2

Ashram Bhajanavali; vide “Ashram Bhajanavali”
This letter is written on the postcard to Vithaldas Jerajani; vide the preceding

item.
3

It is evident from the details of Gandhiji’s diet given in the letter that it was
written before February 21, 1932 when Gandhiji started taking vegetables in the
place of papaya; vide “Diary, 1932”.
4
Benarsilal Bazaj’s father, residing in Britain
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

31

from there. I get excellent almonds. Honey from Mahabaleshwar is
sent to me. Write whenever you feel like it.
My time is spent in spinning and reading. A good deal of time
is devoted to letter-writing as I am permitted to write to Ashram
inmates. And I also sleep enough during the day-time. I walk about
for two hours. Sardar Vallabhbhai is with me.
You must be receiving letters from Rukmini1 . Both she and the
baby are doing well. When will you come back?
I always recall your love.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 9446. Courtesy: Benarsilal Bazaj

49. LETTERS ON THE “GITA”2
CHAPTER I 3

Tuesday Morning, November 11, 1930
The Gita is a small portion of the Mahabharata. The latter is
generally looked upon as a historical work. To us, however, the
Mahabharata and the Ramayana are not historical works but are
treatises on religion. Or, if we call them histories, they narrate the
1

Rukmini Benarsilal Bazaj, daughter of Maganlal Gandhi
Written during Gandhiji’s incarceration in Yeravda Central Prison in 1930
and 1932, these were sent weekly along with letters to Narandas Gandhi for being read
out at the Ashram prayer meetings. Gandhiji commenced the series with Chapter Xll;
vide “Letter to Behramji Khambhatta”, 4-11-1930. The following week Gandhiji sent
Chapter I, with a general introductory note on the Gita.
All the chapters are given here under February 19/21, 1932, the date of
despatch of the letter to Narandas Gandhi, which carried the discourse on Chapter
XVllI and concluded the series; vide the following item. The translation is reproduced
from the Discourses on the Gita (Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad-14, 1960)
with slight changes to bring the text into conformity with the Gujarati original.
The Translator’s Preface in the Discourses on the Gita says: “Gandhiji’s
Gujarati translation of the Gita was published on March 12, 1930, the neverto-be-forgotten day on which he marched to Dandi from Sabarmati. A member of the
Ashram who read it found it very difficult to understand and complained about it to
Gandhiji who was then in Yeravda Prison. Thereupon, he wrote a series of letters to
the Ashram in which he devoted one letter to each chapter on the Gita. . . .”
For Gandhiji’s discourses on the Gita at Ashram prayer meetings in 1926, vide
“Discourses on the Gita”, and for his Gujarati translation of the Gita with a
commentary thereon written in 1929, vide “Anasaktiyoga”.
3
This was sent along with ‘‘Letter to Narandas Gandhi” 11-11-1930; vide
“Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 11-11-1930
2

32

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

history of the human soul; they do not tell of what happened
thousands of years ago, but depict what takes place in the heart of
every human being today. Both the works describe the eternal war
between the God and the demon in man—between Rama and Ravana.
The Gita does this in the form of a dialogue between Arjuna and
Krishna. The dialogue is narrated to the blind Dhritarashtra by
Sanjaya. Literally Gita means that which is sung. The adjective applies
to the noun Upanishad, which is understood, and so the full meaning
of the phrase is “the Upanishad which was sung”. Upanishad means
knowledge-teaching. The word ‘ Gita,’ therefore, means Shri
Krishna’s teaching to Arjuna. In reading the Gita we should feel that
Shri Krishna—God—dwells in our hearts as the holy spirit within us,
and that when, yearning for knowledge, like Arjuna, we take our
spiritual difficulties to Him and seek His guidance, seek refuge in
Him, He is ever ready to instruct us. We slumber, but the Lord within
us is ever awake. He is only waiting for spiritual yearning to be
awakened in us. We, however, do not know how to question Him, do
not even feel the desire to do so. And so we read a work like the Gita
every day and meditate over its teaching. By doing so, we wish to
awaken spiritual yearning in us and learn what questions to put to the
Lord. Whenever we are faced with spiritual difficulties, we turn to the
Gita for their solution and obtain peace of mind through it. This is the
spirit in which we should read the work. It is as it were our revered
guru, our mother, and we should have faith that we shall be safe if we
seek shelter in her lap. We can get all our spiritual difficulties solved
through the Gita. Anyone who daily meditates over the teaching of
the Gita in this manner will ever experience new joy in his study and
find new meanings. There is no spiritual problem which the Gita
cannot solve, though it may be that owing to our imperfect faith we do
not know how to read and understand the work. We read the Gita as
daily spiritual practice so that our faith may increase from day to day
and we may become vigilant. I give here, for the guidance of the
inmates of the Ashram, the meaning of the Gita which my daily
meditation over its teaching has revealed or reveals to me.
When the Pandavas and the Kauravas gathered together on the
battle-field of Kurukshetra (the field of Kuru) with their armies,
Duryodhana, the king of the Kauravas, approached Drona (his teacher
in the science of war) and named the leading warriors on either side.
As a signal for the battle to begin, conch-shell horns were sounded on
both the sides and Shri Krishna who was Arjuna’s charioteer drove his
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

33

chariot into a place between the two armies. The scene which greeted
Arjuna’s eyes unnerved him, and he said to Shri Krishna: “How can I
attack these in battle? I might readily enough if I had to fight with
strangers, but these are my kinsmen. The Kauravas and the Pandavas
are first cousins. We were brought up together. Drona is our teacher as
well as the Kauravas’. Bhishma is a revered elder for both. How can I
fight against him? It is true that the Kauravas are miscreants and doers
of evil deeds. They have wronged the Pandavas and deprived them
oftheir lands. They have insulted the saintly Draupadi. But what shall I
gain by killing them? They are fools indeed. But shall I also be
equally foolish? I have some little knowledge. I can discriminate
between right and wrong. I thus see that it is a sin to fight against
relatives. Never mind if they have taken wrongful possession of the
Pandavas’ share in the kingdom. Never mind even if they kill us. But
how dare we raise our hand against them? O Krishna, I will not fight
against my kith and kin.”
With these words, Arjuna sank down on the seat of the chariot,
being overwhelmed by grief.
Here ends the first Chapter which is entitled “The Sorrow of
Arjuna”. All of us should feel pain even as Arjuna did. No
acquisition of knowledge is possible unless there is in us a sense of
something lacking and a desire to know the truth. If a man is not
curious even to know what is wrong and what is right, what is the use
of religion for him? The battle-field of Kurukshetra only provides the
occasion for the dialogue between Arjuna and Krishna. The real
Kurukshetra is the human heart, which is also a dharmakshetra (the
field of righteousness) if we look upon it as the abode of God and
invite Him to take hold of it. Some battle or other is fought on this
battle-field from day to day. Most of these battles arise from the
distinction between ‘mine’ and ‘thine’, between kinsmen and
strangers. Therefore, as we shall find later on, the Lord tells Arjuna
that attraction (raga) and repulsion (dvesha) lie at the root of sin.
When I look upon a person or thing as ‘mine’, raga takes hold of my
mind; and when I look upon him as a stranger, aversion or hatred
enters the mind. Therefore we must forget the distinction between
‘mine’ and ‘thine’. That is to say, we must give up our likes and
dislikes. This is the teaching of the Gita and all other scriptures. To
say this is one thing; to practise it is quite another. The Gita is there to
teach us how to practise We will try to understand the method it
recommends.
34

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

CHAPTER II1

Monday Morning, November 17, 1930
When Arjuna had picked himself up a little, the Lord rebuked
him and said: “How is it that this delusion has come to you? It is
unworthy of a warrior like you.” But even then Arjuna stuck to his
first position, refused to fight and said: “If in order to get it, I have
toslay elders and other relations, I do not want not only a kingdom on
this earth but even the delights of paradise. My mind gropes in
darkness. I do not know where my duty lies. I put myself into your
hands. Please guide me.”
Finding that Arjuna was bewildered and aspired after
knowledge, Krishna had pity on him and proceeded to explain things
to him: “Your sorrow is for nothing, and you utter words about
wisdom without understanding. You have evidently forgotten the
distinction between the body and the embodied soul. The soul never
dies; but the body passes through childhood, youth and old age and
perishes in the end. The body is born but the soul is birthless and
unchanging. It ever was, is now and will be there for all time to come.
For whom then do you grieve? Your grief arises from a delusion. You
look upon these Kauravas as your own, but you are aware that their
bodies will come to an end. And as for the souls which inhabit these
bodies, no one can destroy them. The soul cannot be wounded by
weapons, burned by fire, dried by the wind or drowned in water. Then
again, consider this from the standpoint of your duty as a warrior with
an army under his command. If you refuse to fight this righteous war,
the consequences will be the very reverse of what you expect and you
will become an object of ridicule. You have always enjoyed the
reputation of being a brave man. But if now you withdraw from the
battle, you will be supposed to have been driven from it by fear. If it
were part of your duty to flee in the face of danger, disgrace would
not matter, but if you retire from battle now, you will have failed to
discharge your duty, and people will be justified in condemning your
flight.
“Thus far, I have tried to reason out things, draw a distinction
between the body and the soul and remind you of your duty as a
warrior. But let me now explain karmayoga (the method of action). A
practitioner of karmayoga never comes to harm. It has nothing to do
1

This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 13/17-11-1930; vide
“Letter to Narandas Gandhi
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

35

with chopping logic. It is something to be translated into action and
experience. An ounce of practice is more profitable than tons of
argumentation. And this practice too must not be vitiated by
speculation about its fruit. Literalists perform Vedic rites directed to
the acquisition of material rewards. If one rite does not yield the
expected fruit, they have recourse to another, and being disappointed
once more, they take up a third. And thus they suffer from utter
mental confusion. As a matter of fact, it is up to us to do our duty
without wasting a single thought on the fruits of our action. To fight
is the duty you have to discharge at present. Gain or loss, defeat or
victory, is not in your power. Why should you carry the needless
burden of thinking about them and be like the dog who walks under a
cart and imagines that it is being drawn by himself and not by the
bullocks? Defeat and victory, heat and cold, pleasure and pain come
to a man in turn and he must put up with them. Without worrying
about the fruit of action, a man must devote himself to the
performance of his duty with an evenness of temper. This is yoga, or
skill in action. The success of an act lies in performing it, and not in
its result, whatever it is. Therefore be calm and do your duty
regardless of consequences.”
On hearing all this Arjuna said: “The course of conduct you
have mapped out for me seems to be beyond my capacity. Not to
worry about defeat or victory, not to waste a thought on the result how
can one attain such evenness of temper and steadfastness in spirit?
How does a man with such attainments behave, and how are we to
recognize him?”
The Lord replied: “ O King, one who renounces all the
cravings which torment the heart and derives his contentment from
within himself is said to be a sthitaprajna or samadhistha (one stable
in spirit). He is unruffled in adversity, and he does not hanker after
happiness. Pleasure and pain are felt through the five senses.
Therefore this wise man draws his senses away from sense-objects
even as a tortoise draws in his limbs. The tortoise withdraws into his
shell when he apprehends danger. But in the case of human beings
sense-objects are ready to attack the senses at all times; therefore their
senses must always be drawn in, and they should be ever ready to fight
against sense-objects. This is the real battle. Some people resort to
self-mortification and fasting as weapons of defence against
sense-objects. These measures have their limited use. The senses do
not make for sense-objects so long as a man is fasting, but fasting
36

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

alone does not destroy his relish for them. On the other hand that
relish may be heightened when the fast is broken, and a man can get
rid of it only with the grace of God. The senses are so powerful that
they drag a man behind them by force if he is not on his guard.
Therefore a man must always keep them under control. This end he
can achieve only if he turns his eyes inward, realizes God who resides
in his heart and is devoted to Him. One who thus looks upon Me as
His goal and surrenders his all to Me, keeping his senses in control, is
a yogi stable in spirit.
“On the other hand, if a man is not master of his senses, he is
always musing on the objects of sense and conceives an attachment
for them, so that he can hardly think of anything else. From
thisattachment arises desire; and when the desire is thwarted he gets
angry. Anger drives him nearly mad. He cannot understand what he is
about. He thus loses his memory, behaves in a disorderly manner and
comes to an ignoble end. When a man’s senses rove at will, he is like a
rudderless ship which is at the mercy of the gale and is broken to
pieces on the rocks. Men should therefore abandon all desires and
restrain their senses, so that these do not indulge in undesirable
activity. The eyes then will look straight and that too only at holy
objects; the ears will listen to hymns in praise of God or to cries of
distress; hands and feet will be engaged in service. Indeed all the
organs of sense and of action will be employed in helping a man to
do his duty and making him a fit recipient of the grace of God. And
once the grace of God has descended upon him, all his sorrows are at
an end. As snow melts in the sunshine, all pain vanishes when the
grace of God shines upon him and he is said to be stable in spirit.
“But if a man is not stable-minded, how can he think good
thoughts? Without good thoughts there is no peace, and without peace
there is no happiness. Where a stable-minded man sees things clear as
daylight, the unstable man distracted by the turmoil of the world is as
good as blind. On the other hand what is pure in the eyes of the
worldly-wise looks unclean to and repels the stable-minded man.
Rivers continuously flow into the sea, but the sea remains unmoved; in
the same way all sense-objects come to the yogi, but he always
remains calm like the sea. Thus one who abandons all desires, is free
from pride and selfishness and behaves as one apart, finds peace. This
is the condition of a perfect man of God, and he who is established
therein even at the final hour attains the beatitude of Brahman.”
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

37

CHAPTER III1

Monday Morning, November 24, 1930
When Krishna had thus set forth the marks of identification for
a sthitaprajna person, Arjuna received the impression that one had
only to sit quiet in order to attain such a state, as Krishna had not
made the slightest reference to any need for action on his part. He
therefore asked Krishna: “It seems as if you hold that knowledge is
superior to action. If so, why are you urging me to this terrible deed
and thus confusing my mind? Please tell me clearly where my welfare
lies.”
Krishna replied: “O sinless Arjuna, since the beginning of time
seekers have taken one or the other of two different paths. In one of
these the pride of place is given to knowledge and in the other it is
given to action. But you will find that freedom from action cannot be
attained without action, that wisdom never comes to a man simply on
account of his having ceased to act. Man does not become perfect
merely by renouncing everything. Don’t you see that every one of us
is doing something or other all the time? Our very nature impels us to
action. Such being the law of nature, one who sits with folded hands
but lets his mind dwell on the objects of sense is a fool and may even
be called a hypocrite. Rather than indulge in such senseless inactivity,
is it not better that a man should control the senses, overcome his likes
and dislikes, and engage himself in some activity or other without fuss
and in a spirit of detachment? Do your allotted duty, restraining the
organs of sense, for that is better than inaction. An idler will only meet
his end the sooner for his idleness. But while acting, remember that
action leads to bondage unless it is performed in a spirit of sacrifice.
Sacrifice (yajna) means exerting oneself for the benefit of others, in a
word, service. And where service is rendered for service’s sake, there is
no room for attachment, likes and dislikes. Perform such a sacrifice;
render such service. When Brahma created the universe, He created
sacrifice along with it, as it were, and said to mankind: ‘Go forth into
the world; serve one another and prosper. Look upon all creatures as
gods. Serve and propitiate those gods, so that being pleased they will
be gracious to you and fulfil your wishes unasked.’ Therefore
understand that whoever enjoys the fruits of the earth, without serving
the people and without having first given them their share, is a thief.
1

This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 21/25-11-1930; vide
“Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 21/25-11-1930

38

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

And he who enjoys them after having given all creatures their share is
entitled to such enjoyment and is thus freed from sin. On the other
hand, those who labour only for themselves are sinners and eat the
fruit of sin. It is a law of nature that creatures are sustained by food,
food production depends on the rains, and the rains descend on the
earth on account of yajna, that is to say, the labour of all creatures.
There is no rain where there are no creatures, and it does rain where
they are there. All live by labour; none can remain idle and live, and if
this is true of the lower forms of life, it is still more applicable to man.
Action takes its origin from Brahma and Brahma from the
imperishable Brahman; therefore the imperishable Brahman is present
in all kinds of sacrifice or service. And whoever breaks this chain of
mutual service is a sinner and he lives in vain.
Tuesday Morning
“When a man enjoys peace of mind and contentment, it may be
said that there is nothing left for him to do. He does not stand to gain
by action or by inaction. He has no personal interests to serve; and yet
he must not cease to offer sacrifice. Therefore do your duty from day
to day without entertaining likes and dislikes and in a spirit of
detachment. He who acts in such a spirit enjoys the beatific vision.
Then again, if even a selfless king like Janaka reached perfection all
the while working for the good of the people, how can you behave in
a way different from his? Whatever a good and great man does,
common people imitate. Take My own case for instance. I have
nothing to gain by action, and yet ceaselessly do I pour myself out in
action. Hence it is that people too go on working more or less. But
what would happen if I ceased to work? The world would collapse if
the sun, the moon and the stars ceased to move. And it is I who set
them in motion and regulate their activity. But there is a difference
between My attitude and the attitude of the common man. I act in the
spirit of perfect detachment while he harbours attachment and works
in his own interest. If a wise man like you ceased to act, others too
would do the same and their minds would be unsettled. Therefore do
your duty without attachment, so that others might not cease to work
and might gradually learn to work without attachment. Man is bound
to work in obedience to and in conformity with his own nature. Only
a fool thinks that he himself is the doer. To breathe is a part of man’s
nature; when an insect settles upon the eye, the eyelid moves of its
own accord. And nobody says: ‘I take in the air’ or ‘I move the
eyelid’. In the same manner why should not all human actions be
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

39

performed in accordance with the qualities of nature? Why should
there be any egoism about it? In order that a man may be able thus to
act naturally and without attachment, the best thing for him to do is to
dedicate all his actions to Me and perform them without egoism as a
mere instrument in My hands. When a man thus gets over selfishness,
all his actions are natural and free from taint and he escapes many a
trouble. Actions then have no binding force for him. Action being
natural, it is sheer egoism to outrage nature and to claim to be
inactive. The victim of such egoism will externally appear not to act,
but his mind is always active in scheming. This is worse than external
activity and has all the greater binding force.
“As a matter of fact the senses feel attraction and aversion for
their respective objects. For instance the ears like to hear some things
and do not like to hear other things. The nose likes to smell the rose,
and does not like to smell dirt. This is also true of the other organs of
sense. Therefore what man has to do is not to submit to these two
robbers, namely, attraction and repulsion. If one wishes to escape their
attentions, he must not go about in search of action. He must not
hanker after this today, that tomorrow and the other thing the day
after. But he should hold himself ready to render for the sake of God
such service as falls to his share. Thus he will cultivate within himself
the feeling that whatever he does is in fact an act of God and not his
own, and his egoism will be a thing of the past. This is svadharma
(one’s own duty). One must stick to svadharma, for it is the best for
oneself at any rate. Paradharma (another’s duty) may appear to be
better, but even so it should be looked upon as dangerous. Moksha
(salvation) lies in embracing death while doing one’s own duty.”
When Krishna said that action performed by one who is free
from likes and dislikes is sacrifice, Arjuna asked: “What is it that
makes a man commit sin? Very often it seems as if he were driven to
sin by some outsider against his own will.”
Krishna replied: “The slave-drivers in this case are kama
(desire) and krodha (anger). These are like blood brothers. If desire is
not satisfied, anger is the inevitable consequence. One who is the slave
of desire and anger is said to be inspired by rajoguna (the quality of
passion), which is man’s greatest enemy and against which he has to
fight day in, day out. As dust hides a mirror, smoke suffocates a fire
and the womb covers the embryo, even so anger deprives knowledge
of its lustre and suffocates it. And desire is insatiable like fire, and
taking possession of man’s senses, mind and intellect, knocks him
40

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

down. Therefore first control your senses, and then conquer the mind.
When you have done this, the intellect also will obey your orders. For,
though among the senses, the mind and the intellect, the mind is
greater than the senses and the intellect is greater than the mind, the
soul is the greatest of all. Man has no idea of his own strength or
soul-force, and tends to believe that the senses, the mind and the
intellect are not amenable to his control. But when once he has gained
confidence in soul-force, everything else becomes easy as a matter of
course. And desire, anger and their countless hosts hold no terror for
him who has mastered the senses, the mind and the intellect.”
[NOTE.] I call this chapter the key to an understanding of the Gita, and the gist
of it is that life is given us for service and not for enjoyment. We have therefore to
impart a sacrificial character to our lives. Intellectual assent to this proposition is
only the first step, but such assent and conduct in terms of that assent are bound to rid
our heart of its impurities in course of time. But what is real service? In order to
obtain the right answer to this question, restraint of the senses is essential, as it
gives us a clearer and clearer vision of the God of truth. Service rendered with selfish
motives ceases to be sacrifice. Hence the urgent need for the spirit of detachment.
When this is understood, all manner of controversies lose their meaning for us. ‘Did
Krishna really ask Arjuna to kill his relatives? Could such killing ever be a part of
one’s duty?’ Questions like these are set at rest for ever. When detachment governs
our actions, even the weapon raised in order to strike an enemy down falls out of our
hand. But a mere pretence of detachment serves no useful purpose. If only we
persevere in our effort, detachment may come to us perhaps the very first day, or
maybe only after a thousand years. We must not worry over the time this takes, for
the effort carries within itself the seeds of success. We must however be on our guard
and make sure that it is a genuine effort, and that there is no self-deception. And this
is certainly possible for us all.1

CHAPTER IV 2

Monday Morning [December 1, 1930]
The Lord says to Arjuna: “The yoga of selfless action which I
commend to you is an ancient truth; I am not propounding any new
doctrine. I have declared it to you, as you are my devoted friend, in
order to heal the conflict in your mind. Whenever goodness weakens
and evil grows from strength to strength, I incarnate Myself and
1

This note has also appeared under the date of writing in “Letter to Narandas
Gandhi”, 24-11-1930
2
This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, November
27/December 3, 1930; vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 27-11-1930 , 3-12-1930.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

41

protect the good and destroy the wicked. Those who are aware of this
power (maya) of Mine are confident that evil is bound to go under. I
am always by the good man’s side. He never strays from the strait and
narrow path and he comes to Me at last, for he meditates on Me and
hides himself in Me and thus is delivered from passion and anger and
is purified by austerity and wisdom. As a man sows, so he reaps. None
can escape from the operation of the laws I have made. I established
the four varnas (classes, not castes) by the different distribution of
qualities and actions. However I am not their author, for I do notdesire
the fruits of action and have nothing to do with the merit or demerit
arising therefrom. This divine maya (course of action) is worth
knowing. All activities prevalent in the world are subject to divine laws,
and yet God is not defiled by them. Therefore He is, and also is not,
their author. And a man who does likewise and acts in a spirit of
detachment without being defiled by actions and by the yearning for
their fruit is sure to be saved. In action he sees inaction and he
understands at once what is wrong action. Wrong actions are all those
that are inspired by desire and cannot be performed in the absence of
desire, such for instance as theft, adultery and the like. These simply
cannot be done in a spirit of detachment. Therefore those who do the
duty that lies nearest without desire and scheming for the fruit of the
action may be said to have burnt up their actions in the fire of wisdom
(jnana). A man who has thus abandoned the attachment to the fruit of
action is always contented, always independent. He has his mind under
control. He gives up all his possessions. And his activity is natural like
the bodily functions of a healthy individual. He is free from any pride
or even consciousness that he is acting on his own. He has the
realization that he is a mere instrument of the divine will. What does it
matter whether he meets with success or with failure? He is neither
elated by the one, nor unnerved by the other. All his work is done as a
sacrifice (yajna), that is to say, as service to the world. He meditates
upon God in all his actions and in the end comes to Him.
“There are many forms of sacrifice, the root of which lies
in purity and service, such as, for instance, control of the senses,
charity and pranayama (breath-control) practised with a view to self
purification. Knowledge of these can be acquired from a wise teacher
(guru) through humility, earnestness and service. If anybody indulges
in various activities which he thinks are yajna, without any
understanding of what yajna is, he will only do harm to himself and
to the world. It is therefore necessary that all actions should
42

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

be performed intelligently. This wisdom (jnana) is not mere
book-learning. In it there is no room for doubt. It begins with faith
and ends in experience. It enables a man to see all beings in himself
and to see himself in God so that everything appears to him to be
actually informed by God. Such wisdom effects the salvation of the
worst of sinners. It releases the seeker from the bondage of action, so
that he is not affected by its results. There is nothing else in the world
so holy as this wisdom. Therefore try to obtain it with a heart full of
faith in God and with the senses under control, so that you will
enjoyperfect peace of mind.”
[NOTE.] The third, the fourth and the following fifth chapter should be read
together, as they explain to us what the yoga of selfless action (anasakti) is and what
are the means of practising it. If these three chapters are properly understood, the
reader will have less difficulty in tackling what follows. The remaining chapters deal
in detail with the ways and means of achieving anasakti. We should study the Gita
from this point of view, and if we pursue this study we shall find without much trouble
a solution of the problems which confront us from day to day. This calls for daily
practice. Let everybody try it. If for instance he is angry, let him remember the verse
dealing with anger and subdue that enemy. Supposing we heartily dislike somebody,
or are impatient or gluttonous or in doubt as to whether we should do or should not do
something or other, all these difficulties can be solved with the help of Mother Gita if
we have faith in it and give it constant study. Our daily recitation of the Gita as well
as this series of letters is a means to this end.1

CHAPTER V 2

December 9, 1930
Arjuna said: “You speak highly of knowledge, so that I am
inclined to think that action is unnecessary. But then you also praise
action, thus making me feel that unselfish performance of action is the
thing to do. My mind will be at peace only if you tell me definitely
which of the two is better.”
The Lord replied: “Sannyasa means knowledge and karmayoga
means selfless action. Both of them are good, but if I had to choose
between the two, I should say that yoga or selfless action is better. The
man who does not hate anyone or anything, does not long for
anything and is free from the pairs of opposites such as heat and cold,
1

This note has also appeared under the date of writing in “Letter to Narandas

Gandhi”
2

This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 4/9-12-1930; vide
“Letter to narandas Gandhi”4/9-12-1930
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

43

pleasure and pain, is a sannyasi (wise man, literally, one who
renounces the world), no matter whether he is or is not a performer of
action. He easily casts off the chain that binds him. Only the ignorant
speak of wisdom and action as different, not the learned. The fruit of
both is the same; both lead to an identical goal. Therefore he who sees
them as one sees truly. The man of pure wisdom achieves his object
by merely willing it, and has no need to perform an outward act.
When the city of Mithila was on fire, others were bound to rush to it
and fight the fire. But King Janaka contributed to this fight by his
mental determination only, for his servants were ready to obey his
commands. If he had run about with a water-pot to quench the fire, he
would only have done harm; others would have stared at him and
failed to perform their own duty, or at the most would have rushed
here and there with a view to the King’s safety. But it is not given to
every one of us to become a Janaka at once. It is indeed a very
difficult task to reach a Janaka-like state. Only one in a million can
reach it as the fruit of service extending over many lives, and it is not a
bed of roses either. As a man goes on performing selfless action, his
thought grows from strength to strength and he resorts less and less to
external action. But he is hardly conscious of this change, and he has
not this change in view either. He is devoted only to service, with the
result that his power of rendering service increases to such an extent
that he hardly seems to rest from service. And finally his service is
limited to thought alone, just as an object in extraordinary motion
seems to be at rest. It is obviously improper to say that such a man
does nothing. But this lofty state can, as a rule, be only imagined, and
not experienced. Hence my preference for karmayoga. Millions
derive the fruit of sannyasa (wisdom, literally, ‘renunciation’) from
selfless action alone. They would fall between two stools if they tried
their hand at sannyasa. If they take to sannyasa, it is very likely that
they will become hypocrites, and as they have ceased to perform
action, they are lost altogether. But a man who has purified himself by
means of selfless action, who has his mind and his senses under
control and who has identified himself with all beings, loving them as
himself—such a man stands apart from action although he is acting all
the time, and is not bound by it. He talks, he walks, he takes part in
normal human activity, but his activity seems to be merely a function
of his organs of sense, and he himself seems to be doing nothing. The
bodily functions of a physically healthy person are natural and
spontaneous. His stomach for instance functions independently of
44

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

him; he has not to bother about its functioning. Similarly a spiritually
healthy person, though acting through his body, is not tainted by it
and may be said to be doing nothing. Therefore a man should
dedicate all his actions to Brahma (God) and perform them on His
behalf, so that in spite of his activity he does not earn either merit or
demerit and is untouched by either, like a lotus leaf which is
untouched by water.
Tuesday Morning
“Therefore a yogi (man of selfless action), performing action
with the body, mind and understanding in a spirit of detachment and
without egotism, purifies himself and enters into peace. The non-yogi,
on the other hand, being attached to the fruit of action, is a prisoner
bound by his own desires. The yogi lives blissfully in the city with
nine gates, that is, his body, having renounced all actions by his mind,
and realized that there is nothing at all that he himself is doing or
getting done. The man with a purified soul does not commit sin, nor
does he do any meritorious deed. He who acts in a spirit of
detachment, having destroyed his egotism and renounced the fruit of
action, becomes a mere machine moving at the will and pleasure of
the Master Mechanic or an instrument in the hands of God. The
question, therefore, of his earning merit or demerit does not arise. On
the other hand, the ignorant man is always counting his merit and
demerit, and sinking deeper and deeper into the pit, so that in the end
the only thing he has earned is demerit. But as regards the man who
destroys his own ignorance by knowledge from day to day, his
spontaneous actions grow purer and purer, and appear perfect and
meritorious in the world’s eyes. He sees all things with an equal eye.
He is equi-minded towards a learned and humble Brahma-knowing
Brahmin, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a degraded human being who
is worse than a beast. That is to say, he serves them all with equal
devotion. He does not honour any one of them or treat another with
contempt. The man of selfless action holds himself to be the world’s
debtor, and he repays what he owes to everyone else and does him full
justice. Here on earth he takes the creation captive and is filled with
the spirit of the Supreme. He is not elated if anybody does something
pleasant; nor is he pained if foul abuse is poured upon him. The man
attached to the world seeks happiness from outside himself. On the
other hand, he who acts in a spirit of selfless detachment discovers the
spring of eternal peace in himself, having withdrawn his mind from
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

45

external objects. All sensual pleasures are a source of pain. One
should resist the rush of desire, anger and the like. The selfless yogi is
constantly engaged in doing good to all creatures. His mind is free
from doubt. He is not of the world though he is in the world. He turns
his eyes inward by means of pranayama (control of breath), etc., and
conquers desire, fear and anger. He knows Me alone to be the
supreme Lord of all, the Friend, and the recipient of sacrificial
offerings, and enters into My peace.”
CHAPTER VI 1

Tuesday Morning, December 16, 1930
The Lord said: “The man who does his duty without any selfish
desire for fruit may be called a sannyasi as well as a yogi. But he who
abstains from action altogether is only an idler. The root of the matter
is that one should not allow his mind to flit from one object of desire
to another and from that to a third. He who would practise yoga, i.e.,
evenness of temper (samatvam), cannot but perform action. The man
who has achieved such evenness of temper will be serene, because his
mere thoughts are charged with the strength of action. A yogi is one
who is not attached to the objects of sense or to action and whose
mind has ceased to roam restlessly.
“A man can be saved or ruined by himself alone. Therefore he
becomes his own friend or his own enemy as the case may be. To one
who has subdued his mind, his soul is a friend; while the soul is an
enemy for him who has failed to achieve self-control. The test for
self-control is that heat and cold, pleasure and pain, honour and
dishonour do not disturb one’s inner serenity. He is a yogi who is a
man of knowledge as well as experience, who is unwavering and
master of his senses and to whom gold, stone and earth seem all alike.
He regards with an equal eye friend and foe, sinner and saint. With a
view to attaining this state a man should stabilize his mind, divest it of
all sensual desires, and meditate in solitude on the Supreme Self. It is
not enough to practise yogic asanas (postures), etc. In order to
achieve evenness of temper, one must scrupulously keep the major
observances (vratas), such as brahmacharya (chastity) and the like. A
man who thus takes his place on a firm seat, keeps the observances
and concentrates his mind on God, enters into perfect peace.
1

This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 13/16-12-1930; vide
“Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 13/16-12-1930

46

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

“This equanimity is not for one who overeats or merely fasts,
nor for one who is too much addicted to sleep or to vigils. Its seeker
has to keep a sense of proportion in all his actions such as eating and
drinking, sleeping and keeping awake. To overeat one day and fast
the next day, to oversleep for a day and keep a vigil the next, to work
hard for a day and pass the next in idleness is no characteristic of a
yogi. The yogi is stable-minded at all times, and is without effort free
from all desires. He is like an unflickering lamp burning in a windless
place. He is not tossed to and fro by dramatic events on the
world-stage or by hisown brain waves. Such mental poise can be
acquired by slow but steady effort. The mind is fickle and restless, but
it should be gradually stabilized, for a man can have peace of mind
only when he is firm of understanding. In order thus to stabilize the
mind, he should constantly fix it on the soul. He will then see all
beings in himself and himself in all beings, for he will see Me in all
beings and all beings in Me. He who is absorbed in Me, and sees Me
everywhere ceases to be himself, so that he is at all times attuned to Me
irrespective of what he is doing, and is incapable of sin.”
Yoga thus described seemed to Arjuna to be a tall order, and he
exclaimed: “How is one to achieve such equanimity? The human
mind is restless like a monkey, and as difficult to control as the wind.
How is it to be curbed?”
The Lord replied: “You are right. But if a man earnestly sets
about conquering attachment and aversion, yoga will not be difficult
for him to practise. But it should be clear to you that it is not for one
who cannot control his mind.”
Then Arjuna posed another question: “Supposing a man has
faith, but is lax in his effort and is thus unsuccessful in perfecting
himself, what happens to him? Is he destroyed like a broken cloud in
the sky?”
The Lord said: “Such a man of faith is never lost, for no one
who takes the right path ever comes to an evil end. After death he lives
for a time in some celestial world according to his merit and is then
reborn on the earth into a holy family. But such a birth is difficult to
obtain. He then regains the mental impressions developed in his
former lives, and struggling harder for perfection, reaches the
supreme goal. Thus making an assiduous effort some attain
equanimity soon, while others do so after a number of lives in
accordance with the measure of their faith and endeavour. This
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

47

evenness of temper is superior to asceticism, to knowledge and to
sacred rites, for these latter are after all only means to the end of
equanimity. Do you therefore become evenminded and a yogi. And
even among yogis hold him to be the best who dedicates his all to Me
and worships Me alone in full faith.”
[NOTE.] Pranayama (control of breath) and asanas (yogic postures) are referred
to appreciatively in this chapter, but we should remember that at the same time the
Lord has stressed the need for brahmacharya, i.e., keeping the observances calculated
to take us nearer and nearer to God. It should be clearly understood that the mere
practice of asanas and the like can never take us to the goal of
evenmindedness.Asanas and pranayama may be of some slight help in steadying the
mind and making it single-purposed, provided that they are practised to that end.
Otherwise they are no better than other methods of physical training. They are very
useful indeed as physical exercise and I believe that this type of exercise is good for
the soul, and may be performed from a bodily standpoint. But I have observed that
these practices do only harm when indulged in for the acquisition of supernormal
powers (siddhi ) and the performance of miracles. This chapter should be studied as a
summary of the teaching in the preceding three chapters. It cheers us up in our
spiritual struggle. We should never be down-hearted and give up the endeavour to
reach evenness of temper.1

CHAPTER VII2

Tuesday Morning [December 23, 1930]
The Lord said: “O King, I will tell you how a man who devotes
his whole mind to Me, takes refuge in Me and practises karmayoga
can have perfect knowledge of Me free from the shadow of a doubt. I
will declare to you this knowledge based on experience, which having
been known, nothing more here remains to be known. Hardly one
from among thousands strives to acquire this knowledge, and perhaps
one only of these strivers makes a success of it.
“Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intellect and egoism— this is
the eightfold composition of My prakriti (nature). This is the lower
nature; the other is higher nature, that is, life. This world is born of
these two natures, that is to say, from the coming together of body and
soul. Therefore I am the cause of the origin and destruction of all
things. As pearls are strung on a thread, even so is the world held
1

This note has also appeared under the date of writing in “Letter to Narandas
Gandhi”, 13/16-12-1930
2
This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 18/23-12-1930; vide
“Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 18/23-12-1930

48

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

together by Me. Thus I am the taste in the waters, the light in the sun
and the moon, the syllable ‘Om’ in the Vedas, the sound in ether, the
spirit of enterprise in men, the sweet smell in the earth the brightness
in fire, the life in all that lives, the austerity of ascetics, the intelligence
of the intelligent, the pure strength of the strong, and the craving of all
beings which does not run counter to righteousness. In short you
should understand that all that belongs to the states of sattva 1 , rajas 2
and tamas 3 proceeds from Me, and depends upon Me alone. People
deluded by these three qualities (gunas) do not recognize Me Who am
imperishable. My maya made of these qualities is hard to overcome.
But those who take refuge in Me pass beyond this maya, that is, the
three gunas. Foolish evil-doers cannot think of coming to Me even in
their dreams. Being steeped in illusion, they roam in darkness and do
not acquire knowledge. But the doers of good deeds worship Me.
Some of them do so in order to obtain relief in their distress; others
seek for knowledge of Me. A third group are inspired by a desire to
get something for themselves while others worship Me with
understanding, thinking it to be their duty. Worship of Me means
service of My creation. This service is rendered by some because of
their misery, by others in order to gain some advantage, by a third
group out of curiosity as regards the outcome of such activity and by
a fourth group who know what they are about and for whom service
of others is something that they cannot do without. These last are My
wise devotees, dearer to Me than all the rest of them. Or rather they
know Me best and are nearest to Me. Their wisdom is the fruit of a
quest extending over a number of lives, and when they have acquired
this wisdom, they see nothing in the world except Me, Vasudeva. But
those who are smitten by a variety of desires resort to other deities. I
alone, however, am the giver of rewards commensurate with the
devotion of each. The achievement too of these devotees of limited
understanding is limited, but they rest content with it. These men in
their ignorance imagine that they know Me through the senses. They
do not realize that My imperishable and supreme form is beyond the
reach of the senses and cannot be grasped with the hands, the ears, the
nose, the eyes. Thus the ignorant do not recognize Me though I am
the Creator of all things. This is my yogamaya (creative power).
1

Harmony, passion, sloth; or rhythm, activity, inertia
ibid
3
ibid
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

49

Pleasure and pain are the necessary consequence of likes and dislikes
and keep mankind under the influence of delusion. But those who
have freed themselves from delusion and purified their thoughts and
actions hold firmly to their vows and offer Me constant worship. They
know Me in the form of perfect Brahman (the Absolute) as well as of
individual selves embodied as various kinds of creatures (adhyatma),
and My creative action (karma). Those who thus know Me as the One
who governs the material (adhibhuta) and the divine (adhidaiva)
aspects and the sacrifices (adhiyajna) and have attained evenness of
temper, are released from the bondage of birth and death after they
have died. Because they have acquired the knowledge of reality their
mind ceases to dwell on trivialities; they see the whole universe to be
filled with the spirit of God and are absorbed in Him.”
CHAPTER VIII1

Monday Morning, December 29, 1930
Arjuna asked: “You spoke of ‘Brahman’ (the Absolute),
‘ adhyatma,’ ‘karma’, ‘adhibhuta’, ‘adhidaive’ and ‘adhiyajna’, but
I do not understand the meaning of all these words. Again you say
that at the hour of death you are revealed to those who know you as
adhibhuta, etc., and have attained evenness of temper. Please explain
all this to me.”
The Lord replied: “Brahman is the imperishable supreme aspect
of God, and adhyatma is the individual soul living in the body of all
beings as the doer and the enjoyer. Karma is the process through
which all beings come into existence, or in other words, the process of
creation. Adhibhuta is Myself as the perishable body, and adhiyajna
is the individual soul purified through sacrifice. Thus whether as the
body or as the foolish soul or as the purified soul or as Brahman, it is
I who am everywhere. And never doubt this that he who meditates on
Me in all these aspects at the hour of death, forgets himself, is careful
of nothing and desirous of nothing will be united with Me. Whatever a
man constantly dwells on in his mind and remembers at the time of
death is realized by him. Therefore at all times you should remember
Me and set your mind and heart upon Me and you will surely come to
Me. You may say that it is hard thus to stabilize the mind. But you
take it from Me that one can become single-minded by daily practice
and constant endeavour, for as I told you just now, all embodied
1

50

This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 27/30-12-1930
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

beings are in the essence Myself in various forms. For this he should
prepare himself from the very first so that his mind does not go astray
at the time of death, but is steeped in devotion, keeps the life force
(prana) steady, and thinks only of Me as the Omniscient the Ancient,
the Ruler, the subtle supporter of all and dispeller of ignorance like
the sun which drives darkness away.
“This supreme state is known to the Vedas as Akshara (the
Imperishable) Brahman and is reached by sages who have freed
themselves from likes and dislikes. All who desire to reach it observe
brahmacharya, i.e., keep body, mind and speech under control and
give up all objects of sense in these three ways. Men and women who
die, having controlled the senses and uttering the sacred syllable ‘Om’
and remembering Me as they depart, reach the supreme state.
Theirmind is never distracted by other thoughts, and when they have
thus come to Me, they are not reborn into this painful condition. To
come to Me is the only means of breaking the vicious circle of birth
and death.
“Men measure time by the human span of a hundred years, and
during that period do thousands of questionable deeds. But time is
infinite. A thousand yugas (ages) make up the day of Brahma;
compared with it a human day or even a hundred years of human life
are as nothing. What is the use of counting such infinitesimal
measures of time? Human life is as only a moment in the in finite
cycle of time. It is up to us therefore to think of God alone to the
exclusion of all else. How can we afford to run after momentary
pleasures? Creation and dissolution have gone on unceasingly during
Brahma’s day and night and will do so in future too.
“Brahma who creates and dissolves beings is only an aspect of
Me. He is the unmanifested which cannot be perceived by the senses.
Beyond this unmanifested there is yet another unmanifested aspect of
Mine of which I have spoken to you. He who reaches it is not reborn,
for there is no day or night so far as this is concerned. This is a calm
and immovable aspect, which can be realized only by single-minded
devotion. It supports and pervades the whole universe.
“It is said that one who dies in the bright half of the month
during Uttarayana (the northward movement of the sun from January
to July) comes to Me if he is mindful of Me at the last moment, and
that he who dies in the dark half of the month during Dakshinayana
(the southward movement from July to January) is reborn into the
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

51

world. ‘ Uttarayana’ and the ‘bright fortnight’ here may be
interpreted to mean the path of selfless service; and ‘Dakshinayana’
and the ‘dark half of month’ to mean selfishness. The path of service
is the path of knowledge, and the path of selfishness is the path of
ignorance. He who treads the path of knowledge is released from the
bondage of birth and death, while he who takes the path of ignorance
becomes a bondslave. After having realized the difference between the
two, who would be so foolish as to prefer to walk the way of
ignorance? All men should learn to discriminate between the paths,
renounce all fruits of merit, act in a spirit of detachment and discharge
their duty with all their heart and soul, and thus endeavour to reach
the supreme state described by Me.”
CHAPTER IX 1

Monday Morning [January 5, 1931]
Having described the lofty state of a yogi in the last verse of the
preceding chapter, the Lord now naturally proceeds to sing the glory
of bhakti (devotion). For the yogi in terms of the Gita is neither a
dry-as-dust man of knowledge, nor a devotee carried away by his own
enthusiasm, but a selfless performer of action imbued with the spirit of
wisdom as well as devotion.
So the Lord said: “As you are free from hatred, I shall now tell
you the secret of wisdom, a knowledge of which will contribute to
your welfare. This is the holy knowledge above all other and is easy to
translate into action. Those who have no faith in it fail to find Me.
Men cannot perceive My unmanifested form by their senses; yet it
pervades the universe. It supports the universe; the universe does not
support it. Again in a sense it may be said that all these beings are not
in Me, and I am not in them. Although I am the source of all beings
and their sustainer, they are not in Me and I am not in them; for in
ignorance they do not know Me and are not devoted to Me. Know this
to be My divine mystery.
“But though it seems as if I am not in these beings, I am like the
air moving everywhere. All creatures pass into My nature at the end of
a cycle and are reborn at the beginning of creation. These acts are
Mine, but they do not bind Me, for I act in a spirit of detachment and
am indifferent as to the fruit they bear. These events happen as such is
1

This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 1/6-1-1931; vide
“Letter to Narandas Gandi”, 1/6-1-1931

52

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

My nature. But people do not recognize Me in such a guise and deny
My existence altogether. They entertain vain aspirations, perform vain
actions and are full of ignorance, so that they can be said to partake of
the nature of demons. But those who abide in the divine nature know
and worship Me as the imperishable Creator. They are firm in their
determination. They are always striving for virtue, praising Me, and
meditating on Me. Others again believe Me to be one or to be many.
There are countless attributes of Me; therefore those who believe Me
to be many think of different attributes as so many different faces of
Mine. But one and all, they are My devotees.
“I am the intention to offer a sacrifice, I the sacrifice itself, I the
offering made to the spirits of the fathers, I the herb, I the sacred verse
(mantra), I the oblation, I the fire to which it is offered.I am the Father
of this world, I the Mother, the supporter and the Grandsire, the object
of knowledge, the syllable ‘Om’, Rig-Veda, Sam-Veda and
Yajur-Veda. I am the end of the pilgrim’s path, the sustainer, the
Lord, the Witness. I am the shelter, the lover, the origin, the
dissolution, heat and cold, being and non-being. Those who perform
the rites mentioned in the Vedas do so in order to gain their fruit.
They may thus attain the world of heaven, but they have to return to
the world of mortals and to die. But if a man meditates upon Me with
an undistracted mind and worships Me alone, I bear all his burdens,
supply all his needs and protect his possessions. Some others who
worship other deities with faith in their hearts are victims of ignorance,
but they are really worshipping Me for I am the Lord of all sacrifices.
However, they do not know Me in My comprehensive nature and
therefore are unable to reach the supreme state. Worshippers of the
gods go to the world of the gods, the ancestor-worshippers to the
world of the fathers and those who worship the spirits go to the spirits,
while those who worship Me with the right approach come to Me. I
accept the offering of love made by seekers, even if it be only a leaf
or a flower. Therefore whatever you do, do it only as an offering to
Me, so that your responsibility for the good and evil results will cease
altogether. As you will have renounced all the fruits of action, there
will be no more births and deaths for you. I am the same to all beings;
none is hateful or dear to Me. But those who worship Me with
devotion are in Me, and I am in them. This is not partiality but only
the natural consequence of their devotion. Devotion indeed works
wonders. He who worships Me in utter devotion becomes a saint even
if he has been a sinner. As darkness vanishes before the sun, a man
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

53

abandons his evil ways as soon as he comes to Me. Therefore know
for certain that My devotee shall not perish. He becomes a man of
religion and enters into My peace. Those who are born in the
so-called lower castes and illiterate women, Vaishyas and Sudras who
take refuge in Me come to Me. It goes without saying that so do
Brahmins and Kshatriyas who lead a holy life. Every devotee enjoys
the fruit of his devotion. Therefore you who have been born in this
unsubstantial world should worship Me and work out your salvation.
Fix your mind on Me, be devoted to Me, offer your sacrifices for My
sake, prostrate yourself before Me. And if you are intent on Me and
reduce yourself to zero by attuning yourself to Me, you are sure to
come to Me.”
Tuesday Morning, [January 6, 1931]
NOTE. We learn from this Chapter that devotion (bhakti) means
attachment (asakti) to God. This is the royal road to the cultivation of
a selfless spirit. Therefore we are told at the very beginning that
devotion is the sovereign yoga and is easy to practise. It is easy to
practise if it takes hold of our heart, but hard going if it does not.
Hence it has been described as something for which we have to offer
our life itself as the price. But he who has plunged into it enjoys
perfect bliss though it scares the mere spectator. Sudhanva1 was
laughing as he lay in the boiling oil while the bystanders were seized
with terror and anxiety. The ‘untouchable’ Nanda is said to have
danced as he was tried by the ordeal of fire. 2 We need not bother
whether or not these are true stories. But the fact is that a man reaches
such a state of calmness and imperturbability when he is absorbed in
something or other. He forgets himself. But who would set his heart
on anything except God? ‘Do not prefer the bitter neem to sugarcane
or the glow-worm to the sun and the moon.’ The ninth chapter thus
shows that renunciation of the fruit of action is impossible without
devotion (bhakti). Its last verse sums up the whole chapter and in a
word means, “Seeking nothing, give yourself utterly to Me.”
1

Son of King Hansadhwaj of Champavati in the Mahabharata. He was thrown
into boiling oil for disobeying his father who was an atheist; but he came out
unscathed because of his devotion to God.
2
Nanda was not subjected to any ordeal. The legend is that he went up in
flames as he entered the shrine.

54

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

CHAPTER X 1

Monday Morning, January 12, 1931
The Lord said: “Hear once more what I say with a view to the
welfare of devotees. Even gods and great sages do not know my
beginning, for the very simple reason that I am without beginning
myself and am the origin of the universe including gods and sages.
The wise man who knows Me to be unborn and without beginning
isliberated from all sins, for when he realizes Me as such and himself
as My child or as part and parcel of Me, he overcomes the human
liability to sin. Ignorance of one’s real nature is the root of sin.
“As all beings derive from Me, so do the various natures
distributed to them, such as for instance forgiveness, truth, joy
andsorrow, birth and death, fear and fearlessness. Those who know all
these to be My glorious manifestations easily become even-minded, as
they cease to be egotistic. Their heart is fixed on Me. They dedicate
their all to Me. I am the only subject of their conversation. They
glorify Me and live in happiness and contentment. To these loving
worshippers always aware of Me I grant the power of understanding,
by means of which they come to Me.”
Arjuna then praised the Lord: “You are the Supreme Brahman,
the highest Abode, and the Lord. You yourself say that sages worship
you as the First of the Gods, the Birthless, the All-pervading. O Lord,
O Father, no one knows your real nature; it is known to you alone.
Now please tell me your glorious manifestations, and explain to me
how I may recognize you by meditation.”
The Lord replied: “There is no end to My divine
manifestations, but I shall name the chief of these only. I am the
atman (soul) dwelling in the heart of all beings. I am the beginning,
the middle and the end of them all. Of the Adityas I am Vishnu.
Among the lights I am the light-giving sun. Of the Maruts (windgods)
I am Marichi. Among the stars I am the moon. Of the Vedas I am the
Sama-Veda. Of the gods I am Indra. Of the sense-organs I am the
mind. Of beings I am consciousness. Of the Rudras I am Shankara
(Siva). Of the Yakshas and Rakshasas I am Kubera. Of the Daityas
(demons) I am Prahlada. Of beasts I am the lion. Of birds I am the
eagle. Indeed I am even the gambling of the cheats. Whatever, good
or evil, happens in this world happens only by My permission.
Realizing this, men should give up their pride and steer clear of evil,
1

This was sent along with vide“Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 12-1-1931

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

55

for I am the dispenser of the fruits of their good and bad deeds. You
should realize that only a single fraction of Mine sustains the entire
universe.”
CHAPTER XI 1

Monday Morning and Afternoon [January 19, 1931]
Arjuna, asking the Lord for a favour, said: “O Supreme Lord,
by teaching me the truth about the soul, you have dispelled my
ignorance. You are All, the Creator and the Destroyer, being
Imperishable Yourself. If possible, please let me have a vision of your
divine Form.”
The Lord said: “There are thousands of my divine forms in
various colours. The Adityas 2 , the Vasus3 and the Rudras 4 —all are
unified in My body, as well as all things, animate and inanimate. But
you cannot see this My form with those fleshly eyes. Therefore I give
you divine sight with which to see Me.”
Sanjaya said to Dhritarashtra: “O king, speaking thus to Arjuna,
the Lord revealed to him His marvellous form which defies
description. We see a single sun in the sky every day, but supposing a
thousand suns were blazing in the sky, the glory of what Arjuna saw
was more dazzling than their accumulated light. The ornaments and
the weapons of that form were similarly divine. Arjuna’s hair then
stood erect. And he spoke, shaking all over.”
Arjuna said: “O God, I see everything and everybody within
your body. Brahma and Siva are there, and so are the sages and the
holy serpents. I see you with countless arms and faces, and find no
beginning, middle or end. You shine like a mass of insufferable light,
and blaze like fire. You are the ultimate foundation of the universe,
the Ancient of Days, and the guardian of eternal law. Wherever I look,
I see parts of your body. The sun and the moon are your eyes as it
were. You pervade heaven and earth. Your splendour burns up the
universe. This world is seized with awe. The gods, the sages, and the
siddhas—all are standing with clasped hands and sing your praise. On
seeing this stupendous form and brilliance I lose my nerve. My
patience and peace are gone. O God, have mercy on me. I see these
people rush into your mouth frightful with tusks as moths fly into a
1

This was sent along with vide“Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 14/19-1-1931
Various classes of gods
3
ibid
4
ibid
2

56

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

flame and you crush them to powder. Who are you with such an awful
form? I cannot understand your ways.”
The Lord said: “I am Time, the destroyer of worlds. You may
or may not fight, but the warriors on both the sides are bound to
perish. You are only an instrument of the divine will.”
Arjuna said: “ O God, home of all the worlds, you are the
Imperishable, Being and non-Being and what is beyond either of
them. You are the First of the Gods, the Ancient of Days; you are the
refuge of the world. You are the one thing which is to be known. You
are Vayu (wind), Yama (the God of Death and Judgment), Agni (fire)
and Prajapati (the Creator). Hail to you a thousand times. Now please
show me your original form again.”
The Lord then said: “I showed My world-wide Form to you,
because I love you. You have seen today something the vision of
which cannot be won by Vedic or any other studies, rituals, alms or
austerities. Do not be bewildered because you have seen it. Cast away
fear, be calm and see my familiar form. That shape of Mine which
you have seen is hard to see even for the gods and can be seen only
by pure devotion. Whoever works for Me, makes Me his supreme
good,becomes my devotee, frees himself from attachment and loves
all beings, comes to me.”
NOTE. This chapter, like the tenth; I have deliberately cut short.
This one is full of poetry and therefore should be read frequently
either in the original or in translation, so that we may be imbued with
the spirit of devotion. Whether we are or not thus imbued can be
found by applying the acid test mentioned in the last verse. Devotion
is impossible in the absence of total self-surrender and all-embracing
love. Self-surrender and a sense of solidarity with all living beings
become easy of attainment if we meditate on God as world-destroying
time into whose gaping mouths the universe rushes to its doom. This
fate is bound to overtake us too all of a sudden, whether we wish for it
or not. Thus all distinctions of small and big, high and low, man and
woman, men and the lower animals, disappear. Seeing that we are all a
mere morsel in the mouth of God as the Destroyer, we should become
humble and reduce ourselves to zero and cultivate friendship with
everyone else. If we do this, we shall cease to be afraid of this terrible
Form of God. On the other hand it will give us peace of mind.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

57

CHAPTER XII1

Tuesday Morning, November 4, 1930
Arjuna asks the Lord: “Some devotees adore a personal
(sakara) God while others worship the Absolute (nirakara). Which of
these two courses is better?”
The Lord replies: “Those who fix their minds on Me (as the
One Life in all) with perfect faith and are absorbed in Me are My
devotees indeed. But those who worship the Absolute and restrain and
subdue their senses are equiminded towards all living beings and serve
them without looking on some as of a superior and others as of an
inferior grade—they also will come to Me. Neither of these two classes
of devotees is superior to the other. But a full realization of the
Absolute is almost impossible for an embodied being. The Absolute is
devoid of all attributes and thus difficult for men even to imagine.
Therefore they are all worshippers of a personal God, whether they
are aware of it or not. Do you therefore place your mind in Me (the
personal God in the universal form) and offer Me your all. If this is
not possible, try to restrain the aberrations of the mind; that is to say,
by observing the yamas and niyamas, and with the help of pranayama
and yogic exercises, obtain control over the mind. If even this is
beyond your capacity, perform all actions for My sake, so that your
delusion will be destroyed, and you will be imbued with the spirit of
detachment and devotion. If you cannot do even this, renounce the
fruits of action, that is, cease to have a desire for the fruits of action,
and do the task which is allotted to you. A man can never have any
say as regards the fruit of his action, as the nature of the fruit is
determined by a number of independent factors. Be you therefore a
mere instrument in My hands. I have thus described four methods,
none of which is superior to the others. You may adopt any one of the
four you like. It may seem as if the path of knowledge (hearing the
doctrine, pondering over it, etc.) is easier to take than that of yamas,
niyamas, pranayama, asanas, etc. Meditation in worship is easier still
and the renunciation of the fruit the easiest of all. But the same
method is not equally well suited for all. And some seekers have to
adopt all the four methods, which are inter-connected. You must
become a devotee one way or other; you may take any path that leads
1
This letter, the first in this series, was sent along with “Letter to Narandas
Gandhi”, October 30/November 4, 1930; vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”,
4-11-1930.

58

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to this destination.
“Let me tell you what the true devotee is like. He does not hate
or bear ill will to any living creature. He looks on all with love and
compassion. He is free from the delusion of ‘I’ and ‘mine’. He
reduces himself to zero. Pleasure and pain, are equally acceptable to
him. He forgives the wrong-doer even as he expects to be forgiven
himself. He is always contented with his lot, and is unshakable in his
resolve. He dedicates his intellect and mind and all to Me. He never
molests his fellow-creatures; these are therefore never afraid of him.
He does not allow himself to become perturbed by the world. He is
free from exultation, sorrow, anger, fear and the like. He seeks
nothing for himself. He is pure and skilful in action. He renounces
every undertaking.1 Although he is firm in his resolve, he is
indifferent as regards the success or failure of his action; that is to say,
he is not anxious about its result. He is alike to friend and foe.
Honour and insult are the same to him. He is silent and content with
whatcomes. He moves freely as if he were alone. He has a steady mind
at all times and places. A devotee who behaves like this in faith is dear
to Me.” 2
CHAPTER XIII

Monday Morning [January 25, 1932]
The Lord said: “Kshetra (the Field) is another name for the
1
In his “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 13/17-11-1930 (vide “Letter to Narandas
Gandhi”, 13/17-11-1930), Gandhiji had explained: “The devotee ‘renounces all
undertakings’. This means the devotee will not draw up schemes of future expansion.
For example, if a merchant who deals in cloth now has any plans of selling fire-wood
as well in the future, or if he, having one shop only, thinks of opening five more
shops, that would be arambha (undertaking) on his part, and the devotee will have
none of it. This principle is applicable to service of the nation as well. For instance,
a worker in the khadi department today will not take up cow-keeping tomorrow,
agriculture the day after and medical aid on the fourth day. He will do his best in
whatever has come to him. When I am free from egoism, nothing remains for me to
do.
“The Lord has bound me with a cotton thread; I am His, no matter where He
leads me. I have been stabbed with the dagger of love.’ A devotee’s every activity is
planned by God. It comes to him as in the natural course of things. He therefore rests
content with, ‘this, that or anything else’ (;su dsu fpr~A_ This is the meaning of
‘renouncing all undertakings’. The devotee does not cease to work; indeed he is
nothing if not a worker. He only ceases to think needless thoughts about his work. It
is these that he has to renounce.”
2
The chapters which follow are from M.M.U./II.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

59

human body and kshetrajna means one who knows the Field.
Understand Me as the knower of the Field in all bodies. Real
knowledge means discrimination between the Field and the knower of
the Field.
“The five great elements, namely, earth, water, fire, air and ether,
individuality (ahamkara), intellect, the unmanifest, the ten senses1 ,
mind, the five sense-objects, desire and hatred, pleasure and pain,
sanghata (the power of combination inherent in the constituents of
the body), consciousness and cohesion, —these constitute the Field
with its modifications. Knowledge of these is essential, as they have to
be renounced. Wisdom is the foundation on which such renunciation
can be based. Wisdom here means and includes humility,
unpretentiousness, non-violence, forgiveness, rectitude, service of the
teacher, purity, steadfastness, self-restraint, indifference to
sense-objects, absence of egoism, insight into the evil of birth, death,
old age, disease and pain, detachment from wife and children, hearth
and home, friends and relations, equimindedness to good and bad
fortune, whole-hearted devotion to God, love of solitude, dislike for
the enjoyment of sensual pleasures in company with others, thirst for
knowledge of the soul, andat last the beatific vision. And the reverse
of this is ignorance.
“Now let me tell you something about that which has to be
known with a view to salvation. That is beginningless supreme
Brahman. Brahman is beginningless because it is unborn and was
there when there was nothing. It is neither sat (existent) nor asat
(non-existent) but beyond them both. But from another standpoint it
can be called sat, because it is eternal. Human beings cannot
recognize it as such; therefore it is said to be beyond even sat. It
pervades the whole universe. It may be said to have a thousand hands
and feet, and though it seems to have hands and feet, it is devoid of
the organs of sense for it does not need these organs. Sense organs are
transitory while Brahman is eternal. And although being all-pervasive
and all-sustaining, it may be said to be enjoying the qualities (gunas),
it is free from them. Where there are gunas, there is change (vikara),
but Brahman is changeless. It may be said to be outside all beings,
because it is out for those who do not know it. And it is within all
1
The five organs of perception, viz., ears, skin, eyes, palate and nose, and the
five organs of action, viz., tongue, feet, hands and the organs of evacuation and
reproduction

60

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

beings as it is all-pervading. Similarly it is both moving and
unmoving. It is subtle and hence imperceptible. It is distant as well as
near. It is undivided in the sense that it is imperishable though name
(nama) and form (rupa) perish, but it also seems to be divided as we
say that it is within all creatures. It creates, preserves and destroys. It is
the light of lights beyond darkness, and the end of all knowledge.
Brahman which is planted in every heart is jneya, the one thing worth
knowing. All knowledge is a means to the end of being united with it.
Not revised.
“God and his maya (nature) are both without beginning.
Modifications (vikaras) are born of maya and these give rise to
various kinds of action (karma). On account of maya, the soul
experiences pleasure and pain and the fruit of merit (punya) and
demerit (papa). He who, having realized this, does his duty in a spirit
of detachment is not born again in spite of his activity, for he beholds
the face of God in all faces, and seeing that not a leaf moves but by
the divine will, he is free from egotism, understands that he is separate
from the body and that the soul, though living in the body, remains
by means of knowledge unaffected like the omnipresent ether.”
Finished at about 2 p.m.
CHAPTER XIV1

Silence Day, January 25, 1932
The Lord said: “Once more I will teach you that supreme
wisdom which enabled sages to reach the highest perfection. People
who find that wisdom and do their duty accordingly are delivered
from the cycle of births and deaths. O Arjuna, know Me to be the
Father and Mother of all beings. The three gunas born of nature, viz.,
sattva (goodness), rajas (passion) and tamas (ignorance) bind the soul
down. They may be described respectively as the highest, the
middling and the lowest. Of these sattva is pure and unsullied and
gives light; it is therefore the source of happiness. Rajas arises from
attachment and craving and makes a man indulge in all manner of
activities. Tamas is rooted in ignorance and delusion and makes one
negligent and indolent. In short, sattva makes for happiness, rajas for
restlessness and tamas for sloth. Sometimes sattva prevails,
overpowering rajas and tamas; at other times rajas prevails,
1

This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 23/25-1-1932; vide
“Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 23/25-1-1932
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

61

overpowering sattva and tamas; at still other times tamas prevails,
overpowering sattva and rajas. When the light of wisdom shines
through all the activities of the body it may be known that sattva is
increasing. Where greed, bustle, unrest and competition are observed,
rajas is the ruler. And the predominance of tamas is characterized by
ignorance, sloth and delusion. If sattva prevails in a man’s life, he is
born in the sinless worlds of the great sages after death. If rajas
dominates his life, he is born among those who are attached to action.
And if tamas is the ruling principle, he returns to the womb of the
senseless. The fruit of sattvik action is purity, while the fruit of rajas is
pain and the fruit of tamas is ignorance. A sattvik man rises to the
higher regions; a rajasik person remains in this world, while a tamasik
individual sinks to the underworld. When a man perceives no doer of
action other than these qualities and knows Me who am beyond them
he enters into My nature. When the dweller in the body has overcome
the three qualities from which all bodies arise, he is freed from birth
and death, old age and pain and drinks the nectar of eternal life.”
On hearing that one who transcends the qualities makes such
great progress on the pilgrim’s path, Arjuna asked: “What are the
marks of such perfection? How does such a perfect being conduct
himself? And how does he cross over the qualities?”The Lord replied:
“A man is said to have risen above the qualities when he is not angry
if the light and knowledge of sattva or the activity and bustle of rajas
or the delusion and ignorance of tamas are there and is not wishful if
they are not. He sits like one who is unconcerned and is not disturbed
by the qualities. He stands apart unmoved, being aware that they are
the doers of all actions. He is even-minded to pleasure and pain as
well as to a lump of earth, a stone and gold. The pleasant and the
unpleasant are alike to him. He is unaffected by either praise or
blame. He is the same in honour and evil fame. He is alike to friend
and foe. And he has abandoned all undertakings. Do not think that
this is a goal you can never reach and that therefore you need not
exert yourself. What I have described is the state of a perfect man. The
way to it is to serve Me with single-minded devotion.
“From the third chapter onwards I have pointed out that a man
cannot so much as even breathe without action (karma), from which
no human being can ever hope to escape. He who would transcend the
qualities should dedicate all his actions to Me, and cease to desire their
fruits. If he does this, his actions will not be an impediment to his
progress, for I am Brahman, moksha, the eternal dharma and joy for
62

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

ever.
“When a man reduces himself to zero, he sees Me alone
everywhere. He is guna-atita (one who has transcended the
qualities).”
CHAPTER XV 1

Night, January 31, 19322
The Lord said: “This world is like an ashvattha (sacred fig) tree
with roots above and branches below and with the Vedic hymns as its
leaves. And he who knows it knows the Vedas. The branches of this
cosmic tree nourished by the qualities shoot to heaven and sink to
earth. Sense-objects are its sprouts. It is these things of the senses
which bind the soul with the bonds of karma in the world of men. The
real nature of this tree cannot be known here, nor its beginning, nor
end, nor foundation.
“This strongly rooted cosmic tree should be cut down with the
weapon of non-co-operation, so that the soul may rise to a higher
world from which there is no return [to the world of mortals]. With
this end in view a man should engage himself in the constant
worshipof the Ancient of Days, from whom all this activity (the
cosmic process) seems to flow. The wise man who is free from pride
and delusion, victorious over the vice of attachment and devoted to the
Supreme Soul, who is free from cravings and to whom pleasure and
pain are alike—that wise man reaches the state which is beyond all
change, and which does not need to be illumined by the sun, the
moon or fire. That is my Supreme abode.
“An eternal part of Myself tansformed into the individual soul
in this world draws to itself the senses including the mind which reside
in matter. When the soul enters the body or leaves it, it takes these
senses with it even as the wind carries fragrance from its places. It
enjoys sense-objects with the help of the ear, the eye, the senses of
touch and taste, the nose and the mind. The ignorant cannot recognize
it as it goes or stays or enjoys itself under the influence of the
qualities, but the sages see it [with the eye of wisdom]. Striving yogis
see it living in their own bodies, but those who have not achieved
evenness of temper cannot see it even if they try. “The light of the
sun that illumines all the world, that which is in the moon and in fire—
1
This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, January 28/ February
1, 1932; vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 28-1-1932, 1-21932
2
The source has “1931”.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

63

know that all that light is Mine. Permeating the soil1 I sustain all living
beings. I become the sapproducing moon and feed the plants.
Becoming the fire of life in the bodies of all living creatures and
being united with the life-breaths, I digest the four kinds of food. I
abide in all hearts. From Me are memory and wisdom as well as their
absence. I am that which is to be known by all the Vedas. So also I am
the Author of Vedanta and the Knower of the Vedas.
“There may be said to be two-kinds of personalities in this
world, namely, kshara (the perishable) and akshara (the
imperishable). The perishable is all beings; and the imperishable is I
who am the same for ever. But beyond either is the highest spirit who
is called the Supreme Soul, and who, pervading all, sustains the three
worlds. This too is I. I therefore transcend the perishable and even the
imperishable, and am known in the world as well as in the Vedas as the
Supreme Reality. The wise man who recognizes Me as such knows all
that need be known, and serves Me with his whole being.
“O sinless Arjuna, I have told you this most secret teaching. By
knowing this a man becomes truly wise and reaches the shores of
salvation.”
CHAPTER XVI2

February 7, I 932
The Lord said: “I will now point out the distinction between the
divine and the demoniacal natures. I have earlier described at length
what is meant by divine nature but I will repeat its distinctive features.
Among the signs of the divine are fearlessness, purity of heart,
wisdom, evenness of temper, self-control, alms-giving, sacrifice, study
of the scriptures, austerity, straightforwardness, non-violence, truth,
freedom from anger, renunciation, peacefulness, not speaking evil of
others, compassion to all living beings, absence of greed, gentleness,
modesty, absence of fickleness, vigour, forgiveness, fortitude, purity,
internal as well as external, freedom from malice and pride.
“Among the signs of the demoniacal are hypocrisy, arrogance,
conceit, anger, cruelty and ignorance.
“The divine nature leads to liberation while the demoniacal
1

Literally, ‘having entered their bodies’
This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 3/8-2-1932; vide
“Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 3/8-2-1932
2

64

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

leads to bondage. O Arjuna, you are born with endowments of the
divine nature.
“I will say something more about the demoniacal nature, so that
people may easily give it up.
“Men of such a nature do not know what to do and what to
refrain from doing. There is no purity or truth in them, so that they
do not observe the rules of good conduct.
“They hold that the world is unreal, without basis or rule. For
them sex is all the world so that they think of nothing except
enjoyment of the objects of sense.
“They do horrible deeds. They are dull-witted. They hold fast
to their wicked thoughts and all their activity is directed only to the
destruction of the world. Their desires are insatiable. They are full of
hypocrisy, pride and arrogance. They are thus plagued by
innumerable cares. They want fresh sensual pleasures every day. They
are ‘ensnared in nooses of a hundred idle hopes’, and by unlawful
means amass wealth in order to gratify their desires.
‘I got this today; I will get that tomorrow. I killed this one
enemy today; I will also kill others. I am a man of might. I have great
possessions. Who is my equal? With a view to fame I will sacrifice to
the gods, give alms and make merry.’ They say this to themselves with
a chuckle, and being caught in the net of delusion, go to hell at last.
“Men with such a nature, given over to pride, speak ill of others
and thus hate God who dwells in all hearts. They are therefore
frequently born in the wombs of degraded parents.
“There are three gates to hell, leading to the ruin of the soul:
lust, anger and greed. Therefore we should renounce them all.
Turning aside from them, men go by the strait and narrow path and
reach the highest state.
“He who disregards the scriptures composed of eternal
principles and gives himself up to pleasure cannot attain happiness or
peace characteristic of the right way.
“Therefore in deciding what you must do and what you must
not do, you should acquire the knowledge of fundamental and
immutable principles from wise men and think and act accordingly.”

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

65

CHAPTER XVII1

February 14, 1932
Arjuna asked: “What happens to those who serve in faith,
neglecting the prevailing code of conduct?”
The Lord replied: “There are three kinds of faith, characterized
by sattva, rajas or tames as the case may be. As is a man’s faith, so is
he.
“ Sattvik men worship the gods; rajasik men worship demigods
and demons; and tamasik men worship the spirits of the dead.
“The nature of a man’s faith cannot be ascertained offhand. In
order to assess it correctly, one must know the precise nature of his
food, austerity, sacrifice and alms-giving.
“Foods which make for long life and increase the vital force,
energy, strength and health are said to be sattvik. Rajasik foods are
violently bitter, sour, hot or pungent and give rise to disease and aches
and pains. And cooked food which is stale or gives out a bad smell
and the leavings of others are said to be tamasik.
“The sacrifice which is offered as a matter of duty without
expecting a reward and with mental concentration is said to be sattvik.
A rajasik sacrifice is that in which a reward is desired and which is
offered for outward show. And a tamasik sacrifice is one in which
scriptural rules are disobeyed, no eatables or alms are given away and
no hymns are chanted.
“Honouring the saintly purity, brahmacharya and non-violence
constitute austerity of the body. Truthful, pleasant and beneficial
speech as well as a study of the scriptures is austerity of speech.
Andcheerfulness, gentleness, silence, self-control and purity of
motive—these are called austerity of the mind. Such austerity of the
mind, body and speech as is practised without desire of fruit by men
with an evenness of temper is said to be sattvik. Austerity practised for
ostentation and with a view to gaining honour is said to be rajasik.
And austerity done by obstinate fools with self-torture or with the
object of hurting others is said to be tamasik.
“A gift ‘made in due place, due time and to a fit recipient’
without expecting a reward and with a feeling that it is right for a man
to give is said to be sattvik. A gift made grudgingly with a view to
1

This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 11/15-2-1932; vide
“Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 11/15-2-1932

66

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

getting something in return is regarded as rajasik. And the gift which
is given in a contemptuous spirit, and without honour done to the
recipient and without considering the proper time and place for it is
said to be tamasik.
“Brahman is designated in the Vedas as Om tat sat. Therefore
men of faith pronounce the sacred syllable ‘Om’ when they
commence any rite of sacrifice, alms-giving or austerity. This single
syllable stands for Brahman. Tat means that. And sat means satya,
beneficient. That is to say, God is one, He alone is, He alone is truth
and the benefactor of the world. He who offers a sacrifice, makes gifts
or practises austerity with a realization of this truth and in a spirit of
dedication is a man of sattvik faith. And he is free from blame if he
knowingly or unknowingly does something different from the correct
procedure in the spirit of dedication. But acts undertaken in the
absence of such a spirit are said to be performed without faith and
therefore are asat (unreal).”
CHAPTER XVIII1

February 21, 1932
Even after he had pondered over the teaching in all the previous
Chapters, there was still a doubt in Arjuna’s mind. So he said: “The
sannyasa of the Gita seems to be different from renunciation as
currently understood. Are sannyasa and tyaga really different?”
While resolving Arjuna’s doubt in answer to this question, the
Lord summarized the Gita doctrine in a concise manner: “Some
actions are motivated by desire. Various activities are indulged in by
men with a view to fulfilling various desires. These are called kamya
actions. Then again there are certain necessary and natural actions
such as breathing, eating, drinking, Iying down, sitting, etc., with aview
to keep the body [a fit instrument of service]. And thirdly there are
actions done with a view to serving others. Giving up kamya actions is
sannyasa, and renunciation of fruits of all actions is tyaga as
recommended to you all along.
“Some people maintain that there is evil, no matter how little, in
all actions whatever. Even so, a man must not give up actions done
with a view to yajna (sacrifice), that is to say, the service of others.
Alms-giving and austerity are included in yajna. But even while
1

This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 19/21-2-1932;
vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 19/21-2-1932
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

67

serving others, a man should act in a spirit of detachment. Otherwise
his activity is likely to be mixed up with evil.
“Renunciation owing to ignorance of duties that must be done
is said to be inspired by tamas. Giving up any action merely because
it involves physical suffering is said to be rajasik. But service rendered
to others because of a feeling that it must be done and without the
desire for the fruits is real sattvik tyaga. In this tyaga therefore there is
no giving up of all actions, but only of the fruit of duties that must be
done, and of course of other, that is, kamya actions. When a [wise]
man acts in such a selfless spirit, all his doubts are dispelled, his
motives are pure and he has no thought of personal comfort and
discomfort.
“He who does not abandon the fruits of action must enjoy or
put up with the natural consequences of his own acts, and is thus a
bondslave for ever. But he who gives up the fruits of action achieves
freedom.
“And why should a man feel attachment for action? It is idle
for anybody to imagine that he himself is a doer. There are five
causes for the accomplishment of all actions, namely, this body, the
doer, the various instruments, efforts, and last but by no means the
least, providence.
“Realizing this, a man should give up pride. He who does
something without egoism may be said to be not doing it in spite of
his doing it, for he is not bound by his action. Of a humble man who
has reduced himself to zero it may be said that he does not kill though
he kills. This does not mean that the man in spite of his humility may
kill and yet be unaffected by the killing. For no occasion can arise for
such a man to indulge in violence.
“There are three things that inspire action: knowledge, the
object of knowledge and the knower. And there are three constituents
of action: the organ, the deed and the doer. The thing to be done is
the object of knowledge; the method of doing it is knowledge and he
who knows it is the knower. After he has thus received an impulse
toaction, he performs an action in which the senses serve as
instruments. Thought is thus translated into action.
“That by which a man is able ‘To see one changeless Life in all
the lives’ and to realize the essential unity that underlies all diversities
is sattvik knowledge. In rajasik knowledge one holds that there are
different souls in different creatures, while in tamasik knowledge a
68

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

man does not know a thing and imagines that everything is mixed up
without rhyme or reason.
“Similarly there are three kinds of action. Action in which
there are no likes and dislikes and no desire for personal gains is
sattvik. That in which there are desires for enjoyment, egoism and
restlessness is rajasik action. And tamasik action is one in which no
thought at all is given to personal capacity and consequential injury or
violence and which is undertaken through delusion.
“So also there are three classes of doers. Of course having
understood the action it could not be difficult to know the doer. A
sattvik doer is free from attachment and egoism and yet firm and
enterprising and is neither elated by success nor worried by failure. A
rajasik doer is impassioned, greedy and violent, ‘slave by turns of
sorrow and of joy’ and of course desires to obtain the fruit of his
actions. And a tamasik doer is unsystematic, procrastinating, obstinate,
malicious and indolent; in short, without an iota of self-culture.
“Intellect, firmness and happiness also are said to be of three
kinds.
“The sattvik intellect is able properly to distinguish between
action and non-action,
What must be done, and what must not be done,
What should be feared, and what should not be feared,
What binds and what emancipates the soul.

The rajasik intellect tries to draw these distinctions but generally fails
to do so correctly, while the tamasik intellect ‘looks upon wrong as
right and sees all things contrariwise of truth.’
“Firmness is the power of taking up some thing and sticking to
it through thick and thin. It is more or less inherent in all things;
otherwise the world could not subsist for a single moment. Firmness is
sattvik when there is a constantly maintained balance between the
activities of the mind, the vital airs (pranas) and the senses. The
firmness by which a man holds fast to duty, pleasure and wealth from
attachment and with a view to personal advantage is rajasik. And
firmness is tamasik,
wherewith the fool
Cleaves to his sloth, his sorrow and his fears,
His vanity and despair.

“ Sattvik happiness is the
pleasure that endures,
Banishing pain for aye, bitter at first
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

69

As poison to the soul, but afterwards
Sweet as the taste of amrit.

It arises from true self-knowledge.
“ Rajasik happiness arises from sensual enjoyment.
Sweet
As amrit is its first taste, but its last
Bitter as poison.

“And tamasik happiness is that
which springs
From sloth and sleep and foolishness.
—EDWIN ARNOLD

“This threefold classification is thus applicable to all things.
The duties of the four varnas are fixed by reason of the dominance or
recession of the qualities planted in each.
“ A Brahmin’s conduct is characterized by calmness, selfdiscipline, austerity, purity, forgiveness, uprightness, wisdom,
experience and faith in God. The characteristics of a Kshatriya are
valour, splendour, firmness, resourcefulness, not flying from battle,
open-handedness and leadership. A Vaishya’s task is ‘to till the
ground, tend cattle, venture trade’, and service is the Sudra’s work.
This is not to say that a member of any one of these classes may not
be endowed with qualities characteristic of other classes or is not
entitled to cultivate them in himself. But qualities and work as
mentioned above serve as signs for the recognition of a man’s varna.
If the qualities and tasks of each varna are recognized, there is no
undesirable competition or feeling of hatred among them. There is no
question here of high and low. But if each does his duty selflessly
according to his nature, he will reach perfection. Therefore one’s own
duty, though it appears to be valueless, is better than the duty of
another which seems to be easy. A man may remain free from sin
when he performs the task naturally allotted to him, as he is then free
from selfish desires; the very wish to do something else arises from
selfishness. For the rest, all actions are clouded by defects as fire by
smoke. But the natural duty is done without desire for its fruit, and
thus loses its binding force.
“The calm yogi who has been sanctified by thus performing his
own duty, who has his mind under control, who has given up the five
sense-objects, who has overcome likes and dislikes, who lives in
solitude, i.e., whose eyes are turned inward, who achieves mastery of
his mind, body and speech by abstemiousness, who is ever conscious
70

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of the living presence of God, and who has given up pride, desire,
anger, acquisitiveness and the like—that yogi is fit to be united with
Brahman. He is equi-minded towards all men. He neither rejoices nor
indulges in grief. Such a devotee has true knowledge of God and is
absorbed in Him. Thus taking refuge in Me, he gains the eternal
place.
“Therefore dedicate your all to Me, regard Me as the supreme
object of your love, and with discrimination, fix your mind on Me. As
you do this, you will overcome all difficulties. But if out of egoism
you do not listen to Me, you will perish. The one thing needful is that,
abandoning all conflicting views, you should come to Me alone for
shelter, and thus be freed from sin.
“Do not tell this truth to anyone who is not a devotee, austere in
life, and hating Me, does not wish to listen. But one who
communicates this great secret to My devotees will surely come to Me
in virtue of his devotion.”
After having thus reported to Dhritarashtra the dialogue between
Arjuna and Krishna, Sanjaya said:
“Where there is Krishna, the prince of yoga, and Arjuna with his
bow and arrows, there are prosperity, victory, happiness and
fundamental morality.”
[N OTE.] Krishna to whom the epithet ‘prince of yoga’ has here
been applied means pure knowledge based on spiritual experience,
and by referring to Arjuna as an archer it is suggested that where there
is action in accordance with such knowledge, the doer obtains every
wish that is not contrary to lofty morals.
From microfilms of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. & II

50. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Afternoon, February 19/21, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your post in due time. Tell Bhai Valji that I have started
reading and revising his translation1 today.
You will of course inquire from time to time after those who are
imprisoned and lodged in the Sabarmati Jail, but you should also keep
yourself informed in which jails the others are lodged. Lilavati came
and saw me. It was good of her.
1

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”,27-1-1932, footnote 1.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

71

Read my letter to Champa. If she is willing to endure her lot and
live with Ratilal, there will be no problem. If, however, she is not
willing, I think we cannot force her to live with him. Ratilal may have
to be put in the asylum again. The whole problem is a difficult one.
Do what you think best. In any case, keep Doctor1 informed.
Chimanlal must take rest. His body gives no service and no one
is able to diagnose the disease.
Krishnamaiyadevi has certainly not acted properly in staying on
in Calcutta. You did well in writing to her. Did you get Lakshmi2
examined by a doctor for her swelling? Is she expecting? That can be
a cause. You should ask her or find out through Lakshmibehn.
Yajna does not merely mean work for the good of others; it also
means body labour. If men did not do body labour, that is, did not
cultivate land and grow crops, the rains would stop. My own belief is
that natural phenomena are connected with moral behaviour. I have
no proof for this. It is my faith. Such faith can do no harm in any
case. Little research is done about such matters in the present age, and
what is written about them in ancient books is treated as superstition. It
is true, of course, that they contain many superstitious ideas. Who can
sift truth from error in these books? In the company of thieves even
an honest man is taken for a thief. That being so, we should not
interpret yajna strictly but accept all possible meanings which satisfy
our moral sense and connect the phenomenon of rain with yajna
sounderstood.In the Gita as in other scriptures, we find one and the
same word used in different senses. Of course, all work done as yajna
should be inspired with the motive of service. Send this to Bhai
Jivram.
Evening, February 21, 1932
I have just finished Chapter XVIII. You will see that I have taken
more freedom in this Chapter than in the others. So far I used to give
a simple translation, more or less, but I did not feel satisfied with that.
This time, I have given the general meaning of the Chapter, with a few
comments intended to make the discussion easier to understand. I
have even omitted a few verses as unnecessary for our purpose. I
don’t think, however, that I have omitted anything useful. God willing,
I will make another effort to explain the general meaning of the work
1
2

72

Dr. Pranjivandas Mehta, Ratilal’s father
Lakshmidas Asar’s daughter
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

for children.
and tell me whether you want such a letter from me. If you want it,
The position about visitors seems to have become uncertain
again. Let us wait and see what happens.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
There are 32 letters, besides this one and the discourse on the
Gita. A list accompanies.
Has Devdas’s case been tried? Do you get any letters from him?
I have received none.1
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8210. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

51. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
February 21, 1932
DEAR BOYS AND GIRLS,

I see from Mani’s letter that no one undertakes to write to me
on behalf of you all. What a state of affairs is this? What purpose
would my writing serve if no one assumes responsibility for attending
to the letter I address to all the children and if no one so much as even
acknowledges receipt of the letter? You should, therefore, write to me
say whether you will send me a reply every week. Do you remember
what I told you about Miss Doris’s school?2 Though the children
there are under eight years of age, what a lot of work they do on their
own responsibility! Some of you are as much as sixteen years old.
Though grown-up, they are counted among children. If not all, they,
at any rate, should assume all the more responsibilities. At Phoenix,
when Devdas and Prabhudas were twelve years old, they got other
children to co-operate with them and shouldered considerable
responsibility. They brought the mail from the post office and also
went to post the letters. They had to walk three miles through the
jungle, but courageously they went. They used to help in the printing
press in a variety of ways and also fetched water from the spring.
1

For the text of the Gita discourse (Chapter XVIII) which followed, vide
“Letters on the Gita”
2
Vide”Letter to Ashram Boys and Girls”, 25-1-1932 and “Letter to Ashram
Boys and Girls”, 5-2-1932
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

73

In short, at one time Maganlal had only this batch of children to
help him, and yet it was possible to cope with all the work, for the
children worked as a team without sparing themselves either mentally
or physically. Think, then, how much more I would expect from you.
Send a reply to this and keep alive your association.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

52. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
[February 21, 1932] 1
SISTERS,

You have won, and I have been completely defeated. I would
always like that you should win and I should be defeated. But I find it
difficult to accept this defeat, for it has weakened the foundation of
the Ashram. However, though I have been defeated, Truth has won.
And what does it matter if, for the sake of Truth, thousands of [such]
ashrams are reduced to ashes?
This is how it is your victory. Several sisters believed that the
friendship of . . .2 and . . .3 was not innocent. Disregarding their view, I
believed the contrary and defended them. The women’s judgmenthas
proved correct and mine wrong. The matter would have ended earlier
if I had accepted your view. But it was necessary that my capacity for
judging people should be tested. It was for my good and yours and
for the good of the Ashram that it should be tested. It was necessary
that my pride should be humbled. Let us hope that it has been.
Having known the generosity of your hearts, I ought to have heeded
your warning, but I did not and you bore that too. You did not
forsake the company of a fool like me. Personally I believe that you
will lose nothing for not doing so. Behind my folly were truth and
pure love and trust in people. God will therefore mend my mistake.
However, I will never disregard your warning in future and will learn
from this bitter experience to be careful even in the smallest matters.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II
1

The letter was presumably written on the same day as the preceding item.
The names have been omitted.
3
ibid
2

74

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

53. LETTER TO MAITHILISHARAN GUPTA
February 20/22, 1932
BHAI MAITHILISHARANJI,

I have received the gift you sent. 1 I will read it with interest. I
shall enjoy reading it as the subject too is after my heart.
Yours,

MOHANDAS GANDHI

[PS.]
I have finished Panchavati2 and liked it. Have started on Saket.
From Hindi: C.W. 9454. Courtesy: Bharat Kala Bhavan

54. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
February 22, 1932
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I was awaiting your letter. Yes, my health is good, so is Sardar’s.
I take honey and half a lemon in hot water at 4.30 in the morning,
followed by one and a half tola of roasted, ground almonds and thirty
dates in tomato juice at 7 o’clock. Lemon and honey in hot water is
repeated at noon, and some vegetable, tomato, fifteen dates and one
tola of almonds at 4 o’clock. I have started on vegetable only these
two days, formerly I was taking thirty dates. On some days I was
taking papaya at four, but I can take it no longer, as vegetable
constitutes the fifth article of food. Neither is there any need for
papaya. It has been like this for about fifteen days. Before that I used
to take half a pound of milk in the morning and half a pound ofcurds
in the evening, but I found milk a bit hard on digestion. Anyway, I am
always pleased to give up milk on any possible pretext; so I am off
milk. I do not know how long I can do without it. My weight is steady
at 106 lb. Do send dates; though the ones I have are fresh and good.
They have been sent by Jerajani.You shall have to apply to
Delhi or Bombay in order to visit me. The permission might be
1

The addressee had sent Saket, a poetical work on the theme of Ayodhya
during Rama’s exile, and three other books.
2
Another poetical work of the addressee dealing with Rama’s sojourn at
Panchavati.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

75

granted, if at all, on the ground of a purely friendly visit. Nothing can
be done from here.
I have collected a few books on currency. But send me whatever
you like. I want to study this subject as much as possible and to the
best of my ability. If you send your own observations I shall go
through them too.
Tell me your experiences of America. How was your health and
what places did you visit? What did you observe at Battle Creek1 ? Did
you meet Holmes2 ?
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 7895. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

55. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
February 25, 1932
CHI. MIRA,

I got your welcome letter this morning. I was waiting for it. We
are both glad you are happy there.3 You find yourself there just when
you were about to break under the strain. I fancy that 12 oz.4 of milk
will not be enough for you. You should take 24 oz. But it may be that
1

A town in Michigan, known as “The Health City”
Dr. John Haynes Holmes
3
As a result of my sending abroad weekly bulletins of authentic news,
regarding the Civil Disobedience movement, I had been served with a notice to quit
Bombay. As I had declined to comply, I was duly arrested, tried and sentenced to three
months’ simple imprisonment, ‘A’ class, and sent to Bombay female jail at Arthur
Road. There being no ‘A’ class accommodation in the Debtor’s jail, which had been
temporarily turned into a jail for female political prisoners, I was put with the ‘C’
class prisoners for the first two nights, after which a small kitchen in the prison-yard
was rigged up as my cell. But as nearly all the space was taken up by a large row of
stoves, there was no room for me to sleep inside. This was a piece of good luck as it
meant I had to be allowed to wander by day amongst the other prisoners in the yard
and to sleep under the sky at night, while the rest were locked up in their barrack. It
may be mentioned that the ‘C’ class political prisoners were mostly well educated
women, used to a high standard of living, certainly higher than the Ashram standard.
But the Bombay Government was particularly severe in its classification, Ba, Mrs.
Naidu and myself being, as far as I can remember, the only women given ‘A’ class in
the whole Province. A few were given ‘B’ class and all the rest ‘C’. The most vital
difference in this classification was the food supplied.”—Mirabehn
4
“12 oz. was the ‘A’ class ration.”—Mirabehn
2

76

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

with the comparatively less expenditure of vitality 12 oz. may be
enough for you. I simply caution you against any false economy.
Your exercise does not appear to me to be enough unless you do a
great deal of walking about otherwise.
I am glad you have so much company. If you are permitted to
describe your company, please give me the description.
The books that I can think of recommending are Sister
Nivedita’s. I would like you to read Dutt’s abridged metrical
rendering of the Mahabharata and Ramayana, Arnold’s Indian Idylls
and Pearls of the Faith.
You should induce your companions to take to spinning and
carding if they have time given to them for that class of labour. You
should be able to do a great deal of Hindi there. But no overstraining
on any account. You have this precious and unsought leisure. You will
make such use as you think will elevate you.My almond experiment
still continues to give satisfaction and the weight still remains 106 Ib.
which is very good. You need have therefore no anxiety on that score.
Love from us both.
BAPU
S HRIMATI MIRABAI
C/ O S UPERINTENDENT
ARTHUR R OAD P RISON
BOMBAY
From a photostat: C.W. 9505. Courtesy: Mirabehn

56. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
February 25, 1932
CHI. MANGALA,

I got your letter written in a beautiful hand.
Memorize carefully the chapters of the Gita. It would be better
still if you learnt the meaning too.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G..N. 4077. Also C.W. 41. Courtesy:
Mangalabehn B. Desai

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

77

57. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
February 25, 1932
CHI. PREMA,

I got your letter.
You want from me inspired utterances which would touch the
heart. If I had a safe filled with them, I would open it and send some
every week. But I have no such safe. The words which I pen or speak,
come to me unsought. Only such words have truth in them, for they
are living words. All other statements are insincere. They may seem
arresting, but I think they produce no abiding effect on the heart. I
can do nothing insincere. During my student days in England, I
attempted twice [to make prepared speeches] and failed on both
occasions.1 I never tried again.
And what is true about my speaking is also true about my
behaviour to you on all other occasions which you mention. I
remember the conversation we had regarding Mirabehn.2 I must have
replied to you as I felt at the moment. I can understand that my words
did not produce a good impression on you. That is a measure of the
imperfection of my non-violence. I must have said only what I felt,
but you might have felt a sting in my words. “One must speak the
truth in words which are agreeable” is not only a maxim of practical
wisdom but is a moral principle. “Agreeable” here means
non-violent. If I had told you gently what I did excitedly, my words
would not have left behind them the bitter memory which they have.
Truth stated in a spirit of non-violence may hurt at the moment, but its
ultimate effect must be as sweet as amrit. This is an essential test of
non-violence. I am writing this from my own bitter experience. I may
have spoken to you vehemently in defence of Mirabehn, but I have
not made any man or woman weep as bitterly as I have made her. My
hardness of heart, impatience and ignorant attachment were
responsible for such conduct. I have felt Mirabehn’s self-sacrifice to
be beyond praise and, therefore, wish to see her perfect. The moment
I see any imperfection in her, my ignorant attachment makes me
1

Vide “An Autobiography” and “An Autobiography”
The addressee had been rebuked by Gandhiji when she complained against
Mirabehn’s having blocked a passage; later she quoted this incident as proof of
Gandhiji’s unwillingness to listen to complaints against those whom he trusted.
2

78

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

impatient and I rebuke her sharply. The result is a flood of tears.
These instances have opened my eyes to the presence of violence in
me and, recalling them, I have been trying to reform myself. I,
therefore, welcome your letters. I do not know whether in return I
shall be able to give you anything, but personally I benefit from them.
I realized this thing—my hard-heartedness—more vividly in England.
Mira was the chief person in attendance on me. There, too, I caused
her to weep bitterly on the slightest provocation. But I learnt a lesson
from that experience. God has never let any delusion of mine last for
ever. Even in the political sphere, whenever I have taken a false step
God has immediately opened my eyes. Your letters help that process
of awakening.
You will now understand my previous letter1 better. How can we
expect perfection from an imperfect being? A blind man has collected
a band of other blind folk. But the blind man knows that he is blind,
and also knows the cure for his blindness. Hence, though living with
blind people, he is confident that he will not lead them into a pit, nor
will he himself fall into it. He walks with a stick in is hand. He feels the
path ahead with the stick before taking every step. And, therefore,
things have gone well on the whole so far. If, despite his using the
stick, the blind man has occasionally strayed from the path, he has
immediately realized his error and retraced his steps and led back his
co-workers. So long as my blindness remains, even a person like you
who loves me will continue to have reasons to criticize me. When the
blindness has disappeared, there will be no such grounds for criticism.
Meanwhile, let all of us, blind men and women, who are seekers after
truth, describe the elephant as we perceive it. Our descriptions will
vary, but each will be perfectly true from the person’s limited point of
view. After all, everyone of us will have but touched the elephant.
When our eyes open all of us will dance with joy and shout: ‘How
blind we were! This is an elephant, about which we had read in the
Gita. How fortunate it would have been if our eyes had opened
earlier’. But why should we worry if their opening is delayed? Time
has no meaning for God, or rather He measures it differently.
Ignorance, thus, will become transformed into knowledge.
I hope you will get from this an explanation of all the
shortcomings you may have observed in me. That does not mean, of
course, that you should not put your doubts before me. You may
1

Vide “Letter to Premabehn Kantak”, 19-2-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

79

continue to put them and I will reply every time.
Send my blessings to Sushila and Kisan. And also to
Dhurandhar if you are permitted to write to him. How is Jamnadas’s
health? What happened to his school?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10274. Also C.W. 6722. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

58. LETTER TO RANCHHODJI DAYALJI
February 25, 1932
BHAI RANCHHODBHAI,

I was glad to read your letter. I consider your family to be
fortunate. Money is a fleeting thing which comes and goes. Is
Kunvarji’s health all right? Kalyanji, of course, has no complaint
regarding health. Do all the three brothers live together?
Convey to Gangabehn compliments from us both for keeping
up her courage. How is Napoleon1 ? Ask him to write to me.
Both of us are quite well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2695

59. LETTER TO SHIVABHAI G. PATEL
February 25, 1932
CHI. SHIVABHAI,

I got your letter.
Every human being is liable to err. However, nothing but good
results to him who, on realizing his mistake, tries to mend it, since in
the long run such a person learns not to make mistakes. His conduct is
inspired by love of truth. Where there is such love, the erring man will
not deceive himself or the world.
I would regard it as his error if Tolstoy expressed the opinion
that you mention. He expressed such mistaken opinions on several
occasions. His greatness lay in the fact that as soon as he realized his
1

80

Chhotubhai, Kunvarji Mehta’s son
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

mistake, he confessed it and corrected it. Moreover, there were so
many changes in his way of life that one should also take into account
the time when he expressed a particular opinion. In any case, in the
matter of husband-wife relationship, I myself am definitely of the
opinion that the consent of both should be necessary for their union
and not for living apart. If that were not so, both would ordinarily
remain in a fallen state. It happens only in rare cases that both wake
up at thesame time and remain awake together.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9509. Also C.W. 425. Courtesy:
Shivabhai G. Patel

60. LETTER TO SHAKARIBEHN C. SHAH
February 25, 1932
CHI. SHAKARIBEHN,

So I have a letter from you at last. If you tell them that your
letter is meant for me alone, nobody will read it there. What does it
matter if the jail authorities here read it? I would, therefore, advise you
to write to me without any reserve.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.G. 30

61. LETTER TO VANAMALA N. PARIKH
February 25, 1932
CHI. VANAMALA,

Does not a man grow? And anything that grows must have a
root. Otherwise, how can it grow? Will it be all right, if we say that a
man’s root is his stomach? By what means does a tree get its food? Is
it not through the root? We get our food through the stomach. The
food is turned into its essence there, and it is then digested and
nourishes the body. We may, therefore, say that a man’s root is his
stomach. Is this all right?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5766. Also C.W. 2989. Courtesy:
Vanamala M. Desai
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

81

62. LETTER TO VIDYA R. PATEL
February 25, 1932
CHI. VIDYA,

I got your letter. Your handwriting is good. Your daily
programme of work also seems all right. Go on in the same manner
and keep on growing.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 9422 Courtesy: Ravindra R. Patel

63. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
February 25, 1932
CHI. SHARDA,

Received your letter. The inmates of the Ashram can never
abuse one another. But quite often, what is not meant to be abuse
sounds like abuse. Hence, let me know what you consider to be abuse
and also inform me who uses those words. Anyone who stays in the
Ashram must abandon fear. Whom need we fear? We should boldly
tell even the elders what we regard as the proper thing.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9946. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

64. A LETTER
February 26, 1932
CHI.,

I have your letter. The chief reason for my giving up milk was
health, and, therefore, I will go without it only so long as I can
preserve my health. So far, at any rate, my weight and strength have
remained unaffected.
A crisis was bound to arise for khadi too. What would it avail
even if it survives this time? Every calamity, if we properly understand
it, is a test. And a test means suffering, that is, penance. Now penance
always purifies the person who undergoes it and also purifies the
cause for which it is undertaken. There is no exception at any time to
82

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

this law. Nothing, therefore, disturbs my joy and peace.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 8950. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

65. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI P. PANDYA
February 26, 1932
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

I got your letter. I did reply to you. . . . 1 It is certainly possible
to acquire control over the sense organs. The Shastras proclaim in the
clearest words that such control is difficult, but they were composed to
help people to acquire it. It becomes possible through hard practice
and the cultivation of disinterestedness. Spiritual development and
self-realization go hand in hand. The remedy for your mental
agitation lies in you, and rest also depends on you. I see many in jails
who do no work, but all of them appear agitated. Rest for the body is
not true rest. The sun that takes no rest even for a moment is always
fresh. The Lord says that, though He works ceaselessly without rest
and without one moment of relaxation, He is the abode of peace. You
should, therefore, seek everything within yourself.At this time when
the inmates of the Ashram are doing real work and not merely
play-acting, you find it uninteresting. Though there are numerous
weaknesses in the Ashram, I describe its work as real because it is not a
shop doing business but a means of serving the world and a sincere
attempt in that direction to the best of our ability. For anybody who
understands the things aright, the Ashram activities are in truth rest
from work.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 345. Courtesy: Bhagwanji P. Pandya

1

Omission as in the source

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

83

66. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
February 26, 1932
CHI. KUSUM (SENIOR),

I got your letter after I had waited for one for a long time.
Tell Chhotubhai1 that both of us often think about him. Do you get
any news about Pyarelal? How is Chandubhai’s health? Where is
Dr. Sumant? How does he keep? I am more or less all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1828

67. LETTER TO LAKSHMIBEHN N. KHARE
February 26, 1932
CHI. LAKSHMIBEHN,

I did get a letter from you at last. Why should you feel shy in
writing to me? I hope to get your reply to my last letter. 2 I am sure
you will not disappoint me.
I am very glad that you are learning weaving. Can we say that
Rambhau’s stay in Almora has fulfilled our expectations?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 280. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare

68. LETTER TO PUSHPA P. PATEL
February 26, 1932
CHI. PUSHPA,

Since your beak has grown so long, how can I recognize you
though you remain my stick? My compliments for such fine Hindi.
Should they go to you or to Parasramji? Discuss the question with him
and let me know.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3981. Also C.W. 27. Courtesy:
Pushpabehn N. Naik
1
2

84

Chhotubhai Purani, a pioneer of physical culture in Gujarat
Vide “Letter to Lakshmibehn N. Khare”, 19-2-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

69. LETTER TO PUSHPA S. PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

Friday [After February 26, 1932] 1
CHI. PUSHPA,

Why are you peeved when I say that you have a pointed nose?
Do you not have a pointed nose? It is a sign of beauty. Now you must
write to me that you are laughing heartily. Those who want to be my
walking-sticks are forbidden to feel irritated.
I shall not write to Mangala this time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 11086. Courtesy: Pushpa Naik

70. LETTER TO MAHAVIR GIRI
February 27, 1932
CHI. MAHAVIR,

I got your letter. I was glad to know that you kept good health
there. Since you left the Ashram to go to Darjeeling, it would have
been better if you had proceeded directly there. The place is certainly
cold, but this is considered the best season. Even persons who are ill
go there in this season. Do you meet the Gujaratis who live in that
place?
Be very careful in spending money and keep accounts. Write to
me regularly. See that you and your sisters do not forget your studies.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6234

1

From the contents; vide “Letter to Pushpa S. Patel”, 26-2-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

85

71. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
February 28, 1932
MY DEAR CHILD,

I was delighted to have your letter again and the unexpected
scribble from Nani1 .
I see you have a cosmopolitan company2 . I only hope this does
not give you more than your health can manage.
No, the Gita does not teach differently. What it does teach is that all
our acts must be natural and spontaneous even when unconscious.
When they are so, there is no thought of reward or result. There is,
therefore, in pure love no giving and no taking. Put in another way
there is no giving on earth without taking. Love gives because it must;
it is its nature. It therefore does not calculate whether there is a
corresponding gain. It is unconscious of the giving and more so of
the taking. Love is its own reward. When there is that ineffable love,
there is a joy which is above all the so-called joys we think we
experience from outward circumstances. It is that joy I want you to
possess. There was a time when you thought, I thought, you had it.
But you had not then gone through the fire. The joy that will surely
be yours one day will come out of the purifying richness of that fire.
It will steal over you when it does come. May it come soon.
We are both well.
Love.
Yours,

BAPU
Photostat No. 108. Courtesy: National Archives of India. Also My Dear Child,
pp. 88-9

72. LETTER TO NANI MENON
February 28, 1932
MY DEAR NAN,

Your attempt to write a letter to me was very good. And what a
reindeer you have sent. What lovely horns! I am sorry I am not
playing with the goats, though they are brought before me everyday
twice to be milked. I don’t play because when they come, I am always
1

Addressee’s daughter
“The Menon home at Selly Oak was always an international centre.”
(My dear Child, p. 88)
2

86

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

doing something which I must not give up. Yes, there are a few
flowers but nothing much to speak of. The ground is stony and they
can’t afford in prisons to lay out flowerbeds. You must write again.
Kisses to both of you.
BAPU

My Dear Child, p. 117

73. LETTER TO ABBAS
February 28, 1932
CHI. ABBAS,

In spite of his struggles a man is carried away by passion, since
to destroy it completely requires an immense effort. Some things
require comparatively less effort and some others require a much
greater effort. We require less effort to spin yarn of 10 or 20 counts,
but none has progressed so far as to spin yarn of 200 counts. To do
that requires better equipment and a far greater effort. We do know
that they spun yarn of 200 counts in Bengal a hundred years ago. If
different degrees of effort are required in such a small matter as
spinning, it is bound to be so in acquiring freedom from passion.
Knowing this, the more we meet with failure the greater should our
efforts be. Some mountaineers have been attempting to reach the top
of the Himalayas. But none has succeeded so far. Our attempt is for a
still higher cause, and it knows no failure.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6315. Also C.W. 8951. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

74. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
February 28, 1932
DEAR BOYS AND GIRLS,

I am waiting for your reply to my letter 1 . Meanwhile, I
congratulate those of you who have undertaken to help in the kitchen.
Some of you are old enough to be able, if they wish, to assume the
whole responsibility for it. The fact that we experience difficulties
1

Vide “Letter to Ashram Boys and Girls”, 21-2-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

87

particularly in the kitchen is due entirely to our shortcomings. I list
below for your information as many rules as I can think of. If you
follow them, you will not find the least difficulty in running the
kitchen.
1. Never lose your temper whatever happens, whether something
is spoilt or broken. Never be impatient. Never worry about anything.
Find out the cause of the trouble and remove it.
2. If a co-worker does not finish his work or is lazy about it do
not get irritated with him, but take upon yourself the additional
burden.
3. Do thoroughly and as perfectly as you can whatever you do.
4. Never play with one another while in the kitchen. Do not hit
anybody even in jest.
5. The best thing is not to speak a word unless necessary. If
anybody cannot control himself, he may talk in low whispers and
make harmless and innocent jokes. However, everybody should
gradually form the habit of speaking nothing at all.
6. If you do talk, do not indulge in malicious criticism of one
another or back-biting.
7. It is enough for small boys to wear only tucked-up dhotis in
the kitchen. The girls also, when sitting, should tuck-up their skirts
behind and wear only jackets above them. It is not necessary for them
to wear the half sari in the kitchen. This saves cloth and minimizes the
danger of clothes catching fire. If anybody wears a shirt, the sleeves
should be tucked up at the elbow.
8. When anybody feels the urge to sneeze, he should hold the
kerchief over his mouth before sneezing, so that he does not blow
spittle from the mouth. Use tie kerchief for blowing the nose and, if
you perspire, wipe the drops with it. One ought not to let the drops fall
into anything. This means that everyone must carry a handkerchief.
9. For wiping the utensils, etc., there should be a separate towel
in the kitchen and it should be washed everyday with soap.
10. Everyone working in the kitchen should take special care to
keep his nails clean. They should be trimmed regularly. If there is still
any dirt under them, it should be removed with pointed straw.
11. No one should touch or taste any cooked item for sampling
it.
12. If, to ascertain whether a vegetable or some similar dish has
88

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

been properly salted, it has to be tasted, the leader of the boys may
take some in a spoon and taste it and, after doing so, immediately
wash the spoon clean.
13. If some special dish or dishes have to be cooked for a sick
person or a person who is observing a vow, do not regard this as a
burden but cook the thing cheerfully. Experience will show that, if the
time-table for the various jobs has been strictly followed, no burden
will be felt at all.
14. Make it a point to arrive at the kitchen punctually at the time
appointed for you. Know that every minute matters, so that you
should arrive two minutes earlier but never a minute later.
15. If you have no work in the kitchen, do not remain there to
gossip or just to look at the others working.
16. The kitchen should be kept clean all the time. All the things
should be in their proper places. After one’s job is done, one should
not leave without arranging the things in order.
In addition to these, you may introduce other rules that you
may think of. If you think that any of those given by me should be
dropped, you may drop them with the consent of the elders. But
scrupulously follow whatever rules you lay down. Everyone should
make a copy of the rules and keep it with him.
I have often felt that the kitchen provides a means for us to test
how far we practise the teaching of the Gita.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I am not writing a separate letter to the women today, since this
one is already longer than I had intended it to be, and, moreover, such
a letter should do quite well for them also.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8955. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

89

75. LETTER TO MAHENDRA V. DESAI
February 28, 1932
CHI. MANU,

You certainly wrote a good letter. But there is much room for
improving your handwriting. If Nanu 1 has become Vimalshah, from
where shall we bring an elephant for him? Or will he make a stick an
elephant and ride on it? Or will he first do deeds like Vimalshah’s and
make himself fit to bestride an elephant?
You wrote a description of Mount Abu. Now write one of
Almora.
Ask Dudhibehn to write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7420. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

76. LETTER TO SUMANGAL PRAKASH
February 28, 1932
CHI. SUMANGAL PRAKASH,

I have your letter. Also Kanta’s. I had been awaiting letters from
both of you. I had even made inquiries about Kanta. I was surprised
that I had not heard from either of you. Now of course I cannot
expect any letter from Kanta. Send me news about her and about
Prabhavati. When did you send the parcel of books? What were the
books? During the journey many things were not delivered to me. I
therefore remember nothing about it. It is a pity that you are not yet
fully recovered. What disease have they diagnosed that it has not been
cured so far?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Sumangal Prakash Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

1

90

Addressee’s younger brother Vimalchandra. Nanu is a pet name for “junior”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

77. DEATH, A FRIEND1
February 29, 1932
There was once a wise man, named Socrates, who lived in
Athens. His unconventional ideas, which, however, spread love of truth
and goodness, displeased the authorities, and he was sentenced to
death. In that country people were in those days sometimes sentenced
to die by drinking poison. Like Mirabai, Socrates was asked to drink a
cup of poison. Our purpose here is to discuss the substance of the
concluding words of Socrates’s defence at the time of his trial. We can
all derive a moral from it. Let us call Socrates by the name Sukrit. The
Arabs knew him as Sokrat.
This is what Sukrit said: ‘It is my unshakable faith that no harm
comes to a good man either in this world or the next. God never
forsakes good men and their friends. I also believe that nobody ever
dies before his time. I don’t look upon the sentence of death as a
punishment. The time has come for me to die and be delivered from
the sufferings of this life. That is why you have condemned me to die
by drinking poison. I am sure that my good lies in that. I, therefore,
bear no anger against my prosecutors or against those who have
condemned me. They may not have meant well by me, but they can
do me no harm either.
‘I have one request to make to the council of elders. If my sons
forsake the path of goodness and follow that of evil, if they become
lovers of wealth, punish them as you have punished me. Punish them
also if they become hypocrites and try to show themselves other than
what they are. If you do so, my sons and I will believe that you have
acted justly.’
This is a request of Sukrit in regard to his sons. The elders of
the city who had assembled to pass judgment on him, did not know
the law of non-violence. He, therefore, made the foregoing request
and thereby warned his sons and told them what he expected of them,
and also rebuked the elders gently for punishing him for doing good.
By suggesting to his sons that they should follow in his footsteps, he
told them in effect that the path which he had shown to the citizens of
1

This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”; vide the following

item.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

91

Athens was also meant for them, and even went to the extent of saying
that, if they did not follow that path, they should be treated as
deserving punishment.
I had decided to let this week be blank. But I could not
reconcile myself to the idea. Glancing at the books, I saw Socrates’s
speech. I opened the book, intending to send something from it, and
my eyes fell on the world-famous passage in it which I have
summarized above.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I and II

78. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
February 24/29, 1932
Evening, February 24, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your packet. The issue of visitors has taken a serious turn
and no solution seems to be in sight. As you had hinted in your last
letter, you also do not seem to have made any request for permission
to see me.
This week’s post contains a letter by Lakshmi senior in which
she complains against her letters being read [by you]. I think that
once at prayer-meeting you should ask all of them whether anybody
has an objection against your reading his or her letters. If any of them
object, you need not read their letters, and even if you think that it is
necessary to read them read only those of their letters which they
permit you to read. Don’t mind if your letters become long. I should
like you to give me all the information which it is permissible for you
to give.
Discuss with Shankerlal1 the problem of increasing the quantity
of yarn spun.
The Parnerkar affair is a painful one. Show as much love and
sympathy as you can.
I understand what you say about the Giri family. Do what you
can.
Padma’s expenses will come to Rs. 60 a month. They are three
1

92

Presumably Shankerlal Banker, Secretary, All-India Spinners’ Association
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in the family and, moreover, Padma is always ill.
If the agreement about visitors does not break down, even as
many as five to seven persons can come and see me. But, as far as
possible, we should take care that they are not more than five.
Send me a copy of Lord Irwin’s letter.
If I get an opportunity to see Mukta 1 and other women, I will
not let it pass.
Have you informed Dr. Jivraj [Mehta] that Triveni 2 does not
keep good health?
Is it through obstinacy that Kusum does not try the remedy
which I have suggested? Revashankarbhai’s Dhiru had a bone
whichhad decayed and he was cured by sun-baths. Countless people
have benefited by this treatment.
I had a fairly long talk with Mathew. You will be happy to know
that he spins and does a bit of other work.
Afternoon, February 29, 1932
I have not yet been able to start ‘Bal Gita’ 3 . Nor can I decide
what else I can write and send. This week, therefore, I send no special
material.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
In the evening, ultimately, I could not resist the impulse to write
something. About visitors there is no decision yet.4
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8211 Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

79. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI A. MEHTA
February 29, 1932
BHAISHRI BHAGWANJI,

I got your letter. Why should we feel hurt if a relation or friend
gives us nothing or takes away something that is ours? If we realize
that we have no claim on them, it is my experience that everything
would be all right. I have observed that that is the experience of many
1
2
3
4

Daughter of Jagjivandas N. Mehta of Amreli
Wife of Jagjivandas N. Mehta
Literally, ‘Children’s Gita’, which later came to be known as Ramdas Gita
For the article “Death, a Friend” which followed, vide the preceding item.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

93

others too. You have earned much and gone through many sweet and
bitter experiences. Why should you not rest satisfied with what you
have got and devote your abilities and your wealth entirely to public
service?
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
S JT. B HAGWANJI ANUPCHAND VAKIL
S ADAR
R AJKOT
KATHIAWAR
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5814. Also C.W. 3037. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

80. LETTER TO KRISHNA M. KAPADIA
February 29, 1932
CHI. KRISHNA,

I was glad to get your letter.
Nobody has been able to come and see me recently, and that is
why there has been nothing in the papers. My health is excellent.
Sardar is with me. If you can come and are permitted to see us, do
come, both of you. Ba must have been released now.
If you have still not overcome love of money, do so. Wealth
does not accompany anyone after death, but one’s good and evil
deeds do. One should, therefore, do whatever service one can.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXII

81. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
March 1, 1932
DEAR MAJOR MARTIN,

As you know, for two weeks now I have not had any visits. They
have been stopped because, I understand, the Government are revising
the instructions that have been in force in this connection. The
suspense is tantalizing for me and inconvenient for those who wish to
94

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

visit me. I would therefore like an early decision in the matter.
The question of seeing my companions who have been brought
to this prison and on which I wrote 1 to you a fortnight ago is much
more vital for me. As I have said, this meeting of some of my
companions now and then is a human want I may not deny myself
without shaking and impairing the whole nervous system. I had hoped
that you would procure an early decision, as I have simply asked for a
repetition of what was considered reasonable by the Government last
year.2 I press for an early reply.
Yours sincerely,

M.K.GANDHI
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No. 9

82. LETTER TO PREMLILA THACKERSEY
March 1, 1932
DEAR SISTER,

I have been robbing you of lots of honey these days. Both of us
have to take it frequently with warm water, and so two bottles get
exhausted in nine or ten days. If you experience difficulty in getting
honey, please let me know. Sometimes the honey is mixed with dirt
and sometimes there are pieces of cork in it. That made me doubt
whether the honey was collected from hives in the countryside. If that
is so, I would not regard it fit for our consumption, for in collecting
such honey a great many bees are killed and, moreover, it is never
clean. I, therefore, eat only the honey which is collected scientifically.
Such honey is now collected in our country. Please inquire how the
honey which you send is collected and let me know.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS

[PS.]
Since the right hand is tired, I have written the above with the
left.
1

Vide “Letter to R. V. Martin”, 16-2-1932
The reference is to the facilities given during his last term of detention in
Yeravda Prison in 1930
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

95

I wrote the following1 through mistake on the back of the reply
postcard on the date mentioned. I had preserved it and use it now.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4821-a. Courtesy: Premlila Thackersey

83 LETTER TO BENARSILAL BAZAJ
March 1, 1932
CHI. BENARSI,

Why have you not written to me till now? What are your present
activities? What is the state of your mind? I met Father several times
and came into close contact with him. He looked after me with great
love. He used to come and see me practically every day. And he had
literally encamped with Mahadev, Devdas and the others. I tried hard
to persuade him to return to India, but did not succeed. Certainly he
has in him a high degree of the spirit of self-sacrifice.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C. W. 9438. Courtesy: Benarsilal Bazaj

84. LETTER TO RUKMINI BAZAJ
March 1, 1932
CHI. RUKMINI,

I got your letter. It is my habit to give to children names which
suggest the qualities we wish them to have. Following that practice, I
suggest Gopal (lal or das) or Madhav (lal or das). Both are names of
the Lord whose pet (lal) or servant (das) I would like myself or
anybody else to be. Further, the word Gopal has two beautiful
meanings: Go means a cow or a sense organ, so that the name would
also signify one who keeps cows or one who controls the senses.
Madhav, too, means nearly the same thing. Madhav is the destroyer of
the demon Madhu, who dwells in our bodies. If you have any
difficulty in choosing between these two names you may cast lots and
decide. If the choice were left to me, I would prefer Gopal. If,
1
The reference is to the following sentences in the letter dated February 2,
1932: “I ate for many days the honey which you had given me for the voyage. It was
excellent.” Vide “Letter to Premlila Thackersey”, 2-2-1932

96

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

however, the name Ramesh is thought better, there is no harm in
giving that name either. Santok should write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9060

85. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
March 3, 1932
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

I got your letter. I was happy to learn that you were improving.
Write to Father Elwin and ask him to write to me without fail.
Shamrao also should write.
Please try and mitigate Champa’s suffering as much as you can.
Decide everything on the basis that a wife has the same rights as
her husband.
Champa may do only as much as she voluntarily agrees to do.
I have already given detailed comments on the description of
the spinning-wheel sent by Abbas. If you have not seen them, please
let me know. I will send the comments again.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.G. 36

86. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
March 3, 1932
CHI. KUSUM (SENIOR),

I got your postcard and letter. You say that you have nothing to
write about, in the same way as children do. This is not right. You will
be able to fill pages even if you describe your experiences. Think, and
write.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1829

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

97

87. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
March 3, 1932
CHI. MANGALA,

I may say that you wrote a good letter this time.
One should not tell a lie even in jest and, if one has done so, one
must immediately correct one’s lapse.
Should one learn even what kind of questions to ask? We may
ask questions the answers to which we do not know and which we
know the other person can reply.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I was very glad that you stood first at the examination. My
congratulations .
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4078. Also C.W. 42. Courtesy:
Mangalabehn B. Desai

88. LETTER TO VIDYA HINGORANI
Y. M.,

March 3, 1932
CHI. VIDYA HINGORANI,

I have your letter. You will be cured by the same treatment and
by being calm. The fact of the matter is that nothing is to be gained
by seeking advice—mine or any one else’s. The mind is its own
remedy, if it means that we can be rid of all worries by remembering
God alone. Keep writing to me. Do not worry about anything.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

98

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

89. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
March 4, 1932
CHI. PARASRAM,

I have your letter. Those girls writing in Hindi write very nice
letters. Why should God bend to every prayer? We hardly know when
he is pleased or offended. Prayer is its own reward
As a matter of fact, Truth is the best policy1 . It is tact2 as well as
delicacy3 . Tact 4 can be called gentleness. Than truth there is no better
policy on earth, nothing more tactful or delicate.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 4968. Courtesy: Parasram Mehrotra. Also G.N. 7491

90. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
March 5, 1932
CHI. SHARDA,

Since you have demanded a long letter, I have taken the double
sheet. Now that you have entered upon your sixteenth year, you have
become a responsible person. Improve your health and dedicate
yourself to the service of others for life. And for this you should, of
your own free will, observe the rules of Ashram life.
Now to your questions.
In the Ashram we keep no idol or image because there is before
us God’s image in the form of the world and we should know God
through it. If we look at the sky, there are innumerable images there
too, and if we wish we may meditate on any of them and think that
God dwells there also. In this connection, we should remember that
persons like Imam Saheb and Amina did not find it necessary to have
what people call an idol.
I have rivers and valleys to be crossed, which means that I have a
1

In the source these English words are in Devanagari.
ibid
3
ibid
4
ibid
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

99

long distance to go before I can realize God.
There can be no absolution from the sin of telling a lie
knowingly, no matter how severe the prayashchitta one undergoes for
it. Prayashchitta wins forgiveness only for one who has told a lie in
ignorance. Do you understand this? If not, ask me again.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9948. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

91. LETTER TO ISHVARBHAI PATEL
March 5, 1932
CHI. ISHVAR,

I got your letter. Both of us were pleased. Persuade Napoleon
also to write sometimes. And you should continue to write. I hope all
of you are well.
Blessings from us both.
BAPU
C HI . I SHVARBHAI P ATEL
C/ O GANGABEHN KUNVARJI
VANZ
Via S ACHIN
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2696

92. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
March 5, 1932
CHI. KUSUM ,

What a woman you are! You wrote to me a postcard and a letter,
and yet could tell me nothing. What did you read all these months,
what thoughts came to you, how much did you spin, what health did
you maintain, what places did you visit? If you wish, you can tell me
all this and much else.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1830

100

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

93. LETTER TO NANABHAI I. MASHRUWALA
March 5, 1932
BHAI NANABHAI,

I got your letter. I had read in the papers about Tara’s1 leaving.
I know that Vijayalakshmi will miss her very much. But it is things
like these which test us.
I also had a letter from Manilal and Sushila. I had advised him
not to return without making proper arrangements for the affairs in
South Africa. Probably he will be in India next week. You gave me no
news about your health. Please do in your next letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7519. Also C.W. 4995. Courtesy:
Kanubhai Mashruwala

94. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 5, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

I had sent a wire to Rajkot the day before yesterday to cheer
Khushalbhai. I have known few persons as fortunate as he. We would
be happy to see him live long and be our guide and counsellor. But,
should he die now, even from the ordinary human point of view that
should be no cause for grief. Since, however, there is no further news
from you, I assume that the cloud has vanished.
The issue of visitors has been partly settled. Anyone from the
Ashram can come and see me, though even from among the Ashram
inmates those who are classed as ‘political’ cannot come. But there
are none such at present, unless we count Valji among them. If,
therefore, anybody wishes to come next week, he may. The
Superintendent should be informed in advance. It would be advisable
to inform me too.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8212. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
1

Tara Mashruwala; Sushila Gandhi’s younger sister

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

101

95. LETTER TO PUSHPA S. PATEL
March 5, 1932
CHI. PUSHPA,

Your letter in Hindi was so good that when I read it, I thought
you to be some other Pushpa.1 Your handwriting in the last letter was
not good. You would get three marks for it. One should write each
letter in a word as carefully as one draws a picture. See Mangala’s
handwriting. How beautiful it is! However, your handwriting this time
was certainly better than in your previous letters.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3982. Also C.W. 28. Courtesy:
Pushpabehn N. Naik

96. LETTER TO VANAMALA N. PARIKH
March 5, 1932
CHI. VANAMALA,

You should improve your handwriting. You do write carefully,
but the handwriting is not as good as it should be.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Is there any news about Narahari?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5767. Also C.W. 2990. Courtesy:
Vanamala M. Desai

1

102

Vide “Letter to Pushpa S. Patel”, 11-2-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

97. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

March 5, 1932
CHI. NIMU,

Having been trained in the Ashram, why need you feel false
embarrassment? If you take the lead, other women also will go out for
walks. Who else, if not a mother, will go out for a walk carrying her
child in her arms? Do you not have any friend in Lakhtar? Induce her
to go out with you. You, mother and daughter, should go out. Take
Navin along. We should effect some carefully thought out reforms in
such matters.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

98. LETTER TO KRISHNADAS GANDHI
Y. M.,

March 5, 1932
1

CHI. KRISHNADAS ,

I have your lucid letter. If you have no work in particular, if
Balkrishna or anybody else acting as editor can spare you and if you
also wish and Jamnalalji is not opposed to the idea, it might be good
for you to go to Vijapur, However, my advice should have no weight
outside the jail gate. It is not right at all for a prisoner to take interest
in affairs outside the jail.
How are Madalasa2 and Om3 ?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 369
1

Son of Chhaganlal Gandhi
Daughters of Jamnalal Bajaj
3
ibid
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

103

99. PREFACE TO “FROM YERAVDA MANDIR”
March 6, 1932
During my incarceration in 1930 in the Yeravda Central Prison,
I wrote weekly letters to the Satyagraha Ashrams containing a cursory
examination of the principal Ashram observances. 1 As the Ashram
influence had already travelled beyond its geographical limits, copies
of the letters were multiplied for distribution. They were written in
Gujarati. There was a demand for translation into Hindi and other
Indian languages, and also into English. Shri Valji Desai gave a fairly
full translation in English. But seeing me in possession of comparative
leisure during the recurrent incarceration, he has sent me his
translation for revision. I have gone through it carefully, and touched
up several passages to bring out my meaning more to my liking. I
need hardly add that, if I was writing anew for the English reader,
perhaps I should write a wholly new thing. But that would be going
beyond my commission. And perhaps it is as well that even the
English reader has the trend of my thought as expressed to the
inmates of the Ashram, and in the year 1930. I have therefore taken
the least liberty with the original argument.
M. K. GANDHI
From Yeravda Mandir

100. LETTER TO M. G. BHANDARI
March 6, 1932
DEAR MAJOR BHANDARI,

You have kindly given me a copy of the fresh instructions
issued by the Government about the weekly visits.
I appreciate the trust reposed in me regarding the determination
as to who shall be considered political inmates of the Ashram. I am
anxious to be true to the trust. But before I could do so, there should
be a common definition of the adjective ‘political’ between the
Government and me. I take ‘political’ to mean those who are
politically minded and are actually taking part in politics as apart
1

104

Vide footnote 1, “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 27-1-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

from civil resistance. For if by ‘political’ are meant those who have
been heretofore imprisoned as civil resisters or are believers in the
doctrine of civil resistance, then there is no non-political inmate in the
Ashram. If, however, the meaning is [as] I have given it, there are only
three political inmates. I mean Sjts. Mahadev Desai, Pyarelal and
Devdas Gandhi. But if I may not see the first two, I may not see
Devdas Gandhi for they are like Devdas to me. As it so happens, they
are all incarcerated. I may also mention that at the present moment
there are only boys and girls and the few adults who are reserved for
looking after the youngsters and the multifarious industrial activities
of the Ashram.
It is difficult, too, for me to submit a list of non-Ashram friends
till I know the definition that the Government have in mind of the
term ‘political’. I shall await reply to this before I submit a fairly full
list for approval. But, meanwhile, I give below illustrative names of
those friends whom I regard as non-political and whom I would put in
the same category as my relatives.
Lady Thackersey, residence—Yeravda Hill. She is a social
worker. She helped me during my serious illness in 1923 when I was a
patient in the Sasoon Hospital.
Prof. Trivedi of the Agriculture College, Poona. He stands to me
in the same close contact as Lady Thackersey.
Yeshvantprasad Desai, mill-owner residing in Matunga. He
nursed me during the same illness and took up his abode in Poona for
helping me.
Pyare Ali and his wife, living in retirement at a retreat near
Thana, where they have taken in a few Muslim orphans. They lived
nearly a year at the Ashram. They are a deeply religious couple.
These friends are in no sense political.
Pending reply to this letter, I have written to the Manager of the
Ashram1 to send those inmates who may wish to visit me.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 9554. Also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800 (40), Pt. I, pp. 131-3

1

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 5-3-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

105

101. IMAM SAHEB-I1
March 7, 1932
I am not yet ready to write and send chapters of the ‘Bal Gita’.
As I was wondering what I should send this time, it occurred to me
that I should give to the inmates of the Ashram my reminiscences of
the Imam Saheb and should carry out this good resolution without
delay. I, therefore, wish to write out such reminiscences as occur to me
and as I think I may narrate.
Imam Saheb went to South Africa about the same year as I
(1893). His real name was Abdul Kadir Bawazeer, but, as he served as
Imam in South Africa, most people knew him as Imam Saheb. I
always addressed him by this name.
The Imam Saheb’s father was the Muezzin of the famous
Jumma Masjid in Bombay and served in that capacity right till his
death. He died only a few years ago, after the Imam Saheb’s return to
India. He fell dead just as he was washing and getting ready for the
azan2 . Such a death comes only to the blessed. The Imam Saheb’s
forefathers were Arabs and had come to India and settled in the
Konkan years ago. Hence he knew the Konkani language too. His
mother tongue was Gujarati, but he had little schooling. He knew
Arabic well enough to be able to read from the Koran Sharif with a
pleasing intonation, though not so well as to be able to understand
everything in the Koran. He had picked up, through contacts
inpractical life, English, Dutch and Creole French. Urdu, of course, he
knew. He had also a working knowledge of Zulu. His intellect was so
sharp that, if he had regularly studied in a school, he would have
earned reputation as a great scholar. Though he was not a lawyer, he
had come to understand subtleties of law through practical
experience.
The Imam Saheb had gone to South Africa for trade and had
earned much. When he gave up business, he kept coaches which he
supplied on hire and had a fairly good income from that calling.
Being a man of independent temper, he never tried his fortune in big
1

This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”; vide the following

2

Call to the faithful

item.

106

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

business. He had a sweet voice, and, since his father was a Muezzin, he
occasionally officiated as Imam in the mosque in Johannesburg. But
he accepted no honorarium for his services.
The Imam Saheb had married twice. Both the wives were
Malays. His first marriage was not successful, and so he married the
lady whom we knew as his wife. This marriage had given him much
happiness. He and the Haji Saheba served each other with great
devotion. He was a sincere friend. So far as I know, the Imam Saheb’s
views about marriage had undergone a complete change and he had
come to believe in monogamy.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

102. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 7, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

I infer from your second postcard that you must have returned
to the Ashram. I hope you got my postcard 1 despatched from here
yesterday. Through some visitor, send again a piece of leather for the
soles. I observe that there is one sole every month to be repaired.
There is no urgency about the leather. Both the sandals have been
re-soled only recently, so that they will require no attention for two
months at least. It was only in order that it may be handy in case of
necessity that I have asked you so early to send one.
All inmates of the Ashram who may be described as ‘non
political’ will be permitted now to visit me. It is left to me to decide
which of the inmates should be treated as ‘political’. But whom
theGovernment would class as ‘political’, I can know only when I
receive its definition of the term. I have, therefore, asked for such a
definition.2 Meanwhile, anyone who wishes to come from there and
whom you permit may come and see me, since, according to me, there
is no one in the Ashram at present who may be described as
‘political’. If nobody is particularly eager to come, it is not necessary
for any of you to come merely to make us feel happy. If, however,
anybody wishes to come, I would not say ‘No’ to him or her. The
Government has asked for a list of ‘non-politicals’ not living in the
1
2

Vide “Letter to Pushpa S. Patel”, 5-3-1932
Vide “Letter to M. G. Bhandari”, 6-3-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

107

Ashram. I will draw up such a list after I receive its definition of the
term ‘political’.
Do you get any news about Prabhavati?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Tell Valji that I have revised his translation of my letters on the
Ashram vows and written out the preface1 . I will keep them with me
now.
Manilal will probably arrive there during this week. If possible,
the two2 should come and see me.
There are 37 letters, in addition to this one and the
reminiscences3 of Imam Saheb.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8213. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

103. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR4
[March 7, 1932] 5
DEAR KAKA,

How are you? What food you get? How many are with you and
who are they? How is Prabhudas? What food he gets? Inform me
about your weight and that of Prabhudas. Similar questions I have
asked Mr. Quinn fearing you might not get this letter. What are you
reading? We both are all right here. For the present I take dry dates,
lime-juice, green vegetables and almond-bread. I am not constipated.
If my weight goes down, I will take milk again. I intend writing ‘Bal
Gita’ and have commenced writing Imam Saheb’s Sirat. I am stuying
1

Vide “Preface to From Yeravda Mandir”, 6-3-1932
Presumably Manilal Gandhi and his wife, Sushila
3
Vide the preceding item.
4
The source bears a note to the effect that the Gujarati original of this is not
available; this translation appears to have been done by the jail authorities. The
addressee was in Visapur Jail.
5
The date is inferred from the reference in the letter to Gandhiji having
commenced writing the biographical skech of Imam Saheb; vide the preceding item,
also “Diary, 1932”.
2

108

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the position of the stars and for that I take assistance of that Gujarati
book which is translated from Marathi and also see the maps given in
the Weekly Times. I get up at night and see the positions of the stars.
This time I hardly send for books. But I get some books from
America. I think I will not be able to study Marathi this time. I feel
weak and require more sleep. Perhaps after long rest I might regain
my strength. How is Narahari? My blessings to you all.
Yours,
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40), Pt. I, p. 88

104. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
March 7, 1932
CHI. PREMA,

I think Rama humbled your pride by making you forget to
complete your sacrificial spinning.1 I don’t count your lapse to be as
serious as you do. It is right, however, that you should regard it as big
enough. I say that Rama humbled your pride because if we, who are
but puppets constantly liable to err, did not commit a single mistake in
doing something, we are likely to be filled with pride (however subtle
it may be). Rama seems to have treated you in the same way as He—
or was it Siva?—had treated Narad. The incident has had two good
results—your pride has been humbled and you will not make the
same mistake again.
I have no comment to make here on the vivid sketches in your
letter. I have never believed that you are hard-hearted. Your criticisms
help me. Every one of us has virtues and weaknesses. If you are less
inclined to see the virtues of others, try to see them more often.
There was nothing in my letter to make Narandas ask questions
about himself. He does work in the spirit of yajna. It is not his fault
that I have left him no time to do any body labour. This, too, is
evidence of my lack of organizing ability. If I had been able to make
efficient arrangements from the time that the Ashram was started, it
1
The addressee was rather proud of her unfailing observance of the Ashram
rules. But once her spinning was short by eight to ten rounds and she atoned for it by
a three-day fast.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

109

would not have been necessary for several persons, as it is now, to be
busy only in general supervision. We have gone on the way we started.
I believe that it is still possible to change things, but I do not know
how, and the Ashram has still not got a man or a woman, who will give
more thought to the problem and enforce the Ashram rules more
strictly. Till we get such a person, we should tolerate the present
conditions. Let us always remember that the Ashram very much falls
short of its ideal, for I believe it quite possible to organize things so
well that everyone in it will do his or her share of body labour and
good order will bepreserved. Let us work in this faith. We shall
discover the key one day.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10275. Also C.W. 6723. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

105. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
March 7, 1932
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

What a lot of trouble you have taken! There is no reason for
getting disturbed over the change in my diet. I have little or no faith
in calories. Their1 norm applies only to them. How can we vie with
them? Individual professions too must be considered while laying
down a standard of calorie requirements. Now I am taking four
ounces of toast too. I have received the dates. I think the good quality
dates from Arabia are better than these. The ones sent to me are quite
good. I will take milk as soon as I feel the need. Have no worry.
I am not surprised to read your account of America. But there
are many good people too.
Did the climate over there agree with you? I am glad to learn
that you have discovered the right diet for yourself. How is Malaviyaji
Maharaj? Sardar tells me that Rameshwardas 2 was ill. I had no
knowledge of this. How is he now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 7896. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
1
2

110

Presumably, Americans’
Addressee’s brother
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

106. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
March 8, 1932
DEAR AGATHA,

I have your two letters also the postman’s attempt [sic].
You are quite correct in not giving me details of the activities of
friends, nor am I eager to know them. I am quite sure that all of you
over there are doing your best and what is proper1 .
Do you hear from or see Maud? Please tell her to write to me
and tell me all about her health and her progress otherwise.
My regards to all the friends.
I have not yet received the Ruskin volumes.2
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1451

107. LETTER TO MANMOHANDAS P. GANDHI
March 8, 1932
3

BHAI MANMOHAN ,

I have your letter. I had been thinking about you a few days ago
when I got it. The books have not yet reached me.
I cannot call to mind any particular book on wool and silk
industries. You should look up the long bibliography at the end of
Puntambekar’s essay4 . There is one in Gregg’s book also.
For the present at least, I have quite a stock of books. Moreover,
Ghanshyamdas also is going to send some, and so I do not wish to put
you to trouble on that account just now.
1

The reference, presumably, is to the India Conciliation Group, London,
whose “members, varying in views, were united in a concern for the situation in
India”. The addressee became its Honorary Secretary in December, 1931.
2
Fors Clavigera; vide “Diary, 1932”, entries under March 25 and April 6; also
in The Diary of Mahadev Desai, Vol. I, under March 28, 1932, Mahadev Desai
explains: “Bapu is reading Ruskin’s Fors Clavigera with great interest . . . .”
3
M. P. Gandhi, Secretary, Indian Chamber of Commerce, Calcutta
4
Hand-spinning and Hand-weaving—An Essay by S. V. Puntambekar and N. S.
Varadachari (S. Ganesan, Madras)
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

111

There is some harm even in being my namesake. If nothing else,
you have to reply to correspondents and also confess that you are no
Mahatma! 1 Both of us are quite well. I cannot do much work with my
right hand now and hence I have Written this with the left.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRIYUT MANMOHANDAS GANDHI
135 C ANNING S TREET
C ALCUTTA
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 15

108. LETTER TO SIR SAMUEL HOARE
March 11, 19322
DEAR SIR SAMUEL,

You will perhaps recollect that at the end of my speech3 at the
Round Table Conference when the minorities’ claim was presented, I
had said that I should resist with my life the grant of separate
electorate to the Depressed Classes. This was not said in the heat of the
moment, nor by way of rhetoric. It was meant to be a serious
statement.
In pursuance of that statement, I had hoped on my return to
India to mobilize public opinion against separate electorate, at any
rate, for the Depressed Classes. But it was not to be.
From the newspapers which I am permitted to read, I observe
that any moment His Majesty’s Government may declare their
decision. At first I had thought that if the decision was found to create
separate electorates for the Depressed Classes, I should take such steps
as I might then consider necessary to give effect to my vow. But I feel
that it would be unfair to the British Government for me to act without
giving previous notice. Naturally they could not attach the
significance I give to my statement.
I need hardly reiterate all the objections I have to the creation of
1

Gandhiji’s letters from correspondents abroad were misdirected to the
addressee.
2
Despatched on this date, the letter was drafted on March 9 and revised on
March 10; vide “Diary, 1932”.
3
Vide “Speech at Minoriteies Committee Meeting”, 13-11-1931

112

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

separate electorates for the Depressed Classes. I feel as if I was oneof
them. Their case stands on a wholly different footing from that of the
others. I am not against their representation in the legislatures. I
should favour every one of their adults, male or female, being
registered as voters, irrespective of education or property
qualifications, even though the franchise test may be stricter for the
others. But I hold that separate electorate is harmful for them and for
Hinduism, whatever it may be from a purely political standpoint. To
appreciate the harm that separate electorates would do to them, one
has to know how they are distributed amongst the so-called caste
Hindus, and how dependent they are on the latter. So far as Hinduism
is concerned separate electorate would simply vivisect and disrupt it.
For me the question of these classes is predominantly moral and
religious. The political aspect, important though it is, dwindles into
insignificance compared to the moral and religious issue. You will
have to appreciate my feelings in this matter by remembering that I
have been interested in the condition of these classes from my
boyhood and have more than once staked my all for their sake. I say
this not to pride myself in any way. For, I feel that no penance that
caste Hindus may do can, in any way, compensate for the calculated
degradation to which they have consigned the Depressed Classes for
centuries. But I know that separate electorate is neither penance nor
any remedy for the crushing degradation they have groaned under.
I therefore respectfully inform His Majesty’s Government that
in the event of their decision creating separate electorate for the
Depressed Classes, I must fast unto death.
I am painfully conscious of the fact that such a step whilst I am
a prisoner must cause grave embarrassment to His Majesty’s
Government and that it will be regarded by many as highly improper
on the part of one holding my position to introduce into the political
field methods which they would describe as hysterical, if not much
worse. All I can urge in defence is that for me the contemplated step is
not a method, it is part of my being. It is a call of conscience which I
dare not disobey, even though it may cost whatever reputation for
sanity I may possess.
So far as I can see now, my discharge from imprisonment would
not make the duty of fasting any the less imperative.
I am hoping, however, that all my fears are wholly unjustified
and that the British Government have no intention whatever of
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

113

creating separate electorate for the Depressed classes.
It is perhaps as well for me to refer to another matter that
is agitating me and may also enforce a similar fast. It is the
wayrepression is going. I have no notion when I may receive a shock
that would compel the sacrifice.
Repression appears to me to be crossing what might be called
the legitimate limit. A Governmental terrorism is spreading through
the land. Both English and Indian officials are being brutalized. The
latter, high and low, are becoming demoralized by reason of the
Government rewarding as meritorious, disloyalty to the people and
inhuman conduct towards their own kith and kin. The latter are being
cowed down. Free speech has been stifled. Goondaism is being
practised in the name of law and order. Women who have come out
for public service stand in fear of their honour being insulted.
And all this, as it seems to me, is being done in order to crush
the spirit of freedom which the Congress represents. Repression is not
confined to punishing civil breaches of the common law. It goads
people to break newly made orders of autocracy designed for the
most part to humiliate them.
In all these doings as I read them, I see no spirit of democracy.
Indeed, my recent visit to England has confirmed my opinion that
your democracy is a superficial circumscribed thing. In the weightiest
matters decisions are taken by individuals or groups, without any
reference to the Parliament, and these have been ratified by the
Members having but a vague notion of what they were doing. Such
was the case with Egypt, the War of 1914, and such is the case with
India. My whole being rebels against the idea that in a system called
democratic, one man should have the unfettered power of affecting
the destiny of the ancient people numbering over three hundred
millions, and that his decisions can be enforced by mobilizing the
most terrible forces of destruction. To me this is a negation of
democracy.
And this repression cannot be prolonged without further
embittering the already bitter relations between the two peoples. In so
far as I am responsible and can help it, how am I to arrest the process?
Not by stopping civil disobedience. For me it is an article of faith. I
regard myself by nature a democrat. Democracy of my conception is
wholly inconsistent with the use of physical force for enforcing its
will. Civil resistance therefore has been conceived to be a proper
substitute for physical force to be used wherever generally the latter is
114

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

held necessary or justifiable. It is a process of self-suffering and a part
of the plan is that in given circumstances a civil resister must sacrifice
himself even by fasting to a finish. That moment has not yet arrived
for me. I have no undeniable call from within for such a step. But the
events happening outside are alarming enough to agitate my
fundamental being. Therefore, in writing to you about the possibility
of a fast regarding Depressed Classes, I felt that I would be untrue to
you if I did not tell you also that there was another possibility, not
remote, of such a fast.
Needless to say that from my side absolute secrecy has been
maintained about all the correspondence I have carried on with you.
Of course Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel and Mahadev Desai, who has just
been sent to join us, know all about it. But you will no doubt make
whatever use you wish of this letter.1
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
S IR S AMUEL HOARE
WHITEHALL
LONDON
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(4), Pt. I, p. 5; also The Bombay Chronicle, 13-9-1932

109. LETTER TO DURGA M. DESAI
March 11, 1932
CHI. DURGA ,

Mahadev arrived yesterday unexpectedly.2 It seems the
authorities thought that I must have one more companion besides
Sardar. There is no cause for worry about my leg. There is a little
inflammation at one spot. Treatment is going on. There is not the
slightest [cause]3 for worry. You can always write to me anything you
wish to. And you may come whenever you like.
Blessings from

BAPU
1

For Sir Samuel Hoare’s reply, vide Appendix III. For an account of Gandhiji’s
discussion with Vallabhbhai Patel and Mahadev Desai on separate electorates and
repression, vide The Diary of Mahadev Desai, Vol. I, pp. 4-5, 7 & 8.
2
Mahadev Desai, addressee’s husband, was transferred from Nasik Prison to
Yeravda Central Prison.
3
The source is mutilated here.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

115

[PS.]
You will find it convenient if you come with the party of visitors
expected next week.1
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9484

110. LETTER TO LAKSHMIBEHN N. KHARE
March 11, 1932
CHI. LAKSHMIBEHN,

Instead of taking somebody’s help to write a letter to me, why
don’t you write in Marathi? I will learn that much Marathi without
effort. I understand what you say about the women. Whether or not
there is an association, all of you there should meet from time to time
and discuss subjects bearing on your spiritual progress.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 281. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare

111. LETTER TO NIRMALA H. DESAI
March 11, 1932
CHI. NIRMALA,

If the elders have gone to the temple2 , all of you should take up
their work. Then you too will have followed them to the temple.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9466

1
2

116

This sentence is in Mahadev Desai’s hand.
The reference is to jail.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

112. LETTER TO NARAYAN DESAI
March 11, 1932
CHI. NARAYANRAO,

Now that you have graduated from Bablo1 to Narayan, I suppose
I may go further and make you a “Rao” 2 . Besides, Mahadev tells me
that you seem to have learnt carding only recently. If that is true, it is
proper that you should be addressed as“Raosaheb”.Mahadev is here
now. You may send any messages you like. How many rounds do you
spin daily?
Blessings from

BAPU

PS.
Since you card, Mahadev is eager to spin with slivers made by
you. Send a few pads.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9475

113. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
Y. M.,

March 11, 1932
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

Write to me everything about Shankerlal. God is our Protector.
Who is this Nanakram in Majoor Hospital? What is wrong with
him? If necessary have him admitted to the Municipal Hospital.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 32785

1
2

A baby boy
Rao” and “Raosaheb” are honorific suffixes added to names of elders.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

117

114. LETTER TO A GIRL
March 12, 1932
CHI.,

Learning the Gita by heart only requires a good memory, and
the task is easy. But understanding the meaning calls for the use of
one’s intellect. This is a difficult thing, and, therefore, uninteresting.
When, however, you feel interest in exercising your intellect, the desire
to understand the meaning will come to you. You should, therefore,
learn to take interest in subjects which require you to use your
intellect.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8963. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

115. A LETTER
March 12, 1932
CHI.,

There are numerous occasions for one to speak. You may have
questions to ask in your class, or may have to speak when playing
games or during the recess. It is our duty to spin and hence, if we do
not spin, we neglect our duty. That means that we fall into a debt.
Just as the hand becomes dirty if we touch a dirty thing so if we
tell a lie the mind is defiled, and that is worse than the hand becoming
dirty. We can wash the hand if it has become dirty. It is not as easy to
purify the mind.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8965. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

118

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

116. LETTER TO NARAYAN M. KHARE
March 12, 1932
CHI. PANDITJI,

If instead of reading many books we read only one and reflect
over it and put its teaching into practice, we get the desired result.
Sannyasa does not mean the renunciation of all activities; it means
only the renunciation of activities prompted by desire and of the fruits
of action performed as duty. This is real freedom from activity. That
is why one must learn to see inactivity in activity and activity in
inactivity. Freedom from activity means only one thing, and it is what
I have explained above. And still one must win such freedom. This
problem led to the idea of renunciation of the fruits of action.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 223. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn
N. Khare

117. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

March 13, 1932
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

I must thank you for your kind letter of the 2nd instant given to
me on the 10th. Though I do not share your rosy opinion about the
working of repression, I know I must not enter into any argument. I
write this only to correct one grave misunderstanding. I cannot accept
the compliment you pay me for my loyalty to my colleagues as if it
was the highest thing in life to me. I wish you could have known that
all my loyalties are subservient to my loyalty to truth. I have been
known, even during the past twelve years, to sacrifice friendships for
the sake of what I have considered to be truth. I am happy in the
knowledge that at no time have I had colleagues more disposed than
now to follow my guidance even though they might differ with me in
important matters short of vital principle. Might not history have been
written differently, if among the celestials I had enjoyed for my
loyalty to truth the credit you kindly give me for my loyalty to my
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

119

colleagues, and if therefore I had received glad response to my
request for the interview? God or the gods in New Delhi had willed
otherwise!!!
The Bombay Government have now sent Mahadev Desai as an
additional companion. Hence I am able to spare you my wretched
handwriting,
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: India office Library and Records. Courtesy: The British
Library, London

118. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

March 13, 1932
CHI. SHANKERLAL,

I have your letter. When I first read it I thought you were
leaving. Hence I wrote to Anasuyabehn. Now I see that it is some
other notice. Let me know what has happened.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 32744

119. A LETTER
March 13, 1932
CHI.,

Family influences by themselves cannot ensure one’s moral and
spiritual progress. Such progress is impossible without effort on one’s
part. If there is no progress despite such effort, we need not worry. It
is as true in the science of spiritual progress as it is in the science of
mechanics that no force ever fails to produce its result. If five maunds
of force push an object towards the north and an equal amount pushes
it towards the south, the object will remain stationary, but both the
forces will have done their full work and the stationary state of the
object will in fact amount to its motion. It is this truth which suggested
120

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the method of working without attachment. We should go on doing
our best.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8962. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

120. LETTER TO DAHIBEHN PATEL
March 13, 1932
CHI. DAHIBEHN,

I was very glad to get your letter. Has your brother completely
recovered? Write to me from time to time. Nobody who has dedicated
himself or herself to service has to go in search of work.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9205

121. LETTER TO MAHENDRA V. DESAI
March 13, 1932
CHI. MANU ,

Your description of Ajmer is good. But the handwriting is bad.
Try and make it better in your future letters. I will look forward to
descriptions of Jaipur and other places. Ask Dudhibehn to write to
me. What is your weight?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7422. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

122. LETTER TO MATHURI N. KHARE
March 13, 1932
CHI. MATHURI,

This time your handwriting was better than it generally is. If you
persist in your effort and try to improve it, you will be able to make
each letter in a word as beautiful as a pearl. Your speed in carding is
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

121

good for your age, provided the slivers which you make are very fine.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 263-a. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare

123. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
March 13, 1932
CHI. PREMA,

I have your letter. For some time I shall have to write with my
left hand and I shall not, therefore, be able to write very long letters.
The left hand cannot write as fast as the right hand can. True,
Mahadev’s help will be available, but dictating to him will be a new
practice so far as letters written from jail are concerned. I shall see
how far I can follow that practice. I shall have to observe whether I
feel at ease in dictating Ietters which are prompted purely by love. I
will certainly dictate letters of business.
I was not in the least pained by your letter.
All of us must grow or deteriorate in some measure every day.
Nothing remains unchanging.1
When I take the blame upon myself, I do not act out of false
humility and do not exaggerate. My taking the blame upon myself
does not mean that others are exonerated. But the leader must take the
discredit for failure as he does the credit for success.
I accept the need for inter-caste marriages up to a certain point.
If a husband has the right to divorce his wife, a wife should also
have the right to divorce her husband. But generally I am against the
practice of divorce. The bond of love ought to be indissoluble.
Boys and girls may be educated either separately or together. It
depends on the subject of study. They will have to study law together.
I cannot lay down in this matter one single rule which can be followed
in all countries and in all circumstances. The problem is not a simple
one. No one has been able to demonstrate decisive results in any
country in this field. The whole matter is in an experimental stage.
1
In her reply to Gandhiji’s letter dated February 25 (vide “Letter to Premabehn
Kantak”, 25-2-1932.), the addressee had stated that if Gandhiji had stopped growing
in stature whether in or out of jail, she would admire him less.

122

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Beauty should certainly be praised, but silent praise is better.
Moreover,
%1 Of one who is not filled with joy
by the beauty of the sky, it may be said that nothing will
please him. But those who dream, in the delirium of their joy, of
building a flight of steps to reach the constellations live in ignorance.
I liked the curriculum2 . I don’t think I can suggest just now any
changes or improvements in it.
As regards Japan and China, our sympathy is bound to be on
the side of the latter. But the real position seems to be as I have
described it in my letter to a child.
What you write about Jamnadas is true. He seems troubled in
mind but keeps his problem to himself. If Sushila 3 can understand
what troubles him, something can be done to help him.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10276. Also C.W. 6724. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

124. LETTER TO PUSHPA S. PATEL
March 13, 1932
CHI. PUSHPA,

I have written at length about speaking in some other letter and
you may read it. 4 God has given us the various abilities to control
them, and some to suppress them altogether. He has given us a mouth
not to go on speaking in season and out of season, but to speak for
doing God’s work. God has given us abilities for doing both good
and evil but we have to get rid of the evil impulses completely. Do
you understand now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3983. Also C.W. 29. Courtesy:
Pushpabehn N. Naik

1

Renounce and enjoy” (Ishopanishad, 1)
For the Ashram school
3
A friend of the addressee
4
Vide “A Letter”, 12-3-1932
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

123

125. LETTER TO VANAMALA N. PARIKH
March 13, 1932
CHI. VANAMALA,

If a girl’s letter does not contain anything which requires a
reply, she should not expect a letter by return of post. Your last letter
was of that kind. But since you have asked me to write to you every
week, I have written this letter. However, in future bear in mind what I
have said.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Is there any news about Narahari?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5768. Also C.W. 2991. Courtesy:
Vanamala Desai

126. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
March 14, 1932
DEAR BOYS AND GIRLS,

I got your letter. It is not right for a brahmachari to attend
to several things at a time. He takes up only one thing at a time and
concentrates all the energy of his body and mind on that thing. If,
therefore, you are occupied in manual work and there is no necessity
for you to talk about anything relating to it, the proper thing would be
to remain silent. However, if we are playing or have gone out for a
walk, talking is a part of the activity and so we can talk at that time.
Anybody who regulates his life strictly according to this principle,
can make it full of interest. And an institution where people work in
complete silence and speak only when necessary impresses us as a
very quiet place. Not only do I see no harm in the girls putting on
shorts and a shirt when doing exercises and also at other times, but I
actually like the thing. For the Ashram residents their goal in life has
already been fixed, and it is that they are dedicated to the quest for
truth.
To your question whether one should or should not aim to be
like a soldier, I shall give an answer after you tell me in your next
letter what all of you understand to be the meaning of the word
‘soldier’.
124

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

After travelling in many countries, I have found India to be the
most beautiful country. But since I am free, as I believe, from blind
partiality, I have always been able to see much good in every country
and so have found them all to be good and have appreciated the
special excellence of each of them. On the whole, however, I have felt
that India is not inferior to any other country, that one finds in it all
that one may want and that what one does not find in India is not
quite essential for our life.
If the Ashram has money to spare and if the things are not
likely to cost much, even at such a time as the present I would have no
objection to having swings and slides made for you. You should,
however, bear one thing in mind, namely, that the Ashram should
always be a poor people’s institution, and that just because the
Ashram has the necessary money we will not be justified in getting
anything we want. And even things which befit poor people may be
ordered only if the Ashram has the necessary funds. The question,
therefore, is only whether we can afford a thing and whether it is in
keeping with our aim.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8968. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

127. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
March 14, 1932
BA,

For some days past I had been thinking of writing to you; and I
read today that you were still out. And so I had a mind to write.
Mahadev also is with us now. Thus our company has become larger.
All three of us are quite well. Ramdas came and saw me. He was all
right. Write to me from time to time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

125

128. IMAM SAHEB - II1
March 14, 1932
As we know, Imam Saheb had set much store by patriotic
considerations in arranging the marriages of his two daughters. He
wanted to marry them to young men who would devote themselves to
the service of the country, would make no difference between Hindus
and Muslims and who would, by their manner of living, do honour to
the Ashram ideal of life. And so he selected two Gujarati Muslims
from families of average means.
My first meeting with Imam Saheb may be said to have taken
place in 1903 in South Africa after my return to that country. He used
to tell me that we had met once before that but I have no recollection
of that meeting. When I set up practice as a lawyer in Johannesburg,
he used to accompany clients to my office. He was an altogether
different man then in appearance and manners. He used to dress
himself in English style, and wore a Turkish cap. I immediately
recognized his intelligence, but otherwise he did not produce a good
impression on me at first. I thought him rather obstinate, but, as I
came to know him better, I liked him more and more.
I saw, as I had more and more experience of dealing with him,
that what I had thought to be obstinacy was only his eagerness to
understand fully the implications of every point. If he held an opinion
on any matter, he would not give it up till his reason was convinced of
his error. He would not take a lawyer’s word as gospel truth in legal
matters merely because he himself was not a lawyer, but would argue
against him even in such matters. Though he had had no education,
he had complete confidence in his judgement. Moreover, he had a
proud sense of self-respect. I, therefore, saw very soon that he had
sufficient strength of mind to cling to his own view without being
overawed by anybody.
In the beginning, Imam Saheb used to come to me on behalf of
clients and explain their cases to me. But he took interest in current
affairs and would draw me into discussion about them. He evinced
keen interest in discussing the hardships of our countrymen in South
1

This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”; vide the following

item.

126

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Africa and took part in the meetings, etc. On most issues he
supportedme, but he never hesitated to oppose me even in public
whenever he did not approve of my stand. Gradually, however, he was
drawn towards me and, when the satyagraha commenced, proved
himself as steadfast as a rock. Some fell and some weakened, and
some opposed me bitterly, but I don’t remember Imam Saheb to have
wavered at any time. When he was imprisoned for the first time,
nobody expected that he would remain strong till the end. On the
contrary, many persons told me, including some who held him in high
respect, that he would not go to jail again, that he had a delicate
constitution, was pleasure-loving and had many wants. This was on the
whole true. However, Imam Saheb never weakened, whereas I saw
many who were known to be simple in their habits withdrawing from
the struggle. Imam Saheb’s capacity for self-sacrifice was very great,
and, though he would think long before taking a decision, he showed
wonderful strength in clinging to a decision once taken.
When Imam Saheb plunged into the struggle, he had no thought
at all that he would have to break up his home and embrace a life of
complete renunciation. As soon, however, as he saw that if he wished
to remain staunch in the satyagraha movement he would have to give
up the attachment to his home, he did so almost in an instant. This was
no small sacrifice on his part.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

129. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Monday, March 14, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

Mahadev has joined me in the nick of time for my right hand
has just gone out of service. By this I do not meant that it is
continually paining, but I certainly mean that it would start doing so if
I went on writing with it or doing any other work. It may even happen
that I shall never be able now to do much work with it, for, I see that,
though I gave it complete rest during the return voyage from
England, it has not recovered sufficiently well so that I could resume
working with it. We need not feel sorry even if it becomes useless for
ever. Sooner or later all the bodily organs will have become weak. We
need not, therefore, feel concerned when we see them gradually
becoming so. It is no small grace of God that I have taken from
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

127

theright hand the service which I have done. And, after all, as our
[spiritual] dictionary1 tells us, it is He who takes work from us, and He
will do so as long as He wills and on His own condition. Our hands
and feet are His tools, and it will be enough if we knowingly do
nothing to impair their efficiency. We were foolish to the extent that
we misused them in the past. It is because we misuse our body that,
when what we call old age arrives, our limbs and organs begin to
decay. To one who has never misused his bodily organs, old age will
not be painful but, on the contrary, it will bring happiness. If trees
were thinking beings, we can easily see that they would feel no pain
when their fruits, fully ripe, fell to the ground. Rather, the knowledge
that these fruits would be used by human beings would make them
happy. Similarly, he whose life is good must feel confident that when
old age has worn out the strength of his body, his new condition will
serve some greater good. But, as things are, all this seems to us as mere
wise talk, for we see no instances in the world, or very few, of perfectly
happy old age. Similarly, we rarely see a person who welcomes his
death as a friend.
The health of all three of us may be described as good. It is true
that Mahadev has been suffering pain in the bone of one of his legs,
but rest and sun-bath will probably cure it. There is no cause for
worry.
You have given no news about Khushalbhai during the past
week. I infer from this that the cloud has dispersed for the time being.
The position about visitors is still not clear. It is not improbable
that the practice may have to be stopped. However, I believe
Jaisukhlal, Kashi, Lakshmi and Moti will have come and seen me in a
day or two.
Haridas Gandhi2 has been brought here. He is still in the
hospital. We get reports about his health from time to time, but none
of us has yet been able to see him. Ramdas came and saw me. Most
probably I shall be able to see the others too. I had expected a letter
from Mirabehn, but I have received none so far.
It was reported in the newspapers that Gangabehn Jhaveri has
been released. It seems somebody paid the fine on her behalf. Who
was that person? Do you get any news about Prabhavati?
1
2

128

Bhagavad Gita
A resident of Amreli who came to join the Ashram
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You should not mind the expenditure on behalf of Radha. I
hope Punjabhai has recovered now.
You may write to Holmes about the permission which those
gentlemen from New York have asked for. Or, it might be better to
send a cable. Since you cannot give a final reply to Holmes within
Rs. 25, you had better send a cable to the others as follows:
“Authorizing Rev. Holmes Community Church New York do
needful.” 1
Send a copy of the cable to Holmes and tell him that, if he
thinks fit, he may give them the permission they have asked for.
Lilavati told me that the preparation of almonds which she had
brought for me was made of a mixture of almonds and dates. If I can
know how it is made and in what proportion the ingredients are
mixed, we may be able to make it here. It does not seem proper that
you should send a parcel of the thing from there periodically, and
even if I don’t mind your doing so I must know the quantities of the
ingredients, for otherwise I can not judge how much of the
preparation I should eat daily.
I had read in the papers about Brijkishan2 .
Blessings from

B APU3
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8214. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

130. LETTER TO RUKMINI BAZAJ
March 14, 1932
CHI. RUKMINI,

I got your letter.
I would prefer ‘Madhavdas’ to ‘Madhavlal’. But these days a
good many people do not like the suffix ‘das’. Did Santok like
mysuggestion?4 You should also discuss the matter with Benarsi and
1

The source has these words in English.
Brijkrishna Chandiwala, who was arrested on February 22, 1932, and
sentenced to six months’ imprisonment and a fine
3
For the article “Imam Saheb-II” which followed, vide the preceding item.
4
Vide “Letter to Rukmini Bazaj”, 1-3-1932
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

129

then decide. Please do not think that the name selected by me should
be approved. Do not neglect to write to me after going to Kashi.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9061

131. LETTER TO SHANTILAL MEHTA
March 14, 1932
CHI. SHANTI,

I got your letter. I was happy. Why have you not mentioned
where you got married? I was glad that the marriage ceremony was
simple. Did you go for the ceremony alone or were you accompanied
by any elders? Manilal does not seem to have arrived last week, but
there was a letter from him in which he said that he would be
positively here in a fortnight or two. If you can settle down peacefully
in your town, I think it would be better for you to remain in India.
What would your wife like? Has she had some education? I should
know that too. Without that information I cannot rush forward with an
opinion.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXII

132. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
Monday, March 14 [1932] 1
DEAR SISTERS,

I am glad that you want a letter from me. I will make today’s
letter brief. It is not good that your Association has not been working.
Even though your number has become small, it would be good if you
can run the Association. Its usefulness may not be apparent now, andit
is also likely that there would be obstacles of various kinds in the
beginning. However, if you persist and carry it on, it is bound to prove
useful. To do so, you should find out collective activities, no
1

From the reference in the letter to Gandhiji’s writing to the addressees earlier
about “women in other countries”, vide “Letter to Ashram Women”, 25-1-1932

130

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

matterhow small, which will be known as the Association’s activities
and in running which everyone would acquire a sense of personal
responsibility. This does not at all mean that you are merely to add
one more activity to several others; it means that the Association
should take upon itself one or more of the activities being conducted
at present. Do not fall a victim to the false notion that women cannot
work as a team. I wrote to you earlier how much the women in other
countries are able to do. Even here we have some examples; if there
are none, we have to provide them.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

133. LETTER TO NEWLY MARRIED COUPLE
March 14, 1932
CHI.,

You two have shown a new path.1 Both of you have my
blessings. Sardar voluntarily adds his. We wish that you two should
devote yourselves to selfless service. That your request for blessings
comes on a printed card makes the request purely formal and to that
extent it loses its value. If blessings are worth soliciting, they are worth
soliciting in a self-written letter, which should also state some good
resolutions made by the couple to mark the auspicious event.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 15

134. LETTER TO CHILDREN
March 14, 1932
Even if the present stage [of the struggle] lasts a long time, our
energies must not flag, as flag they must in case we are unhappy about
it.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 15
1

The addressees had asked for blessings, not as usual on the occasion of their
wedding, but after the event had taken place.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

131

135. A LETTER
March 14, 1932
I further believe that marriages should be contracted out of
caste. Even though the choice is extended up to the Vaishya
community only, it will suffice. But no hindrance should be placed if
a worthy match is found only outside the Vaishya community and the
girl likes him.
[From Hindi]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 15

136. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
March 15, 1932
DEAR MAJOR MARTIN,

I revert to my letter 1 of the 1st instant. I was thankful for the
permission to see my son Ramdas Gandhi whilst the whole of my
request was under consideration. It is high time however that an early
decision was given. The matter has for me assumed extraordinary
urgency because a co-prisoner Haridas Gandhi is seriously ill and has
lost considerable weight. He has lived for a long time at the Ashram. I
believe that I exercise greater influence over him than his father and I
know that the very fact of my seeing him will put life into him. I
would like the Government to realize that young men like Haridas
who have come under my influence are no less to me than Ramdas
Gandhi. It is impossible for me therefore to be at ease whilst this
matter of seeing the fellow-prisoners is hanging fire, especially in view
of serious illness of Sjt. Haridas Gandhi. I request an answer by Friday
morning. 2
Yours sincerely,
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Departmentt, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(14)
1

Vide “Letter to R. V. Martin”, 1-3-1932
For Martin’s letter to the Home Department, Bombay Government, and the
latter’s communication to the Inspector-General of Prisons, vide “Correspondence
Between R. V. Martin and R. M. Maxwell (A) R. V. Martin’s Letter to R. M.
Maxwell”, 15-3-1932
2

132

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

137. FRAGMENT OF A LETTER
March 16, 1932
It is possible and necessary to treat human beings on terms of
equality, but this can never apply to their morals1 . One would be
affectionate and attentive to a rascal and to a saint; but one cannot and
must not put saintliness and rascality on the same footing.
The Diary of Mahadev Desai, Vol. I, p. 15

138. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
March 16, 1932
CHI. RAIHANA,

I got your card. In the letter which has been lost in transit, I had
asked you whether there was any rule regarding the use of ze, and se,
sin, hai, he.
For example, why should khaas be spelt with swad and why not
with se or sin. Why sin and not swad in salaam? Or why not se? In
spelling galat, why toi and not te? Then I had copied the following
ghazal:
Life in this world called beautiful garden is only for a short while; you will
enjoy the spectacle for a few days only. O traveller, prepare for the march;
residence on earth is short. When the great Hakim Lukman was asked, “How
long will you live?”—rubbing his hands in despair he replied: “Only a few
days.” After burial the angel of death said in the grave: ‘‘You will sleep here
only for a few days.”2

I trust you will consider this much enough for today, seeing that
writing with the left hand takes time. The Urdu handwriting is of
course very bad, but I am sure you will have no difficulty in
deciphering it. Mahadev has now been brought to stay with us here.
He remembers your [favourite] bhajan “Awake and arise, O
traveller!” Once it was even sung at prayer-time. Next time I shall
send it to you in Urdu script.
Are you quite well? Where is Pashabhai? Blessings to
Dahyabhai. Our vandemataram and many many salaams to Mother.
Tell Father that we saw in The Leader his photograph with the Aligarh
students. We had a hearty laugh at the sight of his face hidden away in
1
2

Mahadevbhaini Diary has ‘manner’.
Vide “Ashram Bhajanavali”

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

133

the beard. Write to me how Hamida and Rohini are faring. My
blessings to them all. Blessings to Sohaila also and kisses to the baby.
I hope this letter will reach you all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9638

139. LETTER TO M. G. BHANDARI
March 18, [1932] 1
DEAR MAJOR BHANDARI,

When I gave you the three names2 , I did not think of the female
ward at all. But there are many Ashram inmates in that ward. I would
therefore for the time being drop out Sjt. Chhaganlal Joshi and have
Shrimati Gangabehn Vaidya instead.
You rs sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 5129

140. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 18, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your packet yesterday, that is, on Thursday. Harjivan3 and
Sharda wish to come here and see me. They may do so now. The
present position is that those inmates of the Ashram who do not take
part in political activities can visit me. About others, correspondence is
going on. Only those who are regularly engaged in Congress work
can be described as taking part in political activities. According to this
criterion, only Mahadev, Devdas and Pyarelal can be described as
doing that. To some extent Valji also may be classed with them, but
none of the others. However, those who are carrying on picketing at
present must be described [as ‘political’]. Since the whole business is
left to my good faith, the final responsibility rests on me. Hence Bal
1
2
3

134

From The Diary of Mahadev Desai, “Draft of Letter to Frederick Lely”
Haridas Gandhi, Narsinhbhai Ishwarbhai Patel and Chhaganlal Joshi
Harjivan Kotak whose wife was Sharda
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and other boys and girls who are doing picketing should be excluded.
Any of the other inmates can come. Not more than five should come
at a time. As I have already explained in a previous letter, it is not
necessary that five persons, or even one, should come every week. But
anyone who wishes to come has my permission to do so, within the
limits explained above.
It will be necessary to send the names to the Superintendent in
advance, and no one else should be included later. It will be more
convenient to see me between 11 a.m. and I p.m. on any day, except
Sundays and other holidays. I think I have now explained the whole
matter sufficiently clearly. There is nothing more, except that, if those
who wish to come give their names to you in advance, please send
them to me so that I might be ready. . . .1
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—9: Shri Narandas Gandhine, Pt. I, pp. 322-3

141. LETTER TO NIRMALA H. DESAI
March 20, 1932
CHI. NIRMALA,

Even if we spin to meet our own requirements, the country gains
since it means so much addition to its wealth. And, moreover, we shall
have set an example of spending one’s time usefully and of
self-reliance.
Blessings from

B APU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9467. Also C.W. 8972. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

1

The letter is incomplete in the source.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

135

142. A LETTER
March 20, 1932
CHI.,

When manure is spread in the field, it becomes fine earth and
the gases which are generated in the process serve as food for the
trees. Similarly, so long as the saliva remains in the mouth and the
mouth is healthy, it helps to digest food. When, however, it is spat out,
it makes dirt. Mixing with dust, it breeds germs. The point is that in its
own place nothing is dirty, and the second point is that dirt is made by
man. We should know this and understand and observe the rules of
sanitation.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8975. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

143. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
March 20, 1932
CHI. SHARDA,

The stars and the constellations which we see in the heavens are
so many images of God.
Indian women’s dress has appealed to me as the best. Mahavir,
Buddha, Jesus, Mahomed and other teachers have sung praises of one
and the same God.
Most of the education for women should be the same as for
men. There may be some difference bearing on the special functions
and duties of women.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9907. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

136

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

144. A LETTER
March 20, 1932
CHI.,

It is true that in many places people take more freedom than
is proper. Such things always happen whenever there is popular
awakening. Self-control cannot be forced on anybody. We should be
strict in our own conduct and be liberal towards others. What we
regard as excessive freedom may, however, be moderation for those
concerned. One person may take milk as medicine and another may
consume it to pamper himself. Such things happen every day.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8979. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

145. LETTER TO GANGABEHN JHAVERI
March 20, 1932
CHI. GANGABEHN (JHAVERI),

Narandas must have explained to you the whole position
regarding your coming to see me. The Government’s order on the
subject means that those who have been taking active part in the
struggle cannot come. This does not apply to relations. I don’t regard
this issue as worth fighting for and, therefore, I think I should be
satisfied with the facility which they permit. You may write a letter and
say in it what you wish to, or send a message with somebody else who
may be coming. You cannot ask me anything concerning the
struggle. A prisoner has no right, and is not fit, to express any opinion
about anything concerning himself. How did you keep in jail? Narrate
your experience. Who do you think paid the fine?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3949. Also C.W. 70. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Jhaveri

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

137

146. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
March 20, 1932
CHI. MANGALA (DARLING),

When we get swaraj, we will certainly do a great many things.
You will see caves and many other things besides. But there are many
interesting things to see all around us, and we can see them even
today. If you know how to see these, then alone will you see other
things correctly. Have you learnt to look at the sky? I am learning to
do it in my old age.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4079. Also C.W. 43. Courtesy:
Mangalabehn B. Desai

147. LETTER TO MATHURI N. KHARE
March 20, 1932
CHI. MATHURI,

By spinning as a form of yajna we produce yarn for the poor.
Other people will follow our example and spin, and we become one
with the poor and in that way are purified.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 264. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare

148. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
March 20, 1932
CHI. PARASRAM,

Brushing the teeth with datan 1 should be supplemented by the
use of fingers. That is, rub the gums vigorously with the fingers while
gargling after you have brushed the teeth with datan and cleansed the
tongue with the twig. One suffering from pyorrhoea should brush
theteeth with datan twice daily, and I would not think it too much to
give half an hour each time. I have come across negroes brushing
their teeth at all times in the day. The benefit from the use of datan is
1

138

Same as datun; vide “Letter to Tulsi Maher”, 24-1-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

not merely that the teeth are brushed with it, but also that all the
poisonous matter in the gums is thrown out with the fluids discharged
from the mouth while crushing the datan, as we spit out the fluids
entirely. I myself use nothing else except common salt with the datan.
Of course, my brushing the teeth does not mean much, because I have
not a single tooth left in the upper jaw and even in the lower only a
few remain. Both the babul and the neem twigs are good for datan but
perhaps the neem is likely to be better for one suffering from
pyorrhoea as the bitterness of the neem is highly beneficial.
There is not the slightest need for the girls to use a fountain pen.
Really speaking, nobody in the Ashram should need a fountain pen.
Why should anybody be in such hurry? For students at any rate, it is
certainly a harmful thing to use. The reed-pen is the best for writing
Gujarati, Hindi, Urdu and other Indian scripts. We should teach the
children to use it properly.
During prayers at the Ashram, none should start reciting or
singing before the leader begins. And again, the rule is that when he
leads, only those can join in the recitation or singing who can do so in
tune. When the whole community sings harmoniously in one tune,
their singing never fails to produce an effect. Nor does silence fail.
Both are beneficial, each in its proper place. In offering oblations, etc.,
at a sacrifice, the incantations used to be chanted aloud in the belief
that thousands were witnessing the ceremony with reverence. Once
that became a custom, even when only five or ten persons are present
the incantations at a sacrifice continue to be chanted aloud.
The observance of one principal vow mostly includes that of
several minor ones.
Just as a neem tree comes out of another neem tree, so human
beings are born from human beings, and just as the general properties
of the neem are transmitted from one to another, so are those of
human beings. But because of several other factors which also operate,
the transmission of all characteristics is not, as it should not be,
maintained. Moreover, we observe certain peculiarities in man also
because of the difference that exists between man and other living
creatures.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7492. Also C.W. 4969. Courtesy:
Parasram Mehrotra

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

139

149. LETTER TO PUSHPA S. PATEL
March 20, 1932
CHI. PUSHPA,

Would a Sardar write letters? He would act as Sardar and ask
others to write on his behalf.
This time your handwriting was good. If you pay careful
attention, it is bound to improve. Was there any letter from Kamala?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3984. Also C.W. 30. Courtesy:
Pushpabehn N. Naik

150. LETTER TO VALJI G. DESAI
March 20, 1932
BHAI VALJI,

I got your letter. No argument of yours or mine will avail. How
can anybody argue against a law? One may, against a bill. If you do
without an introduction, the thing may be possible.
If children play cards during their recreation time, you cannot
forbid them. We cannot forbid even grown-up people if they play. We
may tell them that it would be better if they did not play. They should
not play for stakes. What is your argument against cards?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati C.W. 7423. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

140

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

151. IMAM SAHEB-III1
March 21, 1932
We should remember that Imam Saheb had set up his home in
English style. Haji Saheba had lived in that style from her very birth.
Fatima and Amina also were brought up like English children. For
one who had lived in this manner, it was extremely difficult to curtail
his heavy expenditure and adopt an utterly simple mode of life. For
Imam Saheb, however, once he had made up his mind to do a
particular thing, it was quite easy to carry out his resolve. And,
therefore, when I decided to leave Johannesburg and to settle in
Phoenix, he himself proposed that he, too, would live there. Though I
knew his firmness of mind, I was completely at a loss what to say in
reply to his proposal. I described to him the hardships of life in
Phoenix. A man who had never put his body to the slightest trouble
and had always lived surrounded by comforts and luxuries, I
wondered how such a person would be able to start forthwith living
like a labourer. Even if he himself could bear the hardships of life in
Phoenix, what about Haji Saheba, and Fatima and Amina, I asked.
Imam Saheb’s reply was brief. He said: “I have put my trust in God.
And you do not know Haji Saheba. She will always be ready to live
where I live, and as I live. If, therefore, you have no other difficulty in
the matter, I have decided to come and live in Phoenix. No one knows
when the struggle will end. I don’t think I shall be able to carry on
my old business of supplying coaches on hire, or take up any other
occupation. Like you, I too have realized that a satyagrahi should give
up love of wealth and possessions.” Imam Saheb’s proposal pleased
me very much. I wrote to my co-workers in Phoenix. They also
welcomed the proposal. And so Imam Saheb and his family came
over.
Many inmates of the Ashram probably do not know that Imam
Saheb joined the residents of Phoenix in all their activities. Everybody
fetched water for his or her own use from a spring below. It flowed at
some depth below the level of the Phoenix Settlement. The Phoenix
buildings were on a hill and one had to climb about fifty feet to reach
the place. Imam Saheb had a delicate constitution even atthat time, but
1

This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”; vide the following

item.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

141

every morning one saw him walking down to the spring with a kavad 1
on his shoulders and climbing up slowly with the buckets filled with
water. The place now occupied by the spinning-wheel in the Ashram
was held in Phoenix by the printing press. All the inmates, boys and
girls, old men and women, educated and uneducated, had to work in
some department of the press. There were all kinds of big or small
tasks, composing, folding the printed copies of the paper, making
wrappers, pasting stamps, moving the wheel with the hand whenever
the machine stopped, etc., etc. Everybody was required to give some
time and help in these tasks, especially on the day on which the
journal was to be published. Imam Saheb, Haji Saheba, Fatima and
Amina, all four of them joined in this work. Imam Saheb had learned
composing. For a man of his temper and habits and of his age, this
was indeed wonderful. In this way, Imam Saheb identified himself
completely with the life at Phoenix. He and the other members of his
family were non-vegetarian, but I don’t remember any time when
they cooked such food at Phoenix.
This, however, does not mean that Imam Saheb was in any way a
less devout Muslim. He never missed namaz, nor did he or his family
ever fail to observe the roza. By adopting the manner of life of the
other inmates and making a sacrifice for their sake, he really
demonstrated the nobility of Islamic culture.
Imam Saheb’s capacity for self-sacrifice was to be put to a still
severe test. He went to jail again several times, and proved himself a
model prisoner. When, however, in the year 1914 it was decided that
most of the inmates of the Ashram should return to India, leaving
only a few of them in Phoenix, Imam Saheb was put to a real test.
South Africa had practically become his home. Haji Saheba, Fatima
and Amina were complete strangers to India and did not know any
Indian language—a little English and Dutch was all the language that
they knew. But Imam Saheb took no time to come to a decision. He
had made up his mind that he and his family would live wherever I
did. That was his self-sacrifice for the cause of satyagraha and his
contribution towards Hindu-Muslim unity.
All the inmates of the Ashram know about his life after his
coming to India. I am convinced that he was rising higher day by
day: his heart was becoming purer, his devotion to God was
1

Two baskets or vessels suspended from the ends of a stick carried
horizontally over the shoulders

142

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

becomingdeeper and his faith in the Ashram rules also was increasing.
But it is not my intention here to give reminiscences of his life in
India. I should like everybody who came into close contact with Imam
Saheb to write down his experiences, and all such accounts to be put
together with these reminiscences.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

152. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 19/21, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

I wrote a letter1 to you yesterday and handed it over today for
posting. I hope you will get it in time. It contains detailed instructions
regarding visits and Champa. In this letter, therefore, I don’t say
anything about these matters. That letter also contains something
more.
I saw Haridas Gandhi, Chhaganlal and Narasinhbhai today. I
shall now be able to see three [prisoners] every fortnight, and in this
way I shall be able to know the conditions of the co-workers who are
lodged in this jail and help them whenever I can. Haridas is
considerably reduced, but his illness is more mental than physical. He
is being well looked after. You will learn more details from my letter
to Kamala. If she wants to come and see Haridas, she may do so. If
she comes on a day on which other inmates of the Ashram are visiting
me and her name is included in the five, she will be able to see both of
us.
Hemprabhadevi frequently writes to me directly, and I also reply
to her directly. That lady’s goodness, her courage and industry and
her intelligence fill me with wonder. Let me hear whenever you get
any news about Janakibehn and Jamnalal, though I believe
Madanmohan 2 also will write to me from time to time. I take it that
Chimanlal’s operation is over. Who performed it? Who is the vaid
treating Triveni and Dudhibehn? Take prompt measures and cure
your scabies. The application of the wet sheet pack is bound to cure it.
I don’t know what advice I should give you regarding the land in
Bidaj. Do what you think right in the circumstances. Raojibhai cannot
1
2

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 18-3-1932
Jamnalal Bajaj’s Secretary

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

143

see you. I didn’t see any letter from Ranchhodbhai. Your list too did
not contain his name.
March 21, 1932
Read my letter to Tilak[am]. If he falls ill repeatedly for want of
meat in his diet, and if he wishes to have it, we should inquire and find
a place where he can get it. If you don’t approve of this, let me know.
I did this [in the past] for two or three co-workers. It is not, therefore,
anything unusual which I am suggesting.
You should, if necessary, even free Hariyomal from active work
and force him to attend to the improvement of his health.
What do you intend to do about Daya, who is being called away
by her father? You must have read my letter to her.
Write to me in detail about your scabies.
Blessings from

BAPU1
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8215. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

153. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
March 21, 1932
DEAR BOYS AND GIRLS,

There is of course no sin if one has to go to answer calls of
nature during the hours for manual work, but it is certainly a bad
habit. A boy or girl who feels interested in such work should attend to
calls before joining it. Moreover, one who has a fixed time for such
calls would always go at that time. If the hours for manual work come
together, then a person would certainly have to go during that period.
For this reason, manual work is never prescribed for more than four
consecutive hours.
Spinning is primarily an education, for it arouses in us a sense
of the duty of service, we learn in it a very useful occupation and there
is beautiful art in it.
One never goes to join any work unless the wish is there. But
children who are not properly trained never feel the desire to do a
good thing. The best rule, therefore, is to join in good work whether
1

144

For the article “Imam Saheb-III” which followed, vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the desire is there or not. A child who does this regularly comes to
like the work in course of time, that is, he feels a desire to join it. If we
always follow only our desires, we would become self-indulgent.We
should try our best to save ourselves from that fate. You may say of
me that my favourite subjects were languages and geometry.
You can come when Narandas permits you to do so, but it would
be good if you control your desire to come. Remember that we are
poor, wish to remain so and aspire to vie with our starving
countrymen.
I will now narrate an incident.
I see here with my own eyes something I had formerly heard
about. We have here a cat which, when it wants to answer nature’s call,
goes to a place where it would not be observed by anybody. It finds
for the purpose a dusty spot and, after answering the call, scratches the
ground and covers up the faeces with earth. After doing that, the cat
sniffs at the spot and, if there is the slightest smell, it throws more earth
on the spot. On seeing this, I asked myself: ‘Do all of us cover up the
excreta as carefully as this cat does?’ We daily bow to Mother Earth
and ask her forgiveness for walking on her with our feet; but do we
cover up the ground after spitting, blowing our nose or passing urine,
etc.? Those who have not been observing this rule should start doing
so immediately.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8982. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

154. A LETTER
March 21, 1932
CHI.,

The real pleasure of being a prisoner lies in having no
visitor. . . .1
As one should not eat hastily, so also one should not write in a
hurry. The ideal is to avoid haste in all matters. If a person has to do
anything in haste, that means that he has been too slow before.
Non-attachment and haste cannot go with each other.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8969. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
1

Omission as in the source

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

145

155. LETTER TO JUGATRAM DAVE
March 21, 1932
BHAI,

We did expect a letter from you. All those who are born do not
reach maturity.1 Moreover, when an epidemic breaks out the
death-rate goes up. Hence I am not surprised by what you write. It is a
wonder and a matter of joy that the death-rate has not been higher.
And, in any case, why should we grieve over death? The death of one
who is fit to die may deserve to be welcomed. Moreover, is it not true
that people die only to be born again? Hence, there is no reason for
sorrow at all. One who has not learnt the art of going his way alone
may be upset by external events. But only they who are strong
enough to stand alone will realize the God of Truth.
From Gujarati: C.W. 8970. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi. Also Mahadevbhaini
Diary, Vol. I, p. 27

156. A LETTER
March 21, 1932
CHI.,

As grain is the body’s food, so worship is the soul’s. He who is
convinced about the existence of the soul cannot live without worship.
Prayer means the soul turning towards God.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8973. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

1

The addressee had complained about those who had dropped out of the
struggle.

146

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

157. LETTER TO BOYS AND GIRLS
March 21, 1932
CHI.,

Do you remember my definition of God? Instead of saying that
God is Truth, I say that Truth is God. I did not always think thus. I
realized this only four years ago. But without knowing it I always
acted as if it was so. I have always known God as Truth. There was a
time when I doubted the existence of God, but even at that time I did
not doubt the existence of Truth. This Truth is not a material quality
but is pure consciousness. That alone holds the universe together. It is
God because it rules the whole universe. If you follow this idea, it
contains the answer to all your other questions. If you have any
difficulty, however, put your question to me. For me this is almost a
matter of direct experience. I say “almost” because I have not seen
face to face God Who is Truth. I have had only a glimpse of Him. But
my faith is unshakable.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8974. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi. Also Mahadevbhaini
Diary, Vol. I, p. 27

158. LETTER TO PURATAN BUCH
March 21, 1932
CHI. PURATAN,

Wasn’t the operation completely successful? What is the
complaint now? I do not mind your question. My spiritual seeking,
whether or not original, has always been in the form of social service.
Such service is an essential part of the quest for truth.
Where do you live?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9164. Also C.W. 8971. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

147

159. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
March 21, 1932
CHI. KUSUM (SENIOR),

I got your letter. Pyarelal and Gulzarilal1 keep good health. If
you are permitted, go and see them2 and others as well. Can it be said
that you keep good health?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1831

160. LETTER TO VANAMALA N. PARIKH
March 21, 1932
CHI. VANAMALA,

I have explained about plays in my previous letter 3 . Did you
receive any letter from Narahari from Belgaum? If you did, what does
he write? Are all [the prisoners] kept together?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5769. Also C.W. 2992. Courtesy:
Vanamala M. Desai

161. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
March 21, 1932
CHI. PREMA,

Whenever I decide to write only with the left hand, my writing
work is automatically restricted. This is because the habit of writing
with the right hand has still not lost its force. The paper and other
articles which I have brought from England are to be used up. If that
1

Gulzarilal Nanda
In Dhulia Jail
3
There is no mention of ‘plays’ in the previous letter dated March 13; vide,
howevever, “Letter to Indu Parekh”, p. 232 and “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”,
24/29-3-1932.
2

148

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

is likely to confuse our minds [in regard to the vow of swadeshi], they
may be put away in a safe place. We will use them later. I have
forgotten the circumstances relating to the article with the locket.
Nothing has come with me which had no historical value. Just now,
therefore, everything should be kept in a safe place. Those articles
which you think can be utilized may be used.
Abhiman in the sense of firm determination is necessary in
regard to yajna, but abhiman in the sense of pride—that pride which
makes you think how strong you are and feel confident that you will
never miss your yajna—such Abhiman should be shunned.
I would have to answer your question about Meghji 1 only if I
claimed that I could not be bound by human attachments. We may try
to free ourselves from their bondage, but should not give up tenderness of heart or our desire to serve human beings. The thought of
what will happen after someone’s death springs from foolishness, not
from human attachment. Everyone is to die sooner or later. Knowing
this, why should we worry over death? Moreover, having surrendered
ourselves as puppets in the hands of the Master, how can we bargain
with Him? He may make us dance as He wills. After all, what matters is
that we should be able to dance. If a person can always dance, what
else can he ask for?
It is very good indeed that you are making progress in your
music. 2 If it is necessary to get your tonsils removed, do so.
The matter about visitors from outside the Ashram has not been
settled. I have included Sushila’s name [in the list of visitors]. In
asking me to discuss your defects, do you want me to praise you? I do
not at all wish to tell you your defects. Haven’t I pointed them out
more than once? Let me know how many of them you have
overcome; we shall talk about others afterwards.
Devotees of God and such other people can cultivate equalmindedness only in a certain measure. He in whom it becomes perfect
must be God. But, then, there is only one God. Hence, even the most
perfect human being will have equal-mindedness in an imperfect
measure. That is why we see differences in people’s beliefs and
conflicts among them. We need not be unhappy about this. The
1

One of the three children who died of smallpox. Their parents had taken
Gandhiji’s advice and refused to have the children vaccinated. On all the three
occasions Gandhiji was perturbed and could not sleep.
2
The addressee was taking lessons from N. M. Khare.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

149

worldis the effect of discord. Our duty lies in cultivating a greater
degree of equal-mindedness every day. If we try to do this, the
presence of discord in the world will cease to hurt us and become
bearable, may even seem beautiful.
We need not believe that everything in India is better than
elsewhere. Moreover, rise and fall is the law of the world. On the
whole, there is much good in India. That is why it became a
conquered country, and not a conquering country. At the basis of this
attitude is the belief that an oppressor is in a worse state than his slave.
What books on astronomy and which of the works of Upton
Sinclair do we have?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10277. Also C.W. 6725. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

162. LETTER TO MADALASA BAJAJ
March 21, 1932
CHI. MADALASA,

From my letter to Vatsala you will find replies to some of your
questions too. Since milk didn’t seem to agree with me here, I said so
in my letter. It is possible that one does not require milk when leading
a quiet life.
Cereals and other grains should not be eaten uncooked. Leafy
vegetables, carrots, etc., can be. If they are cooked, they lose part of
their nutrient value.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Panchaven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 312

150

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

163. LETTER TO BUDHABHAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

March 21, 1932
CHI. BUDHABHAI,

As long as you do not stop thinking about Parvati, you will
continue to suffer from involuntary discharges. Stop thinking of
yourself as Babu’s father and regard yourself as his trustee only.
Small children always live with their mother. Be content with what
Narandas can do about the matter. Do not think too much, either,
about what you eat, and do not be nervous if an involuntary discharge
occurs. If you thus cultivate detachment, everything will be all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33123

164. LETTER TO A GIRL1
March 21, 1932
Realizing the sense of brotherhood is the most important thing
in the observance of brahmacharya. We all are children of the same
Father, how can we at all marry? Food must be eaten only as medicine,
not for pleasure of the palate. Mind and body should be kept
occupied in service. Meditate over Satyanarayana 2 . Cut off your hair
regardless of people’s opinion if you feel it is your duty. Remain ever
absorbed in service as a form of devotion to God.
Keep up a constant struggle against the passions, holding them
to be our real enemy. This very struggle has been delineated in the
Mahabharata.
[From Hindi]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 27

1
2

The addressee was aspiring to observe brahmacharya.
God in the form of Truth

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

151

165. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
March 22, 1932
MY DEAR AGATHA,

You will recognize this hand1 . Mahadev came in just when my
right hand had begun to refuse to work for me, not that there is any
continuing pain but writing with it is difficult. I do a fair amount of
writing with the left hand and am using Mahadev’s hand whenever I
can.
You [talk]2 of Dr. Ramchandra Rao. I can’t identify him He is
not likely to be permitted to see me. We are now three and we are all
keeping quite well, and having a fair stock of books, newspapers and
spinning-wheels, we have enough to occupy our time.
With love,3
Yours sincerely,

BAPU4
From a photostat: G.N. 1452

166. LETTER TO DR. C. MUTHU
March 22, 1932
I was delighted to hear from you and to have a copy of the new
edition of that excellent book5 of yours. I am going to read it again.
Please don’t worry about my food. I have not yet had to resume milk.
I fancy that when one is leading a quiet and contemplative life, one
does not need the stimulation of milk and its vitamins. I am keeping
my weight and the required energy on a diet of bread, almond paste,
green vegetable and tomatoes, and lemon. I take also about 2 oz. of
honey daily mixed with hot water and a pinch of bicarbonate of soda.
The bowels act regularly. I am worrying you with these details as you
have always interested yourself in my health. I have not received a
copy of your address on “How to prolong the span of life in India”
and “Health and disease in relation to childhood.”6
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 5-4-1932
1

Mahadev Desai’s
A word here is illegible in the source.
3
These words are in Gandhiji’s hand.
4
ibid
5
The Antiquity of Hindu Medicine
6
This sentence is from The Hindu, 29-4-1932.
2

152

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

167. LETTER TO PADMA
March 22, 1932
CHI. PADMA,

I got your letter. I read the poem. I see that you have a gift for
poetry. But don’t be impatient. Your gifts will develop only if your
health improves. Do you get any medical help there? Did you go to
Bhowali? The very air of that place is as good as medicine. How is it
that you still don’t improve? I received only one letter from
Sarojinidevi and replied to her. I have decided to experiment on the
Magan spinning-wheel and asked them to send me one.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N 6130. Also C.W. 3482. Courtesy:
Prabhudas Gandhi

168. LETTER TO VITHALDAS JERAJANI
March 22, 1932
BHAI VITHALDAS,

Presuming that you have returned to Bombay now, I am writing
this to your address there. I got the dates you sent for the second time.
They contain numerous caterpillars and weevils, which perhaps may
have bred after the parcel reached here. In any case, however, you
should not send more dates until I ask for them. The dates supplied
here are not bad but, for some time, I wish to see if I cannot do
without dates altogether. It is not possible here to preserve in good
condition a large stock of any eatables. Moreover, friends outside
should not spend either time or money on those in jail unless
necessary. When I need [anything] I will certainly ask [for it]. I hope
your health is daily improving. Sardar and Mahadev are quite well.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI VITHALDAS JERAJANI
KHADI BHANDAR
KALBADEVI R OAD
BOMBAY
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9780
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

153

169. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
March 22, 1932
A devotee of the Gita never concerns himself with the question
whether he can see God while in this body, for it is his duty to do
work but he has no right to claim the fruit. If so, why should we think
about that to which we have no right? All the same, it is my view that
full realization of God is impossible while in this body. We may
almost reach the goal, but, because of the body, it seems impossible
that we can go through the doorway. We must, of course, feel
continually the misery of separation from God, otherwise we would
give up or relax our effort. Such misery, however, should leadnot to
despair but to hope, not to relaxation of effort but to even greater
effort. We have God’s assurance that however small the effort, it is
never wasted. In view of this, even the misery of separation should be
a cause of joy to us, for we must have faith that one day we shall
realize Him.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 30-1

170. LETTER TO A PENSIONER1
March 22, 1932
You should write to Dr. Muthu. My own knowledge, which,
though not scientific, but based on experience suggests that you
should fast for three days and break the fast with milk and orange
juice. If you try this, it will help you.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 30

1

154

The addressee had asked for a nature cure treatment for his asthma.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

171. LETTER TO M. R. JAYAKAR
March 23, 1932
DEAR MR. JAYAKAR,

Many thanks for Mr. Stokes’s book1 . Please tell Mr. Stokes that
I have set aside other reading in order to go through his book. I hope,
when I have finished it, to write to him directly.
I hope that fever has not been troubling you again and that you
have been otherwise too keeping well and fit.
As the right hand again causes trouble, I am using the left hand
for writing. I have now Mahadev’s assistance.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Jayakar’s Private Papers, Correspondence File No. 407-VI. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

172. LETTER TO TILAKAM
March 24, 1932
MY DEAR,

In working out plans for self-restraint, attention must not for a
single moment be withdrawn from the fact that we are all sparks of the
divine and, therefore, partake of its nature, and since there can be no
such thing as self-indulgence with the divine it must of necessity be
foreign to human nature. If we get a hard grasp of that elementary
fact, we should have no difficulty in attaining self-control, and that is
exactly what is implied in the verses we sing every evening. You will
recall that one of the verses says that the craving for self-indulgence
abates only when one sees God face to face.
Love.
From a copy: C.W. 8961. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi. Also Mahadevbhaini
Diary. Vol. l, pp. 14-5

1

Satyakama or “True Desires”

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

155

173. LETTER TO ABBAS
March 24, 1932
CHI. ABBAS,

Your question is very good. “Which does not cause pain to
anybody’’ 1 means that the speaker should sincerely have no intention
of causing pain. We can never know with certainty what the effect on
the other person will be. We may, therefore, only think how we would
feel if somebody said the same thing to us. The same rule applies
about “agreeable” and “beneficial”
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6307. Also C.W. 8988. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

174. LETTER TO JUGATRAM DAVE
March 24, 1932
BHAI,

You have filled up pages all right. Our gharry is not driven by
human beings. It is driven by God. It will certainly continue to run as
long as we, the passengers, have faith in Him. The moment we lose
faith, be sure that the train will stop.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8983. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi. Also Mahadevbhaini
Diary, Vol. 1, p. 34

175. LETTER TO INDU N. PAREKH
March 24, 1932
CHI.,

Yours is an interesting question.
The Mahabharata is a poem and not history. The poet’s aim in
it is to show that, if man adopts the path of violence, he will necessarily
have to resort to falsehood. Even a person like Krishna cannot escape
that necessity. But a wrong is a wrong no matter who does it. The
1

156

Anudvegakaram; Bhagavad Gita, XVII. 15
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

actions of keeping Shikhandi in front and hiding the sun were
certainly blameworthy. If I remember correctly, Vyasji also has
represented them in that light.
If the plays which represent such incidents show that they are
not worthy of imitation, there may be no harm in staging them.
However, the question you have asked is certainly worth pondering
over....1
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8985. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi. Also Mahadevbhaini
Diary, Vol. I, p. 34

176. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
March 24, 1932
CHI. KUSUM (SENIOR),

You have filled your letter entirely with explanations, but you
can do that only once. You can come whenever you wish to.
All three of us are in good health and keep cheerful.
Janakibehn is all right now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1832

177. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
March 24, 1932
CUNNING RAIHANA,

You are trying to delude me by praising my Urdu. By God’s
grace, however, I will not let myself be deluded in this way. My
handwriting is very bad, and so is my spelling. Before my Urdu
deserves such praise, Raihana will have grown into an old woman or I
would have to give more time to it [than I do]. I now copy the bhajan.
Imagine that Raihana is singing it.2
1
2

Omission as in the source
In the source, this paragraph and the song which follows are in Urdu.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

157

Arise, awake, O Traveller, it’s morning now.
Where is the night that you are still in bed?
He gains who stands awake,
And he who slumbers loses.
Open your eyes a little,
You careless one, turn your mind to God.
This is not the way to love,
That while He is awake, you slumber.
Know that you will have to eat the fruits of your doings,
O sinner, how can sin ever bring happiness?
You carry a burden of sin on your head,
Why, then, hold your head in grief and weep?
What you would tomorrow, to today,
And what you would today, do right now.
After the sparrows have ravaged your crops,
What will it avail you to beat your breast and weep?

I see that the handwriting continues to be bad, but I can’t write
better with the left hand. I will try and improve it slowly. Meanwhile,
endure it as it is. Please do not feel ashamed of such a dull pupil. If
you are patient, I may in course of time deserve your praise, which I
do not deserve now. If that does not happen, I will blame you. Isn’t
there a book which explains how to spell in Urdu? Please inquire. If
Hamid Ali and Sharifabehn are still there, convey to them my many
salaams and tell them that I have not forgotten the meeting with them
at Godhra and the help given by both at the Social Reform
Conference.
Tell Father that I got his postcard. However, it would not be
proper for a prisoner like me to write often to a big person like him. I
can write as many letters as I choose to girls like you. Father may
write to me as often as he wishes. There is certainly some justification
for such a rule. There might be no harm in a prisoner receiving letters,
but there may be in his writing. Hence a prisoner may write innocent
letters to children without objection. It should cause no surprise that
Father’s memory is getting weak. It should be enough for us if God
preserves long his strength to dance [with joy]. To Father and Mother,
many salaams and as many vandematarams from us all. Kisses to
Kamalmiyan1 . Blessings to Hamida, Rohini, and others. It is a very
good thing that Ba has now returned to them. Send me from your
1

158

Sohaila’s son
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

treasury some good bhajans of your choice. If you write in Urdu
script, it will serve as a lesson in Urdu for me. Ask Pashabhai to write.
Blessings to him from Sardar and me. Let Sardar remain for ever only
Vallabhkaka for you.
Long live Raihana! Khuda Hafiz.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9639

178. LETTER TO SOMABHAI PATEL
March 24, 1932
CHI. SOMABHAI,

Never mind if Narandas has made a prisoner of you. Improve
your health. Narrate your experiences to me. How did you spend the
time? Is there any news about Bhansali? How much weight did you
lose?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9220

179. LETTER TO VIDYA R. PATEL
March 24, 1932
CHI. VIDYA,

This time your handwriting seems to have deteriorated. You
should see that it is always good. Ordinarily it is not necessary to
make any difference between men’s and women’s work. There is a
difference in some respects, but it will come about naturally.
The correct name is “Mahadevbhai” and not “Madhavbhai”.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 9423. Courtesy: Ravindra R. Patel

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

159

180. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

March 24, 1932
CHI. SHANKERLAL,

After your letter nothing remains to be said. In fact I should not
even think about the happenings outside. But so long as I do not stop
reading the newspapers, it is impossible not to think about them or to
react to them. So I asked you to put my mind at ease. You should
have immediately sent to him the gist of the conversation. That is my
feeling in the light of my earlier experience. But now there is no need
to do it. This suggestion may be useful in future. Gulzarilal is
maintaining good health. It seems he has found, without seeking, the
kind of company he needs. Let me know if you have any more news
about Mridula. You two must be in good health.
My right hand needs rest.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 32743

181. LETTER TO HORACE G. ALEXANDER
March 25, 1932
MY DEAR HORACE,

You will have no difficulty in recognizing this handwriting.
Mahadev was just sent to me when I had again to fall back on the left
hand. I was glad to have your note. Agatha has been keeping me
informed to the extent that she can of your activities and the papers
that I am allowed to receive do also now and then mention something
of the activities of all the many friends who had interested themselves
in this struggle and Hoyland has been telling me of the silent prayers.
I know that they are all precious and not one prayer of the heart is
without an adequate response. What though one does not see tangible
results of all heartfelt prayers!
You are quite right in being happy for me to have this enforced
rest. If it had not come to me there would have been in all probability,
a breakdown. The time here does not hang heavy. There is the
160

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

spinning-wheel, and there are the silent companions—the books—and
I need some time for doing a little writing. And then I have Sardar
Vallabhbhai Patel with me who last time was not kept with me but just
a wall separated him from me. And now I have Mahadev.Yes, I wanted
that special message from Olive1 . I was sorry that I could not come in
closer touch with her during those precious days at Selly Oak, but I
have imagination enough to understand what her beautiful life must
be like. Our love to you and Olive and all the friends.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1412

182. LETTER TO ANANDI ASAR2
March 25, 1932
CHI.,

It was bad of you to have given a curt reply to the visitor. We
should always be courteous to any visitor, no matter how he is dressed,
and we must reply to a visitor’s question.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8984. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

183. LETTER TO MAHENDRA V. DESAI
March 25, 1932
CHI. MANU,

Your description is good, but how about your handwriting
which is very bad? How old are you now? Your handwriting must
improve.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7424. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

1

Addressee’s wife
Addressee’s name
24/29-3-1932.
2

is

inferred

from

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

“Letter

to

Narandas

Gandhi”,

161

184. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI M. PATEL
March 25, 1932
CHI. RAOJIBHAI,

I got your letter. This time we are really being tested. We should
not mind it. Write to me from time to time.
I suppose you know that Mahadev has been brought here. We
three are practically enjoying ourselves.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8994

185. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
March 26, 1932
CHI. MIRA,

No letter from you as you had promised. But I am not
surprised. Such correspondence was held up. But the bar is now lifted
at least so far as I am concerned and therefore presumably so far as
my correspondents are concerned. I therefore expect from you an
answer almost per return. Tell me how you and your companions are
doing, what you are eating and how you are passing the days.
Mahadev has now joined us and we have become a merry
company. He is the most industrious spinner among us. My weak
arms won’t let me try to outdo him. My milkless diet continues
without practically any change in the menu. I think I did tell you
about the addition of bread. As yet it seems to have done no harm.
My weight fluctuates between 105_ and 106_. This is not bad. The
others are also doing quite well.
Love from us all.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6216. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9682

162

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

186. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
March 26, 1932
CHI. MIRA,

Just as I was sending the enclosed 1 , I got your two precious
letters. I therefore suspended the despatch for writing this. You now
know why I could not write, but then we are prisoners. We may not
expect the regularity that independent people can create for
themselves. But there is nothing to grumble at in these delays which
must be regarded as inevitable. Henceforth, let us hope, things will
move on without interruption. But whenever the unexpected hitch of
any kind occurs, do not be anxious, but say, ‘We are prisoners’.
I am glad you have put on weight. For your height and breadth,
you can easily carry 132 lb. But the heat is bad. It is good to have
dropped salt. You might even drop milk and butter for two or three
days and you will feel cool.
I am glad you are growing fond of reading. Get someone to
procure for you full translation of Ramayana by Griffiths and the
translation of eleven principal Upanishads. This will be enough for the
present term.
For Hindi, you should procure Bala Ramayana. As you now
know the story, you will have no difficulty in following it in Hindi.
I had copy of Lord Irwin’s letter2 before too.
I too have no news of Rolland. But I do not worry. Such
interruptions are a legitimate part of the business.
I must stop for the day as I am anxious for this letter to leave
here today.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6217. Courtesy: Mirabehn, Also G.N. 9683

1

Vide the preceding item.
“I think Bapuwas referring to a letter Lord Irwin (now Lord Halifax) had
written to me.”—Mirabehn
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

163

187. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
March 26, 1932
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

What is your wish regarding the bamboo charkha? I need not
see the model. I should like to see models which would help us to
increase the output. If this model is strong and good otherwise, people
will use it because of its low cost. Do you think it necessary that it
should be used in the Ashram? I cannot judge about that from here.
Let me know what the condition of your nose is.
If Sharda does not have massage or take sun-bath, is it because
she dislikes them or is it through lethargy?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.G. 12

188 LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
March 26, 1932
CHI. DEVDAS,

I received today permission to write to fellow-prisoners, and
hence this letter. I think of you every day. Mahadev has been brought
here. All three of us are well. More after I hear from you in reply to
this. Give me news about your health, your reading and your
companions. I write to Lakshmi regularly and receive her letters
written in beautiful Hindi.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2022

189. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
March 26, 1932
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I received today permission to write to you and other
co-workers in prison.
Write to me immediately and give me detailed information
about your health and your diet. All of us feel a little worried about
164

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you. Who else are with you in prison? How is their health? How is
Dr. Sumant1 ? Sardar tells me that like me Diwan Master also has lost
his teeth. How is his general health? I don’t know who else are with
you. Gangabehn 2 has informed me that Pannalal3 is one of them.
My vandemataram to all co-workers. You must have heard that
Mahadev has joined us.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2896

190. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
March 26, 1932
CHI. MANI,

Today I received permission to write to fellow-prisoners. Hence
this letter. As I have got this permission, I take it that the recipients of
my letters will be allowed to reply to me. Reply to this letter at once. I
do not write today to other women prisoners, namely, Lilavati4 ,
Nandubehn 5 and Mridula6 . So let me have news of them too. Who else
are with you?
Mahadev has been brought here. We three are all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
S MT. M ANIBEHN P ATEL
P RISONER
P RISON, B ELGAUM

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 80

1
2
3
4
5
6

Sumant Mehta
Gangabehn Jhaveri
Pannalal Jhaveri, Gangabehn’s step-son
Wife of Harilal Desai
Nandubehn Kanuga
Mridula Sarabhai

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

165

191. LETTER TO NIRMALA H. DESAI
March 26, 1932
CHI. NIRMALA,

Your elder brother’s weight has increased and the leg has
improved so much that he can walk now. There is not the slightest
cause for worry. If brother and sister are of the same age, the sister
can ask the brother and learn things from him. It is a sister’s duty to
do what will be for the brother’s good, regardless of their age.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9468

192. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
March 27, 1932
CHI. SHARDA,

Call to mind the hymn “One step enough for me”. What do we
gain by thinking what we should do in changed circumstances? When
the time comes it will suggest itself. Normally we can say that most
things will still have to be learnt even in swaraj. I hope you know that
[after independence] those of you who are above sixteen will be free
then to do as they wish. People like me will only tender advice.
Now tell me, why don’t you have massage or sun-bath?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9908. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

166

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

193. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

March 27, 1932
CHI. SHANKERLAL,

I received your telegram1 this evening. How did such an
accident happen? Were you present at the time of the operation ? You
have been placed under a great load. But you believe in God. There is
assurance in the Gita that the load of a believer is borne by God. Have
faith in God and keep your mind free.
I shall expect your detailed letter.
Vallabhbhai and Mahadev also are terribly shocked.
How many children does he leave behind?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 32724

194. SOME REFLECTIONS ON EDUCATION2
March 28, 1932
John Ruskin was a great writer, teacher and religious thinker. He
died about 1880. 3 I suppose most inmates of the Ashram know that
one book 4 of his had a great effect on me and that it was this book
which inspired me to introduce an important change in my life
practically on the instant. He started in 1871 writing monthly letters
addressed to factory workers. I had read praise of these letters in some
article of Tolstoy, but I had not been able to secure them till now. I
had brought with me [from England] a book about Ruskin’s workand
his efforts in the field of constructive activities. I read it here. This
book also mentioned the letters referred to above. So I wrote to a
1

Giving news of the death of Dhirajlal Banker, addressee’s younger

brother
2
3
4

This was sent along with ‘‘Letter to Narandas Gandhi”,24/29-3-1932
He died in 1900.
Unto This Last

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

167

woman disciple of Ruskin in England, who was none else but the
author of that book. Being a poor woman, she could not send me the
volumes of these letters. Through foolishness or false courtesy, I had
not asked her to write to the Ashram for the money. This good
woman sent my letter to a friend of hers who was comparatively in
better circumstances. This friend was the editor of The spectator. I had
even met him while in England. He sent me the four volumes in which
these letters had been published. I have been reading the first part.
The thoughts expressed in these letters are beautiful and resemble
some of our own ideas, so much so that an outsider would think that
the ideas which I have set forth in my writings and which we try to put
into practice in the Ashram, I had stolen from these letters of Ruskin. I
hope readers will understand what is meant by ‘stolen’. If an idea or
ideal of life is borrowed from somebody but is presented as one’s
own conception, it is said to be stolen.
Ruskin has discussed many matters. Here I will mention only a
few of his ideas. He says that it is a sheer error to suppose, as is
generally done, that some education however little or however faulty is
better than no literary education at all. It is his view that we should
strive for real education alone. And then he says that every human
being requires three things and three virtues. Anyone who fails to
cultivate them does not know the secret of life. These six things
should therefore form the basis of education. Every child, whether
boy or girl, should learn the properties of pure air, clean water and
clean earth, and should also learn how to keep air, water and earth
pure or clean and know their benefits. Likewise, he has mentioned
gratitude, hope and charity as the three virtues. Anybody who does
not love truth and cannot recognize goodness or beauty lives in his
own selfconceit and remains ignorant of spiritual joy. Similarly, he
who has no hope, who has, in other words, no faith in divine justice,
will never be cheerful in heart. And he who is without love, that is,
lacks the spirit of ahimsa, who cannot look upon all living things as
his kith and kin, will never know the secret of living.
Ruskin has explained these ideas at great length in his wonderful
language. I hope I shall be able to write about them some time in a
language which all the inmates of the Ashram can understand. Today
I rest content with the brief precis given above. But I will say one
thing, that what Ruskin has explained in his finished and cultivated
prose with English readers in view, is practically thesame ideas which
168

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

we discuss in our rustic language and which we have been trying to
put into practice. I am comparing here not two languages, but two
writers. I cannot hope to equal Ruskin’s mastery of language. But a
time will certainly come when the love of our language will have
become universal and we shall have writers like Ruskin who will have
dedicated themselves heart and soul to it and will write as powerful
Gujarati as the English of Ruskin.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

195. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
March 28, 1932
MY DEAR AMTUL,

I was wondering why there was no letter from you. Narandas
kept me informed. Now I am glad I have your letter. It was very good
of Dr. Sharma to treat you without making any charge. You may send
such books of his as he may recommend. The question of deciding
the place for you is a little difficult. You must go to hill or to a
sea-side place. I think you can go to Porbandar or Sasavne. I cannot
think of another place just now. You must not lose your gain by any
false step. If any of your people are living in Mussoorie you need not
hesitate to go there. I agree with Narandas that you should not live at
the Ashram during these hot days.
Of course you can come and see me whenever you wish. Sardar
Vallabhbhai and Mahadev are with me.
As my right hand causes a little trouble if I write with it, I have
been using the left hand.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 238

196. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
March 28, 1932
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

I was distressed to read a note by the Director of Information,
Bombay, that the Bombay Government intended to sell out beyond
recall the lands of ‘recalcitrant’ farmers of Ras and such other
villages. I do not know that you can recall the remark made by Lord
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

169

Irwin last year, in the course of the conversations, that under a
recurrence of the circumstances which had actuated the Government
to sell out some holdings in Ras during the previous satyagraha
campaign, the experiment must not be repeated. I do not suggest that
this remark was anything more than the then personal wish of Lord
Irwin. But I cannot help feeling hurt that all such generous wishes of
an honourable and high functionary should be in danger of being
set aside or overlooked. And even apart from Lord Irwin’s obiter
statement, I would like the legacies of bitternesses to be left either by
Government officials or Congressmen to be reduced to a minimum, if
they cannot be avoided altogether. Surely all irrevocable acts which
parties might possibly deplore in future or for which posterity may
curse us should be avoided.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Home Department, Political, File No. 14/17,1932, p. 7. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

197. LETTER TO TILAKAM
March 28, 1932
Vanity is emptiness: Self-respect is substance. No one’s selfrespect is ever hurt except by self, vanity is always hurt from outside.
In the phrase ‘Seeing God face to face’, ‘face to face’ is not to
be taken literally. It is a matter of decided feeling. God is formless. He
can, therefore, only be seen by spiritual sight—vision.
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 52

198. A LETTER
March 28, 1932
BHAI,

In order to strengthen your mind, you should firmly adhere to
the resolutions for the day which you make every morning. After
some time, you can make resolutions for a week and so gradually for
your whole life. You should not let a single worthless thought arise in
your mind. This is the reason for the great importance of Ramanama.
It is a tamboora, and other good thoughts are like the other
170

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

instruments or like the music. The tune on the tamboora must go on
ceaselessly. For good health, freedom from worry is essential. In your
case, I am sure that your health will improve if your mental illness is
cured. But we should certainly employ remedies for the body too.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8987. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

199. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
March 28, 1932
CHI. MANGALA (DARLING),

Arithmetic is an intellectual subject and similarly the meanings of the Gita verses, history, geography, etc., also are such subjects.
Any subject to understand which we have to labour with our mind is
an intellectual subject. Memorizing the Gita is not an intellectual
subject. Spinning can be an intellectual subject. Anybody who, while
spinning, improves the method of spinning or finds out ways of
improving the construction of the spinning-wheel will have exercised
his intellect.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4080. Also C.W. 44. Courtesy:
Mangalabehn B. Desai

200. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
March 28, 1932
CHI. PREMA,

You may ask any questions you like. You will not probably get
such an opportunity again. You don’t know that I can, if I choose,
reply a question in just one line or may fill pages. If I cannot write a
long letter, I shall be content with a short reply. The reply, however,
will not be incomplete.1
To believe that your tongue had an effect on my right hand is
1

The addressee had then been receiving from Gandhiji letters written with his
left hand.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

171

like believing that, because the branch of a tree fell as soon as a crow
came and sat on it, it fell because of the crow’s weight.
I do get dreams, but the mind hardly ever takes note of them. I
attach no importance to dreams.
I think there are complete sets of Carlyle’s and Ruskin’s works
in our library. If we have them send me a list of the volumes.
How many copies of the consolidated list of books do we have?
If we have more than one copy send one to me.
I have never written to you about the grown up women. I feel
inclined to do so this time. They do not seem to come together for
any common purpose. That is, their Association has broken up. I have
written to Lakshmibehn and Durga on this matter, but I seem to have
produced no effect on them. The women should get the strength to
assume responsibility for joint work. If you have sufficient courage
and confidence in yourself, take up this task. If you do so, however,
you must resolve not to be defeated. We have, in fact, achieved
nothing if we are able to do something when all the circumstances are
favourable. A carpenter gives shape to any piece of wood and a
sculptor makes an image from any stone; we are, likewise, worth our
salt only if we know how to live with all types of people and get work
from them. I think this is the main thing we have to learn in this life.
For that, our heart should be as large as the sea. If we observe the
defects of a person the very moment we see him or her and are
deterred by them, our work would suffer. Everyone has defects. We
have them and so have others. If we are determined to mix with them
despite the defects, only then can we succeed in our work. I know
thatthis is a difficult task. I have been engaged in this one task all
these years and yet I cannot say that I have succeeded in it. I do seem,
though, to have succeeded in some measure. That is why I muster
courage or have the presumption to guide others.
You may now do what you think proper. You can, if you wish,
put this letter before the women.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10278. Also C.W. 6726. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

172

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

201. LETTER TO VIMALABEHN A. PATEL
March 28, 1932
CHI. VIMALA,

Narasinhbhai1 had prepared me for your letter and the books.
Perhaps you know that I was able to see him. He was in good health
and quite cheerful. He is now kept with other prisoners. I will find
time to read the books which you have sent. I hope your work is
going on very well.
Vandemataram to Mother from both of us, and blessings to
you.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3275

202. LETTER TO VANAMALA N. PARIKH
March 28, 1932
CHI. VANAMALA,

A girl of your age should have these things: a fine body, a
strong mind and occupations for both, which include all the processes
relating to spinning, cooking, various games, swimming, music,
knowledge of Gujarati, Hindi and Sanskrit, elements of arithmetic,
history, geography, some knowledge of the Gita and the ability to
recognize stars and trees and plants. If you lack any of these things,
that will be a deficiency. I forgot to mention the art of writing a good
hand.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
How is it that Mohan2 has fever? Has he been examined by a
doctor?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5770. Also C.W. 2993. Courtesy:
Vanamala M. Desai

1
2

Addressee’s father
Addressee’s brother

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

173

203. LETTER TO TARAMATI MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
March 28, 1932
CHI. TARAMATI,

There is no news at all from Mathuradas. Give me news of all of
you in detail. Do you know that Mahadev is with me? How do you
spend your time?
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI TARABEHN MATHURADAS
C/ O MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
57 M INT R OAD
BOMBAY
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

204. A LETTER
March 28, 1932
As the leaves of a tree always live together, so do men with
similar ideas and ways. Their attraction for one another is natural.The
number of one’s co-workers may be a million, but there can be only
one friend, and that is God. It is my view, and my experience, that
other friendships are an obstacle in the way of friendship with God.
I do not know, and do not believe, that Lord Krishna could go
from one place to another, without any physical means, through yogic
power or some other power. A real yogi shuns the exercise of any
supernatural power, for his yoga is exclusively for self-realization.
Would he exchange it for a mess of pottage?
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 53

174

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

205. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 24/29, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your packet yesterday. Gangabehn came and saw me. It is
necessary that we should think about Indu’s health. When he returned
from Bangalore, he weighed 100 lb., and he is 90 now. Discover the
cause. Know from him where and what he eats, what he used to eat in
Bangalore and what was his way of life there, and how, according to
him, he can keep better health in the Ashram. If anybody does not
keep good health in the Ashram, we should try and discover the cause
and, if he or she does not improve with such measures and changes as
we can try and as would be in keeping with the principles of the
Ashram, we should send the person to some other place, to Visapur or
Wardha, for instance. Think over this problem and, if you consider it
necessary, entrust the responsibility in this matter to one particular
person. You will not be able to look after every inmate of the Ashram.
You should be burdened only with the responsibility of giving the
final decision.
I take it that you got the letter 1 which I wrote last week and in
which I explained about visitors, and I do not dwell further on the
subject in this letter. I also wrote about Champa in that letter. There
were two or three other points too.
Indu has raised a very good question in his letter. Read my
reply2 to him. However, you, Panditji, Premabehn, Chimanlal, Valji
and others in the Ashram who think on such matters should ponder
over the problem. Indu had asked whether Krishna did not do wrong
in advising Arjuna to keep Shikhandi in front of him and kill
Bhishma and in employing his Sudarshan wheel to hide the sun
behind clouds, so that Jayadrath might be killed, and had raised the
question whether plays which treated of such incidents should be
performed in the Ashram. I was very much pleased by his question. If
the general tendency of the drama is to show such actions as morally
1
2

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 18-3-1922
Vide “Letter to Indu N. Parekh”, 24-3-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

175

wrong, I would have no objection to its being performed. All the
same, I do have some doubt about the propriety of such dramas being
performed in the Ashram. I don’t think we do any good by
repeatedly presenting to children unworthy actions of great men, even
though we represent the actions as unworthy, unless it is absolutely
necessary to tell them about such actions. They will probably forget
the unworthiness of the action and leave with the impression that we,
too, could do what great men did. It does not, therefore, seem proper
to me to select such incidents and present them in dramatic
performances before children. I think that the dramas which we
perform in the Ashram should be of a different type. For instance,
Rabindranath’s Muktadhara. Maithilisharan Gupta’s Anagh, which I
recently read here, is also a good play and could be performed before
the children there. Its Hindi is simple and sweet and the moral is
excellent.
I go and inquire after Haridas from time to time.
Do you get news about Krishnadas1 from any source? If you do
not, write to Mahavir Prasad and ask him if he has any.
Amtulbehn may certainly come and see me. Your scabies and
Kanu’s ought to be cured now.
About the Vidyapith library, so far as we can judge from
this distance, all of us feel that we should not introduce the kindof
dyarchy which has been suggested. It would mean control by two
authorities. Either they should hand over full control to us or should
themselves exercise it properly as long as they retain it with them.
However, do only what seems best to you. I shall not be able to see the
women prisoners lodged in this jail, but I shall be permitted to write to
them and receive letters from them.
Anandi had referred to Prema in her letter. Read my reply 2 to
her. The matter requires further thought, however. In teaching the
children in the Ashram to be fearless and to stand erect, we have,
unknowingly, taught them rudeness. Even grown-ups are not free
from such rudeness and, sometimes, their rudeness assumes a painful
1
2

176

Krishnadas Simharai, one time secretary to Gandhiji
Vide “Letter to Anandi Asar”, 25-3-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

form. It seems that a guest had arrived in the Ashram and the boys did
not answer his inquiries properly. One directed him this way and
another that way, and none would even reply to his questions. And of
course none took the trouble to accompany him to the office. I
understand from Anandi’s letter that she was somewhere near about
but she felt unhappy afterwards and wrote to me about the incident, it
seems, to confess her error and atone for it. She has asked me about
the duty of the inmates of the Ashram in such circumstances. There is
no doubt about what it is, but since the question has been raised you
should draw everybody’s attention to it. Explain what I have written to
Anandi, filling in the necessary details. In my letter I could write only
a sentence or two explaining the general principle.
Vanamala tells me in her letter that Mohan’s body temperature
always remains 99°. Inquire about this. If necessary, consult a doctor.
Why should a child of his age continually show 99° temperature? Or,
maybe, just because he is a child, on taking his temperature with a
thermometer or examining his pulse, we may feel that he is having
fever but in fact there may be no fever. The heart-beat of a very active
child who is playing about the whole day is bound to be faster, and,
therefore, he is bound to have more heat in him and the thermometer
or the examination of his pulse may show a little fever. In such a case,
the real test is provided by the child’s stool, the appearance of his
tongue, his digestion and his weight. A child’s weight must show
increase every weak. His tongue should be clean and moist, he should
be passing stool without effort and it must be well formed and without
foul smell. If all these signs are there, we need not pay any attention to
what the pulse or the thermometer may tell us. Every mother in the
Ashram, and Jethalal too, should learn these things.
There was a letter from Amtul to which, as desired by her, I have
replied at her Delhi address. Tell her this if she has arrived there. She
may certainly come and see me. I agree with you that it would be
better for her not to live at Sabarmati in summer. It would be very
good if you can arrange for her to stay in Porbandar, Chorwad or
Sasavne. If she has relations in Mussoorie, she may go there. It would
also do her good if she can stay with Padma in Almora. I have given
this advice in my letter to her also. Do help to accommodate her, if
you can, as I have suggested.
On taking your letter in my hand, I read Pyare Ali’s name in it.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

177

At the place where he lives the air may be cool, and so Amtul will
perhaps feel happy there and may also be able to help Pyare Ali.
Sultana1 and other children are there, too. However, treat all this as no
more than suggestions. Do what you think proper.
I and Gangabehn have started writing to each other. She informs
me that all the women prisoners are keeping well.
I got the leather sent by you for repairing sandal soles.
My experiment of milkless diet is continuing. It has proceeded
all right so far. I deduce from this fact that for a person leading a
quiet life milk is perhaps not necessary. From the point of view of
spiritual well-being, it may even be harmful. As yet, this is only an
inference. I can be positive only if the experiment continues
successfully for a long time. In my own case this is certainly true, that
before I was attacked by dysentery in 1918 I could do without milk
no matter how hard I was working. However, these speculations serve
no purpose just now. All that is necessary is that I should let you know
about the effects of the experiment from week to week. For the
present, let nobody even think of following my example.
Blessings from

BAPU2
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8216. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

1

Amina Qureshi’s daughter
For the article “Some Reflections on Education” which followed, vide
“Some Reflections on Education”, 28-3-1932
2

178

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

206. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
March 29, 1932
DEAR BOYS AND GIRLS,

As there was no letter from you this week, there was no need for
me to write to you. But this time I ignore the omission. Knowledge
should be given only to a jijnasu. A jijnasu means a person who
hungers for knowledge. As a child fed by its mother even when it is
not hungry will fall ill, so also, if you are not hungry for knowledge
you will not be able to digest knowledge which is forced on you, that
is, you will derive no benefit from it. Hence, not only should I get a
letter from you every week, but the letter should also be an interesting
one. “Interesting” means sweet, one which gave you pleasure in
writing and will give me pleasure in reading. If you are interested in
lejim exercises, you may write an interesting letter on that subject but
it may not be interesting to me because I may know nothing about
these exercises and have no means here of knowing anything. If you
write such a letter, what can I write in reply? Do you understand now
the two conditions your letters must fulfil so that they may be
interesting? I, too, must fulfil those conditions in my letters. That is
why I once wrote to Sharda that, if you could take no interest in my
letters about the Gita, the fault must be mine. So be it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8989. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

207. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
March 29, 1932
CHI. KAKA,

I am now permitted to write to all of you, and so I am writing
this. Let me know how you keep. I have heard that Narahari and
Prabhudas are with you. Write to me and tell me about their health
too. Since I have asked you to do this, I am not writing separately
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

179

tothem. What have you been reading or studying?
All three of us are well. . . .1 1
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Since I am permitted to write to you, I am sure you will be
permitted to reply to me.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9485. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

208. LETTER TO M. G. BHANDARI
March 30, 1932
DEAR MAJOR BHANDARI,

With reference to my letter 2 of the 6th instant, I have the
definition of the expression ‘Non-Political’ which I observe
corresponds to mine, but I have yet to have the reply with reference to
the five illustrative names submitted of non-Ashram friends who are
likely to want to visit me or who I am likely to want to see. I shall be
obliged if the reply can now be given. I am waiting for that reply to
prepare the list desired by the Government.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No. 9

209. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
Y. M.,

March 31, 1932
MY DEAR ANAND,

It was indeed good news that Father stayed with you. That must
be enough. It is unreasonable to expect coincidence of views. Mutual
respect and toleration is the only thing one may expect and for one’s
own part cultivate.
Vidya must write regularly. You have said nothing about her. I
hope you are getting more and more composed in mind.
1
2

180

A line and a half were censored by the jail authorities.
Vide “Letter to M. G. Bhandar”, 6-3-1932.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Love to you both.
BAPU
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

210. LETTER TO DAHIBEHN PATEL
March 31, 1932
CHI. DAHIBEHN,

I got your letter. The harder the task, the fewer willing workers
will there be. I was, therefore, not surprised by your letter. But
understanding workers, when they observe the paucity of volunteers,
will become more devoted to their work and make greater sacrifices.
If they do so, the number of workers will increase again. There is no
exception to this law.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9206

211. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
March 31, 1932
CHI. KUSUM (SENIOR),

Since you have taken a pledge that you will write, you should do
so regularly. That you have completed twenty-four years means
nothing at all. You have a long span of life before you yet and should
fulfil during it the hopes which I may have built on you. Do go and
visit Pyarelal. Personally I think I am keeping very good health this
time. That I have been able to maintain my weight without milk and
do not require enemas is enough for me. I don’t mind very much if I
cannot write with the right hand. I shall get used to writing with the
left hand. All three of us are doing well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1833

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

181

212. LETTER TO MOHAN N. PARIKH
March 31, 1932
CHI. MOHAN,

The letters you make vary in size. Improve your hand. It is a
good thing that you rise early. Do you know the tables? If you do
not, learn them.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9176

213. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
March 31, 1932
As I had no news from you at all, at last I wrote to Taramati.
Then unexpectedly I got your letter yesterday and felt happy. I do
not worry about your loss of weight. Your health should remain good
in other respects. From the point of view of climate, Nasik is excellent.
Write to me regularly from wherever you may be. If writing to me
comes in the way of your writing to others, ask one of those to whom
you must write to convey your message to me. The understanding
between the authorities here and me is that I can write to any of my
fellow-prisoners. This should mean that, if the prisoner chooses to
reply to me, his letter should not count among the number he is
entitled to write.
. . . 1 A prisoner ought not to even think of the outside world.
Karmayoga for him would mean doing the duty which now has
become his in jail.
In the verse cq_kS 'kj.kefUoPN2 ; “seek refuge in the attitude
of detachment”, etc., the word buddhi certainly does not mean the
samkhya, or the path of knowledge. Here it has the meaning which it
bears in the phrase yogabuddhi, about which the Lord had promised
to explain in the verse , "kk rs·fHkfgrk lka[;s cqf_;ksxsfRoeka
J`.kqA 3 “Thus have I set before thee the attitude of Knowledge; hear
now the attitude of Action”, etc. That is to say, if any comparison is to
1
2
3

182

Omission as in the source
Bhagavad Gita, II. 49
Ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

be made at all, it is between karmayoga and bhaktiyoga. But instead
of making a comparison between jnanayoga, karmayoga and
bhaktiyoga, the Gita aims at a synthesis of the three. To practise any
one of them perfectly, one must also practise the other two. That is,
the three are inseparable. There is some indication of the superiority
of karmayoga from among the three, but only because there is less
risk in it of being deceived. usgkfHkØeuk'kks·fLr izR;ok;ks u fo|rs1 “ Here
no effort undertaken is lost, no disaster befalls”, etc. I believe that we
must first grasp the general purport of the book we are trying to
study. In other words, our thinking about it should be independent.
As for rebirth, there is no room for doubt at all. Our body
changes a little every day, so that in seven years the whole gets
changed altogether. It seems to be the same because the form remains
the same. If the body can be transformed every seven years, there is
no reason whatever to think that what we know as death means
complete annihilation. The atman is different from the body and it is
certainly not destroyed when the body is destroyed. Then, all that
takes place at death is a change of state. If a change of state is
possible, why not a change of the body? However, we can have a full
discussion of this subject only when we meet. Meanwhile, I certainly
wish that you should be able to get rid of your doubts about certain
conclusions. For this purpose, you may put me any questions that you
wish.
I don’t think that I can write a smriti. What I write or say has not
been thought out in conformity with a system. I have only enough
strength to enable me to meet every situation as it arises in the course
of my quest for truth. That is to say, I am no Shastri, and only a
person learned enough to write a Shastra can compose a smriti. This
suggestion was first made to me by Kishorelal. I would certainly write
such a treatise if I could. I would be fortunate, however, if I can use
rightly whatever powers God has given me.
We three are quite well. The third is Mahadev.
[PS.]
I see nothing wrong in your trying without concern for the
result to come to see me. I would be very happy if you succeed.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, pp. 105-7
1

Ibid

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

183

214. LETTER TO VANAMALA N. PARIKH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

March 31, 193[2] 1
CHI. VANAMALA,

I hope you have completely recovered from your illness. The
best subject of study for girls is how to live a pure life. As for other
subjects, each may learn the subject in which she has interest. Persons
of the same age are not necessarily similar in nature.
The leaves of all plants do not show as if they felt shy in our
presence. I do not know why some of them do. If any of the girls
among you has an aptitude for research, let her discover the reason.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5761. Also C.W. 2984. Courtesy:
Vanamala M. Desai

215. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
[About March 1932] 2
PARASRAM,

Questions were being left unanswered. The thing which is seen
settling down in urine is the natural salt. Everyone has some of it more
or less. It is good if a new entrant is medically examined. The
question remains whether we can cope with it or no. Neem stick, like
babul stick, gives good service.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 7480; also C. W. 4955. Courtesy:
Parasram Mehrotra

1
The source has ‘‘1931”, but Gandhiji was not in jail in March 1931. Vide
also “Letter to Vimlabehn A. Patel”, 28-3-1932.
2
From the contents; vide “Letter to Parasram Mehrotra”, 20-3-1932

184

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

216. LETTER TO NARAYAN M. KHARE
April 1, 1932
CHI. PANDITJI,

Sardar is in excellent health, though he has lost some weight.
True, he had made a few changes in his food, but now he has
practically returned to his normal diet. From the authorities there was
no objection at all to his doing so. In the matter of food, the only
restriction is what we lay down for ourselves.
The golden rule to follow in interpreting the Shastras is this: The
various interpretations offered by the commentators may all be
correct from their respective standpoints. The seeker should faithfully
adhere to the meaning that appeals to his heart and act accordingly. It
is for the Shastri to harmonize the different interpretations or to
construct a system, and so on. For the person wishing to construct a
way of life for himself, there is only one harmony to be achieved—
between the meaning accepted by him and his daily life.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 224. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare

217. LETTER TO DUDHIBEHN V. DESAI
April 2, 1932
CHI. DUDHIBEHN,

There is no particular trouble in my hand. I am not using the right
hand for writing merely as a measure of precaution. You must not let
your weight increase. Fast for a few days or live only on fruit. All this
weight is superfluous. It may help you even if you live for some time
on buttermilk.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7425. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

185

218. LETTER TO NIRMALA H. DESAI
April 2, 1932
CHI. NIRMALA,

All of you seem to believe that swaraj means my rule. It will not
be swaraj then. In swaraj, people who are known for their wisdom will
rule. What they decide will be done. Let us hope voters will count for
less than they do today.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Mahadev is quite well. The pain in his leg is much less. He eats
the same things and of the same quality as at home, namely, rotli, dal,
rice, vegetables, etc. There is not the slightest cause for worry.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9469

219. LETTER TO PURATAN BUCH
CHI. PURATAN,

April 2, 1932
Since in any case you are obliged to take rest for some time,
can you not go to either Almora, Deolali, Matheran or Belgaum, or to
a place on the sea-coast like Chorwad, Mangarol, Dumas, Ghogha,
etc.?
I used to pray [as a child] because the elders in the family did.
After earnest introspection in 1893 in South Africa, I became a
conscious believer.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9165

186

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

220. LETTER TO VIDYA HINGORANI
Y. M.,

April 2, 1932
CHI. VIDYA,

I had been awaiting your letter. I am glad to know that you are
doing well. Do not let anything perturb your mind.
I am well and my diet consists of roti, almonds, dates, lemon and
some vegetable. My weight remains unchanged.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

221. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
April 3, 1932
CHI. MANGALA (DARLING),

You should know personally the men and women among whom
you live. You should know the names and properties of all the trees
and varieties of grass which you grow there. You should know where
the Chandrabhaga1 has its source. You should also know the names of
the insects, birds and other animals which you see there, and give
names to such of them as have no names. You should know the good
and the bad points of the soil there, and also the history of the
buildings in the neighbourhood. Is not this enough? How much of all
this do you know?
Our capacity for observation can be increased by forming the
habit of carefully examining things.
I learn to study the firmament with the help of a book.
If it is getting late, you may write less, but write it carefully and
slowly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4081. Also C.W. 45. Courtesy:
Mangalabehn B. Desai
1

A rivulet near the Ashram, now dried up

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

187

222. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 3, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

Generally I get your letters on Wednesday immediately on
arrival. This time, too, I have received a beautiful question from Indu:
“Can we practise sword and dagger exercises in the Ashram?” 1 I
don’t know or remember when swords and daggers were introduced
in the Ashram. Nor do I remember whether, if they were introduced
when I was there, I had been consulted. Whether or not I was, I now
think that these things have no place in the Ashram. All of you should
sit together and think over this matter and, if you feel that their
introduction cannot be defended in any way, get rid of them
immediately. It seems to me that keeping lathis is the utmost limit to
which we can go. However, you and other responsible inmates of the
Ashram should think independently over this matter and discuss it
among yourselves. If there are any other issues besides this, small or
big, you should think over them too.
The other problem is about illness. Anybody who falls ill, as
Indu did, as soon as he or she comes to live in the Ashram, should be
sent away to some other place. For instance, Jamna2 has returned there
after gaining 12 lb. of weight. If she were to lose it all now, I would
certainly feel very unhappy. If a person keeps better health at some
other place than he does in the Ashram, it would be good both for
him and for the Ashram to send him to stay at that place. We should
try and discover the deficiencies of the Ashram because of which
some persons do not keep good health there. The water there is of
course one cause, but there may be other factors too. These are air
and food. We should find out if we are polluting the air in any way.
For this, we should examine whether the arrangements for the disposal
of night soil and the excreta of cattle are satisfactory. If Anandi is
always ill, she should be sent somewhere. Sharda told me that if I did
not object, Velanbehn would send Anandi to live with her at
Matheran. Really speaking, my permission is not required at all. It is
for you to decide whether or not she should be permitted to go.
Personally, I see no objection to the suggestion. At present, her
expenses even in Deolali are borne by us. If, therefore, Anandi can be
1
2

188

For his previous question, vide “Letter to Indu N. Parekh”, 24-3-1932
Presumably, the addressee’s wife who had gone to Bombay for health reasons
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

sent to live with Sharda, that should certainly be done. This solves the
problem about only one of them. I have asked you to think about the
problem of all who keep bad health in the Ashram.
Tell Valji that I have carefully preserved the translation of
Vratavichar1 and that, if possible, I will even return it. I feel now that I
shall be able to do so.
I understand what you say about Champa. Please remember that
it is your responsibility to look after her.
You must have inferred from what I wrote above about Anandi that
Harjivan 2 and Sharda 3 came and saw me. If you canascertain how
Lakshmi, Lilavati and others are doing, please write to me about them.
I got the leather for repairing the soles and the books. The
difficulty which the officials feel in permitting me to see the women
prisoners lodged here is that they would have to be brought to the
men’s jail. And I cannot certainly be taken to the women’s jail. Since
this difficulty appeared genuine to me, I did not insist. It was agreed,
therefore, that we should be permitted to correspond. I have already
started writing. Gangabehn informs me that all are well in the Ashram.
Continue the treatment till your scabies disappears completely.
It will benefit you in other ways too.
Is the Ashram bulletin being issued? If it is, is a copy sent to me
every time? I have not seen any along with your letters for some
weeks past.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I got today Prabhavati’s letter. She is in the Lucknow Central
Jail. Kanta also is there. She has been promoted to ‘A’ class.
Prabhavati has been demoted to ‘B’. According to me Prabhavati has
been promoted and Kanta demoted. Prabhavati seems to be keeping
good health. She tells me that Jayaprakash is in Bombay. For this
week, Mahadev has sketched a fine word-picture4 which I send with
this letter.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8217. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

1

Vide footnote 1, “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 27-1-1932
The Kotaks, khadi workers
3
ibid
4
An account of Duchess Elizabeth under the title “A Saintly Woman of Russia”
from Sir Samuel Hoare’s Fourth Seal, published in Ashram Jivan
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

189

223. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
April 3, 1932
CHI. PREMA,

I got your letter.
Indu has put me some fine questions. Why should we do in the
Ashram exercises with swords, jamaiya1 , etc.? I have discussed this
question in my letter 2 to Narandas. Hence I do not say anything about it here. I have mentioned the question only to ask you
whether it has also occurred to you, since you have been yourself
learning these exercises.
I would not give to the Ashram the certificate which you do. I
would certainly be happy if it really deserved such a certificate. You
may have formed the impression that any person in the Ashram who
takes up some work becomes wholly absorbed in it, but your
impression is not correct. Are we able to observe the Ashram vows
faithfully? It had been decided to teach Hindi, Urdu, Tamil, Telugu
and Sanskrit in the Ashram, but we made only a half-hearted effort.
Have we acquired proficiency in tanning? Do we spin fine yarn of the
highest count? I can point to many such deficiencies, but what I have
said is enough to justify my questioning [your certificate].
Everyone can pay single-minded attention to lathi exercises. But
we can say likewise that everyone runs after sweets. There are indeed
many things in the world the pursuit of which requires no strenuous
effort. Since we are also animals in our nature, this quality [of
pursuing a thing with single-minded attention] is instinctive in us. It
does not have to be cultivated. The question is whether or not [in a
particular case] it deserves to be cultivated. Every property of animal
nature need not of course be regarded as something to be shunned.
How many persons take meals in the common kitchen these
days? Do you still make bread in the Ashram? If yes, who is in charge
of the work? If you make good bread, send a loaf or two with any
person who may come to see me.
If anyone from the Ashram meets Lakshmi, he or she should tell
her that I do not remember not having replied to any letter from her.
1
2

190

Dagger
Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

She should, therefore, write to me.
Dikshit’s Jyotishshastra1 has been translated into Gujarati. I
have got a copy of the translation with me. Ball’s work will be
available to me here, and so I don’t want you to send a copy from
there. The books sent by Upton Sinclair belong to the Ashram. Enter
them in the catalogue and send me Boston and Brass Tacks. Send a
list of the rest.
I like the Upanishads. But I don’t consider myself fit to write a
commentary on them.
You should know my love of jesting. I can tell you only in jest
that you ask me to describe your faults so that I may praise you 2 .
There is, of course, this truth in my remark, that if a person asks
another who loves him or her to criticize him or her, he or she will
hear only praise, for love covers defects as with a veil, or sees them as
virtues. It is the nature of love that it prompts one to point out on
occasion the defects of the beloved one because one wants to see
perfection in the person whom one loves. Did Kisan tell you that I was
praising you even when I described you as hysterical before
Dhurandhar? For, in that context you would have had to be held
guilty of a more serious offence if I did not believe that you were
hysterical. You certainly are hysterical. Sometimes you almost
become mad; what does that signify? Anyone who gives way to an
emotional outburst is hysterical. Do you understand what I mean?
I have always felt that Japan’s policy is regrettable. She certainly
deserved the victory over Russia but that does not make her policy
worthy of emulation by others. Just now, however, it will be enough if
we take care of our own policy. There is the Holy Being eternally
awake with a million eyes to watch Japan’s policy.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10279. Also C.W. 6727. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

1
2

A Marathi work on astronomy
Vide ‘‘Letter to Premabehn Kantak”, 21-3-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

191

224. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
Sunday, April 3, [1932] 1
DEAR SISTERS,

Since I cannot write with the left hand as fast as I can with the
right, I dictate this letter instead of writing it.
‘Whatever women do, how can you, being their elder, employ
satyagraha against them?’ There is a big flaw in this argument and it
is based on a misunderstanding of the nature of satyagraha. In that
question, you equate satyagraha with duragraha 2 . Satyagraha makes
no distinction between the young and the old, the prince and the
pauper. God also employs satyagraha against us. His satyagraha is
unceasing. In essence, satyagraha means simply this—scrupulous
regard for truth. If God did not adhere to truth, the whole world
would perish in an instant. The point is that offering satyagraha is as
much a duty as it is a privilege. But I shall now take your own
instance. If you do not discuss my letters among yourselves and reply
to them, I really need not write to you every week. Even if I write, my
letters will have no value and no effect. A lover of truth never writes or
speaks merely for the sake of writing or speaking. There must be
some definite purpose in his writing or speaking. Ordinarily he should
observe complete silence. Really speaking, there can be nothing for
me to tell you or anybody else, particularly while I am in prison.
Though I am imprisoned, the Government permits me to maintain
limited contact with the outside world, and I avail myself of that
freedom. But I should do so only for writing letters with a definite
aim. A person like me should teach what he wishes to teach only
through his own conduct. Those who do not learn from my actions,
how can they learn from my words? This is the general rule. But there
are persons in the Ashram as also outside it who regard my manner of
life as worth following and, for that very reason, want me to explain
my ideas more clearly. It is my duty to write to them. You are
included among these persons, but only if you ask me some
questions. That is why I told you that, if you do not reply to me, ask
me no question or discuss nothing with me, why should I write to
you?
1
A part of this letter is given in Mahadevbhaini Diary, “Guide to London”,
under the date April 4, 1932.
2
Opposite of satyagraha

192

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I know that you feel shy. I also know your nature. You do what
service you can and say nothing. That is perfectly right, and it befits
you. But even though we should learn to live in that manner, after all
we have to mix with one another. Living in the Ashram means that we
should live as a small community, that is, live together, have our meals
together, work and spend our free time together and think together.
This is the meaning of the mantra which we recite before
commencing every meal. Animals also have some capacity for living
and moving together. But man has it in unlimited measure, and it must
be so because it is his dharma to realize his oneness with all living
creatures. He cannot do this if he cannot live in a community. You
must, therefore, strive your best and cultivate this capacity. Hence even
if you do not meet regularly just now as members of an association,
you should do so at least to qualify yourselves to get weekly letters
from me and to reply to them. In this manner you can make some
progress [towards collective living]. When any of you write to me
individually, I do reply to her. But since I started the practice of
writing a common letter to the women I have realized that I must write
regularly something meant for all the women. The women should
discuss it and I should discuss the questions which they raise. I think
that I have now made quite clear what I wished to tell you and what I
want from you.
This was only a preface to the letter. Trivenibehn has asked me
one question which concerns all women. Today, therefore, I will
discuss that. She asks why women, not only the women in the Ashram
but all women with whom she has come in contact, look as if they
were dead and have no spirit in them at all. There is some truth in her
description, though of course it will not apply to all women. The
reasons which I have been able to discover are these: (1) lack of order
in women’s life; (2) excessive worries; (3) wrong upbringing; (4)
adoption of unscientific measures at the time of child-birth and
during confinement; (5) lack of exercise; (6) eating food which is
harmful to health; (7) the habit of remaining within the four walls of
the home; (8) the habit of eating things which they ought not to eat;
(9) in many cases, harmful thoughts which they do not try to regulate
wisely, but repress.
These are the reasons which I can think of. I do not mean that
all of them apply in every case. Every woman should think and find
out which reason applies in her own case. I have observed one great
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

193

defect in our women, namely, that they hide their thoughts from the
world. As a result, their behaviour becomes hypocritical. This can
happen only to those who are habitually hypocritical. I do not know
anything in the world so poisonous as hypocrisy, and especially when
the evil affects our middle class women who are suppressed
throughout their lives it eats them up like a canker. At every step they
do things which they dislike in their hearts, and believe that they must
do them. If they only think a little, they will realize that they need not
let themselves be suppressed by anybody in the world. If they learn
this first lesson and cultivate the courage to stand before the world just
as they are, they will be able to eliminate the other causes which I have
mentioned.
According to me, this is a very important letter. Think over it
again and again and ask me about anything in it which you do not
understand. If you read the letter twice or thrice, you will be able to
understand it very clearly.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

225. LETTER TO PUSHPA S. PATEL
April 3, 1932
CHI. PUSHPA,

This time your handwriting was a little better. Keep on
improving it.
About spinning, read the letter which I have written to Kanta.
If a Sardar does not order about others, how could he be called
Sardar?
Having taken the part of Mother India in the dramatic piece,
you should now cultivate the virtues befitting her.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3985. Also C.W. 31. Courtesy:
Pushpabehn N. Naik

194

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

226. LETTER TO KISAN
April 3, 1932
CHI. KISAN,

Do you wish me to address you as Krishnakumari? Your letter
was very much to my liking. It is good that you have taught exercises
to Jamnabehn and others.
I believe you must have recovered by now.
Anyway do write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 9068

227. LETTER TO AN AMERICAN1
April 4, 1932
I thank you for your letter. My answer to your first question is
that I would not like anybody to get me out, and certainly not on any
condition. I cannot give up, for any consideration whatsoever, what I
regard as my life’s mission.
The Diary of Mahadev Desai, Vol. I, pp. 54-5

228. LETTER TO AN AMERICAN2
April 4, 1932
I have met many Christian Science friends. Some of these have
sent me Mrs. Eddy’s works. I was never able to read them through. I
did however glance through them. They did not produce the
impression the friends who sent them to me had expected. I have
learnt from childhood, and experience has confirmed the soundness
of the teaching, that spiritual gifts should not be used for the purpose
of healing bodily ailments. I do however believe in abstention from
1

According to Mahadev Desai, the letter was in reply to the addressee’s offer
“to obtain his (Gandhiji’s) release on condition that he devoted himself entirely to
propagating the teaching of Christ”.
2
The addressee, formerly an atheist and now a follower of Christian Science,
had asked for Gandhiji’s views on the subject.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

195

use of drugs and the like. But this is purely on physical, hygienic
grounds. I do also believe in utter reliance upon God, but then not in
the hope that He will heal me, but in order to submit entirely to His
will, and to share the fate of millions who even though they wished to,
can have no scientific medical help. I am sorry to say, however, that I
am not always able to carry out my belief into practice. It is my
constant endeavour to do so. But I find it very difficult, being in the
midst of temptation, to enforce my belief in full.
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 71-2

229. LETTER TO SURENDRA
April 4, 1932
I did get your letter in which you wrote about brahmacharya.
We shall certainly discuss the subject when we meet. The views which I
had expressed at Imam Saheb’s place have become stronger and are
becoming stronger still. That is, I find their truth being proved by
experience. That alone is true brahmacharya which remains inviolate
at all times and in all conditions. It is extremely difficult to cultivate
such a state. But that should not be surprising. We owe our birth to
lust, and love our body which is the fruit of lust. It cannot but be
difficult to get rid of this heritage of lust. However, when we realize
that the body is the abode of the priceless atman, our brahmacharya
would remain inviolate even if Rambha came down from heaven and
embraced us. To everybody, his mother is as beautiful as Rambha, and
the thought of this Mother Rambha banishes impure thoughts from
his mind. In like manner, the thought of any woman should banish
impure thoughts from one’s mind. Need I go on? Reflect over this
again and again and understand all its implications.
If somebody is pleased by your punishing yourself 1 it is not
correct to describe that as the effect of ahimsa. But the matter is not
important. As your faith becomes stronger, your reason will develop.
The Gita seems to tell us that God Himself gives us the light of reason.
Our duty is to strengthen our faith. It is, of course, necessary to
understand the meaning of faith and reason in this context. We cannot
understand them through verbal definitions, but can do so only
1

The reference is to standing with knees bent and arms stretched out like a

chair.

196

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

through true humility. He who believes that he knows, knows nothing.
But he who believes that he knows nothing, acquires knowledge at the
right time. Even God cannot pour Ganga water into a pot that is full.
We should, therefore, always stand before God with empty hands. Our
vow of non-possession means the same thing. But I must stop here.
You may write to me whenever you wish. They will give your letters to
me.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 70

230. A LETTER1
April 4, 1932
If in any situation it is our duty to speak, we must tell the truth
whatever the cost.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 71

231. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
April 4, 1932
CHI. MANUDI,

I got your letter, and read the whole of it twice. You need not be
scared. It was very good that you saw the woeful condition of Harilal
with your own eyes. I knew all about him. However, we should not
give up hope of anyone’s future. Nothing is beyond God’s power? If
there is still some merit to Harilal’s credit earned through good deeds
in the past, it will bear fruit one day. We should not pamper him or
have false pity on him, but should make our hearts purer day by day.
That will have an effect on Harilal too. You have got to harden your
heart and write to him and tell him plainly that, as long as he does not
give up drinking, he will have to assume that you do not exist. If all of
us adopt such a course, Harilal might take heed. Often a drunkard
gives up his evil habit when he is greatly shocked.
I liked your reply about marriage. I am sure it will be all to your
1

The addressee had asked if one must tell the truth even at the cost of someone
else’s life.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

197

good if you stick to your resolution. In your childhood you were so
ill that nobody hoped you would live. You were saved because of Ba’s
patient nursing and the treatment of the Ice Doctor1 . But owing to that
illness, your growth had practically stopped for five years. You are
weak even now, and but for Bali’s2 care, you would become ill again.
On this account, I always deduct at least five years from your actual
age. We have already fixed the earliest age for a woman to marry at
twenty-one years. The age, therefore, which you have laid down for
yourself for marrying is proper. I would regard you as barely fit for
marriage at the age of twenty-five. However, I do not wish to bind you
to a pledge. I write this only to tell you that your present resolution is
right. When Rami wished to get married at a younger age, I did not
come in her way though I did not at all like that she should have
married at that age. As for you, there are many reasons why you
should not marry early. May God keep you firm in your resolution.
At present your duty is to apply yourself hard to your studies, build
up a strong, healthy body, understand the path which Gita teaches and
live accordingly.
Write to me from time to time. You may come to see me if you
wish. Try and improve your handwriting a good deal.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1511. Courtesy: Manubehn
Mashruwala

232. LETTER TO VITHALDAS JERAJANI
April 4, 1932
BHAI VITHALDAS,

We were all very glad to see the letter written in your own hand.
Do take sufficient rest. Resume work only after you are physically
quite fit.
Another parcel of dates from you arrived before my card could
reach you. Dates in which worms have made their appearance should
never be considered fit for consumption. They lodge themselves
between the rind and the pulp, and washing does not remove them, as
1
2

198

Dr. Kelkar
Balibehn Vohra, maternal aunt of Manu Gandhi
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I found from my experience of the dates this time. I send most of the
quantity to the leper hospital here and eat a little from the portion
which is not spoiled. But please send no more. The hard dry dates
which are available in the local market are free from worms and they
serve my purpose well enough. We cannot afford to waste either time
or money. You should, therefore, save both.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9781

233. LETTER TO LAKSHMI JERAJANI
April 4, 1932
CHI. LAKSHMI,

I got your letter. Pencil handwriting is faint and becomes fainter
day by day. By the time the person to whom the letter is addressed
gets it, the characters have become so faint that he can read the letter
with difficulty, and sometimes it cannot be deciphered at all.
Moreover, with pencil you cannot make your handwriting really
good. Finally, pencil handwriting cannot be properly judged. In
future, as long as you can get ink and pen, resolve to use them in
writing letters or anything else.
If Vithaldas is completely restored to health, you too will share
the credit.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 2812. Courtesy: Purushottam D. Saraiya

234. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
April 4, 1932
May God make Raihana healthy both in body and mind and
keep her so. Has the pupil gone to the teacher to learn cunning? The
teacher’s cunning will not avail her. The bhajan you have sent will
seem good only when I can hear it sung, and that can be when you
come and sing it to me. To do so it seems you must turn yourself into
a boy to enter the jail! I shall see if Mahadev can sing. Now read the
ghazal for the day:
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

199

If thou wouldst see Him, with each breath think of Him. Burn thy pride and
smear thy body with its ashes; take up the broom of love and with it wipe out
the distinctions of me and thee; reduce the notion of reality to dust and
sprinkle it on thy prayer carpet; leave the carpet, break up the rosary, throw
the sacred books in the river, seek the help of angels and be their servant; do
not fast nor keep Ramzan, do not go to the mosque nor make obeisances;
break to pieces the water jar for prayer cleansing and drink the wine of the joy
of union; eat and drink but never be off thy guard; enjoy thy intoxication
continuously; burn thy egotism. Be neither Mulla nor Brahmin; leave duality
and worship Him alone. Shah Kalandar has proclaimed: Say, ‘I am He.’ Mad
Mansur says: My heart has known truth, that is the wine shop of the
intoxicated, make that the object of thy visit.1

I do feel ashamed of my Urdu handwriting, but [however much
I try] I cannot write better with my left hand. It took me nearly three
quarters of an hour to write this much. The truth is that I should
practise writing every day. But I am rather ambitious and wishing to
do all I can during this quiet interval, I cannot give much time to
Urdu. It was you who tempted me to try writing Urdu, for you used to
write a few Urdu sentences and, trying to write in Urdu myself, I
became your pupil ! What a pupil, and what a teacher ! It is indeed a
great pair we make. Let us see now if we can justify the designation.
We are eagerly watching what is now in store for Father. We
remember you all very often. Uncle Sardar and Mahadev proudly
narrate many incidents about Father. They had the benefit of staying
with him. I never got that opportunity. I will have my revenge one
day.
I shall expect in your next letter the news of Hamida, Rohini and
others.
I got Pashabhai’s letter just today. If I cannot send the reply
with this, I will write to him later.
I have written enough for the day.
Many, many blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9640

1

200

Vide “Ashram Bhajanavali”. Up to this the letter is in Urdu.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

235. LETTER TO ANANDLAL GANDHI
April 5, 1932
CHI. ANANDLAL,

I wrote you a letter. You will have got it. I got your postcard
yesterday. Why has Harilal1 not written to me himself if he has really
reformed himself? Maybe he was too ashamed to write, in which case
it is all right. But there is no reason for him to feel ashamed. Even the
worst of men have mended themselves. And then the world did not
remember their earlier faults but on the contrary some of them came
to be honoured as devotees. If Harilal has really undergone a change
of heart I regard it as happy news indeed. But I have serious doubts.
People who are addicted like him often take vows only to break them,
They have no spirit left in them. They lose the strength to keep a vow.
Only a few blessed by God are saved. I hope that Harilal would be one
such. Tell him to write. 2 You should also keep me informed about
him. Harilal’s resolve [you say] is up to the month of Margashirsha
according to the calendar followed there. What does this mean? If he
stays perfectly clean up to Margashirsha, does it mean that he will go
back to his old ways again?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Chhaganlal Gandhi Papers. Courtesy: Sabarmati
Sangrahalaya

236. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
April [5] 3 , 1932
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I have your letter. You will guess from the handwriting that
Mahadev is here. I like your taking interest in everybody’s diet. The
food taken by our middle class does not constitute a balanced diet and
there is no doubt that they ruin their constitution by eating useless
1

Eldest son of Gandhiji
For Gandhiji’s reply to Harilal’s letter; vide “Fragment of Letter to Harilal
Gandhi”, 27-4-1932
3
Vide “Diary 1932”.
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

201

stuff. Moreover, doctors and vaidyas in their preoccupation with
making money take no note of this problem. That is why I appreciate
the usefulness of your experiments and I hope that Rameshwarji and
Lakshminivas have benefited. Keep me informed of whatever fresh
discoveries you make.
I am fully aware that misconceptions exist about me. Experience
has taught me that most of the misunderstandings are cleared up if
one has patience. However long the night may be it is bound to come
to an end.
For me the same diet continues. I feel well on it. Do you see
Andrews? How is he keeping?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: C.W. 7897. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

237. LETTER TO MAITHILISHARAN GUPTA
April 5 [1932] 1
BHAI MAITHILISHARAN,

I had your letter. I read Saket, Anagh, Panchvati and Jhankar
with enjoyment. I liked them very much. But I do not consider myself
at all qualified to make comments. However, as you have asked for
my opinion and I did gather impressions while reading I am putting
them down as they occurred to me.
The expression of Urmila’s grief, though beautiful in style,
could hardly have had a place in Saket. That Tulsidas did not say
much about Urmila has been held against him. But this omission I
have not viewed as a fault. I see in that the artistry of the poet. The
composition of Manas is such that a worthy character like Urmila is
brought to notice only by ellipsis, in that lies the greatness of the work
and such characters. The character of Urmila and others could have
been delineated only to enhance the impact of Sitaji’s character. But
Urmila’s virtues were of no lesser order than Sita’s. Sita’s sisters were
of the same calibre as herself. Manas is an incomparable scripture.
The praise of Sita and Rama rings through every page and every
verse. I expected to see the same characteristic in Saket. I failed in this
1

The year is inferred from the contents; vide also “Letter to Maithilisharan
Gupta”, 26-4-1932 and “Diary, 1932”, entry under April 5.

202

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to some extent for the reason explained above. I may mention one
more point. The lamentations of Dasharatha and others described in
Tulsidas’s Manas did not jar. Tulsidasji could not have done
anything different. But such lamentations are not appreciated in a
book of the present period. It affects adversely the sentiment of valour
as well as faith. Those who have faith in the spirit and who consider
worldly pleasures as transitory cannot find death and separation
unbearable. They might temporarily give way to grief but how can we
expect pitiful lamentations from them?
I do not at all mean by all this that you should try to make any
improvements in the second edition. But it will be a different matter if
you find any worth in my comments.
Mahadev is now with me. I have dictated this to him as the right
hand pains and writing with the left hand takes more time.
Yours

MOHANDAS
From Hindi: C.W. 9455. Courtesy: Bharat Kala Bhavan, Varanasi

238. LETTER TO CHAND TYAGI
April 5, 1932
BHAI TYAGIJI,

I was glad to get your letter and gladder still to learn that you
are nursing the plague patients. I am not taking milk these days. Here
I can do with bread, almonds, dates, vegetables and lemons. My views
are the same as before. I am awaiting a letter from Devsharmaji1 . My
right hand pains only when writing, but it has been like this for one
year and there is nothing special. Balvir’s handwriting is good. Has he
got rid of his former faults?
Mahadev is with me. This card is in his hand.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 3259

1

Also known as Acharya Abhaydev

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

203

239. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
April 7, 1932
MY DEAR CHARLIE,

I have your letters and enclosures, also copy of an article of
yours in an old number of Modern Review.
I understand and even appreciate the moral repulsion against
‘fasting unto death’. I have perhaps some repulsion, if not the same
repulsion, against fasting unto death myself, but I remain unmoved.
There are many other things I have done and am still doing against
my will, because I count my will as nothing before God’s will when I
see it clearly before me. I will make myself as certain as it is humanly
possible to be, that the will that appears to me to be God’s is really
His, and not the Devil’s. But when I am clear about it, I rejoice in
obeying that will, rather than mine, although I have no human
companion to endorse it. That this kind of fasting has a definite place
in Hinduism, and properly so, I have not a shadow of a doubt, but it is
a privilege that comes only to a few, and when it comes in obedience
to a call from above, it has a mighty force. Only, fasting unto death is
a corrupt expression. When I used it first, it had its definite meaning.
Now it is being used torn from its context and looks certainly
barbarous. But it is there, and its real meaning is unmistakable, and
you can almost say that it is not so much of a ‘fast unto death’ as it is
a ‘fasting unto a new life’.
All the same, I value your letter and the information you give
me about the English attitude. I do want English sympathy in this big
struggle. I do want also to be understood. You cannot therefore be too
frank or too communicative with me. I shall never misunderstand
whatever these few English friends might have to say.
Kerby Page’s article which you have sent I shall see as soon as I
get the time, and if there is anything worth saying, I shall reduce it to
writing.
I hope that your brother’s septic teeth were extracted and that
he had benefited by the extraction.
You know all about Verrier’s change of mind.1 He had
changed it before your blessings were received, and you know
1

204

About not marrying Mary Gillett
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the reason also for the change. Whilst I was prepared to bless the
marriage, I cannot help saying that I blessed the change still more. So
much depended upon Verrier’s decision. I told him that if it was a
human want on his part, he must marry, no matter what
misinterpretation might be put upon his action. The change came over
both Verrier and Mary without any prompting from anybody at all.
Our love to all.
Yours sincerely,

MOHAN
From a photostat: G.N. 1301

240. A LETTER1
April 7, 1932
I have your letter. I am unable to say that I have reached my
destination. I fear, I have much distance to cover. . . .2
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 59

241. LETTER TO NRISIMHAPRASAD K. BHATT
April 7, 1932
The fear of tuberculosis is worse than the disease itself. 3 The
person who is suspected to have got it is always brooding over the
disease and sees its symptoms in every discomfort that he suffers. If
he can be helped to get rid of this obsession, he recovers very soon.
Why do you worry over the problem of money? 4 You ought to
learn this lesson from me, for I am an expert in the subject. Long
before the country made me a Mahatma, I had learnt that, just as it is
bad economics to do business with borrowed money, so it is a false
conception of dharma to run a public institution with borrowed
money. And if the ablest workers of an institution have to go out
1
The addressee, an overseer, had asked Gandhiji whether he had attained
salvation and seen God face to face.
2
Omission as in the source
3
The addressee had mentioned the proposal to remove Gijubhai Badheka’s
child to Panchgani for treatment.
4
The addressee had expressed his fears about the financial position of
Dakshinamurti, an educational institution, started by him in Bhavnagar.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

205

begging for money to run it, I would say that that is like doing
business with borrowed money. Instead of fixing a specific number,
why don’t you follow this other method, namely, to admit only as
many pupils as you can manage with the money which you get. It is
the easiest thing in the world to do that. You have only to make up
your mind; that is all. At the beginning of every year, you should
estimate the sum which you will need. If you get it without having to
go begging for it, you should carry on, otherwise you should close the
institution. Yours is an established institution now, with a glorious
record. You have efficient teachers. Why, then, have you no faith?
Offer up your venture wholly as sacrifice to the Lord and resolve to
run it in His name. He will then keep it running if He so wills. “We
have heard of none who loved the Lord and whose honour He did not
uphold.” We sang this bhajan at the time of the evening prayer
today. I was reminded of it by a letter which I wrote to a girl. You say
that the problem would not have worried you if Vallabhbhai or I had
been out of jail. But where is the problem? And if there is any, who
are we to solve it? Can one blind man lead another blind man? If you
think that there is a problem, leave it to Him. Do not dismiss all this as
mere philosophizing, but try to act upon it.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 78

242. LETTER TO VANAMALA N. PARIKH
April 7, 1932
CHI. VANAMALA,

We can keep our minds pure by thinking good thoughts. We
can get good thoughts by doing good actions. We cannot always
know when an animal is dying. Often, the fact can be found out only
by an experienced man.
I also am inquiring about Bhai.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I forgot to write in your own letter. Please forgive me. I am
keeping the slip with me.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5771. Also C.W. 2994. Courtesy:
Vanamala M. Desai

206

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

243. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
April 8, 1932
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter.1 It seems to me that the trouble with the right
hand will persist. On coming here I began writing freely with the right
hand and I soon discovered that it was no use. It may be one sign of
creeping old age. If it is, it is cause neither for grief nor wonder. Had I
learnt to use the body merely as an instrument of service and His
temple, old age would have been like a beautiful ripe fruit with all the
qualities of its species at their highest. It would be a stroke of good
fortune if I escape merely with such disability. But even this is idle
speculation. I have no business to speculate about these things. It is
enough to note such things and take reasonable precautions within the
prescribed limits. You will not therefore worry about the hand.
My weight stands at 106 lb. except for the fasting day when it
naturally dropped to 103_. I take during 24 hours five to six slices of
well-toasted white bread, 30 dates, bowlful of boiled vegetable once,
two spoonful of honey at 4.15 a.m. with a pinch of soda and hot water
and soda and lemon 2 twice. I take two ounces (nearly) of almond
paste. This seems to satisfy me; if it fails, I shall go back to milk. The
bowels move perfectly twice or thrice daily without my medicament or
appliances. I sleep between 9 and 3.40 and twice during the daytime
20 minutes each time. I spin 375 rounds in two days. I have not
begun carding yet. Your supply3 seems to be inexhaustible. The
balance of the time is given to reading and writing. Just now I am
reading Ruskin’s Fors Clavigera, a deeply human document. He is
dreadfully in earnest. These letters are his last effort at self-expression
in word and deed. Much time is taken up in writing and now also
dictating letters. As I am allowed to write to fellow-prisoners, naturally
there is more writing to be done than last time. I am glad of it. I
sendsomething on moral problems to the Ashram every week.And
now I have commenced the history 4 of the Ashram for the past five
1

For extracts, reproduced from The Diary of Mahadev Desai,
“With cold water”—Mirabehn
3
“Of slivers”—Mirabehn.
4
Gandhiji had started writing it in Gujarati on April 5, 1932; vide “Diary,
1932”. Its last available portion was written on July 11, 1932, under which date the
book is included in Vol. L.
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

207

days.
This answers all your questions about self.
Vallabhbhai and Mahadev are doing excellently....1 In these
matters we are subject to no restrictions that we would not impose
upon ourselves.
Abstention from salt for a time can do no harm and does
produce the results you have noticed for yourself. The weakening
effect you notice is temporary and can be greatly counteracted by
taking fresh limes in some shape or other. I suppose you know that I
have gone without salt continuously for six or eight years without
noticing any ill effect. Many had joined me in the experiment, you
may therefore prolong your saltless experiment to the extent that it
benefits you. Milk contains much free salt. There is a saltish taste in
raw milk.
I understand and appreciate all you say about yourself. Let me
put you at ease. When I come out you shall certainly be with me and
resume your original work of personal service. I quite clearly see that
it is the only way for your self-expansion. I shall no longer be guilty
as I have been before of thwarting you in any way whatsoever. My
only consolation in thinking over the past is that in all I did I was
guided by nothing else than the deepest love for you and regard for
your well-being. I see once more that good government is no
substitute for self-government.2 A Gujarati proverb says what one sees
for oneself may not be visible to the nearest friend even though he
may have ever3 so powerful a searchlight. Both these proverbs may
not be universally applicable. They certainly are in your case. You
need therefore fear no interference from me henceforth. And who can
give me more loving service than you?
Mahadev has the hymns you sent him. He is going to work at
them. I forgot to tell you that I have now developed the habit of
studying the heavens. As you see my pen is exhausted. This is
Mahadev’s. And it is now past bed time, 9.15. But I think I have left
1

One sentence was censored by the jail authorities.
This sentence, censored by the jail authorities, is reproduced here from
The Diary of Mahadev Desai, “Letter to The Natal Advertiser”, 29-9-1893
3
The source has “never”.
2

208

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

nothing unanswered. I have a full letter from Nurgis about Jal. What a
deliverance!
Love from us all.
BAPU

[PS.]
I enclose an interesting cutting which I consider to be nonpolitical enough to pass muster.
From a photostat: C.W. 9506. Courtesy: Mirabehn

244. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
April 8, 1932
CHI. KUSUM (SENIOR) ,

I got your letters. I did get Pyarelal’s letter, and had also replied
to him. You should now learn to pronounce Sanskrit words correctly
and learn the grammar too. This in addition to spinning on takli. Do
you suffer from constipation? You should improve your health. I had
liked the first part of Saraswatichandra1 very much, but you ought to
read all the four parts. You should also read the four parts of
Kavyadohan. Besides, you should read Karanghelo2 and Vanaraj
Chavdo, as also some writings of Narmadashankar3 and Manilal
Nabhubhai4 . If you read these works, you will have a complete
understanding of the nature of the Gujarati language. Perhaps you
yourself can collect these books and send them.
I didn’t know at all about the Raleigh bicycle having come to
India. I will write to Kingsley Hall. I got Rolland’s books. I will read
them. Taradevi5 is here. I had even a letter from her. She and the other
women are quite happy. She has asked for a copy of the Ramayana. I
will send one to her. I got two letters from Sushila. If she could pick
up enough courage to write, she wouldn’t be Pyarelal’s sister, [would
she? ] The book about Lancashire has gone to [Chhaganlal] Joshi. I
will read it when it comes back to me, and give my opinion. I have not
collected many books this time. But I do receive some from time to
1
2
3
4
5

Gujarati novel by Govardhanram Tripathi
Gujarati novel by Nandshankar Mehta
1833-86; Gujarati poet, popularly known as ‘Kavi Narmad’
Dwivedi (1858-98); Gujarati man of letters and Vedantist thinker
Pyarelal’s mother

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

209

time. I have not yet come across any which I should like to send
toyou. I have received the volumes of Ruskin’s Fors Clavigera; if you
wish, I may send them to you. Pyarelal will hardly get anything new
even from them. I get letters from Muriel, Agatha and Horace. My
weight remains what it was, that is, 106 lb. This is the food which I
take: almonds crushed into paste, dates, toast, lemon-juice and a boiled
vegetable with one meal. So far I have been able to do without milk.
This time I don’t suffer from constipation at all. The hours of sleep
have increased. I see that the weakness of the hand persists but I feel
no pain. I read only for a little while. Just now I am reading Ruskin’s
Fors. As for writing, I have finished the remaining discourses on the
Gita. I have now taken in hand a history of the Ashram. I dictate to
Mahadev. The letters to Ashram inmates take a good deal of my time,
particularly because I write with the left hand. Spinning takes from
one and a half to two hours. Because of the trouble with the hand I
deliberately do not spin longer. I have made it a rule to spin 375
rounds in two days. I have not carded any cotton so far. I have still a
stock of the slivers which Mira left with me. Mahadev has started
carding.
I was going to ask you about Harilal 1 , but meanwhile you have
picked up courage to question me on the subject. I wished to ask you
what you had done, and now you have turned round on me. My
condition remains. Why cannot you write? You should write what you
can; it will be for me to revise and pass what you write. You should
overcome your hesitation and start writing. It is probably out of
lethargy that you do not try at all. If so, overcome your lethargy. If
you do this, I will keep my promise of writing a foreword. The book
cannot be published just now, but it is very desirable that the writing
should be over. I may not perhaps be able to write the foreword after I
am released. I hope you realize that there is a reason for my insisting
that you should start writing. There will be no grace in publishing the
letters without your essay. You ought not to do that.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1834

1

Addressee’s husband, whose letters Kusum Desai had been planning to
publish with a foreword by Gandhiji and a life-sketch by her

210

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

245. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
April 8, 1932
CHI. PREMA,

Since Dhurandhar is here, I shall probably see him some time.
Instead of wishing to kill many birds with one stone, why not wish to
bring down many berries with one hit? You should never wish to kill a
bird.
It was fortunate that you escaped being hurt by the tile. 1 We
should conclude from this that you are destined to do much more.
You need not at all feel confused about the problem concerning
the women. You may give your services if they want them and if you
have confidence in yourself. Otherwise you should forget the
suggestion as if it had never been made. You should have confidence
in yourself not about your ability to teach the women, but about your
humility, about your ability not to let any mis-understanding occur
and to manage any difficult situation that may arise. We often hesitate
to undertake a responsibility out of fear of humiliation, misunderstanding, etc. If you can overcome such hesitation, you may take up
the responsibility. You do believe that all the women are good by
nature. They require the help of someone who can express their
thoughts in words and maintain records for them. An illiterate mother
may have more sense and practical wisdom than her educated
daughter, but, being illiterate, she may not be able to use them. A
daughter can supply this deficiency. I should like you to do that. I
certainly don’t believe that the Association was doing very good work
when Gangabehn was there. But on one pretext or another, she could
bring all of them together. It was her ambition to do this work and she
sowed the seed. She is doing similar work here too. I should like to
see that seed grown into a tree. The women certainly do social work,
but as individuals. I should like them to assume responsibility as a
body, for some social service. This will create in them capacity for
organization. When such capacity has been created, individuals may
come and go but the organization will remain. God has given such
capacity only to human beings. In our country, women have not
1

The addressee was sleeping in a courtyard and a gust of wind sent a tile from
the roof hurtling on her bed.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

211

cultivated it so far. The blame for this lies with the men. But that is a
question with which we need not concern ourselves just now. If we
believe that women must acquire this capacity for organization, we
should try to cultivate it in them. It does not matter if we commence
only with my writing a letter to their Association and their replying to
me. Slowly (no matter, if very slowly) we may take up other activities.
If you have fully understood what I have suggested and if the
suggestion has appealed to you, if the other women also approve of it
and if they are ready to take interest in carrying it out, you may take
up this work. If, however, you see difficulties in carrying it out or see
no meaning in it, you may drop the idea.
Don’t pay attention just now to my request1 to you to send me a
list of books. I don’t want you, for the present, to send anything
besides the books of Upton Sinclair which I have asked you to send.
I don’t at all like the practice of converting a person from one
religion to another. I don’t believe that marriage between a man and a
woman professing different faiths is impossible or always undesirable.
I think the distinguishing features of Hinduism are cowprotection and varnashrama. Any nation that wants to rise should
follow the path of truth and non-violence.
I think I have answered all your questions.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
My copy of the Gujarati Jodanikosh, second edition, published
by the Vidyapith, is Iying there. Send it to me.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10280. Also C.W. 6728. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

246. LETTER TO SECRETARY OF SANTRAM ASHRAM
April 8, 1932
I got your letter and the Gujarati Gita and Ramayana. I thank
Maharajshri for both. If Brahmin pandits who are also men of saintly
character propagate knowledge of the Upanishads and other scriptures
among the people, no one can doubt that they would be doing a good
1

212

Vide “Letter to Premabehn Kantak”, 3-4-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

thing. But nowadays learning and goodness rarely go together. Hence
I am a little indifferent towards such activities.
I am similarly indifferent, or even a little more so, towards
public readings of the Gita and the Ramayana. I put no value on such
readings by persons who do not understand the meaning of what they
read, or even if they understand it, read the scriptures loudly—as if
merely doing that would earn them holy merit —or read them for
show or for fame. I even believe that such readings actually do harm.
If Maharajshri has found a remedy for these evils and has succeeded
in avoiding them in the readings organized by him, I have no doubt
that they will do good to the people.
It should be remembered that I am a prisoner and a letter of this
kind should not be used in public. I request you, therefore, to be
careful in this matter.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 81-2

247. LETTER TO HANUMANPRASAD PODDAR
April 8, 1932
1 and 2. We must believe in God if we believe in ourselves. If
living beings have existence God is the sum total of all life and this in
my view is the strongest proof.
3. The denial of God is injurious in the same way as denial of
ourselves. That is to say, to deny God is like committingsuicide. The
fact remains that it is one thing to believe in God and quite another to
realize God emotionally and act accordingly. Truly, no one in the
world is an atheist; atheism is merely a pose.
4. One can realize God only by ridding oneself totally of
attachment, aversion, etc., and in no other way. I hold that one who
claims to have realized God has not truly done so. Realization can be
experienced, but is beyond description. Of this I have no doubt.
5. I can live only by having faith in God. My definition of God
must always be kept in mind. For me there is no other God than
Truth; Truth is God.
[From Hindi]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 82

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

213

248. A LETTER
April 9, 1932
CHI.,

Gods signify those who do good and demons those who do evil.
There can be no peace between good and evil. Hence there is no
question of partiality in this matter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9019. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

249. A LETTER
April 9, 1932
CHI.,

We should not pay attention to the stories of miracles in
the life of Mirabai. I also don’t believe that they occurred in that
very manner. What we have to remember is the holiness of her
character. . . .1
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9025. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

250. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
April 9, 1932
CHI. MANGALA,

If we treat an enemy as a friend, he will certainly come
ultimately to trust us.
People who are ill, feel tempted to eat all kinds of things. If one
does not succumb to such temptations, one would get all right sooner.
Your weight will increase slowly.
If you pay sufficient attention, you will surely be able to
understand the Gita.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4082. Also C.W. 46. Courtesy:
Mangalabehn B. Desai
1

214

The rest of the letter is not available.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

251. LETTER TO MAHENDRA V. DESAI
April 9, 1932
CHI. MANU,

Your letter was well written. The handwriting ought to improve.
How did you fall ill? I hope you are completely all right now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7426. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

252. LETTER TO NIRMALA H. DESAI1
April 9, 1932
CHI.,

People worship the sacred tulsi because the plant is believed to
possess certain virtues. One should be angry with anger itself. Because
the other person forgets himself or herself, why should we do the
same? Grown-up people also do wrong in getting angry. Even when
they become angry, one should cling to what one [believes]2 to be the
truth. Did you get the letter which your elder brother3 wrote to you?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9470. Also C.W. 9018. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

253. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI M. PATEL
April 9, 1932
CHI. RAOJIBHAI,

This is only to acknowledge your letter. Anybody who attempts
to do something which is beyond his capacity lacks wisdom. He
deserves compliments who does his duty to the best of his ability.
Really speaking, a person need not be complimented for his devotion
1
2
3

Addressee’s name is supplied from the S.N. Register.
From the C.W. copy
Mahadev Desai

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

215

to duty, but when most people disown their obligations, the few who
discharge theirs deserve compliments.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8995. Also C.W. 9014. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

254. LETTER TO VIDYA R. PATEL
April 9, 1932
CHI. VIDYA,

God doesn’t come from anywhere or go away anywhere. He
simply exists for ever. I see nothing wrong in playing cards during
one’s free time. But I would not encourage anybody to do so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 9424. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

255. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
April 9, 1932
CHI. JAMNALAL,

All of us had been eagerly awaiting a letter from you. It was a
full one. I am very happy that the food in this jail has agreed with
you. I had heard about Janakibehn and Kamalnayan. If Vinoba has
not taken a vow to the contrary, I think it is necessary that he should
drink milk. Even in that jail he seems to have adopted a strenuous
programme. In order to be able to keep it up, I think he should drink
milk. I am convinced that there must be some vegetable food which
has the beneficial properties of milk but is free from its noxious one.
But those vaids who are sufficiently well-read in their science to be
able to discover it have never thought about the possibility of there
being such a food and the task is beyond the capacity of laymen like
us. Or perhaps we can discover it, if we give all our attention to this
one problem. It is my firm conviction that it would be improper for
any of us to do so. It is therefore our duty to cling to the task which
has fallen to our lot unsought. I cannot help thinking that it is not
proper for Vinoba to let his weight fall so low.
216

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

A fine group seems to have formed there with you. I envy you
your ‘C’ class. I had felt very happy when I heard that you were
placed in that class. I did not at all feel afraid that it might affect your
health. I have never doubted your ability to safeguard your own
health and that of your companions. Had you not been placed in ‘C’
class, you would never have got the experience you are
nowgetting.Tell Pyarelal that, as I have fully replied1 to the letter
which Kusum wrote at his instance, I don’t dictate anything here. He
will probably get that reply before you get this letter. Let me know if
he does not. All three of us are very well. For the past two months, my
diet has been bread, almonds, dates, one vegetable and a sour lime.
This keeps me all right. I never feel the need for a laxative or an
enema. I am engaged at present in writing the history of the Ashram.
Writing letters takes up a good deal of my time. In this small circle, we
talk about you several times daily. Convey our regards to all. Write to
me whenever you can.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2897

256. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
April 9, 1932
CHI. SHARDA,

It is possible even to win a kingdom by truth, which means that
there is nothing that cannot be attained with the help of truth. But this
does not mean that one should make such an attempt. To do so would
be tantamount to putting God to test. He who worships God would
covet no kingdom. For him kingdom consists in following the path of
truth. I love all languages. The meaning of yajna has been continually
expanding. Gujarati women’s dress is quite good. It requires two
changes: an underwear, and a shirt in place of the blouse.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9949. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

1

Vide “Letter to Kusum Desai”, 8-4-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

217

257. A LETTER
April 10, 1932
CHI.,

It depends on the nature of the vow. Someone may take a vow
of spinning for a certain number of hours, and another person may
take a vow of spinning a certain number of rounds. Some others may
take a vow in regard to both, that is, to spin a minimum number of
rounds and for a minimum number of hours. One must fulfil in letter
and spirit the vow which one has taken.
Our emotions and desires are sometimes ruled by God and
sometimes by Satan. We are tossed between them and that is why our
emotions and desires are constantly changing.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9017. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

258. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
April 10, 1932
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

You should drink through the nostrils every day tepid water in
which soda and salt have been dissolved. The nasal passage, then, will
not get blocked. This is a useful habit to form.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.G. 13

259. LETTER TO NARAYAN M. KHARE
April 10, 1932
CHI. PANDITJI,

What you say about the Vidyapith library is correct.
That one should not speak anything to cause pain to a person
does not mean that one should not speak anything which might pain
him. Though the speaker did not wish to cause pain, it is possible that
218

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the other person will feel hurt. When a father tells his son not to drink
bhang, he does not wish to cause him pain but the latter [being
addicted to bhang], feels hurt. Nevertheless, it was the father’s duty to
forbid the son to drink bhang.
Mahadev did not follow what I said1 about “Narayanrao”. What
is the origin of the name “Hasude”?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 225. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare

260. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
April 10, 1932
DEAR BOYS AND GIRLS,

I hope to get in the next letter a short report of your programme
of work during the National Week2 . We here have not been able to do
anything besides fasting and spinning a little more than on other days.
You still make mistakes in spelling words. See that such mistakes do
not occur. You should learn from my deficiencies. We have had that
Jodani Kosh prepared in a hurry for people like you.
If you really keep awake during prayers, you have certainly
advanced one step.
Mother Gita has already answered the question, ‘What makes us
commit sin?’ Desire and anger do that. All of you will be able to see
this truth if you recollect your own actions of this type in the past.
Think and verify the truth of this. The Students’ Union is not
independent to the extent that it functions subject to the Ashram rules.
The freedom of all such associations is limited to some extent. The
Students’ Union is of course free in its own field.
If I liked any manual work worth the name in my student days, I
may perhaps say that I liked book-binding and carpentry. There are
so many crafts and industries relating to spinning alone that the
question of selecting some other work in addition does not arise. In
order to have a full knowledge of the science of spinning, one must
have some knowledge of each of the following: agriculture, chemistry,
1
2

Vide “Letter to Narayan Desai”, 11-3-1932
Celebrated from April 6 to 13 since the starting of the satyagraha movement

in 1919
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

219

dyeing, painting, carpentry, smithy, weaving, knitting, sewing, carding,
ginning, laundry work, history of the industries of the different
countries, engraving, Arithmetic, geometry, etc. Think for yourselves
and see whether a general knowledge of the subjects just mentioned is
or is not essential for [proficiency in the] science of spinning. I have
enumerated here only the arts and the crafts which I could remember.
If you sit together and discuss, you will find some more to add to the
list. Let me know if you can think of more. I hope that you will
preserve my list at least.
We worship Krishna the perfect avatar of God and not the
Krishna who is supposed to have done so many bad things. That is, we
worship not the historical Krishna but Krishna, the Prince of Yogis,
who served to Arjuna the nectar of the Gita.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 9020. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

261. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
April 10, 1932
CHI. MANUDI,

I am happy that you write to me. You should give up fear of
Harilal and forget him altogether. Bali is a brave woman. Her slapping
[your father]1 was not an act of violence, but showed her deep love.
You must have received the letter2 which I wrote to you last week. I
explained everything in it, and so I don’t write anything moretoday.
What is your weight now? If you have not written any letter to Ba, you
should write one. She will surely expect a letter from you.
Do you pray daily? Do you sing bhajans? If you have not been
doing either, start doing both.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1512. Courtesy: Manubehn
Mashruwala

1
2

220

From The Diary of Mahadev Desai, “Guide to London”
Vide “Letter to Manu Gandhi”, 4-4-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

262. LETTER TO VIMALCHANDRA V. DESAI
April 10, 1932
CHI. NANU,

You have written a very good letter. But you should write
figures so carefully that they look like printed ones. If you are really
eager to learn the primer, Premabehn will teach you. Form the habit
of doing very well whatever you do.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 5755. Courtesy: Vilji G. Desai

263. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
April 10, 1932
CHI. PARASRAM,

The slivers given by Mirabehn are still not exhausted. Moreover,
Mahadev has begun carding from the 5th and I also get a share from
the slivers which he makes. I discontinued the massage during my last
imprisonment. However, Mahadev rubs ghee on the soles of my feet.
I shall write on the subject of teachers if I can. It is through love
and not through fear that a child can be made to give up habits like
stealing things. Scolding a child has little effect.
The difference between flattery and pure service is [as great] as
that between falsehood and truth.
In regard to other things which one should avoid doing, fear of
social criticism has a legitimate place. We need not fear it but we
should not disregard it either.
Morality is both absolute and relative.
No harm may result from chemistry itself but its misuse will
certainly do harm. It is being misused very much.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7493. Also C.W. 4970. Courtesy:
Parasram Mehrotra

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

221

264. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
April 10, 1932
CHI. BRIJKISAN,

I have your letter. You did well in giving me detailed news of
yourself. I consider you lucky to have Dr. [M.A. Ansari]1 and others
as companions. Convey to them salaam and vandemataram from all
the three of us. I hope the Doctor has a new set of teeth by now. Your
letter of the 3rd instant did not reach me.
Of course you have my blessings for your thirty-third birthday.
One-third of your life-span is gone by. We must hope that you avail
yourself fully of the two-thirds left and that you may be granted all
means of service. As you have the right aspirations I am sure that you
will gradually develop the necessary strength of character and other
qualities.
Continue writing. I do get news about Devdas but there has been
no recent news about Krishnan Nair. I have been keeping excellent
health, so have Sardar Vallabhbhai and Mahadev. I have given up
milk for the last two months and take almonds instead. I take bread,
one vegetable and lemons since giving up milk and seem to be
thriving so far. The weight is the same, i.e., 106 lb., as when I entered
the jail. The Gita Shabdanukrama was finished last year. At present I
am writing the history of the Ashram. I read a little and of course
spin.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2391

1

The addressee was, at this time, incarcerated along with Dr. Ansari in the
Delhi jail. He was transferred to Multan jail on April 11.

222

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

265. TELEGRAM TO KAMALA NEHRU1
April 11,1932
ANAND BHAWAN
ALLAHABAD
DISTRESSED
MEETING
NOTHING

2

LEARN
AND

SERIOUS.

MOTHER
RANJIT
PLEASE

3

WIRE

SUSTAINED
LAID
FULL

INJURY
UP

AT

PUBLIC

FEVER.

HOPE

PARTICULARS.

BAPU
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No. 800
(40) (3), Pt. I, p. 127; also The Bombay Chronicle, 18-4-1932

266. WATCHING THE HEAVENS—I4
A lover of truth feels undiminished joy till the end of his life.
He never regards himself as too old to keep on striving for a vision of
the God of Truth. He who undertakes every activity in order to see
God, also called Truth, who sees Truth in everything [that exists] will
not find old age an obstacle [in his quest]. So far as that quest is
concerned, the seeker regards himself as immortal and for ever
young.
I, for one, have been in this beautiful state of mind for years. I
have never felt old age as an obstacle to devoting myself to learning
anything which I believed would take me nearer to the God of Truth.
A recent example of this is my desire for a study of the heavens. Deep
in my heart, I had felt often enough the desire to know something
about the stars, but I had assumed that the numerous activities which
claimed my attention did not permit me to satisfy it. Maybe my belief
was wrong, but so long as I did not myself see the error in it it
could not but prevent me from making the necessary effort. I
think most probably I myself had prompted Shankerlal, during our
1

Wife of Jawaharlal Nehru
At Allahabad during the National Week celebrations; Swaruprani Nehru,
addressee’s mother-in-law, was injured when police made a lathi charge.
3
Ranjit S. Pandit, addressee’s brother-in-law
4
This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”; vide the following
item.
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

223

imprisonment in 1922 [to take up this study]. Books on the subject
were received. Shankerlal picked up enough knowledge to satisfy
him. I could find no time!
In 1930-31, I had the good fortune to enjoy Kakasaheb’s
company [in jail]. He was well versed in this subject. But I did not
avail myself of the opportunity, for my desire was not strong enough
then. In 1931, I was filled with sudden enthusiasm during the last
month of my stay in jail. Why should I not give time to watch that
which, to the outward eye, instantaneously reveals the presence of
God? How pathetic that one should see like an animal merely with the
physical eye without the grand sight penetrating to the sensory nerves
behind? How could I let go this fine opportunity to watch the great
divine lila1 ? I am now quenching the thirst which was awakened then
for a knowledge of the heavens, and I have progressed so far that I
cannot restrain myself from sharing with inmates of the Ashram the
thoughts which fill my mind.
We are taught right from our childhood that our bodies are
made of the five great elements—earth, water, akash, light and air. We
ought to know something about them, but in fact we know very little.
At the moment we are concerned with akash.
Akash means space. If there were no space in our bodies, we
would not be able to live even for a moment. This is true about the
universe too. Our earth is surrounded by infinite space. The blue
which we see extending over us in all directions is akash. The earth
has poles. It is a solid sphere, and its axis is 7,900 miles long. But the
akash is empty space. If we imagine this space to have an axis, we
shall have to imagine it to be of infinite length. In this infinite space,
the earth is like a mere particle of sand, and on this particle of sand
each one of us is a particle, of such infinitesimal size that it is
impossible to explain how small it is. There is, therefore, no
exaggeration at all in saying that, as bodies, we are mere ciphers. Our
body, as compared with the size of the earth, is a thousand times more
insignificant than an ant’s is as compared with ours. Why, then, should
we feel attached to it? Why should we grieve when a body perishes?
However, though in itself the human body is insignificant, it has
indeed great value, for it is the house of the atman, in truth of the
Paramatman, of the God of Truth, if we but realize it.
1

224

Play, sport
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

If this thought sinks deep into our heart, we would never want to
make it an instrument of enjoying gross pleasures. And if we fill our
imagination with the heavens and, realizing the meaning of their
vastness, understand our utter insignificance, all our pride would
vanish. If the countless shining divinities in the sky did not exist, we
would not have come into existence. Inspite of the many discoveries
of astronomers, our knowledge about the sky is practically nil. What
little we know tells us beyond the shadow of a doubt that if the
sun-god rested even for a day from his ever ceaseless tapascharya, we
would perish. Likewise, if the moon stopped raining down her cool
rays, we would meet with the same fate. And we can also infer that the
countless stars which we see in the sky at night have some role in
maintaining this world in existence. Thus, we are most intimately
connected with every living creature in the world and with everything
that exists; everything depends for its existence on everything else.
Hence we ought to try and know something about our benefactors the
shining divinities gliding in the sky.
There is one more reason why we ought to do this. We have a
saying among us: “The hills look beautiful from a distance.” There
is much truth in this saying. The sun, which keeps us alive from a
distance, would instantly burn us to ashes if we went near it. This is
also true about the other heavenly bodies. Since we know both the
beneficial and the harmful properties of the things which surround us
on this earth, we may sometimes feel aversion to them and even feel
ourselves polluted by physical contact with some of them. Of the
divinities in the sky, however, we know only the merits. Hence we
never tire of watching them. Knowledge about them can never harm
us. Moreover, as we meditate on these divinities, we can raise our
imagination with ennobling ideas as high as we wish.
There is no doubt at all that every obstacle which we place
between ourselves and the sky harms us physically, mentally and
spiritually. If we lived in a natural state, we would live under the sky
for all the twenty-four hours of the day. If we cannot do that, we
should spend in the open as many hours as we can. We can watch the
heavens, i.e., the stars, only at night, and we can do that best Iying on
our backs. Hence, anybody who wishes to derive the utmost profit
from the observation of the stars should sleep in the open directly
under the sky. If there are tall buildings or trees near the place where
one is sleeping, they will obstruct the view.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

225

Both children and grown-ups love dramas and the spectacular
scenes which they present. But no drama composed or acted by
human beings can even equal the great spectacle which Nature has
arranged for us on the stage of the sky. Moreover, in a theatre we may
harm our eyes, breathe unclean air and also run a great risk of our
moral sense being weakened. On the other hand, this drama arranged
by Nature can do us nothing but good. Watching the stars soothes the
eyes; to watch the stars, one must remain outdoors, and this gives fresh
air to the lungs; and we have heard of no instance so far of harm
having been done to moral character by watching the stars. The more
we meditate on this miracle of God, the more we grow spiritually.
Anybody who is afflicted by impure thoughts and gets dreams in his
sleep should try to sleep in the open and let himself be absorbed in
watching the stars. He will soon fall into dreamless sleep. When we are
totally absorbed in the grand spectacle in the heavens, we seem to hear
those shining bodies in their utter silence, singing the praise of God.
Let him, who has eyes to see, watch the ever-changing patterns of this
eternal dance. Let him, who has ears to hear, listen to the silent music
of these countless gandharvas.
Let us now try to learn something about these stars, or rather let
me share with all co-workers what little knowledge I have picked up.
The better method, of course, would be to learn something about the
earth before proceeding to observation of the stars. It is quite likely
that the boys and girls in the Ashram who have had the benefit of
Kakasaheb’s company already know the facts which I am going to
describe. I should be happy if that is so. I am writing this for all
inmates of the Ashram, children and grown-ups, old and new. Those
to whom the subject is interesting will find the study quite easy.
The right time for the study of the sky is immediately after
prayer. We need not give it more than twenty minutes at a time. Those
who understand the true meaning of this study will regard it as a part
of the prayer. Those of the inmates who sleep in the open may spend
as much time as they wish, when they are alone, in watching the stars.
As they become absorbed in the scene, they will soon fall asleep. If
they wake up during the night, they may spend some more time in
looking at the sky. Since the sky seems to be moving all the time, the
scene keeps changing from second to second.
If we look at the sky at 8 p.m. in the west, we shall see a grand
figure.
226

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

N.

E.

W.
S.

This figure will be in the west. I see it directly opposite me as I
lie on my back with my head in the east. No one who sees the figure
from this position will ever forget it afterwards. Since this is the bright
half of the month, this and other constellations shine with a rather pale
light, but even then this particular constellation is so bright that even a
novice like me can spot it easily. I shall refer next time to the beliefs
which people formerly held about this group both in our country and
in the West. Just now, I shall only tell you that from the description of
the position of this constellation in the Vedas, Tilak Maharaj was able
to ascertain the date of the Vedas. We have in the Ashram library, a
copy of the treatise by the late Shri Dikshit which gives plenty of
information on this subject. My job is only to arouse interest in this
direction. Once that is done, I myself shall learn more about the
subject from the inmates of the Ashram. For m e, these constellations
have become a means of communion with God. May they be so for
the inmates of the Ashram too.
“Live as you like,
But realize Hari somehow, anyhow.”
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8218. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

267. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 11,1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter. I am certainly happy that nobody comes to see
me. My chief reason is that such visits mean unnecessary expenditure.
It makes no difference who spends the money. When a visit cannot be
avoided, of course we don’t mind. In such circumstances we may go
even to Ceylon. Having said this, let me add that those to whom this
view does not appeal need not act on it. I certainly cannot measure the
strength of feelings of those who are outside.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

227

I am sure Tilakam will not go to Malabar. He will have to be
sent somewhere else. If we can send him to Bombay, the arrangement
is worth trying. Sometimes it happens that Bombay suits persons
whom Ahmedabad does not suit. The air in Bombay is certainly like
what it is in Malabar. We know that it suited Jamna. Write to Manilal
(Revashankerbhai’s) and ask his view, or to Damodardas, if you
approve of my suggestion. I hope Manu has completely recovered
now. If Amtul doesn’t have enough money, I think we should provide
her the fare and other expenses.
I understand what you say about the Vidyapith library. Do only
what seems best to all of you.
It is now two months since I gave up milk. I have observed no ill
effects of the step. The weight is maintained, more or less. The
strength also has remained unaffected. I am, therefore, continuing the
experiment. As I have explained in a previous letter, I am gradually
coming to the conclusion that people who do not lead a very
strenuous life and who can sleep and rest regularly, can do without
milk. In other words, milk is necessary only for a life of rajasik
activities.
I do realize Hariyomal’s worth. See that he does not ruin his
health through his obstinacy. All of us know what Krishnamaiyadevi
is, but we should tolerate her faults as we do the faults of a member of
our family, should indeed go a little further than we would in the case
of our own family members. When you feel that the limit is reached,
you may stop sending money. I cannot say anything more than this
from here.
You may give the permission asked for, for translating
Anasaktiyoga into Malayalam. I gather from your letter that Harihar
Sharma is not in the Ashram at present. My impression is that he is
with Rajagopalachari.
What you say about Mathuradas is correct.
I have not received Jethalal’s report from Anantpur. Nor have I
had any letter from him. If Harilal comes to the Ashram, I think he
should be permitted to stay there only on condition that now he gives
up drinking. You should now consider how long Padma may stay on
in Almora. Ascertain her own view and also that of Sitla Sahai’s in the
matter.
228

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I think I have discussed sufficiently often in the past how people
should act if a tiger makes its appearance in the Ashram. Let them
follow what they remember and what they have imbibed in their lives
from all that I have said.
I have sent from here directly, through Chintamani Shastri, a
letter of condolence about [the death of] Vishnu Kane of Sasvane.
Censor all letters. Raojibhai’s letter should not have been passed. I
know that this will increase the burden on you. But it is necessary [to
do what I have suggested] in order to satisfy that by which we are
always guided.
Blessings from

BAPU

Enclosure:
An English letter for Hume.
An article on “Watching the Heavens—I”1
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

268. LETTER TO HIRALAL SHAH
April 12, 1932
BHAISHRI HIRALAL,

I got your books and your letter full of love. I got them late by
a week because Dahyabhai had forgotten to send them immediately.
The books will be useful to me, and your letter and notes will enhance
their usefulness. But I am not as ambitious as you seem to think I am.
I only wish to acquire sufficient general knowledge to be able to see
God in the heavens more clearly. Please send me a small book on
astronomy which you think will suit my purpose. I will take proper
care of your books. I have observed the care with which you have
used them. Generally I hesitate to borrow such books from friends for
fear that they may be lost or damaged.
I cannot praise your industry and your neatness too much. But
don’t you think that your claim to have discovered a master-key may
be a little exaggerated?2 What is that key? Do you have convincing
1

Vide the preceding item.
In The Diary of Mahadev Desai, Vol. I, Mahadev Desai explains: “Hiralal
Shah wrote to Bapu that he had found the master-key of interpretation in certain
subjects.”
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

229

reasons for believing that it is a key, and a master-key at that? Are
those reasons accepted as convincing by experts? What benefits do
you promise from your discovery? May it not be that there is the
same drawback here as in the case of the spinning-wheel,namely, that
there is no master-key at all? I am certainly ready to be convinced by
you and will weigh your arguments objectively. But I should like you
to cultivate the humility which would befit a dedicated seeker after
truth.I know that it cannot be cultivated consciously. But it lies behind
every genuine discovery. The man who has discovered some new truth
remains doubtful about his discovery inspite of the immense evidence
he may have in favour of his hypothesis. The result is that, when
ultimately he does put his discovery before the world, he has realized
its truth with absolute conviction. The people are astounded and
believe him. There is authority, there is irresistible power, in his words.
The world is immediately convinced by them. It is simply awed by the
proofs he adduces in support of his hypothesis, for he has examined it
from every possible point of view. If this is so about your discovery
too, I should have nothing to say in the matter. In that case, all honour
to you. It is my wish that it may be so.
All of us, that is, all three, are quite well. Please tell Shankar on
my behalf that he should not endanger his health, and ask him to write
to me.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 93-4

269. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 12, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter. I have noted that the batch of visitors will arrive
here on Thursday. Send a cable to America and explain that as a
matter of policy the Ashram does not claim exclusive rights [in its
publications] or grant them to others. Ask them to write and give
details, so that we may think carefully about the request.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
It was indeed a deliverance for poor Mani. I felt happy on
reading the news.
230

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I shall be eager to know the results of the non-stop spinning
competition. Drop a separate postcard to give me the information.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8219. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

270. LETTER TO SHANTILAL MEHTA
April 12, 1932
CHI. SHANTI,

I got your second letter. Whatever you do, do it patiently. It
would be good if you educate your wife a little. I expect that Manilal
will come in May. He has taken more time than he had thought he
would require in winding up his affairs. Be careful in your expenses.
You should either educate your wife yourself or take Jamnadas’s
advice for making some other arrangement for her education.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXII

271. LETTER TO BEHRAMJI KHAMBHATTA
April 12, 1932
BHAISHRI KHAMBHATTA,

I got your letter just when I had been thinking of you and
wondering why there was no letter from you. I gather from it that
your health is all right. I did get in course of time the letter which you
wrote to me from England, and I have the impression that I also
replied to it. I am not aware that I always keep my hand under the
head when sleeping. It is possible that the hand got under the head
sometimes. I was careful in the matter after I got your letter and
remained vigilant. I can say, therefore, that I have never kept the hand
in that position since then. However, that seems to have had no effect
on the condition of the hand. No one has yet been able to make out
the cause of this weakness. As a precaution I even gave up writing with
the right hand. But afterwards the doctors also came to the conclusion
that the pain was not caused by writer’s cramp. If your massaging the
hand is likely to cure the pain, I can certainly secure the necessary
permission. However, if you explain to me the exact manner of doing
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

231

the massage, I would do it myself or ask Mahadev to do it. But the fact
is that the condition is not worth worrying about at all. Nor is the pain
continuous. It occurs only when I use the hand to do certain things.
The surgeon here was of the opinion that the pain was a sign of old
age and that, therefore, no cure was possible. Certain weaknesses
generally appear in old age, since we do not exercise sufficient
self-control in our earlier life. This weakness may be one such, and
there is no reason for sorrow or wonder if it is so. Hence, apart from
taking necessary precautions, I do not worry about the matter. We
have now a new doctor here, who believes that the pain can be cured.
Let me see what he can do.
I hope both of you enjoy peace of mind. We three are happy.
You must of course have met Andrews.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7548. Also C.W. 5023. Courtesy:
Tehmina Khambhatta

272. LETTER TO R. V. MART1N
April 13, 1932
DEAR MAJOR MARTIN,

It was on the 6th of March that I wrote to Major Bhandari1 about
interviews with non-political associates. I sent a reminder2 on the 30th
March, but I am still without a reply. It is high time that I got a reply
about the illustrative list I have already submitted. It causes me much
inconvenience and some anxiety not to be able to see some of the
friends I should like to see and who would like to see me.
The Government have been good enough to appreciate my
desire to write to my prison-associates about their welfare. In virtue of
the permission, I have been writing to some of them, but from
Belgaum I can get no answer. I have written to Shrimati Manibehn
Patel. She is Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel’s daughter, but she has been
under the Ashram discipline for over ten years. I knew from the letter
that was received some time ago by her father that she had been
1
Vide “Letter to M. G. Bhandari”, 6-3-1932 & “Letter to M. G. Bhandari”,
30-3-1932
2
ibid

232

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

ailing. I therefore wrote to her asking her to tell me all about her
health, but I can get no answer. Then there is Kaka Kalelkar whom
you know well and who as you are aware has suffered from
tuberculosis and requires special care. I have written to him also and
can get no reply. The third is Prabhudas Gandhi3 a nearly
relatedcousin of mine, brought up under me as an infant whilst I was
in South Africa. He is suffering from the same disease as Kaka
Kalelkar and has been under special treatment. And there is Sjt.
Narahari Parikh, a member of the Ashram, an old associate. He is also
in the Belgaum prison. I inquired about these last two of Kakasaheb
Kalelkar, but can get no information. Will you please get the
necessary information about their health and diet and weight?
Absence of any news about them is a cause of considerable anxiety to
me.
I shall be obliged if you will kindly ascertain for me whether the
telegram1 I handed to Major Bhandari addressed to Allahabad making
inquiries about the injuries sustained by Mrs. Motilal Nehru and
illness of her son-in-law Sjt. Ranjit Pandit was duly sent. I may
mention that my relations with the Nehrus are more private and
intimate than political, and naturally I am deeply interested in the
health and general welfare of the members of the Nehru family.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No. 9

273. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
April 13, 1932
MY DEAR CHILD,

I am always glad when I hear from you. Your letter is interesting
and revealing. You are still fretting somewhat. That you should get
over. If we have trust in God, we should not worry even as we would
not when we have a trustworthy doorkeeper or guard. And who can be
a better doorkeeper or guard than God the never-failing. It is not
enough that we sing about such things or have a mere intellectual
grasp. It is necessary to feel the thing within. Feeling is exactly like
feeling pain or pleasure. It admits of or needs no argument. Who can
1

To Kamala Nehru; vide”Letter to Kamala Nehru”, 11-4-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

233

argue us out of our experience? I write this because I want you to be
absolutely free from all care and anxiety.
The idea of giving the children dolls of different races was very
good. What is the name of the Hindi girl and what is her province
Did I tell you that Mahadev was with me?
Kisses to the children.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: No. 109. Courtesy: National Archives of India. Also My
Dear Child, pp. 89-90

274. LETTER TO SHANKARRAO DEO1
April 15, 1932
BHAI,

I thought at length over your problem, considered it at night too
and we three discussed it together. The conclusion, in our firm
opinion, is that your conception of dharma is in fact adharma. During
satyagraha, no satyagrahi can take any vow at all connected with it
without obtaining the sanction of the President. Your interpretation of
your vow is a gross distortion. The vow of madhukari has no place in
the jail. You have no right at present to judge whether or not you will
have any sense of shame in going out for madukari after the release.
To envisage now the state of your mind upon leaving the jail would be
to claim the role of God Almighty. All three of us hold that your duty
lies in accepting the food provided for ‘C’ class prisoners in the spirit
of an offering to God. The duty of a sannyasi indicates the same.
Now, as regards clothes, the insistence upon wearing khadi only
while in jail is in no way proper. In this matter the duty of every
satyagrahi prisoner is to refrain from insisting on wearing khadi until
the Congress takes a decision in this. This does not in any way affect
your vow of self-sufficiency. I appeal to you to give up the fast,
acknowledge your mistake and start eating. It would be beneficial to
remain on milk or fruit for a day or two because of the fast. I am
writing this from the medical point of view only. I hope you will
1

Addressee’s name is supplied from “Diary, 1932”. Mahadev Desai explains:
“The addressee was under a vow of self-sufficiency in cloth, so that he wore only
clothes spun by himself, and secondly he had vowed to live on food obtained by
madhukari (begging from a number of houses), and if that was not available, on milk
and fruit.” (The Diary of Mahadev Desai)

234

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

follow our unprejudiced advice.1
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 98

275. LETTER TO M. G. BHANDARI
April 15, 1932
DEAR MR. BHANDARI,

I would like the accompanying letter2 to be delivered to . . . 3 at
once, if you approve of the contents. They are nothing but
re-exhortation to break his fast and take ordinary food.
Yours sincerely,

M. K GANDHI

[PS.]
If . . . 4 accepts the advice tendered in my letter to him and
breaks the fast, I hope you will issue him milk for one or two days, for
it is my experience as a fasting expert that the breaking of fasts on
solid food often results in great harm to the body.
M. K. GANDHI
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 99

276. LETTER TO KHAGENDRA PRIYA BARUANI
April 15, 1932
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for the khadi piece you have sent me. There is no
letter accompanying it. Please give me the history of the piece.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S JT. K HAGENDRA P RIYA BARUANI
NOWGONG
ASSAM
From a photostat: C.W. 9551

1

The addressee gave up the fast on Gandhiji’s advice.
Vide the preceding item.
3
The name is omitted in the source; but it is evident from the contents of the
letter that the reference is to Shankarrao Deo.
4
ibid
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

235

277. A LETTER
April 16, 1932
MY DEAR,

If almond paste agrees with you, by all means take it. But you
must give a fair trial to cod-liver oil. I have heard that it has a nasty
taste, but you must cover the taste or take it as we take water without
bringing the cup to the lips, so that it goes down the throat without
touching the palate.
Love.
BAPU
C.W. 9026. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

278. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
April 17, 1932
CHI. SHARDA,

To ensure our spiritual welfare, we should scrupulously follow
truth. Since we are caught in the workings of Nature, we cannot escape
her effects. It is our duty to fight against evil effects. I don’t think
there is any truth in the belief that the direction in which we keep our
head when sleeping has an effect on us. During the National Week, I
spun twice as much as at other times. Mahadev also spun for yajna
during the Week twice as much as he does normally. And, of course,
we also fasted. All of you did much more than that. God ceaselessly
employs satyagraha against us, for He does not tolerate untruth in us
even for an instant. God means Truth. His satyagraha, therefore,
cannot but be perfect. Is not this clear?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9909. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

236

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

279. A LETTER
April 17, 1932
CHI.,

We live in the Ashram in order to overcome all fears. We follow
truth for its own sake, not out of fear of anybody. Those who have
been suppressed by society should courageously break their bonds.
This is the purpose for which the Ashram exists. I wish that the women
should understand this clearly and avail themselves of the opportunity
[which they have got].
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9032. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

280. A LETTER
April 17, 1932
CHI.,

We are not concerned with when the earth came into existence,
what was the first living creature on it and when it came into being.
That is God’s business. We should know our dharma and that should
be enough.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9036. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

281. A LETTER
April 17, 1932
BHAI,

Nobody should grieve over Mani’s death. For her it was actually
a release from terrible suffering. Nor should you repent for having
decided to get her operated. Do write her reminiscences. You should
all cultivate her virtues in yourselves. If you do that, she will be still
alive. Truly speaking, however, the soul never dies. The bodywhich
the soul inhabits perishes. That happens to all of us, to some of us
sooner than to others.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9043. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

237

282. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
April 17, 1932
CHI. MANGALA,

You should discover the source of the Chandrabhaga by all of
you going for a walk up her bed. It is not at all far. Only the name is
big. All of you have seen her mouth. When you walk towards the
source, you should also observe the things which you come across on
the banks.
We do not spin for money. We should spin, and with careful
attention, because spinning is the only work which millions can do. As
we spin, one of us will be able to invent a really good spinning-wheel.
Even if nobody does that, we shall be able to discover many other
improvements.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4083. Also C.W. 47. Courtesy:
Mangalabehn B. Desai

283. LETTER TO NARAYAN DESAI
April 17, 1932
CHI. BABLO,

Because you signed yourself as Narayan, I added “rao”. 1 Now
you say that you would like to be addressed as ‘Narayan Desai’. What
is wrong with ‘Bablo’ then? I will call you ‘Desai’ after you have
invented a prize-winning spinning-wheel. The first Desais were called
so in virtue of the posts which they held. How good it would be if you
also become a Desai by rendering some great service! There is no fun
for a son to be called a Desai because his father was called that. Would
it not be better to cling to the name given to one in childhood?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9478

1

238

Vide “Letter to Narayan Desai”, 11-3-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

284. LETTER TO PRITHURAJ L. ASAR
April 17, 1932
CHI. PRITHURAJ,

I am addressing this letter c/o the Ashram, as you have not
mentioned your address. In your excellent letter you say nothing
about the hand.
It is not true that the same person cannot be self-reliant and also
owe something to his parents. Just as one inherits certain physical
qualities from one’s parents, so also one may inherit from them
wealth and prestige too, It would be false pride to reject them. A good
son’s duty is to make good use of them and add to them. In this way,
one should see that one’s own efforts carry forward what the parents
had achieved.
We should listen to everybody’s advice, but do only what our
conscience tells us. And in order that our conscience may speak, we
should observe the yama-niyamas1 . Everybody cannot hear the inner
voice. We need divine ears to hear it.
Your handwriting shows considerable improvement, but it has
not yet become sufficiently well formed.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 12187-a. Also C.W. 9045. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

285. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI M. PATEL
April 17, 1932
CHI. RAOJIBHAI,

Your letters are interesting, but they cross the limits.2 After all,
we hold ourselves answerable to the Emperor of emperors, the God of
Truth. I trust all of you and, therefore, never wish to ask you for a
report of your work. I shall be satisfied if I get news about how you
are. This is not meant as criticism. I only wish to draw your attention
to this, so that you may be careful, and to reassure you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8996. Also C.W. 9040. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
1
2

Rules and regulations of conduct for a spiritual aspirant
As they strayed into politics

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

239

286. A LETTER
April 17, 1932
CHI.,

I don’t know when the evil of untouchability entered
[Hinduism]. When there were no cars or other vehicles, people went
on foot. Gangabehn and other women are all right. For infants milk
would be the best food. I don’t ‘remember which play I liked
especially. But it is true that I loved seeing dramas.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 9046. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

287. WATCHING THE HEAVENS-II1
April 18, 1932
There are many fanciful stories about the cluster of stars of
which I drew a figure last time.2 No figure of this cluster shows all the
stars in it. Actually, there are many more stars than you will see in any
such figure. Hence the best thing is for everybody to make his or her
own drawing and show by dots as many stars as can be seen with the
naked eye. If we follow this practice, we shall learn to recognize the
different constellations much more quickly. Moreover, the drawings
which we ourselves make will be much better for our purpose than
those we find in books, for, when the stars are observed from different
places there are bound to be differences in the drawings which
represent them. It would be advisable for everybody to observe the
stars from a fixed place and at a fixed time. This suggestion is meant
for those who wish to make drawings or who are beginners. After we
have become familiar with the different constellations, we shall be able
to recognize these heavenly friends of ours, or these divinities, from
wherever we observe them.
The Hindu, a daily of Madras, publishes a weekly, as does The
Times of Bombay. Both of them give maps of the sky showing the
1

This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, vide the following

item.
2

240

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 11-4-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

constellations visible during each month. The Hindu gives such a map
in its issue of the first week and The Times gives it in its issue of the
second week. If you can get either of these maps, you will learn much
from it. The hundredth number of Kumar is due to be published. Shri
Hiralal Shah has contributed some articles on this subject for that
number. He seems to have made a deep study of the subject.
Everybody who is curious may read those articles. Having read those
articles, I don’t feel inclined to write much here. I will only explain a
little more clearly my point of view in studying the sky. If I attempt
more, I shall not be able to write on other subjects along with my
weekly letters. I may, however, write something occasionally, or in
reply to somebody’s question.
The constellation of which I drew a figure is known among us
as Mriga or Mrigashirsha. One of the months got its name,
Margashirsha—Magshar—from this. The months in our calendar got
their names from the respective constellations. In the West, the Mriga
is known as “Orion”. The constellation is imagined to be a hunter.
To its east, there are two very bright stars in a straight line. They are
imagined to be the hunter’s dogs. The star in the west is the bigger
dog and the one to the north is the smaller dog. The cluster of stars
which we see to its east and south, below the star which forms the
fourth angle of the figure, is imagined to be a hare. The dogs are
running towards it. The three stars in the middle are the jewels in the
hunter’s waist-band.
Those stars have also been shown as representing the following
figures: The bigger of the two dogs is called Lubdhak among us, and
those three stars represent the deer’s stomach. The stars to the south
represent the arrow shot by Lubdhak. The three stars to the north
outside the rectangle represent the deer’s head. These may be
beautiful fancies. A great deal has been written about their origin, but
personally I have read very little of all this.
There is, of course, no such figure in the sky. Nor are the stars
as near to us as they seem. They are not what they look, but are suns
far bigger than our sun. Being millions and millions of miles away
from us, they twinkle in the sky as mere points. Our knowledge about
these suns is very little. But these dusters of stars serve the most
illiterate as their friends. If one looks at them even for a second, one
would forget all one’s misery and burst forth into praise of God’s
supreme greatness. One would realize that the stars were God’s
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

241

messengers and kept watch and guarded us every night and consoled
us in our suffering. This is the real truth. That they are suns and that
they are very far from us are mere intellectual conceptions. Their
service to us in filling us with an awareness of God is the real truth for
us. From a scientific point of view, we may know a good many
properties of water, but may not make any use of our knowledge. The
knowledge that it is something with which we can quench our thirst
and keep our bodies clean, and its use for such purposes, are very
important for us and this knowledge of the utility of water is for us the
truth about it, even if, in real fact, it is a substance with other properties
and uses too. And the same is true about the stars. They serve us in
many ways. I have drawn attention to what seems to me their chief
function and suggested that one should fix one’s mind on that and
benefit from their message. This is what people seem to have always
done from the oldest times. In the course of time, however, all kindsof
other stories spread and the various myths concerning the stars arose.
We may certainly read all this in order to make the study more
interesting, but we should not lose sight of the primary benefit which I
have suggested.
Let us now turn our attention to two other groups to the north of
Mriga.
The bigger group is known as the Saptarshi1 , and the smaller
one is called Dhruvamatsya2 . I have shown seven stars in each group,
but there are many more in the Saptarshi. They are shown in the
drawings which appear in The Times and The Hindu weeklies. In
Dhruvamatsya we shall not see more. It being the bright half of the
month just now, we can see only three, two members of the rectangle
and the one at the end of the tail, which is called Dhruva3 . This is the
only star which remains practically fixed and that is why it was a great
help to sailors in old days. Both these groups seem to revolve round
Dhruva. Here we find it very interesting to watch their motion every
night. Their positions change continually all through the night. If we
noted these positions from time to time, we would find that they trace
quite a big arch. In the West, these two groups are called the Great
Bear and the Little Bear respectively. In one of the books, I even saw
beautiful drawings of them. The Great Bear is also known as the
1
2
3

242

The Great Bear; literally, ‘the seven sages’
The Little Bear; literally ‘the Dhruva fish’
The Pole star
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

plough. The Saptarshi serves as a clock during the night. After some
experience, we can always know the time of the night from the
position of the Saptarshi.
However valuable these benefits and however interesting these
names may be, they seem insignificant to me in comparison with the
primary benefit. We should aspire to be as pure as the sky and as
bright as the stars. We should pray to God, as the latter seem to be
doing in their silence. Just as they do not depart from their paths even
for a moment, so let us never be remiss in doing what we are expected
to do.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

288. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 15/18 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

You must have received my postcard1 about the cable to be sent
to America. Bali and others came and saw me. I was happy that they
came.
I think henceforth we should not permit Harilal to stay in the
Ashram. I have written to him directly to tell him that he would not be
permitted in future to stay there. I have sent the letter through
Jamnadas. He begs to be allowed to stay at a place for a few days, and
spend them in his habitual pleasures. And then he goes and seeks
shelter elsewhere, using the name of the place which he has left. We let
him stay in the Ashram so long in the hope that slowly he would
change his ways there. But on the contrary, he became worse.
You seem to have celebrated the National Week very well
indeed. I hope no one will fall ill in consequence of all that strain.
There is one more point in this connection to which I drew your
attention once. Let me do so again. Instead of overstraining ourselves
during this Week and, when it is over, spending a few days in rest and
then resuming our old life, I think it would be much better if we
utilize the Week to learn to be more vigilant and then keep up
afterwards the increase in production which we effect. In the language
of the Gita, work done in the former manner would be an instance of
1

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 12-4-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

243

demoniac work and work done in the latter manner an instance of
God-like work or the first rajasik work and the other sattvik work.
Here we celebrated the Week as I have suggested. Mahadev started
carding and spun a little more than he had been doing. But I doubled
the quantity of yarn spun daily and, if my right hand does not fail, I
intend to keep up the increase.
Even if some of the inmates who fall ill in the Ashram stay
elsewhere permanently, we should not mind the expense on their
account. Did we not start the Ashram in Almora for this very purpose?
Why cannot we start similar institutions at other places too? If we do,
then whenever we see that the air and water of the Ashram do not suit
a person, as in the case of Jamna, he or she can go and live in one of
those institutions. It will not be very expensive to maintain such
institutions, and, moreover, we shall be able to start work in those
areas. This is what we did in Wardha. In the beginning, we sent
Ramniklal or somebody else there.1 But we had started the Ashram in
Wardha in order to keep it up, and so, when Ramniklal fell ill or found
it difficult to work there—I forget what actually happened—we sent
Vinoba. We don’t have another Vinoba, but I think we can spare one
of the workers from the Ashram and carry on the work at the new
place. If we can find a place on the sea-coast, we should prefer it. But
perhaps this is a long-term plan. Even then this at any rate we can do
immediately: find a suitable place on the sea-coast and send some of
the inmates there, at the same time making up our minds that if
anybody does not improve even after trying two or three such places,
he or she may die, but we will not go further than this in providing
external help for their illness. Whether we do or do not decide just
now to fix any such limit, we must help those who keep bad health
and who require change of air to get it. Our letters in which we have
expressed our views about calling Padma back to the Ashram seem to
have crossed. It seems she, too, wishes to return. Ascertain the views of
Sitla Sahai and Sarojinidevi and do what is necessary. Jamna should
either return to Bombay or select one of the places from Bardoli,
Sasvane, Chorwad, Porbandar, Veraval, Mangarol, Ghogha and
Gopanath. I think the fact that Bombay suited Jamna means only that
sea-air suited her. If this inference is incorrect we shall know through
experience. Any of the places which I think will suit Jamna will, I
believe, suit Tilakam too. I knew of course from the very beginning
1

244

It was Ramniklal Modi.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

that the expense on account of Krishnamaiyadevi, Padma and Radha
was beyond the means of the Ashram, but, as we have tolerated many
other improper things, my mind tolerates this expense too. I do feel
ashamed of it, of course. I shall await a report from you of the views
expressed on the issues raised by the question of lezim1 exercises and
the final decision arrived at. The person who exercised his influence
on behalf of Chandrakanta has not done her good. If there are any
important letters from abroad, which you think should be sent to me,
make copies of them and send them to me. The rest need not be sent.
If any correspondents have asked for autographs [inform them that]
they cannot be sent. I have not yet received the bottle containing the
preparation of almonds and dates. I think I know now how to make it.
I am informed by the jail authorities that Kaka, Narahari,
Prabhudas and Manibehn keep good health. I have received no letter
from them.
Silence Day, April 18, 1932
I got a letter from Mahavir directly. I have written to him
and told him that he should send a budget of the likely
expenditureand fix the last date up to which he will stay. I have asked
him, in deciding this, to remember that our means are limited.
It seems that Nimu and the children do not keep good health in
Lakhtar. I, therefore, think that it will be better if you call them back
there. It seems the children find the heat at Lakhtar too much.
Compared to Lakhtar, Sabarmati is certainly cool. If they prefer
Vijapur, she may go and stay there. But even if you feel that she
should stay at some place other than the Ashram, I think you will be
able to decide finally only after she returns there.
Like the thumb of the right hand, the elbow of the left hand too
pains. The doctor, therefore, has advised me to give rest to the left
hand. I have not felt any pain so far when drawing the thread with the
left hand. It is other movements which cause the pain. As a precaution,
however, from yesterday I have started using the right hand to rotate
the wheel and the left hand to draw the thread. Thus working the
wheel with the left hand, I spun 95 rounds yesterday in three and a
half hours and 85 rounds today in two and a half hours. There is no
2

1
A short wooden device with jingling metal discs attached, used in rhythmic
physical culture exercises and trills
2
Mahavir Giri; vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 21/22-4-1932.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

245

difficulty of a mechanical nature in making the necessary change in
the Gandiva wheel for this purpose. All that is necessary is to remove
the spindle to the other side and fix the wheel on the left hand side.
What effect this change will have on the [left] hand will be known
only after some time. I had been spinning 375 rounds every day in
the week, and I had wanted to keep that up. But I have had to give up
my intention for the present. If, however, I get used to spinning with
the left hand, that will be no small advantage. I therefore do not feel
unhappy about the rounds spun being so few. My purpose in
mentioning this is to induce people there who may have sufficient
enthusiasm to learn to use their left hand as much as they do the right.
In Japan, the people are taught from their very childhood to use both
the hands equally well. This practice will give nearly if not exactly
twice as much advantage as we have now. If our left hand gives as
good service as the right, the latter will get proper rest every day, and
if the right hand ever becomes disabled we would be able to do all the
work with our left hand. This is no small advantage. If this suggestion
appeals to anybody there, he or she should start using the left hand to
do some of the work which we normally do with the right hand. The
activities which immediately come to my mind in this connection are
writing, spinning and eating. If, however, we think a little about the
matter, we shall be able to think of many things which we normally do
with our right hand and which we can, with a little reflection and
without much effort, train our left hand to do.
The stock of cotton with me is about to be exhausted. If,
therefore, you have some cotton of good quality, please send two
pounds of it. There are in all 39 letters today, besides this letter to you
and “Watching the Heavens-II” 1 .
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8220. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

1

246

Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

289. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
April 18, 1932
DEAR BOYS AND GIRLS,

Since we ourselves are a democratic people, it is natural that our
temperament should draw us towards a democracy. But as lovers of
truth it is our duty to see justice and support the party which has
justice on its side.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 9039. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

290. A LETTER
April 18, 1932
CHI.,

Woman’s special virtues are non-violence, patience, forbearance,
capacity for endurance and purity of heart. Dreams are signs of poor
sleep. They may be caused by indigestion or too much of thinking.
We can prevent them by discovering their cause.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9029. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

291. A LETTER
April 18, 1932
CHI.,

We see ignorance all around us. We should not feel depressed
on that account, but should try to get rid of our own ignorance. If we
do that, the ignorance of other people also will probably disappear.
Ignorance means ignorance of one’s duty, or disinclination to do
one’s duty even when one knows what it is.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9030. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

247

292. A LETTER
April 18, 1932
CHI.,

When a sister ties the rakhi round the wrist of her brother, she
expresses her wish for his welfare and her desire that, when an
occasion arises, he should help her. A person round whose wrist a
woman ties the rakhi for ever remains her brother. The brother binds
himself to help the sister even at the cost of his life.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9035. Courtesy: .Narandas Gandhi

293. A LETTER
April 18, 1932
CHI.,

If ever our sister or any helpless person is assaulted by someone,
we should try to save her even at the cost of our life. Whenever one
can kill, one can also lay down one’s own life instead. If, however, we
do not have the strength to lay down our life, we should help even by
using violence. Such violence does not cease tobe violence. It remains
an evil. But cowardice is worse than violence.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9037. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

294. A LETTER
April 18, 1932
CHI.,

To cure bleeding from the nostrils, one should put a mudpack
on the top of the head at noon every day. Next, every morning and
evening one should draw in cold water through the nostrils and throw
it out via the mouth. It is easy to learn to draw in water through the
nostrils. One should not go out too much in the sun, or let the head
become hot. You should not believe that everything you read in a
248

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

book is necessarily true. Experience has proved that it is best to eat
before seven in the evening.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9038. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

295. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
April 18, 1932
CHI. PARASRAM,

You certainly wrote a fine poem for Vimal. After all you are a
father and do love him, and it is right that you should. I do not believe
that he does not take interest in study. In a proper atmosphere,
children learn spontaneously. I have often found that they learn more
outside the class-room than inside it. It is our duty, therefore, to create
the school atmosphere even at home so that the children may
spontaneously go on learning all the time what they can. This is the
true Montessori method. But this means that all the grown-up
members should behave as teachers, that is, should have purity of
character and should love the children. This does not mean that we
should close our schools, but it certainly means that we should, as
quickly as we can, make the whole atmosphere of the Ashram like that
of a school, and that all the grown-up men and women should regard
themselves as the children’sguardians and make themselves fit to be
so. If we do this, the children will no longer feel the hours in the
class-rooms boring.
You should not include for reading Saket and Anagh just
because I have made that suggestion. You may do so only if you like
the suggestion and feel that some at least in the Ashram will appreciate
it.
1. You may give the children some work to be done outside the
class-room.
2. When you go for a walk, sometimes being alone may be good
for you, sometimes talking and sometimes reading and teaching,
depending upon your mood at the time. You should follow your
inclination.
3. All persons who deserve to be looked upon as our parents or
gurus are also worthy of being revered as God !
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

249

4. Anybody who joins the Ashram should follow only the rules
of the Ashram, since even the best inmates are imperfect and,
therefore, their actions should not be taken as examples to be
followed. It is, after all, in human nature that persons who are eager to
follow rules will spontaneously be drawn to those who observe them
most scrupulously.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7494. Also C.W. 4971. Courtesy:
Parasram Mehrotra

296. LETTER TO JAMNABEHN GANDHI
April 18, 1932
CHI. JAMNA,

Anybody who expects a letter from me regularly should himself
or herself be regular in writing to me. What am I to write about, every
week, unless the person writes something?
If Kusum continues to be ill, she should be forced to take rest. I
am afraid she will not recoup her health unless she takes rest. I also
will write to her.
It is now clear that the Sabarmati climate does not agree with
you. This means that you should not live in Sabarmati for any length
of time. You should not feel sorry at this, as it is not the particular plot
of land that makes the Ashram. Your training in the Ashram will have
borne fruit if you observe all its rules wherever you live. If you have
been scrupulously observing the rules in Bombay, there must
havebeen a considerable effect on the environment there. I will write
some time about the importance of observing the rules.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 851. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

297. LETTER TO BEHRAMJI KHAMBHATTA
April 18, 1932
BHAI KHAMBHATTA,

I got your letter. I cannot ask you to come here just now.
Correspondence is going on for permission to see friends. If the
250

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

matter is satisfactorily settled, I will certainly ask you to come. I have
started the massage in the manner recommended by you. It is being
done with an oil I have, named Lakshadi oil. I will let you know the
result. I hope Andrews’s health is all right.
Blessings to you both from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6599

298. LETTER TO MANIBEHN N. PARIKH
April 18, 1932
CHI. MANI,

There is no cause for worrying about Narahari. I have had
official information that his health is good. I am trying to get a letter
written by himself. A person who has put his or her whole trust in
God, why should he or she carry the load of worry?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5966. Also C.W. 3283. Courtesy:
Vanamala M. Desai

299. LETTER TO NIRMALA H. DESAI
April 18, 1932
CHI. NIRMALA,

Our spiritual progress will remain illusory till we learn to regard
every person as our own brother or sister. Why should we feel any
difference between relations and others? How should people who have
no relations behave? Or those who have lost theirs through death? He
who regards all human beings as his relations is never bereft of them,
for they are [count]1 less. Such relationship is the only true one, and all
other relationships are false and transitory. Can you understand this?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9472. Also C.W. 9033. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
1

The source is mutilated here.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

251

300. LETTER TO PUSHPA S. PATEL
April 18, 1932
CHI. PUSHPA,

If swaraj were to mean Gandhi’s rule, it would be a curse. Swaraj
means the rule of all, and that would include Pushpa too,
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3986. Also C.W. 32. Courtesy:
Pushpabehn N. Naik

301. LETTER TO PADMA
April 18, 1932.
CHI. PADMA,

I don’t know who is there in Bhawali at present. Nor do I know
who are still free. You can go to Bhawali only if you have cultivated
some contacts there. But personally I would also like it if you now
returned to the Ashram. We should trust to our fate. What does
Sarojinidevi desire? It will also be necessary to know what Sitala Sahay
desires. I remember to have replied to every letter of yours that I got.
It is you who have not been regular in writing.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6131. Also C.W. 3483. Courtesy:
Prabhudas Gandhi

302. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
April 18, 1932
CHI. PREMA,

You were certainly not in a mood to write when you wrote that
letter. It was as long as your letters usually are, but it seemed to be
incoherent. Just as one should not eat when one is not hungry or go
out for a walk when one does not feel like it, similarly one should not
write a letter when one is not in a mood to write one. Or, you may say
252

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

merely that you are tired and do not wish to write, and stop there.It is
not a good sign that the end of the day finds you irritable rather than
cheerful. This is no evidence of a spirit of non-attachment. I advise
you, nay urge you, to reduce your responsibilities. That will do no
harm either to you or to the Ashram. Only work which is done with a
cheerful mind bears fruit.
I see the co-workers here every fortnight, and this time I had
asked Dhurandhar to come with the others. He keeps good health. He
has lost some weight, for he takes the diet prescribed for ‘C’-class
prisoners. You will be permitted to visit him now, provided no one has
visited him meanwhile.
I hope you wrote what you did about the questions arising from
lezim exercises without giving careful thought to the subject. You
don’t know where the doctrine of “art for art’s sake” leads a person.
In its name, young men in the West have in this age descended right
into hell. Perhaps you didn’t have a clear idea of what art means when
you wrote the letter. But, then, you yourself have warned me that there
will be no sense or logic in your letter. I will not, therefore, dwell
further on this subject.
It is possible that you do not appear hysterical to yourself. Kisan
may also not see that you are so. Or it may be that neither of you has
understood the meaning of ‘hysterical’. Perhaps you have never
consulted a dictionary to find out. Don’t take it for granted that our
M.A.s know English. Moreover, very few people know the meanings
of such technical terms. You are a fine specimen of a hysterical
woman. Being hysterical is not necessarily a defect of character. It is
desirable, however, to overcome this tendency sooner or later. But I
will not lead you into a discussion of this subject. I don’t mind your
thinking that you are not hysterical. Since you always wish to do what
seems right to you, I don’t worry about the matter. “No one striving
to follow good ever comes to harm.”1
Your statement was that it was the special excellence of the
Ashram that no one in it who took up some work left it off. I would
regard that as a certificate. Maybe the Ashram does not deserve it
today, but we should certainly aspire to deserve it one day. I am not
unhappy about our failures. I am aware of them and, therefore, I am
vigilant. The fact that we get no time to learn what we had wished to
1

Bhagavad Gita,

VI.

40

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

253

learn is only evidence of my shortcomings. My organizing ability and
my ability to teach are limited, and my sense of proportion in regard
to time is also limited; nonetheless, if circumstances had not kept me
away from the Ashram for much of the time, I would have somehow
managed to fulfil most of the programme. I say this from experience.
But we should think about the past only with a view to improving
things in future if we can. All of you should apply your minds and
see if you can organize things and do what I have failed to do. Find
some time and think over what we had planned to do, what remains
undone and how much of it can still be carried out. Try to do
whatever can be done. If you think that nothing can be done, forget
what cannot be helped. We should not go on worrying about the
matter.
To become a cipher means to shed the feeling, ‘I am doing
this’. There is no suggestion of pessimism in this.
Mahadev and I may claim to have done twice the normal
amount of work during this Week. This time, Sardar has not yet been
inspired to take up spinning. But all three of us had fasted1 .
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10281. Also C.W. 6729. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

303. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM GANDHI2
April 18, 1932
CHI.,

1. I have never seen any difference between the Jain doctrine
and the general Vedic doctrine. The difference is only one of point of
view. The God of the Vedas is both a Doer and a non-Doer. Since the
1

On the 6th and 13th, the first and the last day of the National Week
The addressee had put the following questions to Gandhiji:
(i) What is the difference between the Gita’s theism and the Jain doctrine that
there is no God?
(ii) If action cannot be attributed to God, who bestows grace? If a person
following the path of devotion does not or cannot believe in Divine grace, what else
can sustain his faith? Is prayer anything more than an expression of a man’s pious
wishes?
(iii) What is the exact meaning of your statement, “Truth is God”?
2

254

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

whole world is pervaded by God, He is a Doer, and yet He is not that
because He remains untouched. He does not suffer the consequences
of karma, since the world is not His karma in the sense in which we
use the word. Looked at from this point of view, the verses which you
have quoted from the Gita can be reconciled with one another. We
should remember that the Gita is a poem. God does not speak nor
does He do anything. We cannot say that God said anything to
Arjuna. The conversation between Lord Krishna and Arjuna is
imaginary. I at any rate do not believe that such a conversation took
place between a real Krishna and a real Arjuna. But there is nothing
inappropriate or untruthful in the method adopted by the Gita. It was
a custom in those times to write religious works in such a form, and
even today a learned writer would not be criticized for adopting a
similar form. Jainism stated the truth logically and unpoetically and,
therefore, coldly, and said that there was no God who might be
describedas Creator of the world. It is not wrong to say this, but the
ordinary mass of people do not respond to cold logic. They always
crave for poetry. That is why even the rationalism of the Jains felt the
need for temples, images and similar aids, for which pure nyaya 1
should have no use.
2. The answer to your second question is contained in the
answer to the first, as the question itself, I think, is contained in the
first question. The word ‘grace’ is a poetic term. Bhakti itself is
poetry. But poetry is not an unworthy or inferior or superfluous
thing. It is a very essential factor. That water is composed of two parts
of hydrogen and one part of oxygen is a factual statement, but to
describe water as a gift of God is poetry. It is essential for a full life
that we should feel in this poetic way, but it is not essential that we
should know the scientific truth about the composition of water.
Similarly, it is perfect logic to say that everything that happens is the
effect of karma. But the true nature of karma is an unfathomable
mystery. We mortals are so utterly ignorant that we cannot know all
the karmas which are the cause of even the most ordinary event. It is,
therefore, true to say that everything happens through the grace of
God. Really speaking, that is the perfect truth. Moreover, the atman
dwelling in a body is imprisoned in it like the air in a jar, and, as that
air cannot use its natural power so long as it believes itself
1

Logic; for Gandhiji’s explanation of his meaning here, vide “Letter to
Purushottam Gandhi”, 12-5-1932.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

255

unconnected with the air outside, so the atman imprisoned in a body
remains cut off from the power of omnipotent God so long as it
believes itself the doer of things. For this reason, too, it is only when
we say that everything which happens is done by God that we speak
the perfect truth as befits a satyagrahi. The desires of a votary of truth
are good and, therefore, they are always fulfilled. Accordingly, our
prayers consisting of the verses which you have quoted1 are bound to
benefit the world also in the measure in which our prayers are sincere.
The world is not separate from us or we from the world. All are
connected with one another in their inmost essence and the actions of
each have effects on all others. Actions here include thoughts also.
Hence not a single thought is without its effect. That is why we must
cultivate the habit of thinking good thoughts.
3. I was not led to the conclusion that Truth is God by
considering that God is formless and so is Truth. But I saw that Truth
is the only perfect description of God. All other descriptions
areimperfect. Even the word ‘Ishvar’2 is a descriptive term, applied to
an omnipotent something which cannot be described by human
speech. If we think of the etymological meaning of the word ‘Ishvar’,
the word does not touch our heart. Thinking of God as a ruler does
not satisfy our mind. It may produce a kind of fear in us, which deters
us from sin and impels us to be virtuous. But virtuous actions inspired
by fear cease to be virtuous. If we act virtuously, we should do so
through love of virtue and not through expectation of any reward.
These and similar reflections resulted one day in my realizing that the
statement that God is Truth is also imperfect. The statement that Truth
itself is God is a perfect statement as far as human speech can express
anything perfectly. We shall come to the same conclusion if we
consider the etymological meaning of the word ‘satya’. It is derived
from the root ‘sat’, which means to exist eternally. That which exists
eternally is satya, Truth, it can be nothing else. But belief in Truth as
God should not diminish our faith, on the contrary, it should increase
it. That at any rate has been my experience. By regarding Truth as
God, we save ourselves from many a pitfall. We no longer desire to see
miracles or hear about them. We may find difficulty in understanding
what ‘seeing God’ means; there can be no difficulty in understanding
the meaning of ‘seeing Truth’. Seeing Truth may itself be difficult, it
1
2

256

The C.W. source has “Samastah sukhino bhavantu” (May all be happy).
Literally, ‘ruler’
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

is so. But as we go nearer and nearer towards It, we can have an
increasingly clearer vision of Truth that is God, and that strengthens
our hope and faith that one day we shall have a full vision of It.1 You
can ask me again if you do not find your questions answered by this.
I will not be tired of answering your questions. And I am confident
that we shall find a satisfactory answer. Maybe this fails to answer all
the doubts that may arise in your mind; in that case you may ask me
again and again.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 105-7. Also C.W. 9044. Courtesy: Narandas
Gandhi

304. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

April 18, 1932
CHI. NIMU,

I received your letter. Ramdas has sent on to me the letter you
wrote to him. I have written to Narandas and asked him to call you
over to the Ashram. Probably the children will get all right there.
Moreover, in the Ashram. there are also such experienced women as
Lakshmibehn, etc. As a general rule, it is best to give no medicine to
children. If you are careful about what they eat, they will not fall ill. If
they do not pass stools with ease, you may give them a little quantity
of castor oil. It will be good if you write to me regularly every week.
There is no reason for you to feel lost.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original . Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

1

What follows is from the C.W. source.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

257

305. A TELEGRAM
P OONA ,

April 19, 1932
ASHRAM S ABARMATI
LAKSHMIBEHN NARMADA
DOCTOR

PERMITTING

AMTULSALAM

MAY

COME

SATURDAY

ONE

O’CLOCK.

Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33516

306. A LETTER
April 19, 1932
MY DEAR,

We are all sons of rishis and there should be no pride of priestly
or any other class. Priests are servants, voluntarily, of the people, and
so are Kshatriyas. And to keep up one’s vow is the duty not merely of
the priest and the warrior but of all mankind. Therefore I should have
respected your vow taken with deliberation and in a worthy manner
without regard to your class. But if you will respect your vow [you]
must surround it with all the protection it needs, i.e., you must take all
the rest that your system requires so that your vow may not be
discredited and so that it may not be unduly tried. Your decision not
to draw anything save for your absolute necessity is quite good.
Love.
BAPU
C.W. 9041 Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

258

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

307. LETTER TO SURENDRAJI
April 19, 1932
Your letter did not require immediate reply, and I also thought
that as a prisoner I should keep myself within proper limits. Hence I
delayed replying to you. I have completely forgotten what you had
said in your previous letter (written to me when I was in England).
You should never hesitate to write to me anything you think about
me. It would be a weakness in you to feel such hesitation. If friends
and co-workers put before me their criticism whenever they think that
I am committing an error, I would learn much from it, because there
would be no malice in their criticism. Moreover, if we are displeased
with anything which a friend may have done, it is a test of our
friendship and love for him to tell him immediately what has
displeased us. Love is not love if it hesitates to speak out through
consideration for the feelings of the person loved.
In the statement, “true brahmacharya is that which remains
inviolate in any condition” 1 , the word ‘condition’ should be
understood comprehensively. That is true brahmacharya which does
not succumb to any temptation or allurement. If a beautiful young
woman makes advances to the stone image of a man, there will be no
effect on the latter. A man is a true brahmachari if, in similar
circumstances, he remains like a stone. And that image neither hears
with its ears nor sees with its eyes. Similarly, a man also should not go
seeking temptations. Anybody who does that is not a brahmachari. A
brahmachari should not knowingly do anything which may be
regarded as a sign of lust. But your chief contention is this, that the
sight and company of women are found in experience to be inimical
to self-control and must, therefore, be avoided. This reasoning seems
wrong to me.
That is not true self-control or brahmacharya which can be
preserved only by avoiding even such association with women as may
occur in the ordinary course and is necessitated by our work of
service. It is only outward renunciation uninspired by genuine
desirelessness. The suppressed craving is bound to break through
when it gets a suitable opportunity. Scripture tells us that our pleasure
1

Vide “Letter to Surendraji”,4-4-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

259

in sense-objects does not disappear completely till we have had a
vision of the Supreme. 1 But the converse is equally true. Till our
pleasure in sense-objects has disappeared completely, we cannot see
the Supreme. In other words, our progress in regard to both is
simultaneous. The meaning of the last statement should be carefully
understood. Our pleasure in sense-objects does indeed disappear only
after we have had a vision of the Supreme. That is, though our
cravings may have subsided, our instinctive pleasure in sense-objects
will have survived somewhere deep in us and, therefore, till we have
seen the Supreme there will always be a possibility of the cravings
being aroused again. After the vision of the Supreme, there can be no
cravings whatsoever. That means that such a man loses the
consciousness of sex and becomes sexless. That is to say, he ceases to
be a figure and becomes a cipher, in other words, loses his self in God.
When craving has ceased altogether, there can be no pleasure in
sense-objects. I think this is easy enough to understand. If in this
discussion we substitute the word ‘Truth’ wherever the words
‘Supreme’, ‘God’, ‘Brahman’, ‘Parabrahman’, etc., occur, the
argument will be clear and it will also be easy to understand the
meaning of realization. Self-deception will not avail anybody here.
Those in the Ashram who, under the pretext of living according to the
ideal of the Ashram being one family, gratify their lustful fancies
mentally are the hypocrites of Chapter III [of the Gita]. Here we are
talking about persons who scrupulously follow Truth and are
considering how they should behave. Hence, even if ninety-nine per
cent of the inmates of the Ashram act as above, so long as the
remaining one percent sincerely try to live according to our ideal of
the Ashram being one family, the aim of the Ashram will have been
fulfilled and the manner of life which we have deliberately adopted in
it will be justified. We need not, therefore, think what others do, but
consider only what is possible for ourselves. But, at the same time, we
should also take care not to imitate others without regard to our own
limitations.2 Others may claim that they can live freely according to
the ideal of our being one family, but we ourselves, if we feel that we
do not have such strength, should avoid physical contact with women
inmates without disputing the claim of those others. We are carrying
on a new and dangerous experiment in the Ashram. Those who can
1
2

260

Bhagavad Gita, II. 59
Literally, ‘pull down our humble cottage on seeing another’s palace’
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

join it without violating Truth may do so, and those who cannot may
keep away from it. We do not regard it as everybody’s duty to mix
freely with the women inmates. All that we do is to permit such
freedom. Those members who can take it without violating dharma
may do so, but those who are afraid of violating dharma by such
freedom may, even though they live in the Ashram, keep themselves
miles away from the company of women. One inmate of the Ashram
may be able to treat . . .1 as his daughter. But another inmate may not
be able to cultivate such a feeling towards her, though he wishes that
he could. It would then be his duty not to be free with her. In this
connection I have given the illustration of a corpse. If you feel that it
is wrong to imagine such a case even as an illustration, you may
suppose ‘A’ and ‘B’ instead. If ‘C’ cannot feel towards ‘B’ as ‘A’
does, it is the moral duty of ‘C’, so long as he lives in the Ashram,
never to touch ‘B’. I have tried to enforce this rule in all cases in
which I came to know the truth.
You should forget what happened about the chair. No
importance need be attached to it. You are a sincere seeker, and,
therefore, the ultimate result will assuredly be good. So long as one
has got reason, one is bound to use it. It is not at all necessary to
smother it. You may commit errors, but you will learn through them
and some day you will make experiments which will prove beneficial.
And it is not as if all your experiments suggested by your reason fail.
What does it matter if five such experiments in a hundred fail? All of
us have a right to make mistakes. Whenever we realize that we have
made a mistake, we shall start afresh and go forward.
I do not remember on what occasion I made it but the statement
that a person who observes the vow [of brahmacharya] can render
greater service to women is perfectly true. And there can be no
question that I must have served them better in the measure in which I
have succeeded in my effort to observe it.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 108-10

1

The name is omitted in the source.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

261

308. LETTER TO SUMANGAL PRAKASH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

April 19, 1932
CHI. SUMANGAL PRAKASH,

I have your letter. It would have been better if efforts had not
been made to have Chandrakanta given ‘A’ class. But what is done is
done. Now she must give up the facilities of ‘A’ class or make the
very least use of them.
I do remember that when I was in England I had a letter from
you but I never had any time there to spare and I hardly wrote to
anyone in this country. Even if you wrote about Kanaiyalal’s death, I
have completely forgotten about it. What had been the matter with
him?
I also remember about the scheme for the publishing house. I
do not recollect that I was able to go through it. I take it that it is
unnecessary now to say anything about it. I had not been given the
book about Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi. You must, if necessary, follow
a strict regimen and put your health in order. It is now more than two
months since I gave up milk. I give up milk whenever a pretext
presents itself and that is what happened this time. This has not done
me any harm and so long as no harm comes from it I shall continue
to eschew milk. In place of milk I take four tolas of roasted almonds
ground to a paste. In addition to this I take baked bread, dates, lemon
and one vegetable a day such as white gourd, brinjal, etc. I take sour
lemon with soda-bi-carb. In the early morning I have honey in hot
water with a little soda. That is my diet. You are not to copy this. You
must have chiefly milk, curd and fresh fruit. If you still feel hungry
you may take greens and chapati or bread, but this is not to be a
substitute for milk and fresh fruit.
It is difficult, if not impossible, to say how long my body will
endure. Whatever I may say will only be guessing. I can not claim that
my life has been one of self-control from the beginning. I have
indulged myself in some form or other and so I cannot take from the
body as much work as I should like. Most of the others, too, are
poorin health and, therefore, either do not see my physical weakness
or ignore it. Be that as it may. All that I wish is that the few years that
are left to me should be spent in some-work or other of service. It will
262

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

be enough if I am not condemned to live the life of an invalid. The
full span of a man’s life is a hundred years. For the reasons explained
above I do not consider myself fit to reach that age.
It is good to have the teeth scraped by a machine. Pyorrhoea
must be got rid of.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Sumangal Prakash Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

309. LETTER TO SUMANGAL PRAKASH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

April 19, 1932
BHAI SUMANGAL PRAKASH,

I have your letter. Kanta must not be coerced into giving up the
facilities she enjoys. So long as she does not herself want to give up
the privileges, she should not be made to do so. To cite my example is
right and not right. It is right because so long as I am engaged in
public work people are bound to take me as a model, which will only
create misunderstandings, because what I expect others to practise I
cannot for various reasons practise myself. So there is a flaw in my
leadership. Citing my example might not be right because my
position is very different from that of others. One reason is my
physical weakness. Another reason is my title of Mahatma. A third
reason is my special situation. In whatever class I may be I have to
have special food, because my body and my vow demand it. This
applies to some extent to all prisoners. It is a different matter that
every prisoner cannot have this facility as easily as I can. I am
permitted interviews once every week instead of once every three
months. As for letters there is almost no restriction. I have decided in
my mind that I have no intimate friend. I meet relatives, not because
they are relatives but because my meeting them serves some moral
purpose. My writing letters also has the same end in view. Whether
deep down it gives me some kind of pleasure I do not know.
Thereseems little likelihood because withdrawal of permission to write
letters or to see visitors would not upset me. In 1930 I refused to avail
myself of the facility of interviews because the Government would not
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

263

accept my condition. In 1922 I had stopped writing letters. Lately I
have been kept apart from others. That also is a reason. One should
not make comparisons with me on this account, but if this is not
obvious I would not like to persuade anyone by arguments. There is
no doubt a slight difference between one who has got ‘A’ class after
some efforts from outside the jail and one who has been given ‘A’
class by the jail authorities themselves. But it is no use stressing this
difference. The ideal should certainly be that there should be no
classification, and where as a result of classification people have been
given better classes they should give up the privileges of those classes.
Very few are today acting up to this idea. Therefore one does not
want to bring the least pressure to bear on a delicate girl such as
Kanta. She is a thoughtful girl and on her own practises such
self-control as she can.
Kanaiyalal’s untimely demise is distressing. But instead of
losing courage you must be doubly careful. The prayer I made on
behalf of Manilal was impelled not by wisdom but by a father’s love
for his son. Only one prayer is proper and that is “May God do as He
wills.” Of course one may ask what meaning this prayer has. The
answer is that prayer should not be given a gross meaning. It means
that to free ourselves of attachments we become aware of the God
dwelling in our hearts and conceiving Him as separate from us, we
pray that we may not be taken where we are impelled by the mind but
that we may be taken where God who is our Master takes us. Whether
our good lies in our dying or in our living we do not know. Therefore
we should not rejoice in life or tremble at the thought of death. We
should treat the two as the same and remain untouched. This is the
ideal and it may take a long time to attain to it. Indeed very few can
attain to it. But this need not discourage us from pursuing it. And the
more difficulties we face in the pursuit the greater should be our
efforts to overcome them.
If we think over the matter deeply we can conquer the palate.
We must not accept defeat. Man’s full span of life is considered to be
a hundred years. It can be more but however long it may be, time is
an unending stream in which a human lifetime is not even a millionth
part of a drop. What can therefore attachment for it or calculation
about it avail? And any calculations we may make can never be
definite. We can only guess and say at the most how long a human life
can be. For the rest even the healthiest children meet with untimely
264

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

deaths. We cannot even say that a man given to lustful pleasures will
not enjoy a long life. The most we can say is that a man who has been
free from lust from the very beginning, who leads a simple life, stands
a good chance of enjoying a long life span. But to seek to conquer
pleasures of sense for the sake of a long life is like digging up a
mountain for the sake of a mouse. We must conquer sensual pleasures
for realizing the Self. If self-control leads to shortening of life rather
than to prolonging it we should not care. A life free of disease and
long in years is the least significant result of self-control.
Being in jail Kanta naturally cannot practise hydrotherapy.
Therefore the best way for her is to consult the best doctors. It is
possible that if she restricts herself to a diet of milk, curd and fruit she
may have some relief in the matter of her menstrual trouble and her
toothache. Relief from pyorrhoea may be attained by chewing a
datun for half an hour morning and evening and by massaging the
gums inside and outside with a finely ground clean mixture of salt
and charcoal powder. I am not writing separately to Kanta.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Sumangal Prakash Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

310. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

April 19, 1932
CHI. KANTA,

At last you are settled. Now take full advantage of the solitude.
Give your friends what you have gained and take from them what is
worth accepting from them. If it is possible, write to me from there.
But the number of letters you write will be restricted. It will therefore
suffice if you write to Brother and he passes on to me what I should
know from it. Or tell Prabhavati to include in her letter what you wish
to say. Take care of your health. We three are together and enjoying
ourselves
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

265

311. LETTER TO NRISIMHAPRASAD K. BHATT
April 20, 1932
My fear has come true. You have seen a discrepancy between
my advice to you and the fact that I myself toured the country to
collect money for the service of the poor. I was afraid that you would
do so. I, however, see no such discrepancy. I did not feel any
inconsistency with my views in this matter even when I started on my
tour. The difference between our two cases is this. Dakshinamurti is
your institution, as the Ashram is mine. Your duty towards it is not to
go out collecting money for it, but to teach and pour your soul into
the pupils. Similarly, my duty towards the Ashram is not to collect
money for it but to observe its vows and help the other inmates to
observe them, and to help in carrying on the various activities of the
Ashram with greater vigour. I must have faith that, if I do this duty, we
shall get the money that we need. The principle regarding the
collection of a fund for the poor should be the opposite of this. In
that case my chief aim was to raise a fund. You cannot go out to
collect money for Dakshinamurti, but friends may certainly approach
people for help to your institution. It is their duty to do so. Do you
now see the difference between the two cases? And this is not a new
kind of difference, nor have I thought of it recently. I bore this
distinction in mind even in South Africa. That is, when I realized it, I
stopped seeking help for Phoenix, but I begged from door to door for
a public institution there. I, therefore, still suggest that you should
resolve, if not immediately, as soon as may be, that you will not go out
to collect money for the institution. You should write toall friends who
have been helping the institution and whom you know personally, and
inform them of your decision, and then let the events take their own
course. The argument that our people do not yet appreciate
institutions like yours and do not realize that it is their duty to give
help to them on their own, is only a half truth. We who manage such
institutions lack faith in our work, and, therefore, the people have not
been rightly educated about their duty of providing funds for them.
This is a vicious circle. The people remain ignorant of their duty
because we have not tried to educate them about it; and till they learn
to give money on their own, we go begging from door to door.
Things will never change in this way. The people will not learn their
266

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

duty and we shall not acquire faith in our work. And the result will be
that all our labour will be wasted. Some of us, therefore, should risk
everything and follow the way of faith. You are in every respect
qualified to take such a risk. Your institution is relatively an old one
and has acquired a reputation for itself. Some of your teachers are
selfless workers, and the pupils are taught with love. We have evidence
of this in the fact that you have succeeded in training some pupils by
your method and that you have friends who give monetary help
regularly. Hence, even from the practical point of view, my advice
does not seem unsound. According to me, absolute faith in one’s
work is also the highest practical wisdom.
Why do you suppose that, if you raise your fees and become
self-supporting, only the rich will send their children to your
institution? You must be admitting some children free. You should
pass on that burden to the rich. They will pay, and must pay, that tax
if they want their children to be educated in your institution. Why do
you entertain any doubt about the value to the people of the
education which you impart? Personally I am firmly of the view, and
my view is based on actual observation, that even our best institutions
do not grow to their full capacity because their heads spend much of
their time in begging money for them. The head of a school should
devote himself exclusively to the internal development of the
institution. Instead, I have seen heads wasting their valuable time in
collecting funds. Personally I feel that in doing so those heads
betrayed ignorance of their real duty. They did not have faith in
teaching as a vocation. We see the result. You and all the teachers
should meet once among yourselves, and then again in the presence
of the friends who have been providing you with funds. Make your
resolution at that meeting. The meeting should be called not to seek
the advice of those friends but to make your resolution and announce
it. Faith does not wait for anybody’s advice, and if you wait for advice
you will stand to lose.
I stop here today. If you wish to differ from me on this issue
again, you may do so. If you can spare time to write to me, I certainly
have enough time to reply. I cannot get so much time when I am
outside. You should, therefore, take the fullest advantage of my wider
knowledge and experience. If you fail to do so, you will be the loser. I
do not hesitate in the least or feel the slightest embarrassment in
claiming that I am something of an expert in this matter. It is for you
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

267

to accept or reject my claim. But just as a man who knows a cure for
snakebite but doubts or hides his ability would be a great fool, so also,
if I know my special ability and still hide it from others I would be as
good a fool as he. I would not knowingly wish to become one.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 112-4

312. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
April 21, 1932
DEAR COL. DOYLE1 ,

Major Bhandari has read to me the reply received from
Government to my letter2 of the 13th April addressed to Major Martin
regarding, among other things, an illustrative list3 I had submitted of
non-political associates who might visit me. In continuation of that
correspondence I now submit as full a list of names of non-political
associates as I can think of. I have given a brief description of the
persons mentioned in the list. On the contrary I have confined myself
to those whom I may wish to see in the near future. These are in no
sense political people. I, therefore, suggest that when I want to see
others outside the list, the Superintendent may be permitted to decide
whether they come within the prescribed limits or not. For I find that
if each case not mentioned in the list has to be submitted to
Government, the delay caused in receiving the reply is likely to defeat
the very object of my application.4
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

1

Inspector-General of Prisons, Bombay Presidency
Vide “Letter to R. V. Martin”, 13-4-1932
3
Vide “Letter to M. G. Bhandar”, 6-3-1932
4
In his reply dated April 23, Doyle wrote: “I have submitted to Government
the further list of non-political associates whom you may desire to see and have also
asked for a decision on your suggestion that the Superintendent be permitted to decide
whether others outside the list may visit you or no. I shall communicate to you the
orders of Government as soon as they are received.”
2

268

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[ENCLOSURE]
DESCRIPTIVE LIST OF NON -POLITICAL ASSOCIATES

1. Indira Nehru, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru’s daughter, 14 years old
and studying in Mr. Vakil’s School in Poona.
2. Jehangir Vakil and his wife, educationist, conducting a model
school in Poona where Indira Nehru is studying.
3. Hemprabha Devi, wife of Babu Satischandra Das Gupta, purely
devoted to khadi work at Sodepur (Bengal).
4. Raihana Tyabji, daughter of Mr. Abbas Tyabji, a permanent
invalid.
5. Hiralal Shah, merchant, residing in Bombay, given to astronomical
pursuits.
6. Damodardas Kanji, private gentleman in Bombay, holding
intimate contact with the Ashram.
7. Karamchand Chunilal, share-broker in Bombay.
8. Hirewanti Mansukhlal, widow of the late Mr. Mansukhlal Chunilal,
a philanthropist.
9. Nargis Captain, an invalid, widow of the late Mr. Captain of the
Indian Postal Service.
10. Ramabehn, student of Gujarat Vidyapith, daughter of Sheth
Ranchhodlal Amritlal of Ahmedabad.
11. Prabhashankar Parekh, private gentleman of Rajkot, father of an
Ashram girl.
12. Behram Khambhatta and Tehmina Khambhatta, an osteologist
of Bombay and his wife.
13. Manjukesha Mashruwala, niece of a member of the Ashram and in
charge of a charitable dispensary.
14. Sushilakumari, student, Medical College, Delhi, sister of Sjt.
Pyarelal of the Ashram.
15. Sushilakumari, school mistress, Girls’ School, Rajkot.
16. Dinkar Mehta, an invalid student of the Vidyapith, under
treatment of Dr. Muthu.
17. Puratan Buch, an invalid student of the Vidyapith.
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40), Pt. I. p. 187

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

269

313. LETTER TO PREMLILA THACKERSEY
April 21, 1932
DEAR SISTER,

I got the cotton and the honey yesterday. May I thank you? The
cotton seems to have been carded in a mill. You probably know that it
can be of no use to me. May I remind you of what I said last year? I
had hoped then that you would stock good, hand-ginned cotton, get it
carded at your place and give it to people to spin. I wanted you to
send me some from such stock of cotton, or if you did not have it, to
obtain some from a khadi store. It seems that the people in the office
here could not explain this to you properly. Send me such cotton
immediately if you can secure it.
I was asked to give a list of persons other than inmates of the
Ashram whom I should like to meet. I had sent a few such names,
which included yours also. The government has replied that you can
come to see me. You may, therefore, now come along with a party
from the Ashram or by yourself whenever you wish to.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4822. Courtesy: Premlila Thackersey

314. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 21/22, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

I get your post regularly on Wednesday every week. I got it
yesterday too. The results of the spinning competition were excellent.
I had certainly guessed that your speed would be very high, but the
speeds reached by the others, too, are very good. I should be happier
if all this makes a difference in the total output.
The pain in my left elbow is of the same kind as in the
right-hand thumb, and the doctor has been advising me for some time
that I should give up spinning for a few days and give complete rest to
the elbow. I told you about this in my last letter. At the moment, all
that I can say is that my experiment is continuing. I can draw yarn
with the right hand with fairly good ease. It is too early yet to say
270

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

whether this will cure the pain in the elbow completely. However, there
is no cause at all for worry. I shall give you definite information on
Tuesday when I seal the letters in a packet. I have started dictating this
letter on Thursday.
I was glad that Mathuradas came and saw me. It would be a
good thing if Tilakam goes to Calicut, but we should not send him at
our own risk unless somebody there offers to take care of him and
treat him well. As regards Amtul, I am writing to her. Read that letter1 .
I told you in my previous letter what I wrote in reply to the letter 2 I
had from Darjeeling. You may come here whenever you wish to. You
will be able to see those women whom the previous visitors did not
see.
I have been trying to do for Kaka everything I can from here.
Use Soniramji’s money as you think proper. It should certainly
be used for supplying free copies of the Gita whenever you think it
justified.
The person who stole things from your room must have known
what it contained. I cannot resist the temptation of saying that Jamna
deserved the lesson. Nobody should keep a single pice in his or her
room. Anything one has should be deposited in the safe of the
Ashram and that, too, only when the person has no other alternative.
Except for books, a few spinning-wheels and such other articles
necessary for our work, we should have nothing in our rooms. Even
the clothes should be the minimum we require for our daily use. As a
rich man feels happier the longer the list of his possessions, we should
feel happier the shorter it is.
Our ideal is to have no possessions worth keeping a record of.
So long as we continue to possess things, our burglar friends are
bound to claim their share. Since we do not voluntarily offer it, they
seize it by force.
You will of course read the letter which I am going to write to
Kusum. It would certainly be good if she learns nursing. I also
believethat Mrs. Lazarus3 will treat her well. But it seems to me that at
present the work is beyond Kusum’s strength. If she cannot preserve
her own health, how will she be able to help others to preserve theirs?
Nursing the sick imposes no small strain on one’s strength.
1

Vide “A Letter”, 22-4-1932
From Mahavir Giri; vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”
3
Matron at the Vadilal Sarabhai Hospital, Ahmedabad
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

271

Sometimes a nurse has to be on duty the whole of the day and the
night. And she is on her feet all the time. Most of the patients have
little endurance. They are irritable and demand immediate attention.
Hence anybody who is sincere in taking up this work must make her
body and mind strong. Of course this is true only about a woman who
wishes to be a devoted nurse. A nurse who doesn’t care for her
patients and whose heart is not in her work is a disgrace to her
profession. A nurse’s job, if done sincerely, is more arduous than a
doctor’s. Good doctors have always given credit to the nurses and
claimed none for themselves. If Kusum has understood all this and if
we can be sure that she can make her body strong enough for the
work, I would certainly encourage her in her idea. Personally, I have
always been of the view that a nurse should remain unmarried. The
best nurses in the world are found among the followers of the Catholic
Church, and that religion also supplies the largest number. All of them
are required to remain unmarried. This is a special merit of the
Catholic Church. Another noteworthy fact about it is that all teachers,
from the primary to the highest level, are unmarried persons. We see
very few other teachers who can excel them.
April 22, 1932
Dhiru had asked me in his letter whether he might send a
Magan spinning-wheel or himself bring one, and I had replied to him
and told him that he could send or bring one. How is it that it has not
yet come? I thought about that spinning-wheel especially because of
the pain in my elbow. Padma, too, has in her letter urged me to use
that model, and so I am more keen about it today than I was when I
wrote to Dhiru. If the spinning-wheel is ready, send it with anybody
who may be coming to see me. If it reaches Bombay, even Dahyabhai
will bring it. He comes every Saturday. I have already written to you
in my previous letter asking you to send me some cotton.
Read the letter which I have written to Vinabehn in regard to
Kusum. I need not write anything more. Manibehn will be released
from the Belgaum jail on May 14. I had a letter from her, in which
she says that Keshu had agreed to make a spinning-wheel for her. If
it is ready, ask him to send it to Dahyabhai in Bombay. If it is not
ready, ask him to make it by and by and send it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8221. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

272

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

315. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
April 22, 1932
DEAR COL. DOYLE,

If you, will turn up the file left by Major Martin, you will find I
am referring to a matter that has been pending for some time. Kaka
Kalelkar you know perhaps as well as I do. He is at present in the
Belgaum Central Prison. He was transferred from Visapur to Belgaum.
I have been trying to get accurate information about his health and
that of three other companions, but beyond getting a little vague
information after considerable delay I have been able to make no
headway. In the reply Major Martin sent me just before he left, he said
that he was asking for the information that I had sought. The
information already received by Major Bhandari shows that
Kakasaheb is weak. Probably he has lost weight and does not get
cow’s milk which he used to get here. Therefore if there are no
political reasons to the contrary, I suggest his transfer to Yeravda, and
if he can be put with me I should bring him up, I hope, to the weight
he reached here in 1930, i.e., to 116 lb.
Of the other three prisoners referred to in my letter to Major
Martin of 13th April, Narahari Parikh has nose trouble which often
causes great pain. His wife Mrs. Parikh writes saying that she cannot
even get acknowledgment from the Belgaum Prison although she has
sent reply-paid postcards. She has not heard from her husband at all
and naturally she is worrying. I have myself written to Kakasaheb
inquiring not only about him but about the other three also, because
they are all inmates of the Ashram, but I have no reply from him or
them. I would like to have their personal letters if I may. I presume
that the object of allowing me to hold correspondence with
fellow-prisoners was to give me the human satisfaction that I need in
the way of getting information from them as to their well being.
I know that you have only just arrived and must be very busy. I
would not have worried you almost immediately on your arrival, but
for the pressing necessity of the cases I have brought to your notice.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No. 9
1

For Doyle’s reply, vide Appendix “Letter from E.E. Doyle”, 23-4-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

273

316. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
[April 22, 1932] 1
CHI. MIRA,

Your expected letter has just arrived. Like you I need not delay
mine.
I am delighted that you have Kamaladevi with you and that she
joins you at the morning prayer and sings bhajans in the evening. 2
Her vigorous skipping reminds me of the time when I used to skip for
the same reason as Kamaladevi. I had taught the boys also. Ramdas
was the gracefullest and best. It is certainly a fine exercise especially
in winter.
It is good that you are continuing your saltless experiment and
that it is agreeing with you.
We have here a new doctor. He is a Parsi Major. He loves his
work and has the innate dignified courtesy that you see invariably
associated with a cultured Parsi. He has been giving me electric
massage for the right thumb and the left elbow. The elbow has been
causing pain for some time, but only when I work in particular ways.
He thinks that it may be necessary to stop spinning for some days.
Having done double work during the National Week, so far as my
output is concerned, it is now about 85 rounds per day. For I have
anticipated Dr. Mehta by using the left hand for turning the wheel.
This is my fourth day. I have made very good progress. The right
hand draws much more steadily and the thread is finer and more
uniform.
This additional practice with the left hand again makes me think
of the necessity of our trying to use the left hand equally with the
right. And we should teach the children3 from now to be
ambidexterous. I have already written about this to Narandas.
1

“Superintendent’s initialling date”—Mirabehn
“Kamaladevi was imprisoned as a ‘B’-class prisoner, and placed like other
‘B’-class prisoners, amongst the ‘C’-class prisoners in the Debtors’ Prison. She and I
began to take too much interest in the well being of the rest of the prisoners with the
result that we were both removed to the permanent women’s jail inside the big Arthur
Road jail, where we were placed in one of three small barracks, which had a common
verandah. The other barracks were occupied by female convicts.” —Mirabehn
3
“Ashram children” —Mirabehn
2

274

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

As a result of the two days, fast, I suppose, I have lost 2 lb. in
weight. There is nothing in this loss, if I do not lose steadily. If I do, I
shall go back to milk without the slightest hesitation. I have given you
this information only by way of report. You must not brood over this
loss of weight.
The history of the Ashram goes on, though slowly. In order to
overtake the arrears of correspondence, I have suspended it for the
past three days. I shall soon resume it.
Study of the heavens has come to stay. I have now a few books
on it. This study puts me more in tune with the Infinite.
I won’t need to card for spinning. Mahadev has already begun.
He always cards more than he spins and this he does for me. The
present stock being so regularly replenished is not likely ever to be
exhausted.
Radha is largely to blame for her bad health. She broods too
much, gives more time than necessary to external tidiness and does
not give herself full rest as prescribed by medical men. I am not now
inclined to press for Almora. We should learn the poor man’s art of
living. I know that I am the greatest hindrance in our march towards
that ideal. You and the other survivors will have to re-arrange many
things that, by my identification with them, have been or will be left as
they should not be.
We are all keeping well except that Vallabhbhai’s nose and
constipation still worry him as before. Dr. Mehta is now dealing with
both the disorders and hopes to produce some relief in a short time.
Whilst this was being written in the midst of interruptions, we saw
from the newspapers received, that Kamaladevi had been transferred
to Belgaum. A prisoner has no choice. His or her body is not in his or
her own keeping.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6218. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9684

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

275

317. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
April 22, 1932
DAUGHTER AMTUL,

If I had time I should write to you in Urdu. Why don’t you?
Only you should write a clear hand. It will be good exercise for me.
Have I spelt your name correctly?1
I have not yet got Doctor Sharma’s books. I shall read them
when I get them and tell you all about them.
For you, I am in correspondence with Narandas.2 Of course you
can go to the Ashram when you wish. What I feel is that you should
live where you keep well. There are opportunities for service
everywhere. A kind word spoken at the right moment is good service.
Even a kind thought that would translate itself into action is good
service. It is idolatry to think that there is no service but what is
rendered through the body.
You should tell me how you pass your day. Do you keep your
diary?
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 249

318. A LETTER
April 22, 1932
DEAR,

I think that you have erred in judging the people in the Ashram.
It is very difficult for one person to say of another whether he or she
has love or not. We know nothing of the struggles that go on in the
human breast between the forces of good and evil. We are ready
enough to see the defects of people but we are unable to know how
many conquests they have made. What I say is not intended to signify
that we are all perfect in the Ashram. Far from it. But I do want to say
that one member has no right to judge another. It betrays want
1
2

276

Gandhiji had written her name in Urdu.
Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi” and “Letter to Hiralal Shah”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

ofcharity. I have also noticed that those who are very exact in the
performance of their own duty are often uncharitable to others,
especially when they do not see them as assiduous as themselves. This
is a grave defect and a hindrance in the path of one’s progress. If we
take care of ourselves, God will take care of the others, if they will not
do so themselves.
Nor does my writing mean that you are mechanically to shut
your eyes and ears to what may be going on in front of you. What I
have suggested is in no sense a mechanical performance. It is a mental
attitude which comes from training. Meanwhile wherever you notice
lack of love, you must as gently as possible bring it to the notice of
those in whom you detect the defect and if you have not got enough
gentleness to do so you should bring it at least to the notice of
Narandas and leave him to do what he likes.
Love.
BAPU
C.W. 9048. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

319. A LETTER
April 22, 1932
CHI.,

We do not take stray dogs under protection in the Ashram. If we
start doing that, the Ashram would be full of them, and we would be
so busy looking after them that we would forget our duty to human
beings. The mantra which we recite before starting to eat is praise of
God. We should offer thanks to God whenever we start doing
something. As far as possible, we should not use goods imported even
from China and Japan.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9052. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

277

320. LETTER TO MAHENDRA V. DESAI
April 22, 1932
CHI. MANU,

This time your handwriting was a little better, but you have still
to improve it in many ways. Request someone to help you and do so.
If Nanu does not let you read his letters, you should not try to snatch
them from him.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7427. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

321. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
April 22, 1932
CHI. PREMA,

I have already written 1 to you about Dhurandhar. He has not
gone on hunger-strike.
I think you should not force Anandi 2 to go out for a walk with
you. If she has no strength, she will not be able to walk. It will be
enough if you teach her pranayama and some passive exercises. Do
you know what passive exercises are?
Regarding conversion, I don’t mean that it is never justified. But
no one should invite another person to change his or her religion. In
my view, the belief which underlies such practice, namely, that one’s
own religion is true and another’s false is an error. When, however, a
person has changed his religion under compulsion or in ignorance,
there should be no objection to such a person rectifying his error, that
is, returning to his original religion; on the contrary, he should be
encouraged to do that. His action is not conversion. If I think that my
religion is false, I should give it up. And I may, I ought to, accept what
seems to me good in any other religion. If my religion seems to me
imperfect, it is my duty to try to make it perfect. It is also my duty to
try to rid it of any evil which I may see in it.
1
2

278

Vide”Letter Premabehn Kantak”, 18-4-1932
Lakshmidas Asar’s youngest daughter
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I regard Mirabehn as a Christian, and now she also regards
herself as a Christian. I see no inconsistency in her being a Christian
and reading the Gita with devotion. Persons belonging to other faiths
also join in our prayers with sincere feeling.
I really don’t know what we shall do after we get swaraj. God
will lead me then, as He does today. A man who believes in God does
not plan what he will do in future. He who plans is not a man of faith,
or rather his faith is weak.
There are not three separate paths, knowledge, devotion and
action, for the realization of God. The three form one single path.
That one path is divided into three aspects for the sake of convenience
[of discussion]. Water is a compound of hydrogen and oxygen, but it
is neither the one nor the other. Similarly, knowledge is not a
self-sufficient path of God-realization, nor is devotion. It may be said
that the path of God-realization is a chemical compound of all the
three factors. This metaphor is defective, but it explains what I mean.
The protection of Draupadi’s honour is not a miracle 1 like the
conversion of water into wine. The faith that God succours his
devotees when they are in distress helps one, and the examples which
support such faith are worth cherishing. If, however, a person
cultivates devotion in expectation of such help, his devotion is of no
value.
I do not approve of a policy of compelling people to become
strong. There should be no compulsion at all in this matter. I have not
known anyone who liked to remain weak in body. This is a matter for
education.
We should put before the people the ideal of reducing their
needs to a minimum. Having done so, we need not concern ourselves
with the result. Where is compromise in this? The question of
compromise does not arise at all. The standard of life of the starving
poor ought to be raised. But this is not a new idea. Even now we are
making efforts towards that end.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10282. Also C.W. 6730. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

1

St. John, ii

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

279

322. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
April 22, 1932
CHI. PARASRAM,

Who helped you to write the letter in Gujarati? Whoever it was,
his handwriting is excellent. I assume that the actual language was
yours.
one may certainly enter into loving rivalry with a fellow-disciple
of one’s guru or with anybody else. That is, we can take everybody
who can do something better than we as our ideal and advance. There
should be no trace of envy in this. I have used the adjective ‘loving’
above to suggest this. In such rivalry, we should wish in our heart that
the person whom we have accepted as our ideal will improve his skill
day by day, so that the ideal which we seek to attain will always be
rising higher as we progress. Such a wish will have a beneficial result
for us too, since we shall be continually advancing.
I am firmly of the view, and it is my experience too, that, if a
person has violated a moral principle in any one sphere of his life, his
action will certainly have an effect in other spheres. In other words,
the belief generally held that an immoral man may do no harm in the
political sphere is quite wrong. And so is the other belief that a person
who violates moral principles in his business may be moral in his
private life or in his conduct in family affairs. Hence, whenever we do
an evil we should overcome [the tendency towards] it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 9437. Courtesy: Parasram Mehrotra

323. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
April 22, 1932
DEAR RAIHANA,

I got your letter. Let Father rest for a few days. I hope that the
work which requires him to stay there for some time is not anything
very difficult. Many salaams and vandematarams to him from all of
us. Tell him also that I always pray to God that He may grant him a
long life and enable him to render great services. Many salaams and
280

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

vandematarams to Mother too. I have got the Urdu books now. I
copy out today a few passages from them.1
My Urdu handwriting will not improve till I practise writing in
Urdu regularly. But how can I spare the time? Moreover, it is my left
hand which I must train. Hence I content myself with what I am able
to do. The progress is bound to be slow, but we cannot help it.
This time you gave me no news about Hamida and her friends. I
must get some in the next letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9641

324. LETTER TO VIDYA R.. PATEL
April 22, 1932
CHI. VIDYA,

It is good to form the habit of having a bath before entering the
kitchen. But the rule cannot be applied to a person who goes there to
have a meal.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 9425. Courtesy: Ravindra R. Patel

325. LETTER TO BEHRAMJI KHAMBHATTA
April 22, 1932
BHAISHRI KHAMBHATTA,

I got your letter. I was glad that both of you could me Andrews.
I will trouble you and request you to come here if I can secure
permission for you to see me, and then also only if the condition has
not improved by that time. Both of us will go through the books on
massage when we get them. I find that Lakshadi oil is excellent.
Blessings to you both from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6600. Also C.W. 4386. Courtesy:
Tehmina Khambhatta

1

This paragraph is in Urdu. The passages copied out are not translated here.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

281

326. LETTER TO A GIRL
April [22] 1 , 1932
CHI.,

Under a father’s rule, exploitation may go on and the pool
suffer. A mother, on the other hand, would spin always for her poor
children.2 The sacred thread and the rosary may give some help in
cultivating holiness. But they are not very useful today. A cow is
looked upon as a mother because, like a mother, she gives milk.
Moreover, a woman feeds her own children till they are one year of
age, whereas the cow gives milk to all of us, and that is why she is our
mother too. A mother receives much service from her children. But
who does anything for a cow? Hence a cow is more of a mother.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 119. Also C.W. 9055. Courtesy: Narandas
Gandhi

327. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL3
April 22, 1932
CHI. MANI,

We were eagerly waiting for a letter from someone there, as
people wait for the rains, when we received one or two . . .. See me
here on your way when you are released. If it is Monday, stay on till
the next day, Tuesday. Between 12 noon or 11.30 a.m. and 1 p.m. is
the most convenient time when you can see me. If you come during
this period, you will be able to see at least two of us. . . . All three of
us are all right. . . .
1

From the C.W. copy
The addressee had asked Gandhiji the meaning of a Gujarati saying, to the
effect that a child might not be as well cared for by his father even if the latter was a
king, as by his mother even if she had to support herself by spinning.
3
According to the source, parts of the letter were censored by the jail
authorities.
2

282

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I see that you have really tried to improve your handwriting.
The result shows that anybody can improve his handwriting if he tries.
This is true about everything.
To learn the Gita by heart also means that we should understand
the meaning of every verse and pronounce the words correctly. Who
teaches you the Gita? Perhaps you will tell me this only when we
meet. But if there is time and if the jail authorities let you do so, write
your last letter before you are released. As regards your health, we will
issue a certificate only after seeing you. . .
Yashoda and the boy visited us once. The boy climbed on to a
chair and was so thoroughly pleased with himself that he left his new
pair of shoes here. Fortunately for him or for Dahyabhai, some one of
us noticed it and immediately sent it to him. Yashoda’s health is none
too good. Indeed she has not been well for many years. Dahyabhai
comes every week and can see both of us.
Jivatram1 is still out of prison and working. Devdas is
in Gorakhpur [prison]. I have just had a letter from him. He is
alone there but quite happy. He reads a good deal. Lakshmi
is no longer ‘poor Lakshmi’! She is still nursing Papa 2 , but the
latter is nearly restored to health. Rajaji is fine. He keeps good
health. His companions also keep fairly good health. Indu3 has not yet
come to see me. I do not know where she is at present. Most probably
she is in Poona. Kamala 4 is in Prayagji. Kamalapati 5 seems to have
some relief from his pleurisy, but still has slight fever.
I will write to someone in Ahmedabad about the spinning wheel.
But we can spare a good one even from here, if you want one. .
. . . I wrote my first letter to Ba only today, but I do get letters
written by her. She and other women prisoners are all right.
Mithubehn continues to conduct her class.
1

J. B. Kripalani
C. Rajagopalachari’s elder daughter
3
Indira Nehru
4
Kamala Nehru, wife of Jawaharlal Nehru
5
Literally, ‘Kamala’s husband’, one of the names of Vishnu
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

283

If your glasses are broken, you can get them changed even
while in prison. But this is perhaps unnecessary now as the date of
your release1 is approaching.
Your letter was received here today and immediately given to
me. The reply also is being written on the same day. I hope that it will
be posted tomorrow. When you will get it depends on your luck and
mine.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, pp. 81-3

328. A LETTER
April 23, 1932
CHI.,

It is not correct to say that Lord Krishna exhorted Arjuna to
follow the way of violence. He only prevented him from doing a great
evil in the name of non-violence. Arjuna had already committed
violence when he assembled the army. He, therefore, had no other
course open to him. He was not afraid of violence. But he did not wish
to kill relation. He did not regard it as evil to fight other people.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9051. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

1

284

She was released on May 15, 1932.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

329. A LETTER
April 23, 1932
CHI.

You did good work during the National Week.
The sound which you hear in your stomach while you are
fasting is made by the movement of the gas.
In order to feel that all human beings are our relations, we
should think constantly that all of us are created by one God.
From Gujarati: C.W. 9060. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

330. A LETTER
April 23, 1932
CHI.,

I would see no harm in boys and girls playing together if certain
restraints are observed. I think they cannot play the game of hututu1 .
In this game, the players touch one another so frequently that impure
feelings are likely to be aroused in some boy or girl. We should avoid
that danger. We should know that, when grown-up boys and girls mix
together in such fashion, impure feelings are likely to be aroused. We
shall gain nothing by hiding this fact.
From Gujarati: C.W. 9061. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

331. A LETTER
April 23, 1932
CHI.,

One should certainly nurse a person who is sick, but cannot omit
spinning for that reason. Nursing a sick person benefits only that
person, whereas we spin for the sake of millions of the poor.
From Gujarati: C.W. 9067. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

1

Also called ‘kabaddi’

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

285

332. A LETTER
April 23, 1932
CHI.,

Wearing the tuft of hair has little connection with dharma. The
support of man’s life is God. If a thing is indispensable, we may use it
even if it is imported from abroad.
From Gujarati: C.W. 9068. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

333. LETTER TO DUDABHAI DAFDA
April 23, 1932
1

BHAI DUDABHAI ,

I got your letter. My compliments to Sunderjibhai for his help.
It seems you have attracted a good many pupils. I hope Danibehn 2 is
all right now. I occasionally get news about Lakshmi3 .
Sardar and Mahadev are with me.
They send their regards to you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 7757. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

334. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
April 23, 1932
CHI. KUSUM (SENIOR),

If you have faith in yourself, my hopes in you will be realized.
You must have written to the Ashram for Gangabehn [Vaidya]’s
powder and pills.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1835
1

The first Harijan admitted by Gandhiji in the Ashram in 1917
Addressee’s wife
3
Addressee’s daughter, who was brought up by Gandhiji in the Ashram
2

286

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

335. LETTER TO MANIBEHN N. PARIKH
April 23, 1932
CHI. MANI,

I got your letter. Do not worry about Narahari at all. I even
hope to get permission for him to write to me. I got news about him
this week also. There seems to be nothing wrong with his health. I
have written a letter to him today. Still, if you wish to go to Belgaum,
you may.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5967. Also C.W. 3284. Courtesy:
Vanamala M. Desai

336. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
April 23, 1932
CHI. MANGALA (DARLING),

You deserve compliments for standing second. Did you
understand the idea that our bodies are things of little value? If you
have understood this, the next step in the argument is easy. Is it not a
great thing that God dwells even in such a worthless thing?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4085. Also C.W. 49. Courtesy:
Pushpabehn N. Naik

337. LETTER TO MOHAN N. PARIKH
April 23, 1932
CHI. MOHAN,

Your handwriting is good. You should become a good man too.
Uncle Mahadev is very well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9177
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

287

338. LETTER TO NIRMALA H. DESAI
April 23, 1932
CHI. NIRMALA,

As far as possible, we should not use foreign goods at all. If,
however, we refrain from using the goods of one particular country
but use the same goods imported from another country, that does not
necessarily imply violence. Ask Premabehn to explain this further to
you.
If anyone is afraid that playing cards may tempt the players to
start gambling, he or she should certainly not play. It can never be
one’s duty to play cards, and it may be too much if we forbid people
to play. Those who can refrain from playing should not play.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9471. Also C.W. 9056. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

339. LETTER TO PURATAN BUCH
April 23, 1932
CHI. PURATAN,

Whatever spiritual growth has taken place in me is wholly the
result of my worship of Truth. From that I have gained all other
things. For the present, you should completely give up the thought of
going to jail. Improve your health first.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9166

288

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

340. LETTER TO PADMA
April 23, 1932
CHI. PADMA,

As I should not write much with the left hand, this letter will not
be long. However, I shall be able to say all I wish to. Personally, I
think that you should go to the Ashram. But we should know what Ba
and Sitala Sahay also think in the matter. I am now ready to spin on
the Magan spinning-wheel. You have copied out quite useful
instructions for spinning on it. Why did you take so much trouble?
Anyway, I will now preserve that letter. Please remember that it is not
one’s body alone that can render service to others. You can also serve
if you live a truly celibate life and become a very learned woman.
They are born to no purpose who, though endowed with a strong
body, do not use it for service. And the knowledge acquired by such
persons also goes in vain. If you understand this, you will give up
worrying and will recover your health more quickly. Blessings to
Shantilal.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6132. Also C.W. 3484. Courtesy:
Prabhudas Gandhi

341. LETTER TO RAMACHANDRA N. KHARE
April 23, 1932
CHI. RAMBHAU,

The account which you have sent of your progress is good.
As one person may live in several houses one after another, so
also there is nothing strange if he should dwell in different bodies one
after another.
Who knows whether Rama did grieve1 as much as he is said to
have done, or whether he grieved at all? What we read is a poet’s
account. It is perfectly true that such grieving would not be seen in a
man of spiritual knowledge. We should, therefore, believe that our
1

Over the abduction of Sita as described in the Ramayana

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

289

ideal Rama would not have grieved in that manner.
You should regain the weight which you have lost.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 291. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare

342. MESSAGE ON SACRED THREAD CEREMONY1
[Before April 24, 1932] 2
The sacred thread ceremony has lost its significance for me
nowadays. Still, if the sacred thread ceremony is deemed essential, it
should be performed only after the boy’s attaining maturity. The
sacred thread ceremony means entering new life and since then
constant endeavour should be made to lead a life of self-control and
service.
The Bombay Chronicle, 25-4-1932

343. LETTER TO PUSHPA S. PATEL3
April 24, 1932
CHI.,

Mother India should possess the virtues of patience, capacity for
endurance, forbearance, courage, non-violence, fearlessness, etc. One
can cultivate them in the Ashram.
Do we remember every event in our present life?4 If we did, we
would become mad. After we have learnt the proper lesson from
anything which we would like to remember, what harm is there if we
forget it? On the contrary, it would be for our good.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9053. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi. Also
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 119
1

Of the son of Mr. Mahulikar, formerly painting master in the Gujarat
Vidyapith .
2
The messege was reported under the date-line: “Ahmedabad, April 24”.
3
The name of the addressee is not given in the sources; but in “Letter to
Pushpa S. Patel”, 3-4-1932, Gandhiji refers to her having played the role of Mother
India in a dramatic piece.
4
The addressee had also asked why we cannot remember the events of former
births.

290

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

344. LETTER TO DUDHIBEHN V. DESAI
April 24, 1932
CHI. DUDHIBEHN,

It is less trouble to me to reply to a letter immediately I get it, if
I have the time to do so. Writing will stop automatically when I can no
longer use my hand. A wife can go where her husband does, but
sometimes dharma indicates a different course. What is essential is to
have patience. We should cheerfully do — learn to do — the duty
which has come to us unsought. Why should a woman believe herself
weak ? Husband and wife are friends and equals of each other. A
weak wife makes the husband also weak. Hence she should be strong
even for his sake.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7428. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

345. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
April 24, 1932
CHI. DEVDAS,

You have proved your opinion of yourself to be wrong. For,
your letter just received is, though not too short, not very long either.
But it will do.
I used to get news of you, though I did not hear from you
directly. It is good that you have got quiet there. It was necessary for
you to get used to it. Since you are keeping good health, I do not
worry on your account.
I certainly wish that you should master Urdu.
It is ten minutes to two now. Mahadev has come to me after
finishing most of his own work, and, since I write very slowly with the
left hand, I am now dictating this letter to him. My aim in asking you
to complete your study of Urdu is that you should read Maulana
Shibli’s writings. He has written a biography of the Prophet and also
anecdotes from the lives of his associates. There is much else too, with
all of which I believe we should become acquainted. If you have
sufficient enthusiasm, you should read all that. You can send for the
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

291

books from Azamgarh, where his office and madrasah are. Most
probably, you were with me during that tour and saw the place. The
present incumbent of Maulana Shibli’s religious office is Maulana
Suleman Nadvi, since the former, as you must be aware, died some
time ago.
I get quite good letters from Lakshmi. That is, she replies to
mine as a matter of religious duty. Her letters are rather short. But she
seems helpless. She admits that she cannot think of anything to write
and so contents herself with a few sentences. However, whatever little
she writes she writes beautifully, and her Hindi may be said to be quite
good. She writes a pleasing hand and seems to be a quiet girl. But why
need I describe her to you ? I have given here, though, the impression
she has made on me. She has been writing, it seems, to the Ashram
inmates too.
We are happy here. We do not feel that we are in a jail. How can
men be styled ‘State prisoners’ unless they enjoy complete freedom
about food, sleep and all else? As for visitors, Dahyabhai comes every
week and he sees both of us together; but Mahadev does not have our
status and, therefore, cannot join us at the interview. Occasionally
someone comes from the Ashram too, andwe two see the visitor.
Durga and Jivanji came once and saw Mahadev. Now we have decided
for the present that Durga should not come and unnecessarily spend
money. However, she is free to change her mind if she wishes, as she
has not taken a vow not to come.
This is our daily routine: All three of us get up at 3.45 a.m.
After we have prayed together, Mahadev goes back to sleep and we
two take honey and water and then have a walk. Afterwards I sleep for
about a quarter of an hour. At 6.30 all the three have our breakfast
consisting of bread, tea, etc., my tea of course being crushed almonds
mixed in water. I like it and have so far not felt the want of milk. That
is the only joint meal during the day. The other two who drink milk
have their next meal at about mid-day, and I have mine at 4 p.m. In
between, I eat dates and almonds. At 4 p.m. I eat some vegetables,
bread and almonds. Mahadev has been doing a lot of spinning and
carding, giving the spare time, if any, to reading. At present he has
also to go through the proofs of the book being published by the
Oxford Press. I take about two of his hours for my work. Owing to the
pain in the hand, since the National Week I have been spinning with
the left hand and drawing the thread with the right. I have had enough
292

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

practice by now and experience no difficulty, though the speed has of
course slowed down. Formerly I used to spin 375 rounds or more a
week, but I cannot maintain a steady speed now. I rest satisfied with
whatever I can spin in two to three hours. The highest number of
rounds I have been able to draw so far with the right hand is 182.
However, I feel confident that gradually the speed will increase. As for
my reading, I could get Urdu readers here and am going through
them. I read Ruskin also and give some time to books on astronomy
too, as I have of late fallen in love with watching the stars. With all this,
I also find time for a nap of 20 or 25 minutes during the day. I have
started writing the history of the Ashram, having completed the
remaining chapters of the Gita 1 some time ago. That is the account of
time for us two. As Sardar suffers from some trouble in his nose, he
remains content with reading newspapers mostly and reading out
something from them to me. He reads a little from other things too,
but he cannot read much as his nose begins running with the
leaststrain. During this jail term, I do not generally ask for books from
the Ashram. Friends have been sending me enough for me to live
on.In fact they are too many already—over two hundred, as I guess.
Not that all of them are worth reading. I liked very much Upton
Sinelair’s latest book which he sent me. In the form of a novel, it gives
a very good account of the working of the American Prohibition Law.
I am sending you the book, which is named Wet Parade. Others of his
books are there in the Ashram, but I believe that this new book has
probably not arrived there. Mahadev told me a story of how you lost
some books. I was not surprised to hear it, as I think I know well
enough your capacity for losing things. Pyarelal is in Dhulia jail, and
Prabhudas is in Belgaum jail, where I hear that he is in very good
health. He has put on two more pounds of weight. Kakasaheb is very
weak. Jamnalalji, Vinoba, Gulzarilal, etc., are in Dhulia jail. Ramdas is
here, and so also are Chhaganlal Joshi, Surendra, Mohanlal, Qureshi,
etc. I am permitted to see them occasionally. Mathuradas is in Nasik
jail. Taramati writes to me occasionally.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2154

1

Vide “Letters on the Gita”

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

293

346. LETTER TO JANAKIDEVI BAJAJ
April 24, 1932
CHI. JANAKIBEHN,

Please write to me. Why do you remain ill? What is your diet?
You should eat fruit in sufficient quantities. You ought to improve
your health. You need not worry about Jamnalal or Kamalnayan or
anybody else. Do you read anything? Who are your companions in
Jail?
All three of us are quite well. We often think about you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2898

347. LETTER TO RAMIBEHN PAREKH
April 24, 1932
CHI. RAMI,

A letter from you would always be a surprise for me. You said
that your birthday was approaching, but forgot to mention which. As
you know, I never remember. Many happy returns of the day to you.
But you should also take up some work of service. Come and see me
when you feel inclined.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9717. Also C.W. 698. Courtesy:
Navajivan Trust

294

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

348. LETTER TO TARAMATI MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI1
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

April 24, 1932
CHI. TARAMATI,

I had been awaiting this letter. I think I did receive your letter of
30th March. The address is correct.
Jyotsna 2 will have recovered by now. If her fever is due to
teething, it has gone on for too long.
If you have heard from Mathuradas, let me know immediately.
How is your own health? Do you get any chance to meet anyone? To
the extent that your health will permit you must undertake some work
of service. Doing work of service helps one to attain peace of mind.
One may serve even one’s neighbours. There is none in the world not
in need of anyone’s help.
Sardar and Mahadev send their remembrances.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
You can come to see me some day if you feel like it.
From the Gujarati original Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

349. A LETTER
April 24, 1932
BHAI,

If you have fully understood the value of brahmacharya, I think
your father’s pain or anger need not be taken into account. If you put
his anger in one scale and dharma in the other scale, the former would
weigh as light as air. But you should first decide whether you regard
brahmacharya as dharma. If you are firm, your father will soon calm
down.
From Gujarati: C.W. 9057. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

1
2

A portion of this letter appears inLetter to Taramati M. Trikumji”, 24-4-1932
Addressee’s daughter

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

295

350. LETTER TO ASHRAM GIRLS
April 24, 1932
CHI.

If you get your hair cropped, you would save the time you have
to in taking proper care of it, save expense over oil, comb, etc., and get
rid of the false notion that there is beauty in hair. Without hair, the
head remains clean. For a woman, absence of hair is a sign that she is
observing brahmacharya. If girls and grown-up women get their hair
cropped, the practice would cease to be regarded as sign of
widowhood. If we think about the mater we may discover some other
benefits also. But are not those I have mentioned enough just now?
From Gujarati: C.W. 9058. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi. Also Mahadevbhaini
Diary, Vol. I, p. 120

351. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

April 24, 1932
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

I would not be able to think anything about Dr. Ambedkar from
here. It is enough if we can retain our right in the land. If anything
has to be done, please do it yourself.
The news about Prabhudas is good. He gets milk. His health is
good. He has gained two pounds.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32866

296

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

352. LETTER TO VATSALA V. DASTANE
April 24, 1932
CHI.

I do not think that you should cut off your hair in the face of
your parents’ opposition. You must convince them before you take
this step. I see no point in the argument put forth by your mother.
If short hair is useful, the other girls may well take up the matter. But
your mother will come round if you have patience. I shall write to
Anna.1
From Hindi: C.W. 9059. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

353. LETTER TO SUMANGAL PRAKASH2
April 24, 1931
BHAI SUMANGAL,

I can only today find the time to write to you. I see nothing
wrong in your continuing to live with your parents till you arerestored
to health. The plan to have Kanta stay with you also seems good. You
must fully recoup your health. It seems to me a drawback that young
men cannot take care of their health. I think it is wrong to be in
possession of a proscribed book. The proscription has not been
withdrawn. It is not possible for me to stay at one place. You should
not exert yourself mentally overmuch. You should therefore give up
the thought of writing a history of the War. I am writing for
Y. I. and Navajivan to be sent to you.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I am not writing separately to Kanta. Let her write to me.
From a photostat of the Hindi: Sumangal Prakash Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

1

Vide “Letter to V. V. Dastane”, 26-4-1932.
The letter appears in this place due to misreading of the year in Gujarati. It
should be read after item No: 430,
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

297

354. NECESSITY OF DRAWING UP A BALANCE-SHEET1
April 25, 1932
Many thoughts occur to me as I write the history of the Ashram.
I become aware of our many short-comings. These reflections have
led me to the conclusion that from time to time we should draw up a
balance-sheet of our progress. A business man draws up a daily, a
monthly and a half-yearly balance-sheet of his business, and a
comprehensive balance-sheet at the end of every year. We are
engaged in the business of spiritual seeking and, therefore, we should
draw up a balance-sheet of our spiritual progress. Everybody should
draw up such a balance-sheet for himself or herself and all of us
together for the Ashram as a whole. If we do not follow this practice,
we would become spiritually bankrupt, as a business man who is
negligent in drawing up the balance-sheet of his business would find
himself financially bankrupt. If we do not know whether we are
progressing or going backwards in keeping our vows and in our other
activities, we would become mechanical in all our work and, in the
end, become less efficient even than machines. In other words, we
would incur loss in our business.
How is such a balance-sheet to be drawn up? I will answer this
question by writing down a few questions.
1. Are we untruthful in our thoughts, speech or actions? ‘We’
means every one of us.
2. If that is the case, who are the guilty persons and on what
occasions were they guilty of untruth? What did they do when their
guilt was discovered and also what action did the Ashram take?
3. During all these years of the existence of the Ashram, have we
made any progress in this matter or have we become worse ?
4. We should ask these questions in regard to all the vows and
whenever we discover short-comings, we should try to think out
suitable remedies and employ them.
We can do the same with regard to the various activities in which
we are engaged. We have to think about them from two different
points of view. From the economic point of view, the question we
1

This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 25-4-1932; vide the
following item.

298

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

should ask is this: ‘Is the activity self-supporting?’ It is our faith that
if an activity is found economically self-supporting, from the moral
point of view also it is likely to have been carried on along proper
lines. If there is either loss or profit, we may be sure that there has
been a violation of moral principles somewhere. The second point of
view is this: ‘Is the activity carried on primarily with a religious
motive?’ It is essential that all our activities in the Ashram should be
carried on with a religious motive, for everything we do ought to be
subordinate to dharma that is, to truth.
Concerning both these—our vows and the other activities—I
cannot help asking the following questions:
1. How is it that in the Ashram itself people deceive one another
in small matters?
2. When shall we cease to distrust one another? What can we do
to bring this about?
3. How is it that burglars from outside still continue to raid the
Ashram?
4. Why is it that the inmates have too many personal
possessions?
5. Why have we not cultivated contacts with the neighbouring
villages? What is the best way of doing that?
6. Why do people continually fall ill in the Ashram?
7. What have we done for the labourers who work in the
Ashram? Why is it that they have not been attracted to come and live
in the Ashram? Or, rather, why should there be any labourers at all in
the Ashram? In the Ashram there should be no masters and labourers.
I can write down many more such questions. But these are
enough to show what I have in mind. I should like all people, young
and grown-up, to start thinking. This was certainly one of my aims in
insisting that all inmates should maintain a diary.
From a microfilm of the Gujarat: M.M.U./II

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

299

355. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 25, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

Change the name of “Ashram Samachar”. The name has given
rise to a needless argument whether it is not a newspaper. Since it is
not a newspaper in any sense of that word, a name which suggests that
it is, should also be dropped.
The title should be “Ashramvasi ane Anya Mitro Pratye’’1 , and
at the end Shankarbhai should sign: ‘Your servant, Shankar’. There
should be no subscription. No copy is sent to anybody who was not in
the Ashram. The [present or former] inmates of the Ashram who
receive copies must be contributing towards its expenses. If these
changes are made, I would be able to send to Chhaganlal and
Gangabehn the very copy you send without being obliged to make
fresh copies. I think this is quite clear.
If you have not sent the cotton, don’t send it now. I got a parcel
from Lady Vithaldas. The quantity will last me a long time.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Think over what I have said concerning the need for drawing up
a balance-sheet.2 I think something like that should be adopted as a
regular practice among us.
Tell Durga that Mahadev got her letter. His leg is completely all
right now. Treatment is going on for the teeth. Tell Jivanji that he
should not forget to send with some intending visitor Mahadev’s notes
concerning the Round Table Conference and his diary of our stay in
London and the other things which I have asked him to send. Ask
Manibehn to see me without fail when she goes to see Narahari. She
should fix with some inmate of the Ashram who may be coming to
this side and travel with him.
[Enclosed is a list of the names of 44 persons for whom I had
1
2

300

‘To Inmates of the Ashram and Other Friends’
Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

sent signed letters to Narandas. Along with that] 1 this letter to
Narandasbhai and the article on “The Necessity of a Balancesheet”.2
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8222. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

356. LETTER TO VERRIER ELWIN3
April 25, 1932
I wish you will not take to heart what the Bishop has been
saying. Your church is in your heart. Your pulpit is the whole earth.
The blue sky is the roof of your church. And what is this Catholicism?
It is surely of the heart. The formula has its use. But it is made by
man. If I have any right to interpret the message of Jesus as revealed
in the Gospels, I have no manner of doubt in my mind that it is in the
main denied in the churches, whether Roman or English, High or
Low. Lazarus has no room in those places. This does not mean that
the custodians know that the Man of Sorrows has been banished from
the buildings called Houses of God. In my opinion, this excommunication is the surest sign that the truth is in you and with you. But my
testimony is worth nothing, if when you are alone with your Maker,
you do not hear His voice saying, ‘Thou art on the right path.’ That is
the unfailing test and no other.
The Diary of Mahadev Desai, Vol. I, p. 87

357. LETTER TO A BENGALI ASPIRANT
FOR BRAHMACHARYA
April 25, 1932
I have your letter. Brahmacharya is a mental state. It is
undoubtedly helped by abstentiousness in all respects. But diet plays
the least part in giving one the necessary mental state. Not that wrong
diet will not hinder progress. What I want to say is that right diet, taken
in moderation, is not the only thing in the observance of
brahmacharya though it is undoubtedly one of the necessary things.
1

From Bapuna Patro-9: Shri Narandas Gandhine, Pt. I
This paragraph appears to have been added by Mahadev Desai.
3
The letter was in reply to the addressee’s letter in which he had said that a
Bishop had called him a traitor to Christ and had prohibited him from preaching in
churches.
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

301

Indulgence of the palate will be the surest sign of weak mental state
which is repugnant to brahmacharya. The sovereign remedy for the
observance of brahmacharya is realization that the soul is a part of the
Divine and that the Divine resides within us. A heart grasp of the fact
induces mental purity and strength. You should therefore read such
books as would enable you to grasp the central fact, cultivate such
companionship as would constantly make you think of the Divine
presence and follow all the directions given about fresh air, hip baths,
etc., in my book called Self-restraint v. Self-indulgence. And when
you are doing all these things regularly and industriously, do not
brood over all that happens, but have confidence that success is bound
to attend1 your effort.
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 117

358. A LETTER2
April 25, 1932
I have your pathetic letter. Seeing that God is to be found
within, no research in physical sciences can give one a living faith in
the Divine. Some have undoubtedly been helped even by physical
sciences, but these are to be counted on one’s finger-tips. My
suggestion therefore to you is not to argue about the existence of
Divinity, just as you do not argue about your existence, but simply
assume like Euclid’s axiom, that God is, if only because innumerable
teachers have left their evidence and what is more their lives are an
unimpeachable evidence. And then, as evidence of your own faithr
epeat Ramanama3 every morning and every evening at least for a
quarter of an hour each time and saturate yourself with the Ramayana
reading.
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 118

1

The source has “attain”.
The addressee, an MA., B.Sc., had written: “Having studied science
extensively, I cannot have faith in God, but I do feel that I should have it. How can I
cultivate it?”
3
The source has this in Devanagari.
2

302

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

359. LETTER TO A WOMAN
April 25, 1932
Laziness is not the only reason for your not writing the diary. It
is difficult to write the truth in it. Try to do it and see.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 120

360. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
April 26, 1932
DEAR COL. DOYLE,

I thank you for your two letters and am expecting early
information about my four friends in the Belgaum prison. Since
writing to you last, I have received two letters, one from Manibehn
Patel and one from Kakasaheb Kalelkar. From both the letters I could
see that the very information that I wanted was scratched out by the
Jail authorities at Belgaum. The letters therefore proved practically
valueless for the purpose for which they were intended. And reading
between the lines I could also see that Kakasaheb was not at all well.
However as you have kindly promised prompt attention, I am
not disturbing the peace of my mind.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No. 9

361. LETTER TO K. NATARAJAN2
April 26, 1932
DEAR MR. NATARAJAN,

I am sure you must have read the reports of an exhibition given
by an Indian yogi of his powers before an audience specially
assembled at the Gokuldas Tejpal Hospital. The yogi is reported to
have eaten a live viper’s head, nails, nitric acid, and the like, and that
the Chief Justice and his wife were among the distinguished audience.
1
2

For Doyle’s reply, vide “Letter from E. E. Doyle”, 28-4-1932
Editor, Indian Social Reformer

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

303

The report states that one lady was so disgusted at the eating of the
viper’s head that she abruptly left the hall before the exhibition was
finished. I do not know how you look at such exhibitions. In my
opinion they are degrading both for the demonstrator, as also for the
public. And if the demonstrator died, as he most likely would, if these
demonstrations were continued, those who encouraged him by
attending them, I should hold guilty of manslaughter. I do not think
that either science or humanity is served by such revolting exhibitions.
The text-books on Hatha yoga clearly lay down that the
Hathayogisare expected not to exhibit their yogic powers or make use
of them for purposes of gain. If you agree with me, will you not
initiate an agitation in the daily Press for preventing such cruel
exhibitions? One man, I suppose you know, recently died in Rangoon
precisely giving demonstrations such as the one reported in Bombay.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 123. Also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40)(3), Pt. I, p. 169

362. LETTER TO MAUDE ROYDEN
April 26, 1932
I thank you for your letter enclosing the correspondence
between yourself and Sir Erric Drummond 3 and Sir John Simon.
When I read about your movement4 , I did not think that you were in
any way showing preference to China over India. I then felt that you
were quite right in concentrating your energy over a situation that
2

1

In his reply Natarajan wrote: “I agree with you that exhibitions of the kind
you refer to are repulsive, and as they serve no useful purpose, they should be
discouraged by public opinion. They recall a saying of Ramakrishna Paramahamsa’s,
which I read somewhere. Someone asked him if it was possible to walk on water.
“Yes”, was his reply, “but sensible people pay a pice to the ferryman” (The Diary of
Mahadev Desai, Vol. I, p. 107). Vide also “Letter to K. Natarajan”, 25-5-1932.
2
Which read: “I hesitated to send you the correspondence because I fear you
must think that our first concern should have been India, but I believe you will
understand and sympathize with our sense of the extreme urgency of the hostilities
between China and Japan in the Far East. I, therefore, send these letters for your
information.” ( The Diary of Mahadev Desai, Vol. I, p. 89)
3
Secretary-General of the League of Nations
4
For organizing a Peace Army

304

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

threatened to involve bloodshed on a vastscale and that too by the
adoption of the method of satyagraha.
The Diary of Mahadev Desai, Vol. I, p. 90

363. LETTER TO V. V. DASTANE
April 26, 1932
BHAI DASTANE,

Shanta sent me your letter written in pencil. Vatsala seems to be
impatient to get her hair cropped. I have written 1 to her saying that
though I support her idea, 2 this was not a matter in which she could
disregard the wishes of her parents. Vatsala desires me to write to you.
I do feel that we should encourage our children to take a step like this
or that, if we cannot go so far as to encourage them, we ought to give
them complete freedom to act as they wish. Even if she changes her
mind later, it is not as if hair will not grow again. However, do not
attach any weight to my opinion in this matter. You may do as you
think fit, as you may have a number of reasons for not giving
yourpermission to Vatsala to do as she wishes. I hope you are in good
health. I envy the company you have got.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3086

364. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI M. PATEL
April 26, 1932
CHI. RAOJIBHAI,

I got all your letters, and I have also replied to them. I am very
glad that you go and see Abbas Saheb. I would be happy if you come
and see me here. But it would be more honourable for us if you do
not come. When we are trusted, we should interpret the conditions on
our side to our disadvantage. This is why I do not ask you to come.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8997

1
2

Vide “Letter to Vatsala V. Dastane”,24-4-1932.
Vide also “Letter to Ashram Girls”, 24-4-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

305

365. LETTER TO MAITHILISHARAN GUPTA
April 26, 1932
BHAI MAITHILISHARANJI,

I have your letter 1 . It is hardly a letter, it is sheer poetry. You
have won over me. I follow your point and from that viewpoint
Urmila’s grief is pertinent. As a matter of fact, I had no right to say a
word. My study of the scriptures is insignificant and of literature even
less. My knowledge of the vernacular too is of the same order. Being
well aware of my own short-comings, I gave you my impressions2 just
as they occurred to me. My friends, knowing my deficiencies but also
my devotion to Truth, ask for my opinion whatever its worth.
Prompted by love I sent you my comments, but I could never have
expected such a beautiful, poetic letter in reply. I shall preserve it and
read it again; which means that I must re-read Saket from the
viewpoint expounded by you. Although your language is pretty easy,
Ioccasionally find it difficult to understand it fully, owing to my
scanty knowledge of Hindi. Yet another reason of my difficulty is my
limited Hindi vocabulary. Is there any dictionary of Hindi wherein I
may find the meanings of all the difficult words used in Saket and
such other books? I know that a determined effort will by itself make
many things clear.
My vandemataram to Ajmeriji3 . I remember his bhajans very
well. God willing, I shall listen to them again some time.
Yes, I have written4 to Parasram to include Saket and Anagh in
the Ashram curriculum. Possibly a start has already been made.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From Hindi: C.W. 9456. Courtesy: Bharat Kala Bhavan, Varanasi

1

Dated April 15, 1932 (S.N. 19312).
Vide “Letter to Maithilisharan Gupta”, 5-4-1932
3
A Muslim poet who had presented a few of his works in Hindi to Gandhiji in
1929 during the latter’s visit to Jhansi
4
Vide, also “Letter to Parasram Mehrotra”, 18-4-1932
2

306

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

366. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
April 27, 1932
DEAR BOYS AND GIRLS,

I do think it would be harmful if boys and girls play hututu
together.1 In this game, the players catch and throw down one another.
Boys and girls cannot play such a game together. We should not
knowingly do something which may rouse impure feelings in us.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 9063. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

367. LETTER TO M. G. BHANDARI
April 27, 1932
DEAR MAJOR BHANDARI,

After all if a letter had to be written about getting the specialists
here, Sardar Vallabhbhai thought that he should write the letter
himself. Hence the enclosed from him. You will see in that letter
absence of any mention of 12 lb. loss of weight. Of course I wholly
disagree with you and the other doctors that these local troubles have
nothing to do with the digestive apparatus. As a layman I strongly
hold the conviction that the nose trouble has much to do with the loss
of weight. In Sardar Vallabhbhai’s case in spite of his strong will, I
know that the constant and irritating attention that the trouble invites
disturbs him as it would anybody. If nothing else, the disturbance
itself would be a sufficient cause to put a person off his food. I know
that in my case I should simply stop taking food if I had such trouble.
I would impute it to something wrong in the stomach in spite of
medical opinion to the contrary. All this however is merely by the
way.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No. 9
1

Vide also “A Letter”,23-4-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

307

368. FRAGMENT OF LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI1
April 27, 1932
I will still not give up hope of your reformation, for I have not
given up hope about myself. I have always believed that I was a bad
man when Ba carried you in her body, but after your birth I have
been doing greater and greater penance for my former life. How can
I, therefore, give up all hope? I will continue to hope as long as you
and I are alive. And hence, contrary to my usual practice, I am
preserving your letter so that, when you have awakened, you may see
the insolence of your letter and weep over it and laugh at your folly. I
am not preserving this letter to throw it in your face then, but only that
I may laugh at it, if God wills that I should see that day. All of us are
full of short-comings. But it is our dharma to overcome them. I pray
that you do so.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 125-6

369. LETTTER TO A SIKH
April 28, 1932
With reference to the growing of hair and beard I hold a totally
different view from yours.2 Whatever value outward symbols had
before, they do not and ought not to possess the superlative value that
you seem to attach to the growing of hair and beard. For me, I can see
no reason whatever for departing from a long established practice
which I have accepted for myself. I would far rather that people
judged me by my deeds than by my outward appearance.
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 129
1

The addressee had written a letter to Gandhiji demanding that his daughter,
Manu, should be taken away from the custody of his wife’s sister, Balibehn Vohra,
and be restored to him. He had also complained about Bali’s assault on him and
held Gandhiji responsible for it. Vide also “Letter to Manu Gandhi”, 4-4-1932 and
“Letter to Manu Gandhi”, 10-4-1932
2
The addressee had written: “I see not much difference between a true saint like
Guru Nanak Dev and your noble self. It will be in the fitness of things if the greatest
living Indian and the greatest man of the present world keep keshas like all the great
men of all times,” (Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol I, p. 128)

308

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

370. LETTER TO LAKSHMI JERAJANI
April 28, 1932
CHI. LAKSHMI,

I got your letter. You find it difficult to write in ink because you
are not accustomed to doing so. But once you get accustomed to it
you will discover that it is easier to write in ink than with pencil.
Moreover, there is greater pressure on the fingers when we write with a
pencil, and hence the hand gets tired sooner.
I myself had written the letter. If the handwriting resembles this,
then the letter was written with the left hand. My handwriting is
certainly bad. No one should copy me in that respect. My right thumb
is paining.
Blessings from Sardar, Mahadevbhai and me.
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 2810. Courtesy: Purushottam D. Saraiya

371. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 28, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

We have two iron machines for crushing nuts, like almonds, etc.
One was sent by Gregg and is brand new, and the other has been used
for some time. Keshu or Premabehn is likely to know about them.
They were used only by Pyarelal. Perhaps Kusum will know where
they are. If you can find them, send one of them to me immediately.
By ‘immediately’ I only mean that it may be sent with somebody who
is coming here to see me, or by railway parcel if it does not cost more
than eight annas. Let Keshu examine the machine before it is sent. He,
too, has had some experience of using them. My experiment with
almonds is going on. One person requires about five hours to crush
them, and the quantity lasts me barely nine days. If I eat more every
day, it would probably last only six days. Why should anybody, I
thought, have to labour so much when we have a machine for the
purpose ? Hence this request. Some almonds were crushed today and
they will last me till Friday week. If the machine arrives before then,
the problem will be solved. By the time you get this letter, you will
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

309

have received the letter which I wrote1 to you today about Harilal. I
expect this letter to be posted tomorrow, that is, on Friday.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8223. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

372. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
April 28, 1932
The question you have put me about the meaning of pinda and
brahmanda is a big one. But I will explain the idea in brief. For our
purpose, we may understand the word pinda to mean our body, and
the word brahmanda to mean the earth. Now, the statement [as in the
pinda, so in the brahmanda] means that everything that is in the body
is there in the earth, too, and likewise there is nothing in the earth
which is not in our body. The latter is composed of the same
substance as the earth. There are five elements of the earth, and the
body is made of the same five elements. Innumerable creatures exist
on the earth and also in the body. As one body perishes and another
is born, so the substance of the earth also is continually undergoing
transformations. We can amplify this analogy still further. But we can
deduce from what I have said, that if we know the real nature of our
body, we shall know the real nature of the earth as well and shall not
have to go far afield in seareh of knowledge. Our body is the nearest
thing to us, and if we understand it we shall have attained our object.
If we try to know about the earth, our knowledge will always be
incomplete. That is why wise men have told us that there is nothing in
the brahmanda which is not to be found in the pinda. Therefore, if we
know the self, that knowledge will include all other knowledge. But we
may also enjoy the knowledge of other things which we gain while we
strive for knowledge of the self, since we shall be enjoying it
asincidental to our pursuit of knowledge of the self . . .2 . I think that
Narasinhbhai has not thought deeply enough in interpreting the Gita.
We should not confuse the Krishna of the Gita with the Krishna of
1
This is not available. Vide, however, “Fragment of Letter to Harilal
Gandhi”,27-4-1932
2
Omission as in the source

310

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

history. The problem before Krishna was not that of violence or
non-violence. Arjuna shrank not from violence but from having to
kill his relations. Krishna, therefore, explained to him that in doing
one’s duty one ought not to treat one’s relations differently from
others. In the age when the Gita was composed, the men who
influenced its thought did not raise the question whether the violence
committed in war was right or not. That question seems to have been
raised only in modern times. The principle of non-violence was
accepted even then by all Hindus; but opinions differed then, as they
do now, as regards what involved violence and what did not. Our
descendants may see violence in many things in which we do not see it
today. For instance, we do destroy life when we consume milk or cook
cereals. It is conceivable that future generations may wish to refrain
from such violence and stop drinking milk and cooking cereals.
Today we commit this violence and still claim without any hesitation
that we observe non-violence. In exactly the same manner, war was
regarded such a normal thing in the age of the Gita that people did
not feel that they violated the principle of non-violence by engaging
in it. The illustration of the war in the Gita, therefore, seems to me
perfectly innocent. If, however, we reflect over the teaching of the
Gita as a whole and examine the characteristics of the sthitaprajna, of
the man who has merged in the Brahman, of the bhakta or of the
yogi, we can come to only one conclusion, namely, that the Shri
Krishna who taught the path of the Gita was literally an avatar of
ahimsa and his exhortation to Arjuna to fight does not in the least
detract from the purity of his ahimsa. On the contrary, if he had
advised Arjuna to follow any other course, I am sure that the
perfection of his knowledge would have been called in question and
he would never have come to be worshipped as the most perfect avatar
of God. You should read what I have written in this connection in
Anasaktiyoga1 .
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 127-8

1

Vide “Anasaktiyoga”

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

311

373. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
April 29, 1932
CHI. PARASRAM

1. It does not befit us to ask the questions you have asked about
Maulana Shaukat Ali. We should not pay attention to the
short-comings of other people or sit in judgment over anybody. We
should exhaust all our energies in examining ourselves. As long as we
can detect even a single weakness in ourselves and, despite it, inwardly
wish that our relatives, acquaintances and friends should not cut off
relations with us, we are not entitled to see short-comings inothers or
criticize them. If we unintentionally see such short-comings in
anybody, we may, if it lies in our power and if it is proper for us to do
so, ask the person concerned about them, but nobody else. There is no
gain in asking other people. However, since you wished to ask me,
you did quite well in doing so. For otherwise I would not have had an
opportunity to lecture to you in this way.
And now I reply to your question. From a distance and on the
basis of the known facts only, we should not approve of the
Maulana’s activities. However, I cannot arrive at any definite opinion
without hearing in detail about his activities from his own mouth.
According to me, it is not correct to say that the followers of the
Prophet ought to, or may, do all things done by him. All people are
not entitled to do everything that the great men may have done. We
have seen that such imitation leads to undesirable results. However, we
find that Hindus, Muslims and followers of other faiths do not only
not follow this golden rule always, but even act as if they were entitled
to do certain things because the Prophets or avatars had done them.
Seeing that this is the general attitude, I am not surprised that the
Maulana has cited the Prophet’s example.
2. What we do about Bhishma and others we may also apply to
social workers of the present day. I feel that the present practice of
(offering) jalanjali needs reform.
Everyone who has written to me on the subject had nothing but
praise about the Ramayana class which you have been conducting.
Go on in the same interesting way. It would be in my view a great
achievement if all at the Ashram come to love speaking in Hindi and
312

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

become interested in the Ramayana. I am, therefore, very much
pleased that you have thrown yourself heart and soul into this work.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7495. AIso C.W. 4972. Courtesy:
Parasram Mehrotra

374. LETTER TO JAMNABEHN GANDHI
April 30, 1932
CHI. JAMNA,

I got your letter. I think that if you definitely feel better in
Bombay than at any other place, you should go there. You should
observe the rules, that is, the vows of the Ashram. You should behave
courteously with everyone and make yourself useful wherever you
live.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 852. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

375. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
April 30, 1932
CHI. MANGALA (DARLING),

To follow one’s atman does not mean acting as one pleases. It
means obeying the voice of God who dwells in our heart. We pray
daily, keep vows and practise self-control in order that we may hear
Him. When we are convinced that we have heard the voice of the Lord,
we should not worry no matter who is displeased with us.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4084. Also C.W. 48. Courtesy:
Mangalabehn B. Desai

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

313

376. LETTER TO MATHURI N. KHARE
April 30, 1932
CHI. MATHURI,

This time your handwriting was better. You should write like this
every time and keep on trying to improve it still further.
God is self-created. He is not born. If He were born, what would
be the meaning of saying that He was God?
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 265. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare

377. LETTER TO VIDYA R. PATEL
April 30, 1932
CHI. VIDYA,

It is not at all necessary to wear a pin in your hair. Dreams come
to everybody. Nobody knows why they come. You will be able to
improve your handwriting if you try hard enough. Do not get
disheartened.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 9426. Courtesy: Ravindra R. Patel

314

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

378. FRAGMENT OF A DRAFT LETTER TO LORD SANKEY
May 1, 1932
You have given judgment against me on evidence of which I
have been kept in ignorance and your judgment has been given at a
time when I have been rendered incapable of defending myself.1
The Diary of Mahadev Desai, Vol. I, p. 97

379. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI P. PANDYA
May 1, 1932
CHI BHAGWANJI,

It is good that you wrote to me. I am going to write about the
subject 2 ; so I do not expatiate on it here. You drew the attention of a
responsible person to what you felt was a slip. Now you have only to
watch what he would do. As for you, you have done your duty.
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 346. Courtesy: Bhagwanji P. Pandya

1

Mahadev Desai explains: “Bapu was deeply pained to read Sankey’s article in
Newsletter. He said it was a vicious piece of writing and he felt he should write to its
author. . . .
The Sardar who was listening to the dictation remarked: ‘Instead of writing
such a longish letter, why don’t you simply tell him that he is a liar?’
Bapu laughed and replied, ‘In fact I have said something stronger still. I say
his conduct is ungentlemanly. I go further and say that he has betrayed a friend or
colleague. This is something that would cut an Englishman to the quick, but I have
written what I felt. People like Shafi and the Aga Khan who met him every now and
then must have told him all these lies. And he not only believed them to be true, but
never asked me about them and throws the blame on me now when I am in prison....’
The keenness of Bapu’s feeling is evident from this sentence in the first draft
of the letter....
Part of the sentence was later replaced with the following: ‘You have given it
after rendering me incapable of defending myself.’ . . .
It is not true again that my claim is exaggerated. Why should our claim to
independence be considered exaggerated? It may be so considered if I propose to
reduce England to slavery. I set forth the Congress demand in my speeches but during
the discussions I dealt with any number of formulas.” (The Diary of Mahadev Desai,
Vol I, pp. 96 -7)
2
The reference is to “Lesson of the National Week”, 2-5-1932
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

315

380. LETTER TO MOHAN N. PARIKH
May 1, 1932
CHI. MOHAN,

A boy of your age should study, play and do some work. He
should also pray. I hope that if you go to Belgaum you will certainly
come here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9179

381. LETTER TO MANIBEHN N. PARIKH
May 1, 1932
CHI. MANI (PARIKH),

I was expecting that you would come this week. When you
come, most probably you will be able to see Mahadev too. I now get
news from Belgaum.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5972. Also C.W. 3289. Courtesy:
Vanamala M. Desai .

382. LETTER TO NARAYAN DESAI
May 1, 1932
CHI. NARAYANRAO ALIAS NARAYAN DESAI ALIAS BABLO,

If we read the Gita and understand it, we shall know how to do
our duty. By spinning during the National Week or at other times, we
increase the wealth of the country and serve the poor.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9479

316

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

383. LETTER TO PUSHPA S. PATEL
May 1, 1932
CHI. PUSHPA,

Gandhiraj means that a person, that is Gandhi, will rule the
country. What is the good of that? In swaraj, everybody will rule, and
everybody will include you, me and all others. If you do not
understand how that can be, ask Premabehn to explain it to you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3987. Also C.W. 33. Courtesy:
Pushpabehn N. Naik

384. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK1
May 1, 1932
CHI. PREMA,

If the burden of work is excessive on you, I cannot accept your
view that it cannot be reduced. That view betrays ignorant attachment
and weakness. I can believe that the cause of your irritability lies in
yourself and not in the weight of work on you. If that is so, you will
gradually learn to keep your balance, for you will not deceive
yourself for a long time. I do not, however, wish to pester you about
this. Try to harden your sensitive nature.
Among our books there are some Urdu ones. A few of them are
likely to be with Imam Saheb. Inquire in the Ashram too. If you
cannot identify them, Parasram will certainly be able to do so. If you
find Sirat-Un-Nabi among these books, send it to me. It is written
by Maulana Shibli. There is another biography of Nabi written by
Dr. Mahomed Ali. Send that too. The Sirat is in two parts.You are
surrounded on all sides by labourers, and the life which they lead is
the only true life. That has been the idea behind the Ashram. True, the
labourers should be seekers after truth. Are you not one? Are not the
other women and the men also such seekers? I believe that everyone is
1
This was in reply to her letter complaining of mental exhaustion. She had
also stated that she was unhappy and felt dissatisfied, and that separation from
Gandhiji pained her.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

317

so to the best of his or her capacity.
You ask me when you will be able to visit me. If you use your
eyes, you cannot but see me. My spirit dwells there, though the body
may be here, and it will continue to dwell there even if the latter is
reduced to ashes. It is quite possible that when I am there in body, my
soul may not be there. Understand this truth and give up your
ignorant idea.
One must feel discontent, but it should be regarding oneself.
The day one believes that one has become perfect, one’s fall has
begun. Hence one ought to be discontented about oneself. But such
discontent does not mean that one should wish all the time to take up
new duties.
I cannot, however, explain all this by argument. Time will do its
work. Where you see pitch darkness today, you will see light
tomorrow. “Premal Jyoti”1 seems to me to be the only bhajan which
truthfully describes this condition of mind. The meaning is very well
brought out in Gujarati. The original English is a marvellous creation,
though.
I have been told that Dhurandhar keeps fairly good health. What
is your present weight? How much milk and curds do you take?
How many volumes do you think there are in the library?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10283. Also C.W. 6731. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

385. LETTER TO VANAMALA N. PARIKH
May 1, 1932
CHI. VANAMALA,

Just as from one grain of wheat grow millions of grains, so from
two human beings millions of human beings may be born. You can
know this even by doing a multiplication sum on your slate. Try to do
it.
I did not say that we should merely learn to turn the charkha
with the left hand. What is necessary is that we should learn to do with
1

A Gujarati rendering, by Narasinhrao B. Divetia, of Newman’s “Lead, Kindly

Light”.

318

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the left hand everything which we can do with the right hand. To start
with, try to write and eat with your left hand and clean your teeth with
it, and after that you may try to do other things.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5772. Also C.W. 2995. Courtesy:
Vanamala M. Desai

386. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
May 1, 1932
CHI. SHARDA,

Learn everything about spinning. Spinning is not for those who
can get other useful occupations. That is why mill-hands are not told
to spin for a wage. Spinning is meant for the millions of Indians who
do not have an occupation for six months in the year. In short, a
person may spin under any pretext; what his spinning adds to the
wealth of the nation is the benefit we get from it.
Khadi is to be preferred because through it we serve the poor to
the utmost.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9910. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

387. LETTER TO VIMAL KISHORE MEHROTRA
May 1, 1932
CHI. VIMAL,

Write in ink. Anyway, you did well in writing to me.
Learn about the yajna from Parasram and, if it needs further
explanation, do write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 4973. Courtesy: Parasram Mehrotra. Also G.N. 7496

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

319

388. LETTER TO SANTU
May 1, 1932
CHI. SANTU,

We must make the least use of weapons which can hurt as we
want to observe non-violence. I have not opposed the practice of lathi
and lezim. I have found no fault with wax candles.
BAPU

[From Hindi]
From a photostat: G.N. 7712

389. LESSON OF THE NATIONAL WEEK1
May 2, 1932
I received a letter from Shri Bhagwanji regarding the selfpurification week celebrated in April last. In that letter he draws my
attention to the waste of cotton which occurs and he also suspects that
some persons knowingly gave a higher figure for the yarn spun by
them. He states that the waste was of two kinds: one, the quantity of
broken threads was more than permissible, and, two, since the spinning
was done with excessive speed the count of the yarn spun was very
low.2
If anybody knowingly gave a wrong figure for the yarn spun by
him or her, I would regard it as a serious matter. Such conduct would
be a blot on the good name of the Ashram. The spinning done by a
person who gives a wrong figure will not be accepted by God as
yajna. The figure entered in our records has no value. The real value
of the spinning done remains what it is. It cannot be increased or
diminished by entering a higher or lower figure in our record.
Besides, the cash value of the yarn is no more than a few annas; its real
value lies in the sincerity of the motive with which the spinning is
done. That value can never be estimated by us. It is recorded only in
the divine book, for who but God can understand man’s motives.
1

This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 28-4/2-5-1932; vide
the following item.
2
For Gandhiji’ reply to Bhagwanji P. Pandya, vide “Letter to Bhagwanji P.
Pandya”, 1-5-1932

320

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

However, we have one test. If such yajna does not yield the expected
result in time, we may conclude that there is some impurity in us. Let
everybody examine his work from this point of view and, if anybody
has been guilty of untruth, let him or her humbly confess it and so
purify himself or herself. We cannot, in the Ashram, keep a secret
watch over anybody; most of the work is carried on the basis of trust
in one another. The Ashram cannot be run on any other basis.
Everybody, therefore, should know his duty and do it. Let the inmates
also think if they have been guilty of anything else besides giving
wrong figures for yarn. Were they slack in doing the spinning? Did
they do it as a task forced on them? Did they give to it less than the
appointed time? Did they throw away the broken threads? This is the
condition for a true yajna: the person doing it should give his
whole-hearted attention to the work, and do it with all his skill and
intelligence.
Let nobody believe that he or she may behave anyhow
throughout the year and still be able to observe the rules explained
above during the National Week. It should be remembered that one’s
whole life in the Ashram has to be a continuous yajna. Among all its
activities, spinning is the supreme yajna. The only difference between
the National Week and the rest of the year is that we give more time to
spinning during that Week.
I suggest that the following rules should be observed in future:
1. If the yarn is of less than 20 counts, the spinning should not
be regarded as yajna.
2. If the waste exceeds a fixed limit, the spinning should not be
regarded as yajna.
3. If the strength of the yarn comes to less than a fixed limit,
then also the spinning should not be regarded as yajna.
In yajna or any other work, the neatness of the product and the
sincerity with which the work is done are more important than the
number or quantity of what is produced. Fifty bullocks who are
physically unfit will prove a burden on the owner, whereas one strong
bullock will do his work well. Fifty knives with blunt edges will not be
useful in mincing vegetables, but one knife with a sharp edge will do
the work perfectly. We should, therefore, learn to give our full
attention to every work which we do. We should devote the next
[National] Week exclusively to this subject.
I observe that some inmates find spinning a boring work and
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

321

prefer something else. There is one natural weakness in this attitude. A
person is bored by the work which he has to do every day and
persuades himself that, if he had been doing some other work instead,
he would not get bored in that manner. However, if that other work
becomes his daily work, he would ask for something else still. Besides,
consciously or unconsciously persons who do spinning think of the
low earnings from that work. According to the standpoint of Ashram
this is a wrong attitude. The wage for spinning is the lowest because it
is the only work at present which millions can do and which can help
them to earn a little money. All of us, therefore, do voluntary spinning
as yajna in order to popularize the work. The idea behind yajna is
that we dedicate the work to God and have faith that He will provide
us the wherewithal for our maintenance. Let everyone understand this
significance of yajna and daily do the yajna of spinning with
whole-hearted devotion and with zest.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

390. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 28/ [May 2, 1932] 1
CHI. NARANDAS,

I have already written to you today a letter 2 about the problem
of Harilal. I hope you will receive it without delay. I need not,
therefore, write anything more about the matter.
Send more pills for Gangabehn made from ten tolas of chaiarj
and ten tolas of asafoetida. I had received the quantity which I had
asked you earlier to send. If, you send the pills with somebody who is
coming here to see me, I will arrange for their being delivered to her.
Personally, I liked Tilakam’s going to Thana. Others also may
go, if they are not likely to be a burden on Pyare Ali. That would look
nice too, for we should be as happy to be a Muslim’s guest as a
Hindu’s. Besides, it would be a painful thing if anybody felt that,
since Tilakam was not one of us and since he came from an Antyaja
family, the present arrangement was good enough for him. If Jamna
willingly goes there, Noorbanu will shower love on her. Since the first
day that we met I have always felt a beautiful light of purity shining in
her eyes.
1
2

322

Inferred from the contents
Vide footnote on “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 28-4-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I hope Gangadevi is all right now. I had a letter from Santok.
She says that she would like Radha to stay on in Deolali for four
months more. If that is likely to restore her health completely, it
would be all right. I have had no letter at all from Ba.
I cannot say that the change of hands in spinning has reduced
the pain. But I see that, had I not made this change, I would have been
unable to continue working. I can see from my experience of drawing
the rounds with the right hand that slowly rotating the wheel causes
much less strain in the elbow than drawing the rounds hour after hour.
I now draw about 200 rounds daily with the right hand. That is five or
ten more than the number I used to draw with the left hand a week
ago. The average then was 187_ [rounds] a day, or say rather that I
kept up that average with an effort. Of course, more time is spent now
in spinning. But in any case I had been giving more time in a week
previously. From every point of view, therefore, the present practice
seems all right. There is no cause at all for worrying about the
condition of my hand.
There is, of course, no ban on printing copies of “Watching the
Heavens” and the other articles I send, but I think it would be wiser
not to print any. Rather than print copies, the better course would be
for somebody to dictate to a group of five to ten persons. This would
be more in keeping with our principles. By following this practice, we
would learn again the art of writing a neat hand. The copies made in
this manner could then be circulated among those who might wish to
read the articles. Those persons may make more copies if they wish
to. Or everybody should pass on the copy supplied to him, on the
same day on which he receives it, to another person whose name is
given to him. In this way it will be possible to circulate a few copies
among a large number of persons and all those who get them will read
the article with special interest and derive greater benefit from it.
Think over this.
[May 2, 1932]
Read carefully what I have written about the work done during
the National Week this time. If you agree with me, show it to all others,
and also try to follow in practice as much of it as can be done. If you
wish to make any changes in my suggestions, you may certainly do
so. I have, generally speaking, only my experience to go by. In the
Ashram you have a veritable mine of experience. It is possibIe,
therefore, that you will find some of my suggestions impracticable,
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

323

but there is no doubt that we ought to pay attention to the fineness of
the count and strength of yarn and to reducing waste. At the
examination, this was the method of evaluation formerly adopted. The
candidate was awarded marks equal to the figure of the count
multiplied by that of the strength. I do not know what method is
followed now. I would introduce the factor of waste in calculating the
marks—reduce the marks in proportion to the quantity of waste.
Mahadev and I have thought out this method. Waste up to one tola for
every pound [of yarn] may be condoned. If the waste exceeds one
tola, for every additional tola the marks arrived at by multiplying the
figure of the count by that of the strength should be reduced by
sixteen. That is, the marks should be reduced by one for every 1/16
tola of waste. If the waste is as much as ten tolas, the candidate should
fail. However, you yourself may decide whether waste, of one tola or
of more than one tola per pound should be condoned. I have given
the figures merely as illustrations to explain my idea. If I were an
examiner, I would even take into account how the candidate sat when
spinning, in what condition he maintained his spinning-wheel, whether
he kept the place where he sat for spinning quite clean and whether he
could repair a spinning-wheel when it went out of order, and calculate
marks for all these. This means that the work of the candidates would
be constantly observed by somebody. This observer would be one of
the examiners at the test. I would not mind if such a practice had the
effect of reducing our output. What is essential is that we should be
sure in our minds that we were vigilant and were progressing from day
to day. I have stated in the accompanying note 1 that when the yarn
spun is of less than 20 counts, the spinning should not be counted as
yajna. This does not mean that no credit should be given for the
spinning done. The candidate would go on spinning every day and be
awarded marks for his work, the yarn could be made use of, but such
a spinner should not be considered to be performing yajna. He would
be only a candidate.
Read the letter which I have written to Dr. Mehta. Forward to
Jetpur the letter which I have written to Manjula, Maganlal’s2 wife. I
have forgotten her father’s name. If you do not remember it, Champa
or Ratilal will probably know it. Read the letter before sealing it, and
communicate the address to me also. I have already written to you
1
2

324

On the National Week; vide the preceding item.
Dr. Pranjivan Mehta’s youngest son who had gone abroad
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

regarding Kusum. Nobody has come to see me till now except
Trivenibehn. About Budhabhai, do what you think proper.
Post the accompanying letter to Hill only if you think it is all
right, for if he comes just now it is you who will have to shoulder the
burden. You must have received my letter regarding Harilal. I had
another letter of bitter complaint from Manu.
BAPU

[PS]
In some of the letters this time, I have omitted “Blessings
from”. The words are understood. I have omitted them to save time.
As I write with the left hand, I naturally like to save as many words as I
can. You will observe that I pay more attention to making every letter
in a ,word distinct. I think that, if I write still more slowly, the
handwriting with the left hand may be a little better. Is there no limit
to the wishes of an old man who has arrived at death’s door?
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8224. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

391. TELEGRAM TO DAHYABHAI PATEL1
May 2, 1932
[REGARD

THIS

AS]

RELEASE

FROM

LIVING

DEATH.

Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 132

392. TELEGRAM TO MANIBEHN PATEL
May 2, 1932
YASHODA
FROM

PASSED

LIVING

AWAY

YESTERDAY.

REGARD

THIS

AS

RELEASE

DEATH.

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 83

1

Vallabhbhai Patel’s son. According to Mahadev Desai, this was sent on
receipt of the news about the death of addressee’s wife, Yashoda.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

325

393. LETTER TO SIR SAMUEL HOARE
May 2, 1932
DEAR SIR SAMUEL,

I am grateful to you for your reply 1 to my letter of the 11th
March. I had hardly expected any reply to that letter. I wrote it purely
as a matter of duty that I thought I owed you. However much we may
differ in our views, in all I may do I want to be correct to the best of
my ability and knowledge. I quite agree with you that you could not
possibly have said more than you have done in your letter under
reply, so far as the first part is concerned. As to the second part of
your letter, it would ill become me, as a prisoner, to enter into any
argument on merits. I must therefore content myself by simply
declaring my conviction that even the newspapers that I am permitted
to receive show how grossly misinformed you must be with reference
to the state of things in this country.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 9556. Courtesy: India Office Library

394. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
May 3, 1932
DEAR AGATHA,

I have your letter of the 15th ultimo. Yes, Mahadev is with us.
You have in English the saving that two is company, three is none.
Somehow or other we three are belying that saying and are getting on
quite well. You must be feeling considerably relived now that you
have Deenabandhu with you. 2 Whether you call Mahadev’s little
hope—or shall we say big hope?—Master Desai or some other it is the
same thing to him, because he is utterly innocent of English. But the
1

Vide “Letter from Sir Samuel Hoare”, 13-4-1932
The addressee was helping C. F. Andrews and this was one of “the ways in
which she interpreted Mr. Gandhi’s request . . . to work for mutual understanding
between India and Britain” (Agatha Harrison, p. 68).
2

326

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

book you have sent I have no doubt contains many pictures. These he
will enjoy without stopping to inquire how you have addressed him.1
With love from us both.
BAPU

[PS.]
Love to Charlie.
From a photostat: G.N. 1453

395. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
May 3, 1932
I got your letter. I would not worry over the loss of twelve
pounds of weight, if your strength has not gone down and you suffer
from no particular disease. I frequently write to Taramati, and this
time she also has been writing fairly often. In the last letter Dilip2 also
wrote two lines. Of course I had to ask for that favour. By now
Taramati must have visited you.
According to me, rebirth is a fact proved by scientific
experiments and by people’s memories of past lives. To accept such
memories as proof, we have to put trust in men who have narrated
their experiences. But so many persons have borne witness to their
remembering their past lives that we cannot brush aside their evidence.
I would not, however, spend time convincing anybody about the
reality of rebirth; nor would I enter into too much argument on the
subject. There are several things scientifically established, our disbelief
in which is of no great consequence in our lives. It is possible that
rebirth may be so defined by somebody that the usual proof offered
in support of it will not satisfy him. My own definition of it is just this.
The soul does not cease to exist with the end of the body, but migrates
from one existence to another, and that is rebirth. That is, I would say
that even Christians, Muslims and Zoroastrians who believe in the Day
of Judgment believe in rebirth according to my definition of it. The
acquisition of another body, in my view, follows as a necessary
corollary from this belief. However, I know that the traditional
Christian view does not permit it, though an increasing number of
1

Up to this the letter is in Mahadev Desai’s hand; the rest is in Gandhiji’s left

2

Addressee’s son

hand.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

327

Christians now believe in the possibility of the soul getting another
body. Lagnantar will not serve as a Gujarati equivalent of ‘divorce’.
Lagnantar means another marriage, which is possible even without a
divorce. If no current word is available, I would coin a new word
Lagnabhanga. On my asking Mahadev, he says that he was going to
suggest this very word. So we have, as the saying goes, two
prescriptions of the same cure for an illness.
Taramati will probably find it difficult to get the ‘Yeravda
chakra’—the Yeravda spinning-wheel—in Bombay. I am writing to
her and advising her to write to Bardoli or the Ashram and ask them
to send it directly to you. Your interpretation of Gita, XVIII. [66]
cannot contradict mine. I do not now remember what the
interpretation I offered in my letters was. But I would certainly oppose
your interpretation if you tried to make out the idea of surrender to
God to be a path in itself unconnected with other duties. I have often
noticed that what we have said or wish to say had already been said by
somebody else in different words. Instead of noting a difference or
contradiction between the two explanations, I see the identity of
meaning. What does it matter if the language differs? I am aware that
there are certain risks in following this method, but they exist only for
those persons who twist the meanings of words to see and prove the
identity of the meaning of the passages in question. I don’t think
there is any such risk for a person who sees such identity
spontaneously. Hence, the question we face is, whether the better
course is to form the habit of seeing identity of meaning or to
proceed on the assumption that difference in language indicates
difference in meaning. In my view, it is dangerous to see difference in
meaning in verbal difference. I very much like to see identity rather
than difference of meaning between Ishvar and Allah.
It seems that apart from Kishorelal and Jairamdas you have no
other companions. Ask them to write to me if they can without
forgoing their right to write an ordinary letter, or include in such
ordinary letter what they wish to write to me. I had one letter from
Jairamdas, to which I replied. It is not at all necessary for you to let go
writing a letter to Taramati for the sake of being able to write to me. It
would be enough if you include in your letter to Taramati whatever
you wish to communicate to me; or, if you write in the letter to me
what you wish to tell her, to that at any rate there can be no objection.
We three are happy here. It is now three months since I gave up
328

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

milk. In its place, I take almonds with bread. So far, the weight has
been maintained. And there is no complaint of constipation, so that I
am carrying on with this diet for the present.
Mahadev points out that in Marathi they use the word
vivahavichchheda for lagnabhanga. Both the words had occurred to
me but I liked legnabhanga better. However, I would certainly accept
the word vivahavichchheda and perhaps even prefer it since I
supportthe view that the terms newly coined in Indian languages
should be uniform.
Convey our due regards to the company there.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, pp. 107-9

396. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
May 3, 1932
DEAR SISTERS,

I had intended to send this letter along with the post dispatched
today, but forgot to do so as I was in some hurry and hard pressed for
time. After the packet of letters was handed over for posting, I
remembered, and could still have written to you and sent the letter, but
decided to put off. I hope all of you help in nursing Gangadevi. At
the Ashram, it is our aim to create such an atmosphere that no one,
including children and the old persons there, should feel the absence
of relations. Anybody who regulates his or her life by the principles
of dharma should first look after those whom he or she does not
regard as relations. For, one’s relations are not likely to remain
uncared for, and if one makes it a point always to pay attention first to
persons who are not one’s relations, by and by one would learn to pay
equal attention to relations and others. It is a matter of congratulation
that the children of Rabaris1 are attending Manibehn’s classes. I was
glad to read what you wrote about the girls. You will have taken a
great step forward if you are able to act towards them exactly as you
have indicated in your letter. Two girls have put me this question in
their letter: ‘May girls use bob-pins or hair-pins? Should they bind
the hair with ribbons?’ I have replied to them as I thought fit, but I
put the matter before you also. I think that neither of the two things is
1

A cattle-breeding community

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

329

necessary. At least they were not in the past. In the West the women do
their hair in different styles so that every woman needs a great number
of hair-pins and ribbons without number. But we do not care for
outward adornment and it does not befit us. It is our duty to save
every pie that we can, like misers; for the money which is given to us
is not our property, we are only its trustees and, therefore, we are
entitled to use out of it only just enough to feed and clothe the body.
I, therefore, believe that hair-pins, etc., have no place in our life. We
should seek our happiness and that of our children only in such
manner as befits us.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 9091. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

397. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
May 4, 1932
DEAR COL. DOYLE,

I thank you for your prompt reply 1 of 2nd instant in connection
with my four friends and co-workers in the Belgaum Central Prison.2 I
thought that you would give me their weights. I would still like to have
them for additional satisfaction.
I am not free from anxiety yet about Kaka Kalelkar. He often
suffers from pain in the spine. From the diet scale allowed to him I
miss butter altogether. You may remember that he had 4 oz. of butter
allowed to him here in addition to milk, bread and vegetables, and I
know that he was able to take all that butter without suffering any
harm and he was able to put on weight and feel energy coming to
him, whereas when he was received here he felt weak and could with
difficulty take regular exercise. I would therefore like to know what
his weight is now and whether he suffers from any pain in the spine.
The letter he was permitted to write to me distinctly states that he had
that pain at the time of writing, i.e., on 13th April last.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No. 9
1

Vide “Letter from E. E. Doyle”, 2-5-1932
Vide “Letter to R. V. Martin”, 13-4-1932 and “Letter to E. E. Doyle”,
22-4-1932
2

330

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

398. LETTER TO PERCY W. BARTLETT
May 4, 1932
DEAR FRIEND,

I received your letter only last Saturday1 together with the Poet’s
draft appeal2 . I do not know that you expect me to say anything now.
But this I can say, that I should yield to no one in my desire for
conciliation and peace. You may therefore depend on my doing
nothing that will prevent them. Consistently with national honour, I
would do everything that would promote conciliation and peace.
More I may not say from behind the prison wall.
I am glad you and the other friends3 were able to visit India and
hope that you were none the worse for its climate.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(3), Pt. I, p. 193

399. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
May 4, 1932
CHI. RAMDAS,

From Narandas’s letter received yesterday, I learnt that Nemu
had returned to the Ashram.
I am afraid I may not have been able to explain in my last letter
what I wanted to say. It has always been my view that asatyagrahi
should never fight about his food. He should thank God for whatever
he gets and eat it.
1
April 30. On April 29, the Secretary of State for India, Sir Samuel Hoare, in
his speech in the Commons had said: “There dearly cannot be any question of
co-operation with anyone associated with civil disobedience. If Mr. Gandhi shows a
disposition to restore the relations which existed at the Round Table Conference, he
will not find the slightest difficulty in conveying the fact to the Government without
any intermediary. The Government will consider the position thus created. But one
thing is quite clear, that there will be no question of making a bargain with the
Congress as a condition of its co-operation” (The Hindu, 24-6-1932).
2
Vide “Rabindranath Tagore’s Appeal”, 22-3-1932
3
Members of the Fellowship of Reconciliation, who had visited India in
Mareh 1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

331

The jailor is the master of a prisoner’s body. Hence, a
satyagrahi should accept whatever food is served to him so long as he
can do so with self-respect and the food is not unclean or of a kind
which he cannot eat. He may eat it if he thinks that he can digest it,
otherwise he may throw it away or return it if he has not already
started eating it. In this age, the laws of good health are generally
observed in fixing prisoners’ food. However, what should one do if
they give only rotla and water?
One may discuss the matter courteously with the official but one
cannot fight about it.
People can get many things, have got many things, by creating
trouble for the authorities. But we ought not to adopt such methods.
I, therefore, believe that you should not protest at all regarding
the bhaji which is being served. Those who wish may eat it and others
may leave it. We should thank God even if we get only rotlas and dal.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 135

400. LETTER TO TARAMATI MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
[May 4, 1932] 1
CHI. TARAMATI,

I have a letter from Mathuradas. He says in the letter that he has
asked for a Yeravda Chakra. If you do not have it at home or have not
sent it already, write to Bardoli or to the Ashram with instructions to
send it. It would be preferable to write to Bardoli as it would be ready
there. At Bardoli Lakshmidasbhai will receive the letter if you address
it to the Khadi Karyalaya. If you enclose this postcard with the letter,
your work will become easier. Jyotsna must have recovered by now.
Mahadev sends you his regards.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI TARAMATI MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
ASAR VIRJI’S BUILDING, 5 TH F LOOR
53 M INT R OAD
F ORT BOMBAY
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1

332

From the postmark
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

401. LETTER TO NANABHAI I. MASHRUWALA
May 5, 1932
BHAI NANABHAI,

Thinking about the matter objectively, I am indifferent whether
Manilal and Sushila come or do not come. In view of his vow, it would
be good if they come but from the point of view of the health of all
three1 of them it would be better if they do not come. Only they can
tell how strictly they interpret his vow. However, from what I know of
Manilal’s nature I guess that he would not put an objective and strict
interpretation on his vow and Sushila also, willingly or unwillingly,
would identify herself with his point of view. This is my analysis of
their character. They are both good and simple-minded so that,
wherever they are, they will take up some work of service and do their
best.
As for revising Anasaktiyoga, I need the presence of Kishorelal.
Unless somebody wakes me up, I shall regard the book with a closed
mind. I shall see what Mahadev can do. If I getKishorelal’s notes, I
will certainly go through them carefully and make whatever changes I
can think of. I must say you have planted your feet in a good many
directions. Does Surendra maintain his weight? Do you hear from
Tara? Regards to you both from all of us here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6683. Also C.W. 4328. Courtesy:
Kanubhai Mashruwala

402. LETTER TO IBRAHIMJI RAJKOTWALA
May 5, 1932
I got your letter. If you ask reason for proof of the existence of God,
what proof can reason give since God is above all reason? For, if you
say that nothing is beyond rational explanation, you will certainly run
into difficulties. If we give the highest place to reason, we shall be
faced with serious difficulties. Our own atman is beyond reason.
People have indeed tried to prove its existence with logical arguments,
1

Manilal, Sushila and their daughter

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

333

as they have tried to prove the existence of God. But he who knows
God and the atman with his intellect only does not know them at all.
Reason may be a useful instrument of knowledge at one stage. But
anybody who stops there will never enjoy the benefits of true spiritual
knowledge, in the same way that intellectual knowledge of the benefits
of eating food does not by itself help one to enjoy those benefits. God
or the atman is not an object of knowledge. He Himself is the
Knower. That is why we say that He is above reason. There are two
stages of knowledge of God. The first is faith, and the second and the
last is first-hand experience to which faith leads. All great teachers of
the world have testified to their having had such experience, and
people whom the world would ordinarily dismiss as fools have also
demonstrated their faith. If we have faith, like theirs, one day we may
have first-hand experience too. If a person sees somebody with his
eyes but, being deaf, cannot hear him and then complains that he had
not heard him, he would net be justified. Similarly, to say that reason
cannot know God betrays ignorance. Just as hearing is not the
function of the eyes, so also knowing God is not the function of the
senses or of reason. To know Him a different kind of faculty is
required, and this is unshakable faith. We know from experience that
reason can be all too easily deceived. But we have not known
anybody, howsoever mighty he may be, who could deceive true faith.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 136-7

403. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
Y. M.,

May 5, 1932
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

Dahyabhai first gave me the news about Indu’s illness. I have
now obtained more information from Shankerlal. How did Indu fall
ill? How is she now? Is it because of her illness that you are there?
How long will you remain there? How are you?
Tell Saralabehn I am deliberately not writing any letter to her.
Of course I think of everybody.
We are well.
334

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You must have come to know of Yashoda’s 1 death. Give our
regards to everybody there,
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: G. N. 11557

404. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

May 5, 1932
CHI. SHANKERLAL,

I have your letter. Take care of your health in every way
possible. If you are in good health, other things can be taken care of.
What advice can I give you at the moment? What can I even suggest?
May God protect you.
I am writing a separate letter to Lilavati.
We have to consider about Gulzarilal. But I am not worrying
since Jamnalal is there.
Things here are proceeding well. I have not yet felt the need to
take milk. Almonds seem to be helping me quite a bit.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 32747

405. TELEGRAM TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA2
May 6, 1932
WE
AM

WERE
HAPPY

FAITH

ALL
THAT

EVERLASTING.

TOUCHED
SHE
NO

LIVED
WONDER

LEARN
WELL

GANGABEHN’S
AND

TOTARAMJI

3

DIED
IS

WELL

DEATH.
WITH

HAPPY.

Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 138

1

Wife of Dahyabhai, Vallabhbhai Patel’s son
This was sent to the Ashram on receipt of the addressee’s letter informing
Gandhiji about the death of Gangadevi Sanadhya.
3
Totaram Sanadhya, Gangadevi’s husband
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

335

406. LETTER TO SAROJINI NAIDU
May 6, 1932
I do not know that I would share Lilamani’s enthusiasm.1
Chivalry is made of sterner stuff. Chivalrous knight is he who is
exquisitely correct in his conduct towards perfect strangers who are in
need of help, but who can make no return to him and who are unable
even to mutter a few words of thanks. But of these things some other
day and under other auspices.
The Diary of Mahadev Desai, Vol. I, p. 102

407. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 6, 1932
CHI. MIRA,

Your letter was received at the expected time.
Do you remember the frail little wife of Dahyabhai— Yashoda.
She died on Sunday. It was a deliverance for her. She had fits and had
almost lost her memory. This means additional burden for
Vallabhbhai. For she has left behind her a bright boy about five years.
But he has broad shoulders.
My weight oscillates between 104 and 106. I am, therefore, not
making any change. I am trying to replace almond paste with
ground-nut paste. If it agrees as well as almond, it will be good. The
others are also keeping well.
Magan wheel2 was received yesterday. I am going to try it. It will
enable me to give complete rest to the left elbow. And Prabhudas will
be delighted when he learns that I am actually trying his invention. Of
course my recent drawing [of] the thread with the right hand will
come in very useful.
1

In the source, Mahadev Desai explains: “Sarojinidevi had written to her
daughter Lila that she was permitted after her arrest to deep in the Taj Mahal [Hotel]
and this reminded Lila of mediaeval chivalry.”
2
“Spinning-wheel with two spindles which are propelled by a foot pedal. As
Bapu used only one spindle, one of his arms could, therefore, be given complete
rest”—Mirabehn

336

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am glad you have begun to use the left hand in place of the
right. It must be done not merely for writing. Try to eat also with the
left hand. No special effort, save a little thought, seems to be
necessary.
I am glad you had a few days with Sarojini 1 and that you were
able to serve her.
What I have said about my being a hindrance is perfectly true. I
may help to start the thing, but, not being able to live up to it must
hinder further progress. The ideal of voluntary poverty is most
attractive. We have made some progress, but my utter inability to
realize it fully in my own life has made it difficult at the Ashram for
the others to do much. They have the will but no finished
object-lesson. We have two delightful kittens. They learn their lessons
from the mute conduct of their mother, who never has them out of her
sight. Practice is the thing. And just now I fail so hopelessly in so
many things. But it is no use mourning over the inevitable.I have just
had a card from Narandas saying that Gangadevi is no more. She died
cheerfully with Ramanama on her lips. She and Totaramji were
worthy of the Ashram.
Perhaps we shall meet soon.2
Love from us all.
BAPU

[PS.]
I spun 24 rounds on Magan wheel. Narandas asks whether you
will be able to see me on 18th. So far as I am concerned, of course
you can.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6219. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9685

1

“Mrs. Sarojini Naidu had been arrested and brought to the Arthur Road Jail.
We had but a few fleeting days together. She was transferred to the women’s jail in the
Yeravda Central Prison”—Mirabehn
2
“My three months’ sentence was drawing to a close”—Mirabehn
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

337

408. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
May 7, 1932
DEAR COL. DOYLE,

I observe from Kaka Kalelkar’s letter to me that though he and
Sjts. Narahari Parikh and Prabhudas Gandhi were put together at
Visapur, they were separated on being admitted to the Belgaum
Central Prison. They are all inmates of the Ashram. Prabhudas Gandhi
was Kaka Kalelkar’s pupil and Narahari Parikh his assistant and
colleague. I do not know that there was any reason for separating
them from one another. If there was none, you will perhaps agree that
in the present state-of the health of both Kaka and Prabhudas Gandhi,
if all the three are together they can be mutually helpful.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No. 9

409. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
May 7, 1932
DEAR COLONEL DOYLE,

I wish to bring to your notice a matter that has reached the point
of exasperation. Over two months ago Sardar Vallabhbhai wrote two
letters, one to his son at Bombay and one to Mr. G. V. Mavalankar at
Ahmedabad, both of which were of a business type. They were duly
authorized, but never reached the addressees. On March 26th Sjt.
Mahadev Desai wrote his monthly letter to his wife at the Ashram at
Sabarmati. The letter never reached her. On the 28th ultimo I wrote,
by permission, a letter addressed to the Ashram and meant for an
erring boy of mine. It was a most important letter in answer to his.
The letter was not delivered at the Ashram, though subsequent letters
were delivered. Almost invariably the Ashrampost reaches the Ashram
two or three days after the due day of delivery. I infer from this that
the letters are delayed, where they are not withheld entirely, by some
authority. I know that correspondence of civil resisters is under strict
censorship. I have nothing to say against it. But the correspondence
sent from a prison, duly franked by prison authorities would, I should
338

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

imagine, be free from further censorship and consequent delay or
danger of being withheld altogether. I do not write letters uselessly
and hope I am meticulous about observing the terms under which I
am permitted to write these letters. If they require a double censorship,
it may be well to let us know. If they are withheld even after being
passed by prison authorities I think it is due to us that we should know
at least the fact of detention. The letter that I sent to my son was
designed to affect the future course of his conduct and it had attached
to it an original letter which my son had sent for my inspection and
which he desired should be returned to him. I have no desire
whatsoever to write a single line that I would not like any Government
official to see. But I do feel hurt when even letters sent by prisoners
that are held to be unobjectionable by prison authorities are delayed
or intercepted in course of transmission.
I should, therefore, thank you if you would kindly enquire of
proper authorities as to the fate of the letters in question. I should be
glad if it were discovered that my suspicions were groundless and that
there had been no interference with this correspondence, and that the
delays had been accidental and that the missing letters had been found
and delivered to the addressees.
Yours sincerely,
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(30), Pt. I, pp. 247-8

410. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
May 7, 1932
CHI. PREMA,

If we make it a rule to draw up a balance-sheet of our spiritual
progress from time to time, we shall be able to get rid of unnecessary
fears and appear to the world as we really are. Obviously, this is true
only about sincere people. Those who are insincere will not be able to
keep up the practice of drawing up such a balance-sheet. They will
find it impossible.
I believe everything you say about Narandas. He ought not to
take up work beyond his strength. No one should do that. But
generally man deceives himself. He is generous towards himself, and
when he has done a small thing he believes that he has exerted himself
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

339

overmuch. Ordinarily, therefore, when someone works hard I do not
feel inclined to dissuade him from doing so. But Narandas’s way is
different. He always takes too much work upon himself. Since he
generally does his work in time, a stranger may not perhaps see how
much he had worked. Hence it is but proper that Narandas should not
undertake new burdens. I have written to him to that effect.1 You
should keep a watch.
My suggestion about a balance-sheet is not likely to make
anyone mechanical in his or her work. If any person living in the
Ashram becomes so, I would blame our method of running it. I know
that that method is not perfect. But no one living in the Ashram has
become mechanical in his or her work, and many who were
mechanical have come to be filled with new life. I infer from this that
our method must be at least 51 per cent effective. Those who are in
charge of the various activities in the Ashram are not experts in their
respective fields. It is not their fault that they are not. But it has always
happened that the Ashram has either undertaken some new type of
activity or has decided to carry on a traditional activity in a new
manner, and, therefore, it has had to train its own experts. This has
resulted in some unnecessary expenditure of time and moneys and
despite that the Ashram has not always done its work so well as to win
praise. The Ashram, however, exists not to win praise but toserve. If it
does the work of service so well that it wins praise for it, we may feel
happy. But, even if it is criticized, we should continue to serve. The
conclusion to be drawn from this is that, as we become progressively
more efficient, we shall be able to do more work and shall feel the
burden of work less and less. Here is a recent experience. When I
started the practice of rotating the wheel with the left hand, on the first
day I could spin only 93 rounds. I also took more time and got more
tired. When my efficiency had increased relatively, I could spin more
than 200 rounds in less time and felt less fatigued. I have now started
spinning on the Magan spinning-wheel. Yesterday I spun 24 rounds
and spent much time. Today I spun 56 rounds in less time. The
fatigue, too, was less. What is true about an individual and his small
task, is also true about an organization and its big undertakings.
“Yoga is skill in work.’’ 2 Work here means service, yajna. All our
difficulties arise from our inefficiency. If we become efficient, what
1
2

340

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi” 4/9-5-1932.
Bhagavad Gita, II 50
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

seems a hardship today will become a source of joy. I am convinced
that in a wellorganized set-up based on right principles, no tensions
should be felt.
You have joined the Ashram to acquire this efficiency. You will
not learn it from anyone. Everyone has to acquire it from the
atmosphere in the Ashram. If any person like you does not acquire it,
he or she will not remain in the Ashram till the end. I am not talking
about those who have no ambition. They will perhaps remain. Since
the Ashram is really an institution based on the principle of freedom,
everyone in it may rise as high as he or she wishes. But no one will be
able to help a person who does not aspire to rise. It is for you to create
the atmosphere in which you can work well. You can attract your
friend to the Ashram. Really speaking, however, that would be
self-centredness on your part. All those who live there are your
friends. Give them what you have and receive from them what they
have. If you believe that you have nothing to learn from others except
from one or two persons, you are sunk in the well of self-delusion. I
think there is none in this world from whom we may not learn
something.
What you write about Ramakrishna 1 is very likely to be true.
I do not regard myself as having attained any degree of spiritual
realization, and I am sure, therefore, that I make mistakes again and
again. But being innocent mistakes, they seem to have done no harm
so far. I, therefore, continue on my path with an untroubled mind and
also draw co-workers into my experiments.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Passive exercises help the weak; for example, massage,
ardhashirshasana2 , ardhasarvasana lying down and raising the legs
or the hands slowly upwards. In all these, the patient remains passive
and gives his or her mental co-operation. Do you follow this?
Prayers have often been attacked, but they have been kept up
for 16 years. How much time do they take? How much of that time
1

Shri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa
Yogic postures
3
The addressee wanted to adopt a new name in memory of his deceased wife,
Rajkishori.
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

341

can be saved? Anyone who accepts the necessity of prayers will not
grudge the time given to them. We can point out a drawback in
everyone. On the whole, however, our prayers seem all right. For my
information, though, what change do you desire?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: 10284. Also C.W. 6732. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

411. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
May 7, 1932
CHI. PARASRAM,

The report is excellent. It is not proper to take the name
Kishorikant,3 and the motive also behind taking such a name is
unworthy. It would have been better if the article about me had not
been written. But now you need not feel sorry for having written it.
You should not write any such article in future. Your possessing
books does not violate the vow of non-possession. They are not
“yours”. This is also true about slips of paper.
There is no universal rule that a person who has no children has
an unfeeling heart. We can try to know God through the study of
chemistry, etc. But that is possible only for a few. Study of the sky is
quite easy. The effect of a diary depends on the kind of diary it is.
BAPU

PS.
The report about Hindi is excellent. Who is in charge of the
sales section?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4797. Also C.W. 4974. Courtesy:
Parasram Mehrotra

412. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI P. PANDYA
May 8, 1932
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

Your letter smacks of a complaint that Narandas does not listen
to you. Please do not think so. Your duty ends when you have
informed [him]. You told him without expecting a response, didn’t
you?
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 347. Courtesy: Bhagwanji P. Pandya

342

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

413. LETTER TO BENARSILAL AND RUKMINI BAZAJ
May 8, 1932
CHI. BENARSI,

I read your remarks. You must have read Father’s letter
addressed to me. It was first received there and then redirected to me.
I did not understand it clearly.
CHI. RUKMINI,

I got your letter. As soon as you came down to the plains, both
of you lost health again. Does that mean that you should permanently
stay at a hill station? I hope that you have completely recovered now.
Do you take out Madhav for a walk every day? See that you do not let
the child’s health suffer for any reason. Write to me regularly. If you
follow Mirabehn’s practice and fix a day for writing to me, you will
not have to try to remember.
PS.
You must have heard about Gangadevi’s death.
From Gujarati: C.W. 9442. Courtesy: Benarsilal Bazaj

414. A LETTER
May 8, 1932
We violate it whenever we eat anything for the pleasure it gives.
To observe the vow of non-indulgence of the palate, we should eat,
from among things acceptable to us, only as much as is necessary to
keep our body healthy and strong. If we observe this vow, we shall
become healthy and remain so, shall find it easier to observe
brahmacharya and acquire control over the mind in other ways too.
From Gujarati: C.W. 9087. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

343

415. A LETTER
May 8, 1932
When Father asked you to go, it was your duty to obey him. Not
everybody likes to live in the Ashram. Only those like the Ashram
who like freedom with self-restraint.
True mercy has never done harm to anybody in this world. We
do not know the real facts about Prithviraj and, therefore, cannot say
anything about his case. In such matters, we should not cite examples
from the past. If we can test a medicine today, why do we want to
know what effect it had in some case in the past?
From Gujarati: C.W. 9097. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

416. LETTER TO DURGA M. DESAI
May 8, 1932
CHI. DURGA,

You should not read Saket so that you may cry with sorrow as
you read it. Even Urmila’s protestations teach spiritual wisdom. We
should read the poem for its glorification of Rama. Moreover, what
comparison can there be between Urmila’s separation from Lakshman
and Durga’s from Mahadev? Yours is no separation at all. You can
write to him, see him if you wish to and get news about him from time
to time. Urmila had no such consolation. How can we compare a
forest with a jail-temple, and fourteen years with two years?
BAPU

[PS.]
You may eat spices if without them you do not keep good
health.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9485

417. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
May 8, 1932
CHI. KUSUM (SENIOR),

I am thinking whether or no I should continue to write to you
But since you wrote a postcard to me, I write this. I should like you to
344

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

pay a visit to Dhulia1 without waiting for a reply. But you know best
whether you can spare time now.
BAPU

[PS.]
Write the essay2 with the utmost care, and not simply as a task.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1836

418. LETTER TO MANIBEHN N. PARIKH
May 8, 1932
CHI. MANI (PARIKH),

I was glad that you came and saw me. It is true that I could not
talk with the children. But you know that this is a prison. How long
could we go on talking? You should give up your weakness. You
should not let tears be seen in your eyes. Write to Shankarlal and tell
him that I was unhappy that I could not see him. But that could not be
helped. I was very glad that Babu also came and saw me. I could have
no fun with him either.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5968. Also C.W. 3285. Courtesy:
Vanamala M. Desai

419. LETTER TO MAHENDRA V. DESAI
May 8, 1932
CHI. MANU,

I have already described my experiences in England which were
worth describing. After all, can I describe things as well as you do? If,
however, you improve your handwriting, I will think about some other
experiences in England and write about them.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7429. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

1
2

To the Dhulia District Jail to meet Pyarelal and Gulzarilal Nanda
Vide “Letter to Kusum Desai”, 8-4-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

345

420. LETTER TO PUSHPA S. PATEL
May 8, 1932
CHI. PUSHPA,

You should try and understand the virtues of Mother India, and
then cultivate them in yourself by degrees.1
If we think over everything which happens in the course of even
one day, we feel giddy. If, then, we try to recollect every thingthat
happened during a number of years, would we not become mad?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3988. Also C.W. 34. Courtesy:
Pushpabehn N. Naik

421. LETTER TO VIDYA R. PATEL
May 8, 1932
CHI. VIDYA,

Your handwriting this time was a little better. If you take
sufficient care every time, it is bound to improve. I cannot answer
questions about what this or the other thing is made of You should put
such questions to Premabehn or somebody else there.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 9427. Courtesy: Ravindra R. Patel

422. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
May 8, 1932
MISS RAIHANA,

What have you been doing, sitting idle there? What a teacher
you are! I have now procured a copy-book for improving my
handwriting. I will start doing exercises in it from today or tomorrow.
I have also been studying the Urdu readers. The thing is that I am
ambitious to do much but can spare only limited time. Let us see. All
I do I do in the name of God and for His work. He will lead me where
1

Vide also “Letter to Pushpa S. Patel”, 3-4-1932 and “Letter to Pushpa S.
Patel”, 24-4-1932

346

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

He wishes. You know what you sang the other day:
Open your eyes a little
You careless one, turn your mint to God.
What you would tomorrow, do today
What you would today, do right now.

I am of course trying to do the thing just now. It is in His hands
to lead me to the goal.1
I will not write more of the Urdu exercise today. In the midst of
several other things to do, I cannot find for it the time Iwould wish to
give. I hope the climate of Mount Abu has benefited Father, you and
all others. Does Hamida still have difficulty about [digesting] food?
How many of you are at Mount Abu? I have never seen it in my life.
Do you know very well Dahyabhai, son of uncle Sardar? Father
of course does. His wife, Yashoda, died nine days ago, leaving a small
child behind. Dahyabhai has been much upset. He was here to see us
on Saturday. Tell Father about this if he does not already know.
If you have all returned to Baroda by now, find out from among
Father’s books Amir Ali’s Spirit of Islam and send it for Sardar.
Mahadev and I have read it, but Sardar has not.
All three of us are happy here. It is hotter here than it usually is
at this time of the year.
Did Sohaila accompany, or has she accompanied, you to Abu?
Kamal must be growing fast. Give my dearest love to him.
To all of you, our salaam, aadaab, vandemataram or blessings
as may be proper and fitting, and to Father bhrrr from me.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9643

423. LETTER TO VIDYA HINGORANI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

May 8, 1932
CHI. VIDYA,

I have your letter, It is very good that you are staying with
Father-in-law. Do not think too much. Do what service you can and
always have Ramanama in your heart.
1

Up to this the letter is in Urdu.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

347

I have not yet come to a decision about meeting people. I shall
write to Mehta when I make up my mind.
I have Anand’s letter. You should write to me every week.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi: Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

424. CLEANLINESS, TRUTHFULNESS, PURITY,
NEATNESS 1
May 9, 1932
Now that I have succeeded today in acquiring over the Magan
spinning-wheel brought by Dhiru enough elementary control to
satisfy me, I feel sufficiently free in my mind to pay attention to the
appearance of the wheel. Vallabhbhai’s sharp eyes detected a spider’s
web on it, and he immediately joked about it. I discovered now the
real source of Manibehn’s great love of neatness. The envelopes in
which I seal the letters for the Ashram are an illustration of this quality
of Vallabhbhai’s. Anybody who has not seen these envelopes should
do so immediately. Along with neatness, they exemplify great
economy. The letters which I write from here do not require very long
envelopes. It will, therefore, be observed that two envelopes are made
out of the original one. The brown paper which comes here in the
form of packets, etc., is preserved and then used for making new flaps
for the envelopes.
This was by way of introduction. I noted Vallabhbhai’s
comment, but at the moment I was impatient to try the spinningwheel. The doctor had been advising me not to use the left hand even
for turning the wheel. Hence I thought that, if I could rotate the wheel
with either foot, probably I would not have to drop spinning for a
single day. In my impatience to acquire control in managing the
spinning-wheel as soon as possible, I let the web remain where it was.
But I felt confident today that I would be able to work with my right
hand, and so began observing the poor condition of the
spinning-wheel. I saw that there was not only one web, but that there
were webs in seven or eight places. And the entire spinning-wheel was
1

This was sent along with ‘‘Letter to Narandas Gandhi’, 4/9-5-1932; vide the
following item.

348

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

covered with dust. The brass spindle-bearers were covered with a
sticky layer of grease and dust. There was plenty of dust on the
wooden boards too. This should be deemed unpardonable. The
spinning-wheel is the divine weapon of Daridranarayana. It is the
chief means of worship. By neglecting it and allowing it to be covered
with dust, we show lack of reverence for Him. Generally, temples,
mosques and other places of worship are kept clean. But we believe
that every spot on the earth is as sacred as a temple. There is no place
anywhere where God is not present. To us, therefore, our bedrooms,
dining rooms, libraries, lavatories—all these are sacred as temples and
should be kept clean as such. All the more so a spinning-wheel. If we
really believe in its power, none of us, from the very young to the old,
would ever let a spinning-wheel remain unclean.
I have already referred once to the cat’s love of cleanliness.
Recently I observed more evidence of it. She gave birth to two kittens
about a month and a half ago. Their ways are wonderful. The three
are rarely found separated. The mother cat lets the kitten suck
whenever they indicate their desire. The two cling to her and suck at
the same time. It is a sublime sight. The mother has no feeling of false
shame about the matter. She does not perform all actions in public
and anywhere. As soon as the kitten could walk and play, she taught
them the procedure to be followed for defecation. She withdrew to a
quiet spot where the earth was soft and dug out a small hollow. She
put the kitten in position over the hollow, afterwards covered the
excreta with earth and made the spot as clean as it was before. The
kittens now follow that procedure every day. They are a brother and a
sister. Four days ago, one of them was trying to dig a hollow in the
earth, but the ground was rather hard. The other one went to its help
and the two together dug out a hollow of the required size. After
defecation, they covered up the excreta with earth and left the place.
Why should we not willingly do what these creatures—even the little
ones—do?
The four words in the title are intended to suggest the same
meaning. Since we are conscious of ourselves as souls, our cleanliness
must be both internal and external. The former means truthfulness.
Truthfulness is the essence of purity, and is also another name for
neatness. If we are neat and tidy outwardly but have unclean minds,
we make a false show or are guilty of pure hypocrisy, or that may be a
sign of our lustfulness. Thus, for men and women who strive to lead a
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

349

life of self-control, outward neatness is of value only if it is a sign of
inner purity.
Our holiest temple is our body. We should take care not to let it
be infected with any impurity from outside. We should not sully the
purity of the mind with evil thoughts. Anybody who follows this ideal
of cleanliness will display neatness and tidiness in everything he does.
That would be his instinctive behaviour.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./ II

425. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 4/9, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter. Both the letter and the accompanying
comments of Premabehn I found very useful. I think you have
become somewhat impatient. The one virtue of your character which I
value most is that you never undertake any work beyond your
strength, do thoroughly whatever you take up and never lose your
peace of mind. We see a combination of these three virtues in very few
persons. I think you have shown it in your character. It is now very
necessary to take care that you do not lose this precious asset through
impatience. Everybody is not capable of doing everything. We see a
few persons who do many things but most people can do only a few
things. It is enough that you belong to the former class. Provided you
take care of your health and preserve your peace of mind and remain
cheerful, I will say nothing against your taking upon yourself as much
responsibility as you wish. But one forgets this condition when one
becomes impatient. Maganlal forgot it and he paid a heavy price for
it. We should learn from his mistake. Premabehn believes that you
have taken upon yourself such a heavy burden that your body cannot
bear the strain for long. 1 Kusum also seems to agree with her. Think
over this and make whatever changes may be necessary. If you have
been hasty about anybody else, too, in any matter, you should rectify
your mistake. I think the following rules should be observed.
1. Everyone should get one hour which he may spend as he
likes. Nobody should spend it in any work or activity which is part of
1

350

Vide also ‘‘Letter to Premabehn Kantak”, 7-5-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

his daily routine.
2. The period of silence at prayer-time should be increased
from one minute to five minutes. One person should keep his eyes
open and, when the five minutes are over, give a mild stroke on the
bell.
3. Spinning, etc., should be done only during the time left out
of compulsory bodily labour like cooking, cleaning lavatories,
helping in the dairy, working on the farm, washing and bathing, etc.
All these are essential activities. We should so arrange our daily
programme that we are able to do full justice to them.
4. Sufficient time should be allowed to a person to leave one
duty and take up another.
5. If, as a result of arranging the work in this manner, it becomes
necessary to engage paid labourers, you must engage a sufficient
number of them. But we should not treat them as labourers. We
should see to it that they get proper accommodation and clothes to
wear and gradually we should draw them towards the Ashram rules.
These rules should be explained to them before they are engaged.
6. If you can reduce the activities and do without paid labourers,
that would certainly be the best course.
7. Everybody, whether grown-up or young, must go to bed as
soon as it is nine. Children under 12 should go to bed at eight.
You may revise these rules from time to time in the light of your
experience there. Though I think about these matters from here and
raise issues for you to think over, you should carry out my
suggestions only to the extent practicable. I hope you do not
discharge any labourers who are prepared to observe our conditions.
Though they work for wages, I regard them as inmates of the Ashram.
I had a long talk with Kusum, and so I do not say anything about the
matter here. Giridhari came and saw me recently Manibehn Parikh
also was one of the party. I cannot describe Dhiru’s health as
satisfactory. I got Dr. Sharma’s books. I also got Jodanikosh1 , etc.
The yarn spun by Chhakkaddas appears very clean and even in
texture like silk. I see that he has taken great care in spinning it.
Mahadev thinks that the count probably does not exceed 20. I have
not examined the yarn carefully from that point of view. But even if
1

The standard dictionary of Gujarati orthography published by the Gujarat
Vidyapith.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

351

Mahadev is right, I would rate yarn of 20 counts which is strong and
even in texture much higher than yarn of 40 counts which is weak and
uneven in texture.
I am glad that Nimu has returned. Will her mother stay there? I
should be happy if she does. Ask Nimu to write to me every week
without fail. If she does, she will also be able to give some news which
I may convey to Ramdas.
Jamna must run away to Bombay. What is the name of the
doctor who extracted Mathew’s tooth? I think Mathew should be
permitted to go and visit his father. It seems to me that by and by he
will become a fine worker. He is good-natured and gentle and his
intentions are always good.
I have already written 1 to you that Gangabehn again requires
asatotida powder and chaiarj, the same quantity as you sent before.
Mahadev got the parcel addressed to him. It seems certain now that
the packet2 received from Jethalal has been lost. What did it contain?
Who has signed the receipt?
If it is the rule in a jail to handcuff a prisoner when he is taken
out and if a prisoner is so handcuffed he should not protest but, on
the contrary, should cheerfully submit to being handcuffed. This has
been my view from the very beginning. When I was taken out of jail
in Pretoria and brought to a court to give evidence in a case, I was
handcuffed. I welcomed that, for I did not regard myself as different
from other prisoners and never desired treatment different from
theirs. Today also I do not desire such treatment. That there should be
improvement in the treatment of prisoners is a separate issue, and the
change should be brought about mostly by the efforts of people
outside. Prisoners can bring about a change only by obeying the
harshest prison rules. There is only one exception to this, which is
really not an exception, namely, that a prisoner. ought not to submit
to anything which is humiliating. The law does not permit humiliation
of prisoners. This may be taken as my general view. Only those who
had taken a vow to spin regularly before the struggle started may
insist on being permitted to spin in jail. There are very few such
persons. I cannot write more than this on this subject. I have already
written to you about Parvati. You did all right in giving one hundred
1
2

352

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 28-4-1932, 2-5-1932
Containing a report of the khadi centre at Anantpur
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and fifty rupees to Champa. We cannot be very rigid in such matters. I
have not received the cotton yet. There is no hurry, of course, since I
have already received four pounds from Lady Vithaldas.
May 9, 1932
I got the cotton. The papayas were excellent. The bread also
was very good. The cotton parcel cost a little too much. But that is
bound to happen sometimes. The machine for crushing almonds was
used the very next day after it arrived. It saved much labour. I have
written1 about cleanliness this time and what I have said should be
carefully borne in mind. Why did Dhiru bring the spinning-wheel in
such dirty condition? Try and find out if Gangadevi gave any
personal service to Totaram which some other woman also can give,
and appoint someone for the purpose. Are his requirements of food
being looked after? Jamna should leave and go away to Bombay
without delay. A list of 38 letters accompanies.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8225. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

426. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
May 9, 1932
Bismillah
CHIRANJIVI RAIHANA,

Please do not laugh at the sight of this! Remember I am writing
a copy-book, I am trying to learn to write exactly as children do. Just
when, tired with other work, I had started writing this, your
much-awaited letter arrived. Father and Mother are both very clever
people and they know that my views very much resemble theirs. That
is why they ask you to follow my advice. They have thus contrived to
deprive you of your freedom. And this innocent, crazy girl is now a
prisoner of old people. Let us see what happens. After all, it does not
matter that people like you and me are always drawn into their net.
The visit to Mount Abu seems to have done you no good.2
I hope this is enough for today. I take a great deal of time to
1
2

Vide the preceding item.
Up to this the letter is in Urdu.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

353

write even such a hand as this. God has given you the gift of singing
bhajans. Go on doing that, serve your elders as best as you can, and
live contented. Contentment also is a form of service in itself. Send me
what Pashabhai has written. There is no harm in his going to America.
It will be enough if he takes every step after careful thought.
Moreover, you are there to guide him. Tell Hamida to write to me as
soon as she leaves. I had expected a letter from Rohini. Many
blessings to Kamalmiyan. Many . . .1 . I hope some day to give him a
slap or two. My bhrrr to the white beard. Tell all that we think of them
every day. Some topic or other always crops up. It is like what Hazarat
says in his ghazal. Even if one tries. not to think about a thing, one
does think about it. Some things one cannot remember though one
would like to, and some others one cannot forget though one tries to.
He never lets our wishes be fulfilled. I was glad that you wrote the
ghazal in the Gujarati script.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Uncle Sardar has made it his occupation to add to the country’s
wealth by making such envelopes. Did I tell you this before?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9642

427. LETTER TO TOTARAM SANADHYA
May 9, 1932
BHAI TOTARAMJI,

I am overjoyed to learn that you are not grief tricken over
Gangadevi’s death.2 The grief can be only out of self-interest. As for
Gangadevi, she is released from pain and has undoubtedly attained a
nobler state. We all are thankful to you. Chhaganlal and Gangabehn
have expressed sorrow. Chhaganlal grieves for her, remembering all
her kindness to his children.
To me Gangadevi was the personification of renunciation, and
her renunciation was combined with detachment which made it
enduring. It was an example to be emulated by us all. I have found in
you the quality of detachment. Do tell me if there is any exaggeration
1
2

354

Omission as ill the source
Vide ‘‘Telegram to Gangabehn Vaidya”, 6-5-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in my statement. And if what I say is correct, send short memoirs of
Gangadevi.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2531

428. LETTER TO RAMACHANDRA N. KHARE
May 10, 1932
CHI. RAMBHAU,

You now seem to be doing your duties very well. Give complete
rest to the arm which has sustained injury. I have now acquired fairly
good control over the Magan spinning-wheel. Truthfulness is the first
step in culture.
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 292. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare

429. LETTER TO VIDYA R. PATEL
May 10, 1932
CHI. VIDYA,

We should not follow anybody. If you wish to get your hair
cropped, you should go ahead and do so. You will not then feel the
weight of hair on your head. Your time will be saved, and there will be
no more dirt in the hair. However, if you wish you may let your hair
remain. Don’t mind if people call you a bear. That is only a
good-humoured jest.
From Gujarati: C.W. 9443. Courtesy: Ravindra R. Patel

430. A LETTER
May 10, 1932
When deciding what one’s duty is, many questions may arise.
But when examining the teaching of the Gita, we have only to
consider what Arjuna’s question was. If a teacher goes beyond the
scope of the question put to him, he would be a bad teacher, for the
questioner’s attention would be fixed on his question and he would be
in no fit state of mind to listen to other things. The discussion may
even be beyond his capacity and may, therefore, bore him. Further,
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

355

the reply to his question is likely to get lost in the discussion about
irrelevant issues, in the same way that plants of grains in a field
sometimes get buried under the weeds which grow round them. From
this point of view, Krishna’s reply to Arjuna is perfect. And when we
leave Chapter I and come to Chapter II, we find that it breathes the
pure spirit of ahimsa. We should not, believing or claiming that Shri
Krishna is the most perfect avatar of God, expect that we can get from
his words a simple reply to every question that may arise in our minds
in the same manner that we can find the meaning of a word by
looking up a dictionary. Even if we could find such replies, that would
do us harm, for in that case nobody would strive for further advance
or new discoveries. Man’s reason would simply atrophy. Thus, the
people of every age should strive to solve the problems of that age by
their own hard labour and tapascharya. We should, therefore, try to
solve the problems which arise in the present age in regard to war and
other issues with the help of the principles enunciated in a noble work
like the Gita. But even such help will be negligible. We shall get real
help only from what we learn through tapascharya. Books on
Ayurveda describe the properties of innumerable herbs and plants. We
may read those descriptions for guidance. But the knowledge so
gained will be useless, may even be burdensome, if the properties
attributed to those herbs and plants do not pass the test of actual
experience. We have to seek solutions to the many difficult problems
of life in exactly the same manner. If you still wish to ask me any
questions on this subject, please do.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 146-7

431. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
May 11, 1932
CHI. DEVDAS,

Yesterday, the 10th, I got the letter you wrote on the 1st It was
not delayed here. According to me, this delay is not too long in the
case of a prisoner. After all, what is the value of his time? 13/12 rupees
per hour, for I think daily expense on account of a prisoner comes to
Rs. 13. I think personally that the weakness of my hands is a symptom
of old age. Don’t most old people suffer from some weakness or
other? We should remember that this weakness was there even when I
356

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

used to take milk. Had it not been so, I would have perhaps got
alarmed and resumed taking milk. Has any of my experiments done
me harm in the long run? The only such case which I can remember
is that of the last experiment, that is, Gopalrao’s experiment. 1 I was
hasty in starting it and waited too long before giving it up. I persisted
in it even though people were falling ill one after another. From the
economic point of view the experiment was a good one and Gopalrao
had great faith in it. Excepting this one, my impression about all other
experiments is that I had benefited from them physically and
spiritually. This time I am wide awake. I don’t attach too much
importance to the experiment. After I am released from jail, I think I
shall have to take milk and, therefore, here I wish to do without it only
if I can do so without harm. There is not the slightest cause for
worrying about my health, as I have maintained my weight.
I will certainly go through the Urdu books which you have
mcntioned, when they come. This time I had intended to take up Urdu
at a somewhat later stage since I wished to do some other reading
before. But Raihana began writing a few Urdu sentences in her letters
to me and I thought that it would be good to reply to her in Urdu. By
and by I appointed her to be my Urdu teacher, and asked her to send
me the corrections in the Urdu I wrote every week. Of course this
cannot satisfy me. Hence I took out from the jail library here Urdu
readers and began to study them. As my Urdu handwriting is verybad,
I have now procured a copy-book and some tracing paper. I am now
trying to see how deep I can go into this study. On the one hand is
this Urdu, and on the other the Magan spinning-wheel. I am now
giving my whole self to the Magan wheel since I had already decided
to please Prabhudas and to test and utilize his abilities, and since to
add to this the doctors here insisted on my giving complete rest to the
left hand, which was possible only if I drew the yarn with the right
hand and rotated the wheel with my foot. I find it difficult to move the
wheel with the foot and to draw the yarn with the right hand. But I am
confident that I shall succeed. Some time ago I felt that I had acquired
the necessary control, but lost it, today again I feel that I have partly
regained it, though spinning in this manner takes quite a lot of time.
And third is Ruskin. The study of economics, which was the fourth,
has been suspended for the present. The fifth thing is Maithilisharan’s
Saket, which I wish to read carefully. Mahadev and I have already
1

The reference is to the unfired food experiment in 1929

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

357

read it once, and Vallabhbhai also has read it. It seems to be a fine
work. I am sure if you secure a copy there and read it, you also will
like it. For you it will be very easy reading. I shall send the book to
you from here if you cannot get a copy from the Kalyan office. And
the sixth is watching the stars. I have taken this up quite seriously.
During the day I read something on the subject and at night observe
the particular stars carefully enough to be able to recognize them
afterwards. I wonder why I did not take serious interest in this subject
earlier. I always wished to do so, but the desire was not sufficiently
strong to make me take up the pursuit immediately. But now I see that
everybody ought to cultivate as much acquaintance with the denizens
of the sky as he conveniently can. I believe that millions of people
can, without much difficulty, acquire enough knowledge of them for
their own satisfaction and raise themselves spiritually. Anybody who
tries to study the stars from a spiritual point of view will easily
experience true joy of the heart and will be filled with greater
devotion to God. I do not know whether this is true of all, but I do
know that such was the effect on me and that is why I have kept up the
practice. Probably you get no opportunity to see the sky at night.
When do they lock you up? We three sleep directly under the sky.
Opposite we see the Venus shining, to our right is the Great Bear, and
to the left the Swastika (the Southern Cross). Leo roars right over our
heads and Jupiter, too, is straight above us. I read in Gujarati Hasan
Nizami’s Kavan Charit. It did not make on me the impression it did
on you. When I read it I was not prejudiced against him, still I did
notfeel that his motive was pure. His language seems to be good, but
for anybody who wants to read Urdu books for the sake of language
there are many others equally good. If one does not mind difficult
words, Shibli’s language has no small power. I am sure you will like
Upton Sinclair’s Wet Parade. There are many others of his books at
the Ashram. I got only two here, all the rest are there. As for
Mahadev’s view of your capacity for losing books, you will know it
from what follows. You should not readily accept their “no” to your
demand for a spinning-wheel. Carry on a courteous fight for it. I will
look into the book on health when it arrives. Mahadev certainly did
not receive the letter written to him from Delhi. Lakshmi writes to me
regularly and so do I to her.
Mahadev may or may not write to Durga a letter which will be a
letter according to you. But he asks me to add this here: His charge
against you about losing books referred to the loss of as many as 80
358

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

books at the jail gate in 1930. It was the goodness of the stranger that
he delivered them to us, but his goodness does not mitigate your
carelessness. If Mahadev had your company as he had twice formerly,
he would have been much happier. Sometimes when cooking he
remembers you and recalls the Lucknow days when you did joint
cooking. When carding he remembers you daily (since you helped
him in carding everyday). And he unfailingly remembers you
whenever he gets a good book to read (though he does not get much
time to read, despite his having a whole heap of books with him, for
spinning and carding take up four or five hours in the morning, then
he spends two hours with me, and writing the diary in detail also takes
up some time). He remembers you when recalling memories of our
stay in England, when singing bhajans at the time of prayer, when
taking soda-water in the evening, etc., etc. If you read the
Gitarahasya1 in Hindi why didn’t you read it in the Marathi original?
If you can read the whole of Shibli’s volume you can make from it a
beautiful book in Gujarati describing incidents in the Prophet’s life.
Kaka, Narahari, Mani and Prabhudas, all four of them underwent
considerable suffering at Belgaum, but the problems have been nearly
solved now. I am in correspondence with all, (though not as regularly
as I am with you). But of course how long will the thing last! Among
newspapers, besides The Time [of India] we get The Leader, The
[Bombay] Chronicle, The Hindu, and The Tribune. Mahadev does not
get much time to read them. You know his indifference in the
matter,but he pastes a good many cuttings. (It is Sardar who reads the
papers to us both.) The load of correspondence is getting heavier day
by day. In addition to the Ashram post, we get quite a good number
of letters from other places (that is, from England and America). The
entertaining letter 2 which Romain Rolland wrote to an American
friend about our stay with him has been published in India. You will
find quite a good deal of useful material from Mahadev’s Diary and
his album of cuttings—he keeps copies of important correspondence
too. Jamnalalji, Pyarelal, Vinoba, and Manilal Kothari, all of them are
happy in the Dhulia jail. Mathuradas and Kishorelal are at Nasik,
Ramdas, Chhaganlal, Surendra and others are here, Kanti and other
youngsters are at Visapur, and most of the Ashram women excepting
Ba are here—I am in fairly regular correspondence with all’ these.
1
2

Commentary on the Bhagavad Gita by B. G. Tilak
Vide “Romain Rolland’s Letter to An American Friend”, 12, 1931

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

359

Have you heard that Sardar’s son, Dahyabhai, lost his wife? For poor
Yashoda, it was a real deliverance, since her life was a living death to
her.1
The envelope containing this letter was made by Vallabhbhai.
We thus try to save every pie. Blessings from us all should always be
understood.
BAPU
S JT. D EVDAS GANDHI
‘A’ C LASS P RISONER
DISTRICT JAIL
GORAKHPUR, U.P.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2016

432. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
May 11, 1932
DEAR BOYS AND GIRLS,

I got a letter from you after a long time. Do not give up the
work which you have begun. Look upon it as part of your education.
Why should we not treat everybody as a friend? Exclusive
friendships may even result in bitterness. But our life will be full of
joy if we regard everybody as a friend.
If you wish to spare the time required for the preparation of
dramatics, etc., from the hours of manual work, you should consider
whether the others can do without your help. We should do what
farmers’ and shepherds’ children do. Why not spare the time for
dramatics from the study hours? Think over this and let me know.
BAPU
From a microfilm Of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

433. LETTER TO MAHENDRA V. DESAI
May 11, 1932
CHI. MANU,

Your handwriting was good this time. Your weight should
improve. I am glad that you have started spinning. How many rounds
do you spin [per hour]?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7430. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

1

360

What follows is in Gandhiji’s hand.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

434. LETTER TO PADMA
May 11, 1932
CHI. PADMA,

I got your letter. Rambhau and Dhiru told me in their letters the
very same thing that you did. When it becomes impossible to use my
hand now, I rotate the wheel with my foot. Since the slivers are very
bad, my speed does not exceed 100 rounds. When I start using better
slivers, it will go at any rate to 160.
As regards your digestion, take the measures I have described in
my letter to Sarojini. In addition to them, you should drink in the
morning a glass of warm water with ten grains of soda mixed in it.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6133. Also C.W. 3485. Courtesy:
Prabhudas Gandhi

435. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

May 11, 1932
CHI. MANGALA,

I can say that your speed in spinning on the takli is quite good.
You will stand first.
Aminabehn’s children have taught [the lesson] that parents
should observe self-restraint.1 They were only children. Men and
women who observe celibacy can have no children. If there are no
births, there will be fewer to die. When you grow up, won’t it be good
if you practise self-restraint?
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11096. Courtesy: Pushpa Naik

1

Vide “Letter to Kusm Desai”, 8-4-1932 and “Letter to Secrtary of Santram
Ashram”, 8-4-1932
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

361

436. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
May 11/12, 1932
CHI. PREMA,

I asked you about your weight and diet 1 because I felt some
doubt concerning your health. What was your highest weight in the
past? Don’t they cook tomatoes or bhaji any time? They had decided
to plant lettuce, what happened to that? You yourself can plant lettuce
or fenugreek in a small bed. They will sprout in but a few days. You
must include some fresh green leaves in your diet. Since one can eat
them uncooked only in small quantities, growing them is no difficult
matter. I don’t know why tomatoes cannot be grown all the year
round. Ask someone.
I met Dhurandhar immediately [after he was brought here] and
visit him from time to time, for I had come to know him closely
during the March. Moreover, since I take interest in your life I take in
his too, for your sake. This is an instance not of special love for an
individual, but of non-violence. If we bear love for one person so that
we feel aversion to others or cannot love them, then that would be an
instance of special love. I believe that I bear no such love for any
person. I do all that I do for you because I think you require such
attention from me, because you expect it and because I believe it is in
my interest to do so for I expect much from you. If you see practical
shrewdness behind this attitude, I would not quarrel with you.
Personally I think this is the mark of a non-violent nature.
I hope you have not forgotten about the Urdu books.
If all the people have decided to leave the Ashram at the same
time, I do not approve of that. But now the Ashram has been in
existence for so long that I would not argue about any matter nor
complain against anything connected with it. Realizing that something
is wrong somewhere, I try to get things right whenever such an
occasion arises, and dissuade people from leaving it if I can do so
without much trouble. If the Ashram is likely to be deserted
completely and if you can stay behind cheerfully, do so, and leave
when other workers return. However, it is for Narandas and you to
decide what is the right course for you to adopt. How can I judge
from here?
1

362

Vide “Letter to Premabehn Kantak”, 1-5-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

May 12, 1932
I send with this an article by Montessori in the weekly Hindu.
Mahadev liked it and so I asked him to take out the cutting. Read it.
See if you find anything in it worth accepting. Otherwise throw it
away.
Sushila will be permitted to see me. If, therefore, you wish to
bring her along when you come, you may do so.
I did not intentionally leave any of your questions unanswered.
I still cannot recollect which question I left unanswered. If you ask it
again, I will reply to it.
The problem about the type of education imparted in the
Ashram is an old one. I don’t think it is proper to make any
comparison with a boarding school. The whole burden is borne by
Narandas, and he may, therefore, act as he thinks best. You can help
him in arriving at a decision. Personally, I would apply one rule,
namely, that the proposal should appeal to the children. Everything
which they do unwillingly will fail in its aim and will have helped in
perpetuating the tradition of compulsion. We can stop observing
holidays if and only if the children welcome the idea.
I will not pass judgment about anything which you did in the
Ashram school. If I were there, I would certainly interfere from time
to time, but I will say nothing from here. As you follow the practice of
self-examination, you will correct yourself whenever you go wrong.
I don’t know if I had tried to teach you knowledge of the
Brahman, but in any case you betrayed your ignorance by claiming
that you had it. The arguments which you went on to advance serve
only to prove your ignorance. An intellectual understanding of the
concept of the Brahman does not amount to a knowledge of It.
Knowledge of the Brahman awakens in the heart. And it is not true
that one who has attained to that state renounces all external activity.
Outwardly, the spiritually awakened man and the ignorant may look
alike, but the motives which inspire their activities are as poles
asunder. Ramanama is not incompatible with knowledge of the
Brahman. They may mean the same thing. Any person claiming
knowledge of the Brahman, who feels polluted by Ramanama has
fallen into the well of ignorance and is in a desperate condition. He
who merely repeats Ramanama with his lips engages in a fruitless
exercise and wastes his time. Knowledge of the Brahman and being
happy in my presence are certainly not incompatible with each other;
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

363

if, however, my absence affects your devotion to duty, you have not
attained knowledge of the Brahman but are in a state of ignorance.
Anyone who claims to have such knowledge will in all probability be
devoid of it. It is a knowledge which does not speak about itself—its
presence is revealed by its own light. The sun does not have to testify
to the fact of its light. We can see that it shines. We can say the same
thing about knowledge of the Brahman.
When I had faith in British rule, I used to believe that it was for
the ultimate good of the country, that it was inspired by noble
motives. But I cannot discuss this question further.
I do not like the literature on sex that is being published in
America.
BAPU

[PS.]
I do intend to write about it. When children ask questions, we
should give them straight answers. I don’t know about the cinema, but
stage performances have a place. For realizing God, the practice of
non-attachment seems to me the best method. It includes everything.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10285. Also C.W. 6733. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

437. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
May 12, 1932
DEAR COLONEL DOYLE,

I am deeply grateful to you for the prompt reply you have sent
in respect of my inquiry contained in my letter1 of the 4th instant. The
addition of three ounces of ghee to Kaka Kalelkar’s diet certainly
meets, if I may dare to say so, the physical needs of his constitution.
The assurances contained in your letter do relieve me of considerable
anxiety on the score of these friends of mine.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No, 9

1

364

Vide “Letter to E. E. Doyle”, 4-5-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

438. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM GANDHI1
May 12, 1932
I got your letter. It was a beautiful one. My statement that
Jainism puts emphasis on pure nyaya 2 has been slightly misunderstood by you. Pure nyaya may mean right policy or just decision,
and ordinarily that is the sense in which we use the word. But I did not
use it in that sense. I wanted to say that Jainism emphasizes logic, but
that logic sometimes leads to wrong conclusions the consequences of
which are fearful. This is not the fault of logic, but we do not always
possess all the data necessary for arriving at a correct conclusion. Nor
is every word understood by the hearer or the reader in the same sense
in which it was used by the speaker or the writer. Hence the heart, that
is bhakti, faith and first-hand experience, is given a higher place than
logic. Logic is a purely intellectual process. We should not care in the
least if logic, that is intellect, cannot understand what is self-evident to
the heart. On the contrary, sometimes our intellect is convinced of
certain ideas which the heart does not accept. We should, then, reject
them. You will be able to think of any number of illustrations which
will explain my point. In the sense in which I have used the word
nyaya above, it can never be an end in itself. Both nyaya and the yoga
of desireless work are means. The former belongs to the sphere of the
intellect, the latter is a matter of the heart. We cannot cultivate
desirelessness with the help of the intellect.
Now I will deal with the issue which you have raised.
Compassion and ahimsa are not two different things. Compassion is
not opposed to ahimsa. Anything which is so opposed is not true
compassion. We can describe compassion as the concrete expression
of ahimsa. It is a contradiction in terms to describe any man as free
from attachment and without compassion. A person who is free from
attachment should have a compassionate heart as large as the ocean.
1

“Who wrote that according to the Jains even compassion is included in
attachment (raga), albeit a desirable one, and therefore Bapu’s action in putting an
ailing calf out of pain was not worthy of vitaraga (one who is free from attachment)”
(The Diary of Mahadev Desai, Vol. I, pp. 108-9).
2
Vide “Letter to Purushottam Gandhi”, 18-41932
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

365

And when such compassion embraces millions, to say that, though
sattvik, it is not free from attachment is to betray ignorance of the
meaning of the word or else to give it a new meaning. Generally, we
use the word in the sense in which Tulsidas has used it. His meaning is
clear in the following doha 1 : n;k /keZ dk ewy gS iki@nsg ewy A
Here, compassion is used as a synonym for ahimsa. Perfect ahimsa is
possible only in the atman in its disembodied state. But when the
atman takes on a body, ahimsa manifests itself in one as the feeling of
compassion. Considered from this point of view, my mercy-killing of
the calf3 was an expression of the purest ahimsa. To endure suffering
in one’s own person is the very nature of the atman, but it is contrary
to its nature to make or let others suffer. If the mercy killing of the
calf had been prompted by a desire to relieve my own pain [at its
suffering], the act was not ahimsa, but to end the calf’s pain was
ahimsa. Indeed, ahimsa implies inability to endure other creatures
suffering pain. From such inability arise compassion, heroism and all
other virtues associated with ahimsa. It is perverse logic to argue that
we should be able to look on while others suffer. Again, it is not
always true that death is more painful for human beings than anything
they may suffer in life. I think that it is we ourselves that have made
death the terror it is. The so-called savages do not have the same fear
of death. The martial races also have very little of it. And in the West a
school of thought is spreading whose followers would prefer to end
their lives rather than go on living in extreme pain. I think that the
assumption of excessive fear of death proceeds from ignorance or dry
theorizing. Because of that assumption, we, and especially the Jains,
have perverted the meaning of ahimsa, with the result that true ahimsa
has practically disappeared. A woman who jumps into a well in anger
may clutch at a rope offered to her, but one who has jumped into it
deliberately under the force of some belief, whatever it be, will disdain
to avail herself of a rope even if offered to her. The practice of
harakiri among the Japanese is a well known example of this. Whether
that practice is the result of right knowledge or ignorance is beside the
point. Here I am only pointing out that there are countless instances in
which men prefer death to life. In the West they kill animals whose
condition is hopeless and who suffer extreme pain, and behind this
1

Couplet
“Compassion is the source of dharma and pride is the source of sin (or, the
ego is the cause of the body).”
2

366

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

practice lies the belief that they do not experience much fear of death,
and that they will prefer death to suffering pain beyond a certain
limit. This idea may not be true, and it is, therefore, our duty to
behave towards animals as if life was as dear to them as it is to human
beings.
If you accept so much, it is not very necessary to consider the
matter from a social point of view or from the point of view of our
duty towards society. Where the people have regard for ahimsa, there
is little risk of the example of my killing the calf being misused.
Where people have no such regard, in any case animals are killed.
Thus, my action is not likely to increase violence to animals. When
killing the calf, it was not necessary for me to know all the possible
consequences of my action. If it was certain that the calf would never
die in any other manner, I should of course have paused before
killing it. In other words, if it were the case that nobody but I could
have ended the calf’s life, it would have been necessary for me to
think of all the possible consequences of my action. But the fact is
that all creatures, calves as much as we, live with the possibility of
death always hanging over us. Therefore, the utmost that could have
happened was that the calf would have lived for a few days or months
or a year more. These considerations are not irrelevant to the case,
since my motive was disinterested and my only aim was to end the
pain of the calf. We may, therefore, say that even if there was any
error in my reasoning, no harmful consequence to the calf followed
which would never have followed but for my action. 1 Ask me again
and again till you have understood the point. The subject is an
important one and the explanation deserves to be carefully grasped. It
is easy to grasp, and once it is grasped you will be able to deduce
many other consequences from it.
It is undoubtedly true that my approach to the problem attacks
certain generally accepted beliefs. But I do believe that we, that is
Hindus, have become so full of cowardice and inertia that the true
essence of ahimsa is forgotten and the thing has come to be identified
with superficial concern for the lives of lower creatures. In its essence,
ahimsa is a powerful emotion of the heart which finds expression in
numerous forms of service. If it manifests itself in its perfection even

1

The rest of the paragraph is from the C.W. copy.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

367

in one human being, its light would be far more powerful than that of
the sun. But where do we find such ahimsa today?1
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 150-3. Also C.W. 9112. Courtesy: Narandas
Gandhi

439. LETTER TO PUSHPA S. PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

May 12, 1932
CHI. PUSHPA,

You have advanced far ahead of Mangala in spinning on the
takli. That is wonderful.
It is good that you and Mani do the cleaning together.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11078. Courtesy: Pushpa Naik

440. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 13, 1932
CHI. MIRA,

In the hope that you would get this on or before Monday, I
write in reply to your unexpected letter received today.
It is well if you do without the fountain pen. But what we must
aim at is the correct attitude. This brings about lasting and drastic
changes. A detailed local treatment must go hand in hand with a
penetrating search after the root cause, the desire to possess. It is
possible to conceive a person not being poor in spirit though he may
1

Mahadev Desai explains: ‘‘While the above was being dictated, we had a
discussion about the two readings in Tulsidas’s verse: Bapu said, ‘‘I have heard both
of them, but I prefer to read deha (body).” I remarked that the Vedantic idea that pride
is the root of the body did not fit in well here. Perhaps the poet wanted to say that
mercy is the root of religion and pride is the root of sin. Bapu said, ‘‘If we read deha,
he means that the body being the root of pride is an obstacle in the way of mercy. But
to spend ourselves to the uttermost in service is purest mercy. This mercy should be
cherished as long as we live.” I objected that that was so but it was not what the poet
meant to say. Again Bapu’s interpretation was too subtle for the common man, while
he could easily understand that pride is the root of sin. In any case, the latter half of
the verse had nothing to do with the subject-matter of the letter.” (The Diary of
Mahadev Desai, Vol. I, p. 111)

368

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have nothing, because he is jealous of those who possess. He has
nothing, but feels the deprivation. Another may have by him a golden
footstool which he is seen using in order to save his feet from treading
on hot ashes, but which he converts into cash for the poor the very
next moment and feels the delight of dispossession. This is not to
criticize what you have done but to enforce it, if it is at all necessary or
possible.
You will come as soon as you can, bringing with you anyone
who may wish to come and who is permitted to come. Pyare Ali and
Noorbanu can come. Not yet Damodardas whose name is still under
consideration. You should go to Pyare Ali’s place and there see
Amina’s children and Tilak. Of course, Tilak can come if he wants to.
There is immediately the question of poverty. But I would not bring it
up in his case if he has a desire he cannot restrain.
Your left-hand writing is certainly steadier than mine. You will,
in a short time, write as well with the left as you do with the right hand.
I am delighted Sofia is with you. I have met her. It is just like
her to join you in prayer so heartily. Give her my love. I would almost
wish for her sake that she had you longer than you would be. Let her
write to me if ever she has a month when she has nobody else in
particular to write to. That could not be I am sure. But who can say?
Magan wheel has caused me trouble, but I am gaining mastery
over it. Ground-nuts are gone. Vallabhbhai and Mahadev frightened
me and I have allowed myself to be frightened. My weight has gone
up to 105 1 /2 again.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6221. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9687

441. WONDERFUL SELF-SACRIFICE1
May 15, 1932
Sometimes a lesson in even an ordinary school reader teaches us
a great moral. Recently I have been reading an Urdu reader. Some of
the lessons in it are very good. One of them produced a profound
effect on me. Thinking that it may have such effect on others too, I
1

Presumaply, this was sent along with ‘‘Letter to Narandas Gandhi”,
13/15-5-1932; vide the following item.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

369

give here a summary.
A few years after the death of the Prophet, there was a great
battle between the Arabs and the Romans. On both sides large
numbers of warriors were killed and a great many wounded. Every
evening the fighting would stop. One evening after the fighting had
ended an Arab warrior went round the battlefield to find his cousin. If
he found the cousin dead, he would bury the body, and if he found
him alive he would treat his wounds. Thinking that the cousin might
be thirsting for water, this Arab carried a jug full of water.
As, with lamp in hand, he made his way through the bodies of
warriors Iying wounded and crying in pain, he found his cousin and
indeed he was thirsting for water. His wounds were bleeding
profusely. There was little hope of his remaining alive. The Arab held
out the jug of water before him. Just then they heard a wounded
warrior crying pitifully for water. The cousin felt compassion for that
man and asked the Arab to go first to him and give him water. The
latter immediately went in the direction from which they had heard
the cry.
This wounded man crying for water was a big chieftain. As he
was about to take the jug of water from the Arab, they heard
somebody else crying for water. This chieftain, like the Arab’s cousin,
was a man of compassion. With great difficulty, he uttered a few words
and made gestures to the Arab and explained to him that he should
first go to that other person and, give him water. Feeling miserable, the
Arab ran to the place from which the cries had come. But the moment
he reached there, the wounded warrior breathed his last and closed his
eyes. The water had arrived too late. The Arab quickly returned to
where the wounded chieftain was lying. He found that the chieftain,
too, was dead. With a heavy heart and praying to God, the Arab went
back to where his cousin lay, and found that his pulse, too, had
stopped and he had died.
Thus, none of the three got water. But the first two won
immortal fame. The pages of history abound in such instances of pure
self-sacrifice, and, if they are narrated by a master of the pen, we even
shed a few tears over them. But I have narrated this wonderful story
here with the hope that it may inspire in us the spirit of self-sacrifice
displayed by those two brave warriors and that, when such occasions
arise, we will give water first to others before drinking it ourselves, will
save others’ lives before saving our own and if, in trying to do so, we
meet death, we will meet it with a smile on our face.
370

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I think even more difficult than the sacrifice of water is that of
air. Without it we cannot live even for a minute. That is why the whole
world seems to have been filled with air. However, it does sometimes
happen that men are locked up in a small room as in a cupboard.
There is only one small hole letting in air, and only those who get this
air are likely to survive and the others would die. We should pray to
God that if ever we found ourselves in such a condition we would
voluntarily give up our place near the hole.
Next to air comes water. We occasionally hear of men fighting
for a glass of water. We should hope that if we find ourselves in such
circumstances, we will have the spirit of self-sacrifice displayed by
those brave Arabs. But very few people are tested in this manner.
There are less severe tests which we face almost every day. Let all of
us ask ourselves: Whenever we are confronted by such tests, do we
always put our co-workers and neighbours before ourselves? If the
answer is in the negative, then it means that we have failed in the test
and that we have not learnt even the first lesson in non-violence.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

442. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[May 13/15, 1932] 1
CHI. NARANDAS,

I received two packets from you this time. I follow your
argument that yarn of 16 counts will be cheaper than that of 20
counts. But I think we shall find that on the balance yarn of 20 counts
is cheaper, for in spinning such yarn we shall have to remain vigilant
all the time. The spindle, etc., will have to be kept in good condition.
By “cheap” I do not mean here merely economical. I give to the
word a spiritual sense. If, therefore, you see no other difficulty, insist
on everybody spinning yarn of 20 counts and do it yourself, and see
that the other conditions are also observed. If you find that this results
in decrease in production for the time being, never mind. Probably
you remember one thing which I suggested to you once or twice. We
should reckon the value of all types of work at the same rate. In other
words, if a person works for one hour, whether he spins or cards or
weaves or does carpentry work or writes accounts or works on the
1

From Bapuna Patro-9: Shri Narandas Gandhine, Vol. I, p. 368

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

371

farm, the value of his work should be the same. For the purpose of
our record, I had suggested that the value should be one anna per
hour of work. If all inmates of the Ashram above the age of ten, other
than those who may be bedridden, have been working daily for an
average of eight hours, I would say that the Ashram was
self-supporting. This may seem just now to entail loss from the
economic point of view, but ultimately the account will balance itself
even from that point of view. Of course, in proceeding on this basis we
assume that all inmates have been honest. Everybody must have used
the time honestly. To make sure of this, we should have considered,
when making the entry, whether the person had done as much work
per hour as everybody doing that work was expected to do, and
whether he had done it with proper care. I did not suggest that this
record should take the place of the usual account that is kept. It does
not require too many entries. The daily figure will be entered against
everybody’s name; it may be one in some cases and two in others, and
the figures will indicate the number of hours for which the person had
worked. The figures will be entered only against those who pass the
test in our eyes. I would call this a spiritual account. If we work in this
manner, whatever the yield of our farm and our dairy I wouId
describe those activities as self-supporting. Moreover, this plan
assumes that the labourers will be as good as inmates of the Ashram
and that we shall be satisfied with the vegetables, fruit and milk which
we produce in the Ashram. These ideas have not sprung up in my
mind recently. I have been discussing them ever since the
establishment of the Ashram. I may not have discussed them at length
with you, but I used to discuss them frequently with Maganlal. But till
now they have remained as mere wishes. I am simply pouring out
before you the stream of thoughts which started with reflections on
the spinning yajna during the National Week. I do not wish that you
should start implementing these suggestions right now. You are a
steady man, and, therefore, I do not hesitate to put before you
whatever ideas come to me. I don’t wish to confuse your mind in any
way or start you worrying needlessly. There are persons who become
impatient as soon as a new suggestion is put before them, immediately
start implementing it and, failing in their attempt, get confused. In the
result they will have given up the old practice but discovered nothing
to take its place. I believe you do not have this weakness in your
nature and that is why I throw out to you every new fancy which
occurs to me. When you are fed up with this, please drop a hint and I
372

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

shall calm down. From here I can give you no active help in your
work, but within my limits I can help you with suggestions. But this
help also I can give only if you receive the suggestions patiently, put
each in the proper cabinet in your brain and weigh its practicability
before acting on it. If, however, they become a burden on your brain,
my sending them will serve no useful purpose.
Let me return for a while to the question of 20 counts. It is not
quite correct that cloth woven from yarn of 16 counts lasts longer
than cloth woven from yarn of 20 counts. If the cotton from which
the yarn of 20 counts was woven was of suffciently good quality and
was properly carded, and if the yarn spun from it was strong enough
and the weaving was sufficiently close, the cloth would certainly last
longer than the cloth of 16 counts which we have with us now. The
fact that the latter lasts longer only means this: Both the varieties of
yarn which we spin, 16 counts and 20 counts, are weak. But the yarn
of 16 counts is likely to be less weak comparatively, and such yarn
can be spun even from cotton of inferior quality without its quality
being affected. Hence the cloth woven from it may appear stronger
than the cloth woven from the yarn of 20 counts. If we cling to this
belief, we shall be responsible for spreading the notion that cloth
woven from yarn of 16 counts is stronger than cloth from yarn of 20
counts, and, if my argument about yarn of 20 counts is correct, we
shall also be responsible for encouraging work of bad quality. Up to a
limit, the finer the count of the yarn which we are able to spin the
better shall we be able to serve the poor, because that will raise the
prestige of khadi.
I think we shall be able to demonstrate that it is not difficult to
spin fine yarn which can be used for weaving cloth. Just now I give all
my attention to learning to spin on the Magan spinning-wheel. But
Mahadev has been experimenting with the slivers sent by
Chhakkaddas. He has made some changes in the spindle-bearer, and
these changes by themselves have enabled him to spin without any
difficulty yarn of 36 counts from the slivers which he has been using
all along. Previously he could spin yarn of 20 counts, then of 25
counts and now he can spin yarn of 36 counts. In the letter which I
wrote to Lakshmidas yesterday I have explained how this
improvement took place. Get that letter from him and read it. It is
true, however, that Mahadev’s speed has decreased a little. When he
was spinning yarn of 25 counts, his speed was 300 rounds per hour; it
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

373

was 240 when the yarn was of 32 counts, and now for yarn of 36
counts it is 210 rounds per hour. This decrease does not alarm me in
the least. When the count of the yarn becomes fixed, I am sure his
speed will increase a little. My point is that by gradually learning to
spin yarn of finer count, we are helping the cause of khadi. It seems
you celebrated Maganlal’s anniversary in a most befitting manner.
Panditji, Lakshmibehn, Yashvant Prasad and Mathuri came and
saw me. Manibehn was the oldest among the party, and hence I gave
the letter to Harilal to her. While giving it I asked her and was told that
all of them would return to the Ashram on the same day. Isent the
letter with her, thinking that it would reach you earlier than by post. I
feel helpless. I got one more letter from Harilal. In both letters I see
pure insolence and total lack of shame. I don’t see in Bali the faults
for which he blames her. She has been like a mother to Manu, and,
therefore, it would be a cruelty on Manu to remove her from her
charge. However, I cannot have in prison the information which you
may get there. After knowing my views, therefore, do what seems best
to you whenever you have to decide what to do.
There is no cause for worry about my hand. It pains when I
work, but not at other times. If I feel that milk will help to cure the
pain, I will certainly start taking it. The pain was there even when I
used to take milk.
I see that Ratilal is a heavy responsibility on you. I have had two
letters from Champa. She seems to have felt hurt for some reason. See
what you can do to pacify her. She says that her younger brother
wants to stay in the Ashram. If you think he can stay in the Ashram,
take him in. Write to Harihar Sharma and ask him if he will take away
Ratilal. I am afraid that even if he goes to Rangoon he will not stay
there without Champa. And the latter does not wish to go there. I
believe that she has good reasons for not wishing to go there.
Grant the permission desired by Ranganath Kulkarni to make a
Marathi translation. None of the papers sent by Jethalal Govindji were
reports about Anantpur. But I did get one letter from him. The prison
authorities tell me that the reports must have been received, but that
they seem to have been misplaced. Please, therefore, obtain their
copies from him.
There is probably much exaggeration in the complaint you have
received regarding the women. I will, however, inquire about the
matter.
I sent to you the five names of intending visitors which were
374

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

approved. The other names which have been approved are as under:
Indu Nehru, Jehangir Vakil (of Poona, Indu’s tutor) and his
wife, Hemprabha Devi, Raihana, Hiravanti Mansukh lal, Chhaganlal,
Rama (Ranchhodbhai’s) Prabhashankar (Champa’s father), Behram
Khambhatta and his wife, Manjukesha, Sushila (Pyarelal’s sister),
Sushila (Premabehn’s friend), Dinkar Mehta, Puratan Buch. You need
not write to them. If Puratan comes to the Ashram any time, you can
tell him that he may come whenever he wishes. I have given the list
only for your information. If you know of any other persons who
wishto visit and if they come within the conditions laid down by the
Government, please send their names to me.
There is a letter from Mahavir. He writes in it that all of them are
keeping good health and that, therefore, they should be permitted to
stay on for a few months more. I think that they may be permitted to
stay on. It would be advisable to fix the upper limit of their
expenditure. I should like them to take up some work in Darjeeling. If
you can think of any, please suggest it. I think you did write to me
and tell me what their monthly expenditure was, but I have forgotten
the figure. I think it would be good if they marry Maitri to someone
in Darjeeling. She has certainly reached marriageable age. They
wished to get her married to Khadgabahadur. But I don’t think he will
agree. I have written directly to Maitri about this. Read that letter. If in
the end they decide to stay permanently in Darjeeling and Mahavir
starts earning, that would certainly be good. If you have thought
about any suggestions in this regard or if any suggestion occurs to
you in future, please let me know.
Ramdas writes and tells me that he has deposited some of his
money in a certain bank and he wants the amount to remain where it
is. I heard that Gopaldas1 , the Vidyapith graduate, has received serious
injuries. Inquire about him and let me know the facts. If he is able to
write, ask him to do so. Ask Chandrashankar to send me by registered
post a copy of Maganbhai’s Mimansa2 . He should also write how he
keeps.
Did Ba get my letter? I have had no letter from her at all. Did
you read what Jamnadas said about Harilal? I am afraid the latter has
misled you. Many persons write to me and tell me that he has
abandoned all restraints. Haridas Gandhi’s3 health is fairly good. He is
1

Gopaldas Jivabhai Patel, who was seriously injured in a lathi-charge at a
Congress meeting in Delhi
2
Maganbhai Desai’s thesis Satyagrahni Mimansa, for which he was awarded
the degree of Samajvidya Parangat by the Vidyapith
3
He was one of the prisoners transferred from Sabarmati to Yeravda.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

375

being treated properly. His illness, however, is mental. Does his father
visit him? Where is Kamala?
BAPU
From a microfilm
Courtesy:Narandas Gandhi

of

the

Gujarati:

M.M.U./I.

Also

C.W.

8226.

443. LETTER TO MANSHANKAR J. TRIVEDI
May 15, 1932
CHI. MANU,

I got your letter. According to me, the most important benefit of
your going there 1 will be improvement in your health and the good
and bad experiences which you will get there. It will certainly be very
good if you attain great proficiency in your medical studies, but see
that you do not harm your health or let go opportunities for other
experiences for the sake of your studies. Since you will have to study
German, learn it sufficiently well to be able to read and understand
German literature without difficulty. And you should be careful to
create a good impression on the people about you, that is, about India.
I have just received a letter from Walsh2 in which he writes about you.
Both he and Zimmermann impressed me as good men.
Do you meet any Indians there?
All three of us are well. Sardar and Mahadev send their blessings
to you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1005

444. LETTER TO MAHAVIR GIRI
May 15, 1932
CHI. MAHAVIR,

I got your letter. I cannot understand why you did not get mine.
In future I will send through the Ashram my letters to you. All of you
also should send your letters to me through the same channel. I hope
1
2

376

To Germany
Carlyle Walsh
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the money has been sent to you. Please drop the idea of going to
Kalimpong. If all of you keep good health, you may remain where
you are. And everyone in the family should take up some work. What
is everybody’s programme during the day? Do all of you keep a
correct diary?
How is it that I have had no letter from Maitri? Has
Krishnamaiyadevi recovered now? With whom do you stay?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6235

445. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
May 15, 1932
CHI. PARASRAM,

You should write in your diary anything which occurs to you.
You can write even your most secret thoughts. Nothing concerning
ourselves need be kept secret from other people, and you should not,
therefore, worry who will read your diary. For that reason, however,
you cannot record others’ short-comings or what anybody may have
told you in confidence. Only the secretary of the Ashram or a person
authorized by him has the right to read anybody’s diary. But, on our
part, we should not wish our diary to be kept secret from any person.
You should not in any circumstances stop spinning on the takli
and be out of practice, no matter even if you can give to it only half
an hour every day. Have you become methodical now?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7498. Also C.W. 4975. Courtesy:
Parasram Mehrotra

446. LETTER TO PADMA
May 15, 1932
CHI. PADMA,

I advised you to come away because you asked for my opinion.
If, however, you yourself wish to stay there, why need I ask you to
come away? When Sitala Sahai comes there, ask him to write to me.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

377

I have kept up spinning on the Magan spinning-wheel. Your
suggestion was not found very useful. It did not solve my difficulties.
If the wheel has not stopped in the desired position, I have often to use
the hand to put it in that position. But I can use only one hand. The
left hand is useless because of the pain in the elbow.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6141. Also C.W. 3493. Courtesy:
Prabhudas Gandhi

447. LETTER TO SUSHILABEHN GANDHI
May 15, 1932
CHI. SUSHILA,

You are a very clever woman. I do not understand how you can
say that you have been waiting for a letter from me, having written to
everybody earlier to say that you were starting today. If now you do
not get a letter, you may complain. I am glad that you have decided to
stay there for the sake of Sita. I also did think sometimes whether it
would be good for you and her to come over. Let me know how you
are helping there and also write to me in detail about your daily
programme of work. I am sure you have good company now. Ask
Pragji to write to me in detail. How is Parvati? Will all of you stay
together or separately?
All three of us are happy.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
The envelope in which this letter is being sent was made by
Sardar. It was made from the paper in which the small parcels which
we receive are wrapped. People like you living in a civilized country
may not look with favour upon such gifts from a poor land. But what
can we do? Seeing your palaces, should we destroy our cottages?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4788

378

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

448. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

May 15, 1932
CHI. MANGALA,

Why did your hand shake? Why did your eyes burn? When the
eyes burn, sprinkle hot and cold water. What was it, you had asked me
about the rules of the kitchen? I do not remember. Write again.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11097. Courtesy: Pushpa Naik

449. LETTER TO BHAU PANSE
May 15, 1932
CHI. BHAU,

I have your letter and also Vinoba’s discourse on the first
chapter [of the Gita]. Follow it up by the second.
It will be good if all learn the new method of using takli. Which
of you have learnt it? I hope you are keeping well.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 6727. Also C.W. 4470. Courtesy: Bhau
Panse

450. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
May 15, 1932
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I got your letter yesterday. I had sent a prompt reply to your
letter written from Gwalior. I addressed it to Gwalior which might be
the reason of its non-receipt by you. Some of my letters are certainly
missing. Malaviyaji’s enthusiasm as well as his optimism is worthy of
emulation. We are all doing well. My diet so far continues to be the
same and I am maintaining approximately the same weight. I hope
Rameshwardas is well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 7898. Courtesy: G.D. Birla
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

379

451. LETTER TO MAITHILISHARAN GUPTA1
May 15, 1932
BHAI MAITHILISHARANJI,

I got your letter and the dictionary too. I received another copy
of Saket with your annotations. The notes will be of great help to me.
I will not bother you to send Hindi Shabdasagar. The Kalyan office
might possibly send me one. Anyhow, I shall manage well enough
with your notes and the dictionary. This correspondence about Saket
cannot be made public for the present. The condition that no letters of
mine will be published during my incarceration is implied in the
permission for writing letters granted to me. And there is no harm in
keeping this correspondence unpublished for some time. The inherent
strength of Saket will by itself push it ahead. Mahadev had an
experience of your affection, I was extremely delighted to hear the
whole account from him.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From Hindi: C.W. 9457. Courtesy: Bharat Kala Bhavan, Varanasi

452. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
May 15, 1932
CHI. BRIJKISAN,

I have your letter. I had sent a lengthy reply to your earlier
letter in which I answered all your queries. But it appears that it did
not reach you as you have made no mention of it. We all are doing
well. Convey our salaam, Vandemataram and respectful greetings to
the friends there. I hope you are maintaining your health. Rest on
hearing from you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2392

1

The letter was in reply to the addressee’s (C.W. 9458) suggesting publication
of his correspondence with Gandhiji for the benefit of the readers of Saket.

380

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

453. LETTER TO BABALBHAI MEHTA
May 16, 1932
CHI. BABALBHAI,

I hope you can now spin yarn of 20 counts. The daily reading
of the Gita you find uninteresting because probably you do not
reflect over what you read. If you look upon the Gita as our mother
who guides us daily in our life, you will not find its reading
uninteresting. After the reading every day, you should reflect for a
minute over what you have read. You will daily learn something new.
Only a perfect man will have no more to learn from it. But the
ordinary man who commits some error or other every day will not
weary of reading the Gita if he looks upon it as the mother who will
save him from his faults.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9451

454. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
May 16, 1932
CHI. JAMNADAS,

I have heard from you after a long time. I of course had learnt
the fact of Harilal’s beastly behaviour, but wanted to know the details
from you as I did not depend in any way upon what Anandilal had
written to me. What are your grounds for saying that I deliberately
remain silent on the subject of Harilal’s vices? I have never concealed
my disapproval. I express it whenever anybody gives him something.
What more do you desire or suggest that I should do? Of course I
wrote to him and told him that I still cherished the hope that he would
repent.1 That has happened in the case of many. As long as a person is
alive, we must continue to hope that he will reform.
Let me have more information about the school. You should not
lose self-confidence and give up the work you have undertaken.
According to me, it is only there that your health will improve. Howdo
you find the atmosphere there? ‘Is the State being ruled well? Are the
people happy?
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9444
1

Vide “Fragment of Letter to Harilal Gandhi”, 27-4-1932.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

381

455. A LETTER
May 16, 1932
Even if your mind wanders when praying, you should keep up
the practice. You should retire to a secluded spot, sit in the correct
posture and try to keep out all thoughts. Even if they continue to
come, you should nevertheless complete the prayer. Gradually the
mind will come under control. The Gita also says that the mind is
restless, but it tells us that with patient effort we can bring it under
control. “We shall never willingly accept defeat, though we lose our
life in the struggIe.”
From Gujarati: C.W. 9114. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

456. LETTER TO KHUSHALCHAND GANDHI
May 16, 1932
RESPECTED BROTHER,

You seem to have demonstrated a miracle. From the letters .
which I got, I had given up hope altogether. But the letters which I get
now have raised in me the hope that we shall meet in the present life.
If you can, kindly write a letter to me, otherwise dictate one.
Mahadev is with us.
Respects to you both.
MOHANDAS
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

457. LETTER TO JAMNABEHN GANDHI
May 16, 1932
CHI. JAMNA,

If your health does improve there, what more can we desire?
Kusum was guilty of a serious lapse in not asking for
permission. Did you draw her attention to her error? Sometimes the
girls don’t mean anything and forget common courtesy only through
their innocence. I admit this short-coming in our education.
If the grown-up women treat all the children as their own, the
latter would develop very well.
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 853. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

382

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

458. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
May 16, 1932
CHI. KUSUM (SENIOR),

The letter is altogether incomplete. I will think out questions
when I have some time. You should reply to them and after that I will
do what I can. I will then call for the papers here. There is no hurry
just now. My promise to write means that I will write but only when I
get time.
Are you referring to the letters which I dictated to you? If that is
so, when some day a collection of letters dictated to various persons is
published, those dictated to you will also be included in it. Is there any
special reason for publishing the latter separately?
If you have not settled down by June and pay a visit in the first
week, you will be able to see Mahadev too. Did you visit Pyarelal? If
Sushila wants to visit me, she will be able to do so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1837

459. LETTER TO FULCHAND B. SHAH
May 16, 1932
BHAISHRI FULCHAND,

All of us were glad to receive your letter. We need not worry
over such incidents.1 After all we are prisoners, and should be content
with whatever facilities we are allowed. Time was when prisoners were
not permitted either to read or write, were not even given sufficient
food to eat, were kept in fetters all the twenty four hours and made to
sleep on straw. We should, therefore, think it God’s kindness that we
get the facilities which we do. When our self-respect is attacked, we
may lay down our lives to save it, but we should endure physical
suffering.
1
This sentence is reproduced from a fragment of the letter in Mahadevbhaini
Diary, Vol. I, p. 156. From the addressee’s letter to Gandhiji written from Visapur
jail, 13 lines had been censored out by the jail authorities.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

383

We were happy to learn that all of you were happy there. After
all, happiness and unhappiness are states of one’s own mind. The fact
that you and Mama obey the rules and persuade others also to obey
them and to observe cleanliness does great credit to you both.
I hope that every one of you there makes the best use of his
time. You are not likely to get such quiet and leisure again in life. You
may read if you get books, and you can always think and reflect. And
there is so much work, too, from which you should volunteer to do
something or the other. There is one serious mistake which all of us
commit, and it is that we waste Government’s time or property as if
they did not belong to us personally. A little reflection will show that
the Government’s time and property belong to the people. If we waste
them because they are at present controlled by the Government, it is
the people’s property and time we waste. We should, therefore, make
the best use of anything which we have occasion to use. The goods
also which we produce by our work in jail increase the nation’s
wealth. The fact that the present Government is foreign does not affect
this argument. But I would be entering the field of politics if I go
further than this, and as prisoners we cannot discuss politics. I,
therefore, stop here on this subject. Tell me, when you write next, who
else I know are there, or somebody else whose time for exercising his
right of writing a letter has come may write to me. Is Diwan Master in
that jail? Is Madhavlal of the Ashram also there?
The three of us, it may be said, are really enjoying our time.
There are no restrictions on food except those which are self-imposed,
nor on the hours of rest and sleep. Carding and spinning are going on
fairly well. And we also read. We get a reasonable supply of
newspapers too. As for books, friends send them regularly. We pray at
regular hours. That is our daily programme.
Our regards to you all.
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9445. Courtesy: Chandrakant F. Shah

460. LETTER TO VIDYA R. PATEL
May 16, 1932
CHI. VIDYA,

If you spin with enough care, you will certainly be able to spin
yarn of 20 counts.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 9428. Courtesy: Ravindra R. Patel

384

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

461. LETTER TO PUSHPA S. PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

May 16, 1932
CHI. PUSHPA,

Premabehn would never refuse to reply. You must ask your
question politely,
You must learn Hindi, because that is the language spoken in the
major part of India.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11079. Courtesy: Pushpa Naik

462. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
Y. M.,

May 16, 1932
CHI. NIMU,

I have your letter. Sumitra should not be given rice.; Oranges
should be sweet. Add some water to the milk. Add honey instead of
sugar. Papaw should be given in small quantities and that well mashed.
She will now have cut teeth, so probably it will be all right to give her
the kind of khakhari they used to make with soda and salt in it and
rolled thin as paper. Observe timings in feeding.
Add some water to the milk for Babu. Give him dill water. Add
honey to it. Add lime water to the milk. Ask Jethalal to consult the
books there and explain how to make it. Both should get lots of fresh
air. Give them exercise. Do you know how to exercise children ?
Mathuradas had given a book to Ramdas. Did he read it out to you? If
the book is not there, ask Premabehn to explain its substance. You will
get a beating if the kids’ health suffers. Ramdas is well.
BAPU

[PS.]
About separate kitchen you may ask Narandas.
From the Gujarati original: Nirmala Gandhi Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

385

463. LETTER TO VIMAL KISHORE MEHROTRA
May 16,1932
CHI. VIMAL,

Your letter this time is good. Keep it up. You can teach
everyone Hindi while playing games. Try to spin fine yarn.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 7499. Also C.W. 4976. Courtesy:
Parasram Mehrotra

464. A LETTER
May 16, 1932
BHAI,

Ask for anything only in the sacrificial spirit.
A guru is one who guides us to righteousness by his own
righteous conduct.
True development consists in reducing ourselves to a cipher.
Selfless service is the secret of life. To rise above passions is the
highest ideal.
The sages mainly from their own experiences have laid down
rules of thought and conduct.
A rishi is one who has realized himself. Sannyasa according to
Gita is the renunciation of actions prompted by desire.
Only one who has his body under control is a man. Beauty
because of its quality of inwardness cannot be experienced in the
physical sense.
All your questions have been answered.
BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 9122. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

386

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

465. A LETTER1
May 17, 1932
Life without a ruffle would be a very dull business. It is not to
be expected. Therefore it is wisdom to put up with all the roughness
of life, and that is one of the rich lessons we learn from the
Ramayana.
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. l, p. 158

466. LETTER TO NIRMALA B. MASHRUWALA
May 17, 1932
CHI. NIRMALA,

I was very glad to get your letter. Write regularly in future and
give me news about Kishorelal and Gomati. Do you ever go to see
them? Let me know Gomati’s diet at present. Who are the others there
with her? I know all those who are with Kishorelal. I have written to
Manju and advised her not to leave the hospital. She has taken up this
responsibility of her own free will. I am of the view that she cannot
give it up now without a strong reason for doing so. What is Nathji’s
view? And what do all of you think? All three of us keep good health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 2661. Courtesy: Kanubhai N.
Mashruwala

1

The addressee had asked Gandhiji if he had met anybody who was never
perturbed.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

387

467. LETTER TO WOMEN PRISONERS
May 17,1932
God cannot be seen with our physical eyes. He has no body,
and, therefore, we can see Him only with the eyes of faith. When no
impure thoughts or feelings disturb us, when we feel no fear and are
always serene, that is a sign of God’s presence in our heart. In fact, He
is always there, but we do not see Him because we do not have faith,
and in consequence suffer in many ways. When true faith is awakened
in a person, he does not feel the outward sufferings. This is true about
Taradevi Bajpai. She should do only as many pranayamas and in
such manner as cause no physical discomfort. I have no experience of
the type of pranayamas practised in Hathayoga. I cannot therefore
guide her in this matter, nor is such pranayama necessary. We cannot
know God by performing certain physical acts. To know Him we
should have living faith and should live according to that
faith.Pranayama and other processes purify the body and give us a
measure of peace. They have no other benefit.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 157-8

468. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
May [18] 1 , 1932
DEAR COLONEL DOYLE,

Major Bhandari told me today that he was instructed to prohibit
Shrimati Mirabai (Slade) from seeing me should she desire to do so.
As it so happened, she having been discharged from Arthur Road Jail
yesterday came today to see me. It would have been courteous if she
had been previously informed by Government that she would not be
allowed to see me. But that is perhaps a small matter. What is of the
highest concern for me is that of all the Ashram people Mirabai
should be singled out for the prohibition, whereas hitherto she has
never been prohibited from seeing me. I have always been under an
impression, and have been grateful, that the Government had tacitly
1

Vide the following item. The source has ‘‘19’, the date on which the letter was
submitted for despatch; vide “Diary, 1932”, entry under ‘‘May 19”.

388

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

recognized not merely the fact of Mirabai being an inmate of the
Ashram, but being nearer to me than an Ashram inmate, if such a
thing was possible. I may mention that she is under strict instructions
not to take an active part in the present political movement and not
deliberately to seek imprisonment. Her activity has been confined
purely to conducting the constructive khadi movement and reporting
to friends in the West the present political happenings. .If these be a
disqualification, there is hardly a person whom I should be able to see.
If therefore I cannot see Mirabai, I do not know how far I would
be justified in availing myself of the permission to receive other
visitors. Needless to say that I do not discuss politics with Mirabai or
any other visitor, nor have I the slightest desire, even if it was possible
for me, to direct the movement from within prison walls. All interviews
take place in the presence of the Superintendent. If therefore the
Government have any regard for my feelings or Mirabai’s, I hope that
they will reconsider their decision and permit her to visit me as before.
Will you kindly place this letter before the Government and
request an early decision?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(2), Pt. I, p. 95

469. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 18/19, 1932
CHI. MIRA,

I was distressed suddenly to find that you were not to see me.
My first thought was not [to] see anybody at all if I could not see you.
But I restrained myself and saw the others. I have now written1 to the
Government asking them to reconsider their decision. If they do not, I
imagine I must cease to see others. I have said almost as much in my
letter to the Government. It would be another matter if they had any
reasonable ground for the prohibition. Meanwhile you should write to
me. I hope this unexpected thing has not upset you. More later.
1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

389

The Bombay happenings1 are heart-rending. God’s will be
done.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
[May] 19 [1932]
As I handed this to Superintendent he told me he was sending
me your letter. I have it now. I do not need to add anything just now.
There is no such thing as a blow in reality. 2 After having entrusted
oneself to God where is any room left for blow? Therefore rejoice in
suffering.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6222. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9688

470. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 19, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

It has been decided not to permit Mirabehn to see me. It is a
serious question now for me whether I should see other visitors. I have
written to the Government and informed it almost in so many words
that, unless it reconsiders its decision, I would have to think seriously
whether I should see any other visitors. If, therefore, Premabehn,
Sushila and you wish to come, you should come soon. I may perhaps
be able to see you. If meanwhile I receive a negative reply in regard to
Mirabehn, I will most probably send you a wire asking you not to
come. You may come even on Tuesday if you wish.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8227. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

1

Hindu-Muslim riots
“Bapu refers to the shock of being refused admission at the gate.”—
Mirabehn
2

390

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

471. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
May 19, 1932
CHI. PREMA,

Though you are likely to visit me next week, I think it best that I
should reply to your letter. Moreover, an incident which occurred
yesterday shows that my receiving visitors should always be treated as
uncertain.
Vali has proved her worth very well indeed. I don’t think the
Ashram can take credit for that. She seems to have joined it with her
character already formed.
Why girls brought up in the Ashram seem so weak is a problem
which I have not been able to solve. I have my explanations for that,
but I think it useless to discuss them unless I can give reasons in
support of them. We should try our best to discover the real reasons. It
should also be borne in mind that, after leaving the Ashram, these girls
do not always improve.
To keep a watch 1 over Narandas means that, when he seems to
have taken an excessive burden upon himself you should caution him
and also inform me. I have discovered no ambiguity in any of my
statements. If they are ambiguous, they are so unintentionally and
because of my imperfect command over language. My statements are
short, and hence they leave many things unsaid. But in this respect
they are like propositions in geometry.
Those girls who wish to learn English may certainly do so if
they have paid attention to Hindi and Sanskrit and acquired a good
command over Gujarati. Of course, this is subject to facilities for
teaching English being available. We ought to have them, no doubt.
You do not seem to have understood my interpretation of
passive exercises. What a person does himself cannot be described as
passive. Passive exercises are for people who are ill. If I am ill and
wish to give exercise to my bowels, and if someone massages the
abdomen or raises my legs several times to form a right angle with the
rest of the body and lowers them again, and I am not required to raise
or lower any limb, then that is passive exercise. I don’t think you have
understood that this is what the phrase means.
1

Vide “Letter to Premabehn Kantak”, 7-5-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

391

I had two aims in practising silent prayer. One was, of course, to
give rest to the mind. But it was also difficult to turn the mind inward
except through such prayer. Whenever we lay aside one work and take
up another, we should feel that we have ample time on hand. We
should not feel impatient or restless. It is thus that we gradually learn
detachment.
I think I do command concentration, but not well enough to
satisfy me. I try earnestly to cultivate such concentration, but I am not
impatient.
If the children take no interest in any of the prayers, a special
item can be included for them, as used to be done by Prabhudas. I
should be happy if they sit through the prayers with faith and in
stillness.
I did not say it by way of praise that the same prayers have
continued for sixteen years. It was only a statement of fact. I did not
wish to suggest that all have been attending the prayers for so many
years. The Ashram has clung to these prayers in the face of all
troubles and criticisms and quite a few people have derived peace of
mind from them. All that I intended to say was that these prayers
ought not to be given up or altered without a strong reason.
Women’s prayers will not seem proper in the evening.
Moreover, some people devote the evening to reading, etc.
What you write about yourself is correct. You should follow
your reason and your heart. I am not impatient. I may tell you what
seems proper to me, but cannot force you to accept my suggestion
against your reason. All I can do is to act as a friend. I can, at the
most, claim my experiences over many years in my favour. If,
however, they find no echo in your heart, even thousands of them will
have no value for you. I make, of course, one claim for the Ashram. It
helps new-comers to grow wings. They may then fly where they will.
If they continue in the Ashram of their own free will, they are
welcome to stay. Even if they do not stay, the Ashram will have done
its duty in one matter. This can be proved to have happened to many
persons, especially women. At different times in the past, girls came
and joined the Ashram, who had no spirit in them at all. Today they
believe themselves independent and are in fact so. Such were
Gulbadan, Umiya, Vidyavati, Rukhi, etc. Love for individual persons is
not wholly forbidden. Only, such love should not be an obstacle to
love for all beings and for God. My love for Ba today flows from my
392

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

love for God. When I was filled with lust, it was an obstacle to love of
God and was, therefore, unworthy.
The loss in your weight need not worry you, if otherwise you
are all right. Sushila may come.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10286. Also C.W. 6734. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

472. A LETTER1
May 19, 1932
. . . should not be forced to forgo the two special facilities
which she enjoys. Till she herself feels a strong desire to forgo them,
we cannot ask her to do so. You are both right and not right in citing
my example. You are right because so long as I am doing active work
people will point to my example and, in consequence, be misled. For a
variety of reasons, I cannot demonstrate in my own life standards of
conduct which I expect others to follow. I know that this is my
deficiency as a leader. At the same time, you are not right in citing my
example because my condition is now different from that of my
co-workers. One reason for this is my physical weakness, another is
my Mahatmaship and the third is my uncommon mode of life. Even
if I were in ‘C’ class, my food would be different from that of the
other prisoners, either because of my weakness or my vows. This
would be so, more or less, in the case of any prisoner. That other
prisoners may not get special facilities of diet as quickly as I get them,
is another question. I see visitors once every week, instead of once
every three months, and there is no restriction at all on the number of
letters I can write. In justification of this, I have told myself that I have
no personal friends and that I do not see relations because they are
relations, but my seeing them serves a moral aim. I write letters with
the same aim. Whether there is an element of self-indulgence lurking
behind this, I do not know. But it is not likely to be so, for, if
2

1

The Diary of Mahadev Desai, Vol. I, gives only the initial letter “S” of the
addressee’s name. The addressee had questioned how Gandhiji could advise others to
forgo privileges while he himself enjoyed them; why we are grieved to see an ailing
or dying man; why we thank God if he survives; why Gandhiji had himself so thanked
God when Manilal was saved; what the span of human life was, etc.
2
This name is omitted in the source.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

393

interviews and writing letters stopped, I would not be perturbed. In the
year 1930 I had stopped seeing visitorswhen a condition laid down by
me was rejected. 1 In 1922 I had similarly stopped writing letters. 2
Apart from these reasons, there is another reason too, namely, that I
am kept apart from other prisoners. For all these reasons, a
comparison between other prisoners and me would not be right.
However, I don’t think it proper on my part to try to convince
anybody in this matter with arguments if the difference is not
self-evident to him. There is certainly some difference between the
case of a person for whom ‘A’ class has been secured through outside
influence and that of another who has got it in the normal course, but
the difference is not worth stressing. The ideal, of course, is that there
should be no classes and, therefore, prisoners who have been put in
the so-called upper classes should give up their privileges. Very few
persons yet follow this ideal in practice, and so I do not feel inclined
to put any burden on a young woman like . . . . She is a very
thoughtful woman. I am sure she exercises of her own accord
whatever self-control she is capable of.
My praying for Manilal was not a sign of my spirituality but was
a sign of a father’s love for his son. There can be only one right
prayer, that God may do what He wills. Of course the question can be
asked what purpose such a prayer serves. The reply to it is that the
meaning of the prayer is not to be understood literally. We are aware
of the presence of God in our heart, but, for the moment we imagine
him to be external to us and pray to Him in order that we may be
delivered from ignorance. In other words, we do not wish to follow
wherever the mind drags us. If, however, God is external to us, we wish
to follow Him wherever He, our Master, leads us. We do not know
whether it is good for us that we should live or that we should die.
Hence we should not rejoice that we are alive or tremble at the thought
of death. We should look upon life and death as equal and be
indifferent to them. This is the ideal. We should not give it up because
we cannot reach it all at once or only rare persons can reach it. On the
contrary, the more we realize its difficulty the harder should be our
effort to reach it.
The full span of a man’s life can exceed even 100. But
1
Vide “Letter to Tricumdas Dwarkadas”, 28-2-1933 and “Letter to P. R. Lele”,
28-2-1933
2
Vide “Letter to Hakim Ajmal Khan”, 12-5-1922

394

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

however long a man may live, his life is not even one ten-millionth of
a moment in the infinite cycle of time. Why, then, should we be eager
to live a long life and try to determine its maximum span? Any figure
wedetermine will never be exact. We can only guess what the
maximum span of human life can be. In actual life we even see a
healthy child die suddenly. Nor can we say that a sensual man will not
enjoy a long life.At the most we can say that a person whose life has
always been simple and pure will very probably enjoy a long life. But
those who acquire control over the senses in order that they may
enjoy a long life only dig up a mountain in order to find a mouse. We
should acquire control over the senses in order that we may know the
self. We should not care if, as a result of such control, our life
becomes shorter instead of longer. A healthy and long life is the least
important benefit of freedom from the cravings of the senses.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. 1, pp. 162-4

473. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR,

Silence Day [Before May 20, 1932] 1
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

I have your letter. Your health must return to normal. Where
does Krishnadas live in Kadi? Who is in Vijapur? I feel that you can
also ply takli the same way as I do. Sitting on a chair with the hand
straight and not raising it higher, is not tiring at all.
If possible, I will write something which the children can
understand, about the shloka pertaining to sthitaprajya. I will not get
your spinning-wheel here as my stay here is uncertain and also I have
no time.
There is no time today for writing anything more. What kind of
life is this that even here I do not get time. But then, you know my
programme. I do not have even a single minute free.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32937
1

From the reference to the addressee’s spinning-wheel, it appears that the
letter was written before the preceding one.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

395

474. LETTER TO BABALBHAI MEHTA
May 20, 1932
CHI. BABALBHAI,

We should do a thing to please elders if it is not immoral. It
cannot be a matter of dharma to sing group-prayers aloud. Hence you
cannot offer satyagraha to get freedom to do so. There is no loss of
self-respect at all in giving finger-prints in a jail. The practice of
obtaining prisoners’ finger-prints has no bearing on the fear of their
running away.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9452. Also C.W. 9115. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

475. A LETTER
May 20, 1932
You should not be in the least disappointed at seeing no
immediate result whatever of your work. We should stick to the work
undertaken, in single-minded devotion to it, with the faith that service
done with pure motives, selflessly and as sacrifice to the Lord never
fails to bear fruit. We even know that often in the past men gave their
whole lives to some good cause and the fruits were enjoyed only by
those who came after them. It should not be a matter of any wonder if
four or five years of work by men like us yield no results in a poor,
despairing region like Orissa, where several people may have gone
under the pretext of public service and robbed the people. On the
contrary, it would be a matter for wonder if such a brief period
yielded any results. Besides, you actually see the beginning of
someresults. Your field of work lies there, and you and your
co-workers should stick to it with the conviction that it is also the place
where you can attain self-realization. I was glad to learn this time that
all of you are in good health. As you get more and more accustomed
to the climate there and the mind remains cheerful, that will have its
good effect on your health too.
From Gujarati: C.W. 9116. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

396

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

476. A LETTER
May 20, 1932
Give up all idle thoughts and constantly wish the good of all
living creatures. The more you do so the more peace of mind you will
enjoy.
From Gujarati: C.W. 9113. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

477. LETTER TO JAMNABEHN GANDHI
May 20, 1932
CHI. JAMNA,

Kusum is still a child in some ways. Very often a child learns
only through bitter experience. If she takes rest in Ranavav now, she
will be all right.
If you do not improve, you too should go somewhere outside.
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 854. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi.

478. LETTER TO PUSHPA S. PATEL
May 20, 1932
CHI. PUSHPA,

Your handwriting is improving now. Children should go from
the prayer directly to bed.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3989. Also C.W. 35. Courtesy:
Pushpabehn N. Naik

479. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

May 20, 1932
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

I was keenly waiting for your letter. Ultimately it arrived.1
Dhiru had come to see me and left behind the Magan spinning-wheel.
1
A few lines after this have been crossed out in the source. They may have
been censored by the jail authorities or cancelled by Gandhiji himself, who had
dictated this letter, having written only the last few lines himself.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

397

I observed him drawing yarn on it for a minute. From the very next
day, I started spinning on it. I had to face a lot of difficulties but I
cannot say that the written suggestions sent to me by Padma were of
any help. You had assessed the qualities of a learner and a stupid
learner, and according to that estimate, I stand nowhere even near the
stupid learner. I wasted quite a large number of slivers while plying it,
sometimes for four hours, sometimes for five hours and sometimes
for three hours. Now I can say that I have acquired sufficient
mastery over it. Today, I spun 183 rounds of yarn in about one and a
half hours. When the switch which gives direction to the wheel does
not arrive and stop at the right place, the wheel requires pushing by
hand. The directions for the difficulties I encountered are not
mentioned in your list of suggestions. From that, I have come to the
conclusion that my difficulties are unusual. If that is a fact, it is not
surprising. An old man’s organs do not co-operate with each other
promptly. So I took time in bringing about co-ordination between my
hand and fingers. I could not work on two spindles because of pain in
my left wrist. The doctors believe that the pain will not go unless I
give my left wrist complete rest. So the biggest utility of the Magan
spinning-wheel for me is that because of it I am able to continue
spinning. I have started hoping that gradually I will be able to achieve
my normal speed on the Magan spining-wheel. Al one time I feared
that I would not be able to spin on it at all. But I did not want to
accept defeat and therefore worked hard on it. I do not find
spinning on it at all difficult. Initially I used to get tired but now I
do not. . . 1 Today is the fourteenth day of my spinning. I like
mydevices. It is good. The spinning-wheel is cheap and there is
scope for making it still cheaper. Some modifications occur to me
but I will take sometime to carry those out. I cannot say just now that
I have so much mastery over the spinning-wheel as to
makemodifications in it. It is plied with both hands that is no
doubt a clear advantage. An efficient spinner would spin either
twice or one and a half times or one and two-third times more with
two hands than he would with one hand. I can think of other reasons
too, for producing more yarn on it. I may be wrong.2 You will
immediately gain one or two seers of weight if you personally see the
1

A few words here are illegible in the source.
The remaining paragraph is already reproduced in “Letter to Prabhudas
Gandhi”, 20-5-1932
2

398

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

interest I am taking in your spinning-wheel. You will be very happy. I
had decided to experiment with your spinning-wheel at a time when I
had no problem with my wrist. Now I have to do that under
compulsion. Either I give up spinning or spin on the same
spinning-wheel. Just as a person who is in difficulty thinks of new
tricks to save himself, I will keep on thinking about new techniques of
improving my speed on the Magan spinning-wheel. And if you are
released, and I am allowed visitors at the time, come and see me and
teach me some new tricks.1
And when you say that you would not allow anyone to depend
on you, then on whose strength are you going to buy the land? How
then can you insist on buying the land? One of the conditions of
buying the land was that you would stay on it as a guard. You violate
that condition and suggest buying the land—how are both things
possible. It does not matter if you violate the conditions because as
long as the land is not bought, you have to some extent a right to
change your opinion. But the moment you absolve yourself from that
condition, you lose the right to suggest buying of land. Not only that.
The land will be bought under new conditions in case it is bought.
And as you say, the talk you had with the seller was final. Then you
cannot absolve yourself from the commitment. I do not analyse all
these to bind you but to show you what difficult predicament you are
in. I understand you. I do not want to criticise you in any way. One
need not bind a devoted worker like you. No person, however
respected he is, can absolve others from their moral obligations.
Everyone has to define his or her own moralobligations himself. As
long as you do not have trust in yourself, you should not even accept
for yourself any moral obligation. If you compel yourself, you will
possibly impede your progress. It is all right if you rise gradually. No
doubt you are going to rise because your intentions are pure, you are
hardworking, you want to help others to the best of your ability and
you do not want to deceive yourself. However, you will come across
many moral dilemmas. Do not worry about them. They will help you
to become a matured person.2
‘Matparah’ means ‘devotion to truth’. ‘Charan Padma’ means
‘lotus feet of Satyanarayan’. By using the word ‘Lotus feet’, a
1

A few lines are again crossed out here, probably censored by jail authorities.
The following two paragraphs are already reproduced in “Letter to Prabhudas
Gandhi”, 20-5-1932
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

399

devotee has personified truth. Truth is formless and so people imagine
it in the form they like. In spite of knowing that it is imagination,
different persons conceive different images. As long as the
imagination lasts, theimages are true; the devotees ascribe whatever
they want, to those images. In fact, Vishnu, Maheshwar, Brahma,
Bhagwan, Ishwar, etc. are all meaningless names or are wanting in
meaning. But truth conveys full meaning. A person who says that he
will die for God would not be able to explain what he meant by that
and the listener, too, would hardly grasp the meaning of what is told to
him. But a person who says that he would die for truth, knows what he
had said and the listener would also most probably grasp the meaning
of it. You ask me, “what does Rama mean?” It is almost meaningless
to worship Him after I explain to you the meaning. But if you worship
Rama with the realization that one whom you wanted to worship was
Him, only then will he be a Kamadhenu1 to you. If you recite the
name of Rama with that faith, be it a parrot-like recitation, you will
transcend the material world. The difference is that you recite the
name of Rama with faith in Him which a parrot certainly does not
have. A parrot is devoid of faith and will therefore feel tired and give
up, or, if he worshipped God in pursuit of self-interest. he will keep
quiet after collecting enough grains for himself. From this point of
view, you do not need a symbol. Tulsidas has given more importance
to the name of Rama than to Rama, the man. That is to say, he has
suggested that the name need not have any meaning. A devotee will
create the necessary meaning later on according to the nature and
quality of his faith in Him. That is the beauty of the practice of such
worship, otherwise it cannot be proved how even the dullest of men
can enjoy spiritual awakening. The only condition is that the name of
God should not be taken to impress others or to deceive others. As I
have suggested, if a man worships God with faith in Him and never
tires of doing so, for him He becomes a Kalpataru. I have no doubt
about it. Men so inclined can prove this for themselves. Initially, their
mind, while worshiping God, will wander for days together, in some
cases for years; they will become restless, feel sleepy, even more than
that, they might have some tragic experience, but even then if they
keep on worshipping God, their devotion will pay. I have no doubt
about it. An inanimate thing like a spinning-wheel comes under
control only after giving us a lot of trouble. Other things which are
1

400

The proverbial cow, believed to fulfill all wishes of the worshippers
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

more difficult give us more trouble before we achieve them. What can
we do for a person who wants to achieve the best but does not take the
medicines prescribed for it patiently for a long time and gets
disappointed.
I feel that the above covers answers to all your questions; after
these there remains nothing for you to ask. If you can develop faith,
go on repeating His name while doing your work—eating, drinking,
sitting or sleeping. Even if you have to devote your whole life, you are
not going to accept defeat. If you do this, no doubt, you will be more
and more at peace with yourself with each passing day.
Do only as much writing and reading as you can without
straining yourself. There is no need to tire out yourself by drawing up
a big programme of writing and reading or getting disappointed if
you are not able to keep it up. I will see what I can do for Devidutt
and Chandradutt’s sister Lakshmi.1 I believe Chhaganlal will take care
of inspection and checking of trivial things about which you have
written. Dhiru has lost a lot of weight and so he has gone to Ranavav.
Kusum has also gone as she too keeps indifferent health. Padma has
not recovered from her illness, so I need not expect much from her.
The three of us are still together and are keeping good health.
I am writing on aparigraha for the Ashram somewhat on the
lines you wanted me to write. I do not get much time as I am occupied
these days with Magan spinning-wheel and the increased
correspondence. And for that reason . . .2 is lying unfinished.
I will certainly not draft trivial rules. I neither have the
inclination nor it is good to draft such trivial rules. With the change of
place and time, new sub-rules will emerge from great principles. At
the same time, some rules will become obsolete while new ones will
come in force. If you have a thorough understanding of the basic
principles, then you would know the source of the sub-principles and
be able to draft the rules easily. Just as a person who knows the
derivation of the principles of geometry is able to find the correct
time.
Totaramji’s wife, Gangadevi was conscious till the last moment.
1

Gandhiji wrote to Narandas Gandhi to accommodate her either at Wardha or at
Sabarmati Ashram and inform Prabhudas accordingly. Vide “Letter to Narandas
Gandhi”, 19-23-5-1932
2
A word here is illegible in the source.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

401

She died while reciting the Ramanama. A few hours before her death,
she knew that she was going to die. She had warned others and was
herself very cheerful. Totaramji was also quite composed. Gangadevi
brought credit to the Ashram in her life and in her death.1
Blessings from Sardar and Mahadev. Keep on asking me till you
are satisfied. Do you meet Kakasaheb and Narahari?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32935

480. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
May 20, 1932
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

I am enclosing a letter from Prabhudas. I have given an
answer to his spiritual problems. As for the Almora Iand, I have said
that the idea of buying the land has been given up as no responsible
person is at present in a position to stay there and Pantji3 is also away.
I have also written to him at length about the Magan spinning-wheel
on which I have been spinning and over which I have acquired some
control for the last four days or so. I think he will be happy to read
that I have also added that he might come and see me when he is
released, if I see visitors then. As for Lakshmi, Devidatta’s sister, I
have said that I will do the needful. You have to reply to all the
remaining points. He is in excellent health and does not seem to have
any trouble now. It seems he would desire a change of place when the
monsoon sets in and it rains heavily. The letter has been censored at
several places and this is my guess from the portions not struck off by
the officials. However that may be, a request for a transfer should not
be made and certainly cannot be made from here. Dr. Talwalkar may
make the suggestion if he thinks it fit and wishes to do so. I do not
have the fear which Prabhudas has. But no one can tell, and when the
patient himself is afraid, his fear itself brings about what he fears.
As for Khushalbhai, I guess from the letter which I have
received that he has got a new lease of life for a time. All three of us
are well.
2

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.G. 37
1

The remaining letter is in Gandhiji’s own hand.
Vide the preceding item.
3
Govind Vallabh Pant
2

402

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

481. LETTER TO DUDHIBEHN V. DESAI
May 21, 1932
CHI. DUDHIBEHN,

I hope Mavo1 has completely recovered now. Write to Valji and
tell him from me that he should demand the food which he requires.
He should not think that he cannot get it. For reasons of health, even
‘C’-class prisoners get milk, etc. I will write to Nanu2 about study.
I was glad that you got the opportunity to nurse Gangadevi. The
lady has become immortal through her death.
Do write to me from time to time.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7431. Courtesy: Valji G. desai

482. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
May 21, 1932
CHI. RAIHANA,

I got your letter. Convey the sympathies of us all to
Tehminabehn3 . God has ordained death as well as birth. We, therefore,
should not rejoice at the one and grieve over the other. Everything has
two sides, or rather, the two are one and the same thing. In our
eagerness to live, we believe death to be different from life and
something bad. I have read Hazrat’s ghazal twice already. I shall read
it again to understand it thoroughly.4
Please be satisfied with this much exercise for today, I take
some time to write so much, as I write with the reed-pen and take great
care to see that the handwriting is good. Please forgive me for
forgetting to reply to your question. I thought I had replied to it.
There is no doubt at all that your duty is to stay with Mother. That is
to be the form of your sadhana 5 and also your service. I am,
therefore, glad that you have made this choice. Always remain
satisfied with it. I hope the Abu climate did good to you all. Does
1

Self-dedication
ibid
3
Tehmina Khambhatta
4
Up to this the letter is in Urdu.
5
Sudarshan Desai and Vimalchandra Desai, addressee’s sons
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

403

Father dance in his usual fashion? There he must have become a
young man again. After the Bombay madness we have to forget our
dancing and our playing. I can never understand how man can fight
man in the name of religion. But let me check my thoughts and my
pen. At present I am drinking cupfuls of this poison.
Send the book when you all return to Baroda.
Many many salaams and vandematarams to Father and Mother
from us all.
When is Hamida’s time for release?
Many Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I heard on Saturday that Hamida had been released. Is the
information correct? If it is, she should write to me a full account [of
her stay in jail].1
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N.. 9644

483. LETTER TO VIMALCHANDRA V. DESAI
May 21, 1932
CHI. NANU,

I got no letter from you this week. When will you now start
taking interest in study? Children learn even as they play. In prison
here, even kittens learn. Their mother teaches them. If you want to
know how she does it, you may listen to my account2 which I give in a
letter to someone else.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 5756. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

1
The postscript, written in Urdu, seems to have been written on May 23; vide
‘‘Diary, 1932”, entry under ‘‘May 23”.
2
Vide the following item.

404

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

484. THE CAT — A TEACHER1
May 22, 1932
I have already written about our cat’s love of cleanliness. 2
Observing her and her kittens’ ways, I feel that she is an ideal teacher.
Whatever they have to be taught, she teaches quietly and without any
fuss. The method is quite easy. She demonstrates to them by her own
example what she wishes to teach, and the kittens learn the thing very
quickly. In this manner they learnt to run, climb trees and come down
again carefully to eat, to kill a prey and to lick their bodies and clean
them. In a very short time they have learnt to do all that their mother
can do.
The cat does not leave the kittens alone for long. Her love for
them is just like that of a woman’s for her children. She sleeps with
the kittens clinging to her. When they indicate a desire to suck, she lies
down and lets them do it. If she has killed a prey, she brings it to
them. Vallabhbhai gives them some milk every day. All three of them
lick it from a saucer. Sometimes the mother only looks on without
sharing the milk. She plays with them as if she were their own age, and
even engages in a sort of wrestling with them.
I have drawn a lesson from all this, namely, that if we wish to
educate children properly we should ourselves do what we want to
teach them to do. Children have great capacity for imitating others.
They do not easily understand what is explained to them orally. If we
wish to teach them truthfulness, we ourselves should be scrupulously
truthful. If we wish to teach them not to keep with them more things
than they need, we, too, should not do that. And what is true about
moral rules is true about bodily labour.
Looking at the matter in this light, we immediately see that the
present-day education produces very little result, considering the
expenditure of money and time which it involves. We also realize that
all grown-ups are teachers so far as children are concerned. It is
because people do not pay proper attention to their duty as teachers
that education has degenerated.
1
This was sent along with ‘‘Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 19/23-5-1932; vide
“Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 19/23-5-1932
2
Vide “Cleanliness, Truthfulness, Purity, Neatness”, 9-5-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

405

Creatures like cats have no reason, or say, they do not have
reason like man’s. We, therefore, should do much more than what
they do. But before we can do so, as guardians of the moral character
of the next generation we should observe moral principles in our own
lives. We should learn, to the best of our ability, to live as we wish the
next generation to live.
I have written all this with the hope that all men and women
inmates of the Ashram who give their services as teachers, and others
too, may think along these lines and, wherever necessary, act
accordingly.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

485. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
May 22, 1932
MY DEAR CHILD,

I understand all you are doing. Only you must not work
yourself into anxiety. If we simply make ourselves instruments of His
will, we should never have [an] anxious moment.
Yes, there is no calm without a storm, there is no peace without
strife. Strife is inherent in peace. We should not know it without
[strife]. Life is a perpetual struggle against strife whether within or
without. Hence the necessity of realizing peace in the midst of strife.
It has been hot in Poona this time. As a rule it is never so hot in
Poona. But the rains are now coming in and we are having beautiful
sunsets and sweet songs of the birds.
Have you been to that patient1 again?
I told you Mahadev was with me. He spins and cards about five
hours daily. He is now spinning very fine counts. Owing to weakness
of my hands I cannot do much. I hope you are keeping well.
Love from us all and kisses to the children.
BAPU
From a photostat: No. 110. Courtesy: National Arehives of India. Also My
Dear Child, p. 90

1

406

The cripple girl; vide “Letter to Esther Menon”, 21-1-1932.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

486. LETTER TO NAN AND TANGAI MENON
May 22, 1932
DEAR NAN AND TANGAI,

You have sent me a sweet letter.
I see you are making friends with birds. We have made friends
with a cat and her kittens. I call her sister. It is delightful to watch her
love for her young ones. She teaches them all sorts of things by
simply doing them.
God bless you. With kisses,
BAPU
My Dear Child, p. 117

487. LETTER TO P. C. RAY1
May 22, 1932
The work you are doing is difficult, but it is the only way to
help our people. There is no substitute for charkha for universal
relief.
It is nonsense for you to talk of old age so long as you outrun
young men in the race for service and in the midst of anxious times
fill rooms with your laughter and inspire youth with hope when they
are on the brink of despair.
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 169-70

488. LETTER TO ARUN DAS GUPTA2
May 22, 1932
Mother tells me you are ailing and that you insist on reading
and working. Will you not give yourself rest and the body a chance of
recovery? Though death and life are the faces of the same coin and
though we should die as cheerfully as we live, it is necessary until lifeis
there to give the body its due. It is a charge given to us by God. And
we have to take all reasonable care about it. Do write to me if you can.
God bless you.
3

Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 168
1

Dr. P. C. Ray, known as Acharya Ray, scientist and educationist; vide also
‘‘Tribute to P. C. Ray”, 24-5-1932
2
Son of Satis Chandra Das Gupta
3
Hemprabha Das Gupta
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

407

489. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
May 22, 1932
CHI. KUSUM (SENIOR),

I had given a reply to Pyarelal’s questions. Did you convey it to
him? He doesn’t seem to have received any message from me.
The letter1 to you ought to be published.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1838

490. A LETTER
May 22, 1932
CHI.,

We ourselves are the source of moha 2 . There are two powers
dwelling within us: the divine and the demoniac, the Pandavas and the
Kauravas. The demoniac is the source of moha. Why should we not
fix our minds on the true Mahadeva instead of on His image made of
earth? Or rise from the inert matter to spirit? If we cling to the
trunk,we automatically get hold of the branch. If, on the contrary, we
cling to the branch, the branch will break and we shall fall with it. It is
no sin to think about people with whom we are related by blood.
However, we wish to enlarge our definition of blood-relations so as to
include in it all people. If we make a distinction between ‘ours’ and
‘the others’, we suffer in innumerable ways. If we imbibe the truth
that the two are the same, there will remain the pain of neither
separation nor death. Do not look upon this as philosophical or
difficult knowledge and be scared by it. It deserves to be digested.
Such an attitude of mind means not diminishing of love but its
enlargement. In truth, we always go on, knowingly or unknowingly,
enlarging our idea of ‘ours’. If we carefully grasp this
supremelyvaluable law, it leads to very important results.
From all I have written, accept only as much as you can digest
and leave the rest. The rule that applies to food applies here also
I hope that the change of climate will do you good.
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9117. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
1
2

408

From the addressee’s husband
Infatuation, ignorant attachment
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

491. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
May 22, 1932
CHI. SHARDA,

Even silence for five minutes can serve many purposes. It also
means rest. If the Ashram cat makes a mess all over the place, you
must take it that it has acquired the bad habit from us. No man has
influenced the cat here.1
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9947. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

492. LETTER TO TARAMATI MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

May 22, 1932
CHI. TARAMATI,

I have received your letter. You do not have to seek
permission from here to visit me. You must write to Narandas, so that
you can be allotted your day when someone is coming from the
Ashram. Only one interview is allowed in a week. Even this is likely to
be stopped. Interviews have been stopped in the case of Mirabehn. If
that restriction is continued, I may have to stop interviews. You will be
informed if that happens. Let me know when you hear from
Mathuradas.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

Vide “Cleanliness, Truthfulness, Purity, Neatness”, 9-5-1932 and “The Cat- A
Teacher”, 22-5-1932
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

409

493. LETTER TO TOTARAM SANADHYA
May 22, 1932
BHAI TOTARAMJI,

Your reminiscences of Gangadevi1 sent here are sacred.2 Though
I had inferred a great deal about her qualities your reminiscences of
her are truly astounding. The Ashram is blessed where such a chaste
woman lived.
BAPU
From the Hindi original: Banarsidas Papers. Courtesy: National Archives of
India

494. LETTER TO VIDYA HINGORANI
Y. M.,

May 22, 1932
CHI. VIDYA,

I have your letter. Your duty for the present is to be with your
in-laws and serve them and do such other work of service as you can.
When your turn comes God will clear the way. Be patient for the
present. Improve your health.
I have had two letters from Anand. But I have not replied to
them, nor did he expect an answer. I did not know his address either.
Newspapers report that he has been taken to Sindh.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

1
2

410

Addressee’s wife, who had died in the first week of May
Vide also “Letter to Totaram Sanadhya”, 9-5-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

495. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 19/23, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter on Wednesday morning. If you think that I am
doing any injustice to Harilal, please tell me. I say this because you
have not said in your letter what you decided after reading my letter1
to Harilal. Provided you observe the three conditions I have
mentioned, you may do all you can. I can have no objection then.
If you have found any improvement as a result of the period of
silence having been increased to five minutes, please let me know.
Lady Vithaldas, Mathew and Manibehn came and saw me.
Mirabehn will not be permitted. The decision has been a great blow to
her. I feel that if the gates are not opened to her, I should stop seeing
any visitors. I have even written a letter 2 to the Government (very
nearly) to this effect. It is probable, therefore, that the next week will
be the last during which I shall be seeing visitors. And even of that I
am not certain, for, if I get a negative reply before that, I will stop
seeing visitors immediately. I, therefore, also intend to drop a postcard
to you today. If you get it in time, it should be in your hands on
Sunday. If you do get it and if you do not receive a wire from me not
to come, it might be advisable for you to start soon. Provided, that is,
you think it necessary to come and see me. This applies to Premabehn
and Sushila too.
I think it will be difficult to make the labourers give up
smoking. It would of course be good if you succeed. But it would be
most undesirable if they agree to give it up for fear of losing their
jobs or any other similar reason and then continue to smoke on the
sly. One labourer may be a smoker and still be good in other ways,
while another who does not smoke may be a very bad man. Of the
two, the one who smokes is a far better person. Hence, while paying
attention to the habits of those whom you engage as labourers, pay as
much attention as you can to their inner character as well.
I was glad to learn that Dhiru and Kusum have gone to Ranavav.
1
This is not available; however, vide “Fragment of Letter to Harilal Gandhi”,
27-4-1932
2
Vide “Letter to E. E. Doyle”,18-5-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

411

Don’t let them return to the Ashram all too soon. We may be sure that
those who have understood the meaning of the Ashram rules of life
and have fallen in love with that life will carry the Ashram wherever
they go. Moreover, if Dhiru and Kusum, who have spent many years
in the Ashram, cannot observe the Ashram rules even while living
away from it, it will only show that they have Iearnt nothing from their
stay in the Ashram. Anybody who has understood the meaning of the
Ashram life can serve wherever he lives. The field of service is as wide
as the world, and opportunities for it exist everywhere. Dhiru and
Kusum, therefore, ought not to get impatient. If the water of Ranavav
agrees with them and their health improves, let them stay there till they
get completely all right.
Pyare Ali, Noorbanu and Tilakam have not come [to see me till
now]. If you sent any messages with Mathew, they remained with him,
for he could not speak much.
I have received no letter from Ba so far. Maybe her letters
have not been dispatched from there. They don’t seem to keep back
any letter here. If any of you can, please inquire from
theSuperintendent whether they have been dispatched. In any case Ba
can certainly inquire.
May 20, 1932
Are there any Chharas still staying near the Ashram? If there
are, have you cultivated contacts with them? Do they harass you in
any way? Why do the Ashram inmates keep a watch [at night]? For
how many hours is the watch kept? Who are the persons taking turns?
Who stays in Doctor’s bungalow? Who stays in Jyotirbhavan? I send
with this a letter from Chhaganlal, along with one from Prabhudas to
me. Read both of them. There is a reference to Lakshmi in them. If
Balkrishna agrees to accommodate her in Wardha, let her go and stay
there. If Balkrishna does not agree or if the girl wants to stay in
Sabarmati and if you see no difficulty in that, accommodate her
there.1 If you cannot do so and if Balkrishna is not prepared to accept
the responsibility, write to Devidatta and inform him accordingly. And
also to Prabhudas.
I can now say that I have acquired control over the Magan
spinning-wheel. Today I spun 183 rounds in about 2 1 /2 hours. The
yarn must be of about 16 counts. The slivers sent by Ramjibhai were
1

412

Vide also “Letter to Chhaganlal Gandhi”, 20-5-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

full of hard particles, otherwise I think I could spin yarn of even
higher count. The wheel still offers difficulties. I have often to use my
hand and put the wheel in the right position. I believe this must be a
defect. The pedal produces a low grating sound. Show this to Keshu.
Ask him if he has any suggestion to make.
May 22, 1932
If you have not read out to the inmates of the Ashram the
reminiscences of Gangadevi which Totaramji has sent, or given them a
summary, you should do so. They are quite interesting.
May 23, 1932
Today I spun 89 rounds in 50 minutes. The count of the yarn,
too, is 20.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

496. LETTER TO ELIZABETH F. HOWARD1
May 23, 1932
DEAR SISTER,

I was delighted to have your letter. I have a most vivid
recollection of the very pleasant and peaceful time we had at your
place.2 From what I saw during those brief hours and in autumn I can
easily picture all you say of Epping Forest in spring time.
It was a matter of sorrow to me that I could not see the friends
who visited India recently to study the situation. Please give my
regards to Mr. Bartlett and tell him that as soon as I received his letter
enclosing the Poet’s appeal I sent him my reply3 which had naturally
to pass through the Central Government. I do not know whether it was
sent to him. Of course I cannot repeat the contents here.
I thank you for the extract from George Fox’s writings.
Please give my regards to your mother who I hope will finish
the century and accept the same for yourself. Yes, Desai is with me
and wants to be remembered to you.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 862
1

Addressee’s name is supplied from the G.N. Register.
Gandhiji visited the addressee at Ardmore, Buckhurst Hill, London, on
September 20, 1931.
3
Vide “Letter to Percy W. Bartlett”, 4-5-1932
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

413

497. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
May 23, 1932
CHI. MANUDI,

I have your letter now, but I have been regularly getting news
about you from others. I have collected a good many pictures for
you. I had collected them during my last imprisonment but I could
not meet you at all and give them to you. Some of those are still left,
to which I go on adding more. You will get them sooner or later. The
later you getthem, the more precious they will be, won’t they? I am
glad that you do not wear ornaments. Never mind losing your hair. It
will grow again. There is no beauty in wearing long hair. If there were
any, one would look beautiful even with hair stuck on the head.
Beauty lies in goodness of heart. If it was not so, the sight of glass or
wax dolls would be enough to give us pleasure, and we would preserve
the soulless body in a frame. The fact that we do not do so means that
whatever beauty there is in the soul. Can this be in anything except its
qualities? One who realizes this will look upon the body as only a
means for the progress of the soul.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Write to me and tell me whether you followed what I have said
in this letter.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1513. Courtesy: Manubehn
Mashruwala

498. LETTER TO BENARSILAL AND RUKMINI BAZAJ
May 23, 1932
CHI. RUKMINI,

This letter is meant for both of you. I got your card and was
happy to learn that the little boy had recovered. It would be good if
you can manage somehow to take him out for walks.
Rameshwardas’s1 letters suggest that he is very much troubled in
1

414

Rukmini Bazaj’s father-in-law, Rameshwarlal
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

mind. Benarsi can understand the reason better than I. He should do
something in the matter if he can.
I have received some reminiscences of Gangadevi. She lived a
pure life devoted to the service of others. Why is it that you do not get
the Ashram Patrika there? Probably you have not asked for it.
Probably you have also not heard of the death of Dahyabhai’s
wife, Yashoda. Do you read newspapers, etc.?
Blessings from

BAPU
S MT. R UKMINIDEVI AND S JT. B ENARSIDAS
23/96 PANCHGANGA
KASHI , B ANARAS, U.P.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9139

499. LETTER TO HANUMANPRASAD PODDAR1
May 23, 1932
I do not remember any incident in my life which had
particularly increased my faith in God. For some time I had no faith,
but it began to grow when I started thinking and reflecting about
religion, and it has gone on increasing ever since as I have come to
feel more and more distinctly the presence of God in my heart. But
why do you ask me this question? Is it with the intention of publishing
my answer in a future issue of Kalyan? If so, it will serve no useful
purpose. If you have asked it for your own guidance, I must tell you
that in this matter another man’s experience will not help you. Faith
in God will increase only through ceaseless striving with such faith as
you have.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 170

1
Mahadev Desai explains: “The addressee had asked Bapu if there had occurred
any particular incidents in his life which strengthened his faith in God.”
(The Diary of Mahadev Desai, Vol. I, p. 125)

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

415

500. LETTER TO ABHAYDEV SHARMA
May 23, 1932
BHAI ABHAY,

I have been daily looking forward to your letter when at last I
got one yesterday along with two copies of Vaidik Vinaya1 . I had
received a copy earlier. I will certainly read it and give you my
comments if I have any to make. I like your becoming an Acharya 2 ,
but I dislike it too. But I believe it on the whole to be right because
this duty has come to you unsought. You will be able to perform
some great service in this way. Where is Jayadev? Daya has impressed
me very favourably through her letters. I see in her the makings of a
true sevika.
How is Ramdevji keeping and how is Vidyavati?
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI ABHAY ACHARYA
GURUKUL KANGRI
DISTRICT S AHARANPUR
From Hindi: C.W. 9661

501 TRIBUTE TO P. C. RAY3
May 24,1932
Acharya Ray I had the privilege of knowing for the first time
when Gokhale was his next-door neighbour in 1901 and I was
undergoing tutelage under the latter. It was difficult to believe that the
man in simple Indian dress and wearing simpler manners could
possibly be the great scientist and professor he even then was. And it
took my breath away when I heard that out of his princely salary he
kept only a few rupees for himself and the rest he devoted to public
uses and particularly for helping poor students. Thirty years have
made no difference to the great and good servant of India. Acharya
1

An annotated compilation, by the addressee, of Vedic mantras, to be recited
one on each day of the year
2
Headmaster, preceptor
3
On his seventieth birthday

416

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Ray has set us an example of ceaseless service, enthusiasm and
optimism, of which we may well be proud.
M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(3), Pt. I

502. LETTER TO SATYACHARAN LAW
May 24, 1932
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your circular letter about Acharya Ray’s seventieth
birthday celebration. I send you the accompanying humble tribute1 in
the hope that it would be allowed to reach your hands by the
authorities.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
DR. S ATYACHARAN LAW
S ECRETARY
ACHARYA R AY ’S BIRTHDAY C ELEBRATION C OMMITTEE
C ALCUTTA
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(3), Pt. I

503. LETTER TO MOOLCHAND PAREKH
May 24, 1932
The Harijan Samiti’s resolution seemed shocking to me. What
guidance, however, can I give from here? How can a single school for
Harijan children be closed while the members of the Samiti are alive?
If they are sincere, they would sell themselves into slavery, would sell
their property but continue to run every school. Instead of accepting
defeat, therefore, you should have hope that when you come forward
to sell yourselves, the people will buy you and pay the Samiti all the
money it needs. You may doubt this, but I do not. Don’t you
remember Bhoja Bhagat’s lash?
Bhakti is a bargain in which you must stake your very life, for full of
danger is the path ahead.

[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 171
1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

417

504. A LETTER
May 24, 1932
Boys and girls should be married only after they have grown
up. The partners should choose each other with the consent of their
parents. Hence there is no unnatural restriction in such a method. If
anybody asks my opinion, I would say that marriage between persons
following different faiths was a risky experiment. If both husband and
wife believe in their respective religions and actively follow them in
their lives, difficulties are likely to arise between them. Thus I think
that the Bhatia girl’s marriage is a risky step, but I do not regard it as
irreligious. I would not oppose it if their love is pure, if the Bhatia girl
can follow her religion and the Muslim youth his and if their ideas
about food are the same. But I do not advocate marriages between
persons of different faiths as I advocate inter-caste marriages because
I desire the disappearance of sub-castes. I would not agitate against
such marriages either. This is an issue on which every man and
woman should think and decide for himself or herself. There cannot
be a uniform law for all.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 171

505. LETTER TO K. NATARAJAN
May 25, 1932
When I said that writing about the abuse of occult powers you
might have been stronger,1 I used the adjective precisely in the same
sense in which I use it regarding admitted evils. I feel that whilst we
should spare evil-doers, we dare not be sparing in our condemnation
of evil. Perfect gentleness is not inconsistent with clearest possible
denunciation of what one knows to be evil, so long as that knowledge
persists; and there would need to be no cause for regret later if our
knowledge of the past was found to be a great error of judgment. In
our endeavour to approach absolute truth we shall always have to be
content with relative truth from time to time, the relative at each stage
being for us as good as the absolute. It can be easily demonstrated
1

This letter is not traceable; for an earlier letter on the subject, vide “ Letter to
K. Natarajan”, 26-4-1932

418

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

that there would be no progress if there was no such confidence in
oneself. Of course our language would be one of caution and
hesitation if we had any doubt about the correctness of our position.
In the case in point, the motive of the exhibitor, no matter how
excellent it may be, in my opinion would be no excuse for his
exhibition, and the laziness of the spectators in not having thought out
the consequences of their presence at such exhibitions is again no
excuse for their presence. But I must not labour the point any further.
I thought that as I could not endorse the position taken up by you in
your letter 1 , I should just place before you my argument for your
consideration.
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 177

506. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI2
May 25, 1932
It is irrelevant to the point of the story either to praise or blame
the man who carried the water. If you reflect a little, you will see that
he could not force the soldiers to drink water. Nor is it to the point to
ask whether there was enough water for three. Each of the first two
soldiers, on hearing somebody else crying for water, refused to drink
the water before that other soldier had got some. Hence we need not
blame the man who carried the water for having failed in his duty.
You do not seem to have visualized the situation.
When a person is extremely thirsty, he feels such intense craving
1

Which read: “As for my paragraph about occult powers which you feel might
have been stronger, it is curious but I seem to have utterly lost the taste for and the
knack of strong writing particularly in criticizing persons. When I take my pen
intending to hit hard, the picture of the other man stands before my eyes and seems to
say: ‘You do not know what I have to say for myself. I too have ideals, however much
they may be obscured by my conduct. Judge me as you would yourself.’ I avoid all
adjectives of judgement as poison and try in all that I say to be completely objective.
This has become a habit, and I do not doubt that in all circumstances it is a healthy
one. As regards this particular matter, the thought that after all the man takes his life
in his hands weighs my judgment. As for the curious crowd, they, I suppose, find
relief from the tyranny of daily circumstances in witnessing facts which show or seem
to show that one man at least is able to rise above them.” (The Diary of Mahadev
Desai, Vol. I, p. 128)
2
Misinterpreting Gandhiji’s article ‘‘Wonderful Self-sacrifice” (pp. 433 5),
the addressee had argued that the man who carried the water had failed in his duty, for
he could have given some water to each of the three dying men.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

419

for water that he does not care for anybody else and, if he himself gets
any water, gulps it down. In this case the poor soldiers were nearing
death. But even at that time they did not forget their goodness, which
means that they remained in a spiritual state right to the end. The man
who carried the water was quite helpless. In any case, was it possible
for him to enter into argument with the wounded soldiers, who were
drawing their last breath? If you think over all this and reflect a little,
you will realize that this, which actually occurred, is an example of
sublime and perfect self-sacrifice, and that the man who carried the
water and accidentally became the cause of their death deserves no
criticism at all. Generally, we do not come across such perfect
examples in history. There is always some imperfection or other. But I
see none in this.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary Vol. I, pp. 172-3

507. LETTER TO SHANTIKUMAR MORARJEE
May 25, 1932
CHI. SHANTIKUMAR,

I got a letter from you after a long time. You certainly have my
blessings. May you live long and render selfless service. Remember a
noble verse which our people often recite:
That which goes by the name of adversity is not such; nor is that
prosperity which goes by that name. To forget God is adversity; ever to think
of him is prosperity. 1

That is, what people call misery is not real misery and what they
call happiness is nothing of the sort. Real misery is forgetting God—
that is, Truth, and real happiness is remembering Him.
My respectful greetings to Mother. I hope Gokibehn2 is all
right. Give my blessings to Sumati.
Sardar sends his blessings, and Mahadev his regards.
You may write to me anything you wish to.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4796. Courtesy: Shantikumar Morarjee
1
2

420

Vide “Ashram Bhajanavali”
Addressee’s aunt
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

508. LETTER TO RELATIVES OF DARBARI SADHU
May 25, 1932
Please tell Darbari that there was no need for him to give up the
kasti1 and sadra 2 , and that it would be proper for him to resume them
as soon as he returned home. There is no sin in wearing them, nor is it
superstitious to do so. By wearing them he does no harm to anybody,
but by not wearing them he gives pain to-other Parsis. It does not befit
a servant of the people to give pain to anybody needlessly, and
moreover such behaviour is a violation of ahimsa. It should be
enough if one does not attach undue importance to these things. One
should not idolize them, and he does not do that. The two things are
only outward signs of one’s being a Parsi, and I do not think it
desirable from any point of view to discard them. I have asked
Dahyabhai to bring for him books containing the teachings of
Zoroaster. I have read Zoroaster’s sayings. I read a translation of the
Vendidad3 many years ago. The work is rich in ethical teaching. Since
Zoroastrianism is a very old faith, it is possible that all its scriptures
have not survived and that those which are extant do not contain
spiritual knowledge of the same order as the Upanishads and other
works do. Darbari should read the extant works and reflect over them.
But even today it is accepted that Zoroaster’s teaching is based on that
of the Vedas. As far as I remember, the translator of the Vendidad has
pointed out a close similarity between Zend and Sanskrit. It is,
therefore, in no way derogatory to Zoroastrianism or to the
self-respect of the Parsi community to fill in the deficiencies which
may be observed in the Parsi scriptures with the help of the Vedas and
the Upanishads. In fact, it is our right, even our duty, while adhering
to our own religion, to accept from other religions anything which
specially appeals to us. It is fanaticism to think that we cannot adopt
anything from other religions, and Darbari and all of us have grown
out of it.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 173

1
2
3

Sacred thread and shirt worn by Parsis
Videvdat, a later Avestan writing
ibid

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

421

509. LETTER TO BHUSKUTE1
May 25, 1932
What do you mean by asserting that there is no guiding force in
the universe? How can we make such an assertion? My statement
seems to have been somewhat twisted in this context. I have only said
that Truth is identical with God and you may take it to be the Moving
Spirit. In this context karta 2 does not have the meaning we usually
attribute to it. Therefore Truth is karta as well as akarta3 . But this is
only an intellectual explanation. There is nothing wrong in this matter
in believing whatever one’s heart accepts, as no man has perfect
knowledge of God nor can he express whatever little knowledge he
has. It is true that I do not depend upon my intellect to decide upon
any action. For me the reasoned course of action is held in check
subject to the sanction of the inner voice. I do not know if others
would call it the mysterious power or whatsoever. I have never
deliberated upon this nor analysed it, I have felt no need of doing so
either. I have faith, and knowledge, too, that a Power exists beyond
reasoning. This suffices for me. I am unable to clarify this any further
as I know nothing more in the matter.
[From Hindi]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 173-4

510. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
[May 26, 1932] 4
CHI. MIRA,

I was waiting for your letter. It came today. The shock such as
you received must be accepted as the common lot of those who would
only serve their conscience. I shall take no hasty step. If, apart from
the personal equation, I did not think it to be my duty to stop
seeingothers if I could not see you, I would not take that step. But let
1

Mahadev Desai explains: ‘‘Bhuskute had asked how Bapu acted according to
the dictates of the inner voice while he believed that Truth is God and there is no
Creator.” (The Diary of Mahadev Desai, Vol. I, 127)
2
Doer
3
Non-doer
4
“Date of Yeravda Postmark”—Mirabehn

422

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

us wait and see.
Tulsidas’s Ramayana is to me a work of great religious merit. I
have not myself read Griffith’s translation1 , but I knew that it was the
best available and I am glad you have found it so good.
Don’t you try to make envelopes there?2 It is a fascinating
occupation when you have the time. If you have weak persons having
no occupation, they may try their hands at the thing. But not you. For
you it would be an uneconomic use of time.
I was again 105 1 /2 lb. today. So you see there is no cause for
anxiety.
I have now acquired sufficient control over the Magan wheel to
make the work pleasurable. I spun 202 rounds in 82 minutes, i.e., 147
rounds per hour—not bad for me. I hope to do much better still.
Give my love to the Rollands and tell them I simply enjoyed that
3
letter to the American friend. Surely there was nothing [wrong] about
it. And how can there be anything wrong in an honest expression of
opinion?
Love to you all from us all.
BAPU

[PS.]
No separate letter to Radha.
From the original: C.W. 6223. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9689

511. A LETTER
May 26, 1932
Tell Chhotubhai that it is useless to think about his father’s
illness here. Why, then, should he go on worrying? His father is under
the care of the great Father of us all. At present Chhotubhai is
exempted by Him from serving as His instrument and nursing his
father. He need not, therefore, think about the matter. It is a weakness
to lose one’s peace of mind. None of us can be wholly free from that
weakness, but the more clearly we realize that we control nothing the
more we shall enjoy peace of mind.
From Gujarati: C.W. 9121. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
1

Of Valmiki’s Ramayana
“Bapu and specially Sardarji [Vallabhbhai Patel] were making envelopes for
Bapu’s letters.” —Mirabehn
3
Describing the meeting between Gandhiji and Romain Rolland in December
1931; vide “Romain Rolland’s Letter to An American Friend”, 12-1931
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

423

512. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
May 26, 1932
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I have your letter. The letter I addressed to Gwalior was
somewhat lengthy. I recollect this much but nothing of the contents.
We must consider the views of the workers regarding working in three
shifts and also the extent of the material and moral benefit to them
from it. If they gain materially but lose morally, it will not be
acceptable to me. I may be considered neutral as I have at present no
means of ascertaining labour’s point of view. I only hope that this
change has been made with due regard for the labourers’ attitude
towards it. I have received two books. By two books is meant one
pamphlet and the proof of your speech. Is it not? These two are with
me. I have not been able to read them so far, as I could not take time
off from the work on hand. I had to devote a good deal of time to
working the charkha with the foot owing to pain in the left hand. And
moreover I have taken up the study of Urdu. I shall now possibly save
some time and use it for reading the two items. I distinguish between
optimism and simplicity of heart. Panditji1 is endowed with both. That
person is an optimist who continues to hope despite the discouraging
signs on the horizon and his own knowledge of them. This quality can
be found in Panditji in plenty. To accept in good faith someone’s
encouraging utterances is simplicity of heart. Panditji possesses that
too, which in my opinion is undesirable. Panditji, by virtue of his
nobility, has come to no harm on account of this quality. But we
should not emulate it. Optimism is dependent upon the inner voice
while credulousness is dependent upon external factors.
I am not qualified to give any opinion on foreign travel.
Ordinarily my views are well known.
My diet continues to be the same. The weight too is steady.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 7900. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

1

424

Madan Mohan Malaviya
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

513. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
May 26, 1932
BHAI KRISHNACHANDRA

I have your letter. The man who has faith in God will never go
to astrologers. Therefore in my view no action in deference to their
prediction is called for. In fact I have observed on many occasions
events happening contrary to the predictions and honest astrologers
do admit that predictions merely indicate the possibility. Thus
undoubtedly there is sufficient scope for individual effort. The
meaning of the Gita, III. 33 is clear enough; our basic nature cannot
be altered. The English saying that the leopard cannot change his
spots also supports it. What is true of the skin is true of the inside too.
That is why so many people are unable, in spite of great efforts, to
change qualities ingrained in their nature.
Gulkand1 can be taken in place of dates, raisins, etc., but it can
never be as beneficial. It is difficult to specify the quantity; everyone
has to find that by experience.
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a photostat of the Hindi: S.G. 38. Also G.N. 4261

514. LETTER TO VERRIER ELWIN
May [27] 2 , 1932
MY DEAR VERRIER,

“Ask and ye shall receive” has been verified once more.
Your lovely letter arrived here today. I read it after five and today
being Friday, without any prompting from me, Mahadev gave effect
to your sugggestion about fellowship by singing “Lead Kindly
Light” in its very beautiful Gujarati version. At the evening service it
is always Mahadev’s part to sing the bhajan. The hour would be
approximately 7.40. The prayer commences at 7.30 and opens with
the 19 verses at the end of the second discourse of the Gita. It is
followed by Ramanama and then comes the bhajan. As soon as I read
1

A preparation made from rose petals and sugar
From the reference in the letter to ‘‘Friday”, which fell on May 27. The
source, however, has “26”.
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

425

your suggestion I had no hesitation in endorsing it, but I was debating
as to the choice of the hymn. I had in mind the singing of the English
text and so the choice was limited. It could either be “Lead Kindly
Light” or “When I Survey the Wondrous Cross” or “Take My Life
And Let It Be” for the simple reason that I myself cannot very well
sing any of the other favourite hymns of mine—not that even these
three I sing accurately. But it would be a fair approach to the tune as I
have heard it. Mahadev is unused to the tune of English hymns, but
by thinking of taking up the Gujarati version of “Lead Kindly
Light”, Mahadev solved the difficulty about the choice and singing.
There is a special fitness about the choice of this hymn of Newman’s.
It was that hymn which, when I was in physical distress, was sung to
me by Olive Doke in Johannesburg under the late Rev. Doke’s roof.1
So you may take it that we shall be here singing this hymn at 7.40
every Friday evening with the knowledge that you at least will be
joining us wherever you are, whether the suggestion is taken up or not
by the other friends. Let there be no Press publicity about this at the
present moment. I do not know that the Government will appreciate it
and from my place as a prisoner I would not like to do a single thing
that they would not approve of, unless of course I had to engage in an
open quarrel with them in any vital matter. I shall be asking Narandas
to sing this bhajan on Fridays at the Ashram prayer which during
summer months always begins at 7.30.
Yes, I like very much, if only for the sake of the old lady and
Eldyth2 , the idea of your going to England for a few months and you
certainly need the change for the sake of your health. And since you
should be going, the sooner you leave the better.
I do not like the idea of Mother and Eldyth coming to village
India or any other India. The spirit with them may be willing but the
flesh will not respond. You yourself are no bright example in this
respect, and it would be unwise to put the strain on them of settling
down in India. It would be however a wholly different thing if,
independently of any prompting on your or anybody else’s part, they
felt the clearest possible call from within. But in that case, there would
be no question of seeking or accepting advice from any quarter. Such
cases have of course happened before now. There the spirit surmounts
1
In February 1908; Gandhiji was taken care of by the Rev. Joseph Doke after
the assault on him by Mir Alam; vide “My Reward”; also “Satyagraha in South Africa”
2
Addressee’s younger sister

426

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the flesh.
I do not at all like the news about Shamrao’s illness. He should
be ashamed of himself. He must learn the art of living befitting a true
servant of Daridranarayana.
The passages1 you quote from Plotinus are very striking and
very beautiful. The first is good for all time, the second the modern
mind will carp at. I have personally no difficulty in understanding the
author’s meaning.
During your absence and Shamrao’s, who will be in charge of
Karanjia?
With love from us all to you all, including your host and hostess,
BAPU
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(3), Pt. 1, p. 233

515. FRAGMENT OF LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI2
May 27, 1932
In a long letter to Devdas Gandhi, Bapu paid a generous tribute to Narandas
Gandhi, the Ashram Secretary, ‘‘who, by his firmness, patience, courage, renunciation and good judgement, has relieved all my anxiety about the Ashram.” . . . As
regards his Urdu studies, Bapu wrote to Devdas Gandhi:

There are lessons on history in each reader. Some of them deal
with the Prophet and his times, while others are concerned with
Muslim rulers in India. The standpoint from which these are written
should be understood by everyone. I have an increasing realization of
the importance of Urdu studies. By learning to write a language in its
own script we can write letters in it. Moreover we thus also acquire
greater mastery over the language, and are better able to decipher as
well as understand letters received by us. I believe we should learn
how to write Urdu letters to Muslim co-workers. If we are compelled
to write to them in English, Hindi can never take its legitimate place as
the national language. That is why I think that ability to write in Urdu
is an essential part of our mental equipment.
He then referred to the circumstances in which he began to write Urdu letters to
Raihana Tyabji and said:
1
2

For the passages and discussion on them, vide The Diary of Mahadev Desai,
The Translation is reproduced from The Diary of Mahadev Desai, Vol. I.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

427

All these are non-violent and delicate means of establishing
friendly relations with Mussalmans.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 181-2

516. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
May 28, 1932
MY DEAR AMTUL,

I have read both your letters. Your Urdu writing is not clear
enough for me. I gave nearly an hour to it and could only get the
substance of your letter. I gather that it is only a paraphrase of your
English letter. If you can keep your head cool and composed, I think
you should stay with the family for the time being and then go to the
Ashram. If you find it impossible to be at peace with yourself living
with your people, you should stay with Noorbanu.
Does this answer all your questions? If not, write again and that
in English. Write partly in Urdu also.
I shall write to Dr. Sharma.
I was glad you were able to come. You must regain the lost
weight.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 250

517. LETTER TO NARAYAN M. KHARE
May 28, 1932
CHI. PANDITJI,

I doubt if there was any moral obligation on the pupils of your
guru, the late Panditji, to do something in his memory and pay their
debt to him. But, since all of you felt that something must be done,
you were bound to do what you did.
Write a letter to Lakshmibehn and send it with somebody there
who may be coming this way. Or ask Narandas to write. Sometimes I
come to know about a thing only after it is over.
I hope Rambhau is all right now. He who rides may fall too.
428

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I look upon the problem of untouchability from a purely
religious point of view. There must be, therefore, no separate
electorates in any case. But the reservation of seats for them, if it is
statutory, will not test the caste Hindus and, therefore, will not be a real
prayashchitta1 on their part. We cannot bargain with the
‘untouchables’. What is necessary is that the suspicion which they
harbour in their minds should go. If you still do not understand my
position, please ask me again. Please take care that these views do not
find their way into print in any circumstances.
There is a possibility of the visits coming to a stop.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 227. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare

518. LETTER TO RAMACHANDRA N. KHARE
May 28, 1932
CHI. RAMBHAU,

You should not worry about the injury to the bone. Such
accidents happen to anyone who does physical exercises. I hope the
bone has now been properly set.
Your reply was very helpful to me. Following your suggestion, I
have been able to stop touching the wheel with the hand. I have
understood the trick, though I have not yet mastered it.
You still make mistakes in your Gujarati. Avoid them and
improve your handwriting. My compliments to you on regaining
your weight.
When you are entrusted with a responsible job, look upon it as
an opportunity to render more service and to be more humble.
Monetary help should be given only to a person who is really in
need of it. And it is properly given when it is given at the right time
and without any feeling of pride that one was helping somebody.
Non-violence means that we should not give pain to anybody
for our good. It comprises both such a state of mind and such
conduct.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 293. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare
1

Atonement

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

429

519. LETTER TO LAKSHMI JERAJANI
May 28, 1932
1

CHI. LAKSHMI (BORIVALI ),

If you used a small slip only for economy and if you use such
slips when writing to everybody, what you did was right.
How did Kaka get eczema? Who are there with him?
I write to Gangabehn every week.
If you make a mistake when writing in ink, you may certainly
strike out the word or words.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 2811. Courtesy: Purushottam D. Saraiya

520. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
May 28, 1932
CHI. SHARDA,

How is it that you don’t get rid of your illness at all? “Satya is
bound to triumph” does not mean that it should be victorious exactly
at the time we desire it to be. Moreover we cannot say that what we are
convinced to be true is the truth. So we may say: ‘If what we think to
be truth is indeed the truth, it is bound to succeed.’
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9911. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

521. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
May 29, 1932
MY DEAR CHILD,

This is silence time. I have your longish letter—none too long
for me. I forgot last time to tell you I had received the book you sent
me. I shall read it as soon as I can. Every minute is pre-mortgaged.
Any new reading or other work that comes my way has therefore to
await its turn unless it is of such paramount importance as to warrant
1

430

A suburb of Bombay
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

suspension of current work.
Feeling is of the heart. It may easily lead us astray unless we
would keep the heart pure. It is like keeping house and everything in
it clean. The heart is the source from which knowledge of God
springs. If the source is contaminated, every other remedy is useless.
And if its purity is assured nothing else is needed.
This is written with the right hand, for the left has become worse
than the right. There is nothing to worry about. Only, it must have
complete rest. I therefore spin on a wheel which has a pedal and draw
the thread with the right hand.
We are three—all well.
Love from us all. Kisses to the children.
BAPU
From a photostat: No. 111. Courtesy: National Arehives of India. Also My
Dear Child, p. 91

522. LETTER TO GOSIBEHN CAPTAIN
May 29, 1932
Your welcome letter. I don’t expect Jalbhai to trouble to write to
me. I expect you, the nurses, to do that work. A patient has to eat,
sleep, complain and bully. He is an angel when he omits to do the two
last things. I hope the crutches will go.
I am no good at choosing books for others, even for you,
though so near to me. The book of life is really the book to read and
that you are doing more or less. The other is amusement for those
who have no service. One would think that here at least one would
have plenty of time to read. Well, spinning and preparatory studies
leave little time for reading for amusement. But I must stop this
lecturing.
Are you keeping well? Has Nargisbehn lost her headache? The
Government’s reply regarding her is that I am not to see her.
Evidently they think that she is taking an active part in politics or that
she suffers from contamination.
Now it is my left hand’s turn not to be used. Can it be old age
knocking vigorously at my door?1
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 185-6
1

The source has this paragraph in Gujarati.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

431

523. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
May 29, 1932
CHI. PREMA,

I write this letter though I had none from you this week, for
when it reaches the Ashram, you too will have returned and will
probably expect a letter from me.
I was happy that all of you came and saw me. Of course, we
did not have much to talk about, and in any case the time was too
short. I deliberately did not give time to Sushila alone. Whatever
timewas permitted to me had to be divided among you, Amtul and
Sharda. Did Sushila have anything particular to ask me?
In their letters to me, I am afraid the boys and the girls put to
me all sorts of pointless questions, and that too merely for the sake of
asking some questions. Explain this carefully to them once. Writing
letters also requires to be taught to some extent.
I shall look forward to an account of your experience of the
visits.
Did you see Dhurandhar? Anybody else?
I hope you have succeeded in increasing your weight.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10287. Also C.W. 6735. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

524. LETTER TO VENILAL GANDHI
May 29, 1932
CHI. VENILAL,

I got your letter. Your illness was such that you are bound to
take time to regain strength. Try to regain it patiently.
You have practically got a new life. Make the best use of it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 917. Courtesy: Venilal Gandhi

432

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

525. LETTER TO DAUDBHAI
May 29, 1932
I welcomed your letter. Fight like a lion bad thoughts and
impulses. It is our duty to fight. Whether we shall win rests with God.
We should be content with fighting. But our fighting must be sincere.
Seek the company of the good. For that, you should read good
books. In a city like Bombay, reading good books is the only way of
being in the company of the good. According to me, the sight of
Noorbanu is also uplifting like the company of the good. She is a
truthful and pure lady.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 187

526 LETTER TO MAGANLAL P. MEHTA1
May 29, 1932
Received the letter from Venice. Let me know how you passed
your time on the steamer, what things you observed during the voyage
and how you spent your money, so that I may have an idea of your
powers of description and of what you regard as simplicity.... 2 Take
walks for exercise and make yourself physically fit. Do not get others
to do what you can do for yourself. Do not use a conveyance in order
to reach a place if you can negotiate the distance on foot. Fight
against cold by exercise, not by sitting near the fire place....3
Write to your father regularly. Send him a statement of accounts
from time to time. Remember that parents can never have enough of
letters from their children. They are interested in the minutest details
about them. Fulfil your father’s expectations about you.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 186-7

1

The translation is reproduced from The Diary of Mahadev Desai, Vol. I.
Omission as in the source
3
ibid
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

433

527. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
Y. M.,

May 29, 1932
CHI. KANTA,

I have your letter. You kept me waiting too long. I hope you
have not forgotten your Gujarati ? It is good you are learning English
from Kisan 1 . I trust you have made good progress. If your health
remains good, Father’s anger will pass.
What else are you studying? Do you get all the material you
need for writing?
Tell Prabhavati I have written three letters to her. I do not know
whether she got them.
Blessings to Sarup, Kisan and Prabhavati.
All the three of us are quite happy.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

528. LETTER TO BHAU PANSE
May 29, 1932
2

CHI. BHAU ,

I have your letter. Send me only as much [portion] of Vinoba’s
discourse as you conveniently can. If possible, write in ink. Did you
take it down while Vinoba was discoursing or did Vinoba himself
write it out? Training in takli is progressing well. It will be very good
if all the Ashram inmates learn it.
The silence period was lengthened from one minute to five
minutes in order to give people greater peace. 3 It appears that all the
people were much too distracted. Concentration will be greatly helped
if all observe silence with a willing heart.
1
2
3

434

Kisan Ghumatkar
A Co-worker of Vinobha
Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi,” 4/9-5-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

To meditate upon the image of a living person is not proper.
The object of concentration is expected to be, and ought to be,
perfect, but how can we call any living person perfect? The
illustrations in the Ramayana and similar works are worthless. But
why do we need a concrete image? God is without form or attributes.
Why not concentrate one’s thoughts on Him? If that is impossible, a
form or an imaginary figure, may be meditated upon. Why not
meditate upon the Gita? It has been compared to the kamadhenu. Let
us meditate on this; we can gain much from it. However it be,
meditation upon living persons is harmful; so it should be avoided.
Write to Rameshwarji that I have already sent him three or four
letters.
Krishnadas informed me that Vinoba had started grinding flour
and that Jamnalalji had lost 20 lb. in weight.
Here are some remedies for constipation. They can all be tried
simultaneously.
1. Drink hot water with salt and lemon-juice in the morning; Salt
can be substituted by jaggery or honey.
2. Sleep with an abdominal mud-pack at night.
3. Give up pulses for some time.
If you do not benefit with this treatment within three days,
follow it up by eating only boiled greens for the next three days. Eat
them hot. Tandalja is the best among the greens. You can take salt
and lemon-juice on it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 6729. Also C.W. 4472. Courtesy: Bhau
Panse

529. LESSON OF DEATH1
May 30, 1932
So far as I remember, the following deaths have occurred in the
Ashram till now: Fakiri, Vrajlal, Maganlal, Gita, Meghji, Vasant, Imam
Saheb and Gangadevi. (It would be desirable to record the dates on
which these persons died).
1

This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 26/30-5-1932; vide
the following item.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

435

Fakiri’s death cannot be described as one befitting an inmate
of the Ashram. The Ashram had been recently established when he
died and he had not imbibed its moral and spiritual influence. He was
no doubt a brave boy. I have made the foregoing remark as he died a
victim of gluttony. His death was a test for me. I remember that I sat
up, alone, by his side for the whole night on the last day of his life. In
the morning, I had to catch a train for Gurukul. I watched the bier
being borne away and then, hardening my heart to stone, took the
road to the station. Fakiri’s father had entrusted him and his three
brothers to me, knowing that I would make no distinction between
them and others. When Fakiri had gone, I lost the other three brothers
too.
Vrajlal had joined the Ashram when he was well advanced in
years and met his death while doing an act of service, thus winning
immortal fame for himself and bringing glory to the Ashram. He had
descended into a well to bring up a child’s pot and, while climbing up,
because of fatigue lost his grip of the rope and fell and died.
Gita passed away peacefully, hearing verses from the Gita.
Meghji was an undisciplined child, but he preserved wonderful peace
during his illness. In most cases children suffer a great deal when
seriously ill and are difficult patients to nurse. But Meghji was an
almost ideal patient. Vasant did not have to be nursed for a long time.
A fatal attack of smallpox carried him away in a day or two. His death
was a painful test for Panditji and Lakshmibehn, and they stood it
well.
What shall I say about Maganlal? We are describing here the
deaths which occurred in the Ashram. Hence Maganlal’s name has no
place in the list. But how can I leave it out? He had come into the
world to serve the Ashram. As gold is tested in fire, Maganlal was
tested in the fire of service, and passed away after proving his perfect
worth. Everything that we see in the Ashram bears witness to
Maganlal’s devoted service.
Imam Saheb’s was the only Muslim family in the Ashram and
all the members were perfectly loyal to its ideals. His death has created
an unbreakable bond between us and Muslims. Imam Saheb regarded
himself as a representative of Muslims and had joined the Ashram as
one. (I remember here Amina’s two children. But they were only
infants and there is little to say about them. Their deaths certainly
teach us the necessity of self-control.)
436

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Gangadevi’s face is still vivid before my eyes, and I seem to
hear her voice too. I still take pleasure in recalling memories of her.
Her life teaches all of us, and particularly women, many lessons.
Though practically illiterate, she possessed spiritual wisdom. She was
the only person who, of her own accord, refused to go for change of
air though she could have gone. She looked after every child
entrusted to her care as if it was her own. I do not remember any
occasion when she had quarrelled with somebody or got angry. She
was not attached to life. She did not fear death— she met it with a
smile on her face. She knew the art of dying, for there is an art of
dying as there is of living.
I have recalled all these deaths lest we forget what we are. Our
earth is like a particle of sand in this vast universe. On that particle of
dust we are, so far as our bodies are concerned, mere specks. We
cannot count the number of ants in an ant-hill, and cannot even see
with our naked eyes creatures smaller than the ant. In relation to the
Cosmic Form of the Lord, we are smaller than even the invisible
creatures on our earth. That is why there is perfect truth in the
description of this body as kshanabhangur 1 . Why should we be
attached to it? Why should we cause pain to a single ceature for its
sake? Why should we move heaven and earth to preserve something
which is more brittle even than glass? Death means nothing but the
soul leaving that body. Why should we fear it, then? Why all this
desperate struggle to delay its coming? Let us all, grown-up and
young, ponder over this constantly and give up the fear of death, and,
while the body lasts, spend it in the service of others. We recite daily
the last 19 verses of Chapter II of the Gita in order that we may get
the strength to live in this manner. We shall find in them what we seek
only if they fill our very hearts.
PS.
After I had finished the foregoing, Mahadev reminds me of the
deaths of Fatima, Kaki2 and Valji’s mother. But I leave the discourse
as it is, since their inclusion would not affect the lesson which I have
drawn. Even so, I may say that what I was told about these deaths fills
my mind with holy thoughts.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

1
2

Momentary
Wife of D. B. Kalelkar

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

437

530. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 26/30, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

Premabehn, Sushila, Amtulbehm, Sharda, Noorbanu and Pyare
Ali were here before I got your packet. When absolutely necessary
you may increase the size of the party from five to six or even seven.
But ordinarily it would be desirable to stick to five. Only this time the
number was six, not counting Amina’s children. I think it will be safer
for you to stick to the limit I have given, so that you may not displease
anybody. Vallabhbhai had concluded that you had dropped your
name because there were already five names. Whether that is the
reason or whether you did not come because you did not think it
necessary to come, in either case it was all right. Probably, there will
be no occasion for you to bear all this in mind. I have still not
received the Government’s decision in regard to Mirabehn. If it is in
the negative, you may take it that I will stop seeing visitors.
Lakshmidevi, who is in the prison here, has left her spectacles in
the Ashram. She has asked me to request you, if you find them, to
send them here with somebody. If no one is coming, send them by
parcel. And also send 20 tolas of asafoetida pills along with it. When
you say that Ba’s letters were dispatched directly, I suppose you mean
that they were sent through the Superintendent. If that is so, please
inquire there. In affixing a stamp on the envelope in which you
dispatch letters for me, you generally affix it at one of the two ends
where it is closed. But unless you affix stamps at both ends, affixing a
stamp at one end only serves no useful purpose. It would be advisable,
therefore, to affix stamps at both ends. Either do that, or put sealing
wax at both ends. Adopt whichever method you like.
You may certainly discuss with other inmates there my
suggestion about calculating the value of work at the rate of one anna
per hour, but I think for your own observation you will find it very
helpful to maintain such a record in an independent book. The books
being kept at present will continue to be maintained. The one I have
suggested will be in addition to them. If, however, I have been able to
explain my idea, you will see that there is so little to be recorded that
the work will not be heavy at all. Moreover we shall be able to judge
whether there is any truth in what I have been saying. If the summary
438

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

at the end of a month reveals a great difference between the actual
figure of expenditure and the one arrived at by following the method
of calculation suggested by me, we may assume that we shall never be
able to close the gap and my mind will then start working in some
other direction. I am confident, however, that such a summary will
lead to a conclusion which will surprise us. It is my experience that
very often because of our lethargy we continue to labour under a
mistaken idea, and, if we make proper calculations, we are able to get
rid of our preconceived notions and correct our errors. Personally, at
the moment, I see no error at all in my reasoning and I believe,
therefore, that the result will be excellent. Since for hundreds of years
different types of work have been paid for at different rates, we
assume that that is the right thing to do but I think it is a false notion.
Did you read the latest letter which Harilal wrote to me? Even
the handwriting is not steady. He seems to have written the letter with a
trembling hand. Either he has written it in great excitement, or he was
drunk when he wrote it. The language is all excitement and insolence.
No attention is paid to ordinary syntax, words are left incomplete and
even the signature is not completed. I think we should completely
forget him now. If God wills, he will reform himself one day. Even in
order to open his eyes, it is necessary that we should let him know
plainly what we think about him. You say that you got “both” my
letters to him. Does that mean that you also got the one which we
thought had miscarried?1 If you got it, did you examine the postmark
on it?
The electric treatment seems to have had no effect on the
hand. For the first two days, it seemed that it might really do some
good. The real trouble just now is not with the right hand but with the
left elbow, but the doctor does not give electric treatment for that. He
has been thinking of giving radium treatment. Since I spin on the
Magan wheel, I do no work at all with the left hand. But there is no
cause for worry. So far it has been paining only when I work with it.
At other times there is no pain. As for getting Khambhatta here to
examine the bone, I cannot say anything just now. Permission for him
has been received, but it will not be possible for me to avail myself of
it if the reply in regard to Mirabehn is in the negative. I thought I had
sent to you the five nameswhich had already been approved. You
1

In “Letter to E. E. Doyle”, 7-5-1932, Gandhiji refers to a letter dated April 28
to “an erring son”; vide also “Diary, 1932”, entry under “April 28”.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

439

know three of them now. The other two are Trivedi and Lady
Thackersey. It would be fine indeed if you think you can look after
Jayantiprasad’s daughter. Jayantiprasad gave me the impression,
during the Dandi March, that he was careful in observing rules.
I feel rather unhappy that Chimanlal and Sharda do not
improve. I write down here the suggestion which occurs to me just
now as to what they should do. I will not write to them separately. Let
them take this as addressed to them. Shivaji used to keep indifferent
health. He read all the literature on the subject that he could get, tried
the diet changes and exercises recommended in the books which he
read and succeeded in improving his health. Chimanlal should do
something like that. I don’t mean that all could try everything that
Shivaji did. But Chimanlal has been in the Ashram for a long time, has
thought about the subject and has observed my experiments too. It is,
therefore, possible that he will hit upon something which his body
needs. We have plenty of books on the subject in the Ashram. There is
a small book even on chromopathy. This remedy is quite easy to try.
The doctor 1 whose treatment helped Amtulbehn employs it in many
cases. Light asana exercises also may help. Chimanlal should find
some time and read about them. According to me, these remedies are
more effective than doctors’ medicines, and they are spiritually
harmless. We often see that even the latter fail. Medical science is
altogether imperfect and much of it is based on hypotheses. Since the
body of every person is a unique organism, we do not at all
exaggerate in saying that there are no remedies which are universally
applicable. About Sharda, I think that we know the remedies but they
have not all been tried. She also may be partly responsible for this.
You should gently persuade her to try them.
I think it was a very good thing that Jamna went to Ranavav.
Since Purushottam is with her, you will not have to worry about her at
all. Parnerkar’s problem is very complicated. Do what you can. Read
my letter to Titus. Compared with the heat there, the heat here is a
joke. Hence our tapascharya, both outward and inward, is no real
tapascharya. Yours deserves to be envied. I hope and pray that you
will survive it.
If all my letters are not translated into Hindi, make it a strict
rule that they must be. Even if there are sometimes only two or three
1

440

Hiralal Sharma
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

persons who do not know Gujarati, the letter must be translated, unless
the persons themselves do not wish it.
May 30, 1932
I had written one letter to Savitribehn, that is, Mrs. Standenath,
and put on it the address given by her. But the letter has been returned
from the D.L.O. I am now sending it to you, along with the envelope.
If you have more particulars of her address, use it and send the letter
by registered post. She must be awaiting a letter from me and, having
got no reply from me, must be feeling unhappy. If you find her full
address, please send it to me too.
Father Elwin has suggested that we should recite a Christian
prayer here every Friday, and that his Christian friends will sing the
same prayer on that day and at the same time. They would thus
cultivate a communion of hearts with us. Mahadev accepted the
suggestion as soon as we read his letter last Friday and we replied to it
with Premal Jyoti1 . Hence we have fixed upon that hymn as the one
we will sing every Friday. Discuss the matter with Panditji and, if he
agrees, sing it every Friday there too at the time of evening prayers.
You will observe that I have now resumed writing with my right hand.
The doctors here are strongly of the view that the left elbow requires
complete rest. Failing this, they think gradually the pain will increase.
I have, therefore, given up even writing with the left hand. In a day or
two, they will put the whole arm in plaster. Don’t get alarmed on
reading this, for the elbow has never pained so far except when I have
been working with the left hand. The arm is to be put into plaster only
as a precaution. The doctors are convinced that this pain has no
connection with my diet. People who play tennis also get such pain
sometimes, and the doctors believe that, because of my regular
spinning for many years, I have strained the elbow much more than
tennis players do. Hence they think that it requires complete rest for
some time.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8829. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

1

Vide “Cable to J. F. Horrabin”, 3-1-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

441

531. LETTER TO GULCHEN LUMSDEN1
May 30, 1932
DEAR SISTER,

I thank you for your letter. I well remember the visit of Sir
Henry Lawrence to this prison in 1922 or 23, and he is right in his
impression that I then passed my time principally between reading
The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire and spinning at the wheel.
It is also true that he found me quite happy. But there was no “lovely
orchard” then, nor is there now. There were then, as there are now,
some tall trees about. The rooms are bare and barred cells of an
ordinary Indian prison. As cells they are well lighted and well
ventilated. So long therefore as the surroundings are concerned, there
is no question of my memory betraying me, for at the time of writing
I am exactly in the same surroundings as when Sir Henry saw me. If
therefore his description of them gave you the impression of a fairy
tale, it was surely erroneous. Happiness after all is a mental state, and
for myself, being used, now for more than a generation, to a hard life,
I have learnt to detach my happiness from my surroundings.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 9527. Courtesy: Mrs. Hugh Lumsden, Canada

532. LETTER TO A. R. TIJARAY
May 30, 1932
MY DEAR TIJARAY,

I have your letter, received just now. The previous letter you
refer to was not received at all. I would have attended to it there and
then. Sardar Vallabhbhai who is present whilst I am dictating this and
who has shared all the correspondence with me has also no
recollection whatsoever of anything having been received from you.
However I know no one in Vienna. I have never been there. But I
haveno doubt that when you tell the specialist the whole of your story
he will treat your case as he must have treated similar cases before. If
1

442

Addressee’s name is supplied from Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 189.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

it is of any value, you may certainly use this letter to identify you as
Principal, Tilak Vidyalaya, Nagpur. I hope you will benefit by the
treatment there. I am glad that Vithalbhai is improving. Please
remember me to him.
Yours sincerely

M. K. GANDHI
A. R. TIJARAY
(PRINCIPAL, TILAK VIDYALAYA,
C/ O PENSION B. P FEFFER
WILHELM EXNERGASSE 28
WIEN IX, A USTRIA

NAGPUR)

Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(3), Pt. 1, p. 241

533. A LETTER1
May 30, 1932
In my opinion unity will come not by mechanical means but by
change of heart and attitude on the part of the leaders of public
opinion. I do not conceive religion as one of the many activities of
mankind. The same activity may be either governed by the spirit of
religion or irreligion. There is no such thing for me therefore as
leaving politics for religion. For me, every, the tiniest, activity is
governed by what I consider to be my religion.
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 189

534. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
May 30, 1932
CHI. KUSUM (SENIOR),

You did well in paying a visit to Pyarelal. He had become
impatient to get my reply. I have written a postcard to him directly
from here. Mahadev will write by and by. Inform me what your
movements for some time will be. If you intend to write to Pyarelal,
1

The addressee had advised Gandhiji to give up politics and to preach the
truths common to Islam, Christianity and Buddhism.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

443

inform him that I am still reading Ramakrishna’s and Vivekananda’s
books 1 . I will send them over to Rameshwardas2 when I finish them.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1839

535. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS PODDAR
May 30, 1932
BHAI RAMESHWARDAS,

I got your letter. I hope that you got my last letter which I wrote
before you wrote yours and which I sent to you through the Ashram.
Stick to the vow of spinning. Do not take any new vow until your
mind has become firm. However, adhere with the utmost firmness to
the vows which you have taken and maintained so far. Even a small
vow becomes a rudder to the ship of one’s life, if one sticks to it in the
face of all difficulties. It will be all right if you can win over your
mother and sister-in-law with loving persuasion, otherwise you should
patiently tolerate their opposition. They should not be forced against
their wishes. It will be good if you send the boy to the Gurukul at
Kangri. There he will learn Hindi, Sanskrit and English and almost
everything else that they teach at a high school. If he is unwilling to
go to the Gurukul, he may go to Santiniketan. In that case he should
learn Bengali. If even that does not suit him, he may join the Kashi
Vishvavidyalaya. He will not be able to study at home. Since you have
withdrawn him from the high school there, it would not be proper to
send him back to it. Nor would it be right to interrupt his studies. It
would, therefore, be desirable to send him to one of the three places
mentioned above.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 181

1

Presumably by Romain Rolland; vide “Diary, 1932”, entries under May 22

and 23.
2

444

Rameshwardas Poddar of Dhulia
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

536. A LETTER1
May 30, 1932
I believe, and doctors also hold the same view, that no woman
can be absolutely and simply raped. Not being prepared to die, a
woman yields to the wrongdoer. But a woman who has overcome all
fear of death would die before submitting to the outrage. It is easy to
say this, but difficult to act in this manner. Hence when a woman
yields to the wrongdoer unwillingly, it is but right that we should
regard her as having been raped. If such a woman becomes pregnant,
she should not resort to abortion. A woman who has been the victim
of a rape does not deserve any censure. On the contrary, people
should have compassion for her. If, however, a woman wishes to
conceal the very fact of her having been raped, who is to say what
right she has, whether or not she has a right to resort to abortion? In
her fright she would believe that she had such a right and do as she
wished. After the outrage, a woman has no right at all to commit
suicide, nor need she do it.
My replies to your letters or to the letters of others, being written
from jail, must not be published. I write numerous letters from here
and it would not at all be proper to publish them. The Government
may even tolerate the publication of all these letters, but a satyagrahi
ought not to take such freedom. This is one of the restrictions which a
satyagrahi voluntarily imposes on himself. The world is not impatient
to know my views and act according to them. Even if it is, it should
exercise patience at present. Nor do I myself attach so much value to
my views. And, moreover, I cannot say about any view which I may
express now that I will not change it in future. I may not mind
expressing my personal views to a person like you. I would assume
that you would bear in mind my temperament and my short-comings
and take them for what they are worth.
And now about the questions you put. Some of them are such as
should not be asked at all. A seeker may ask a person in whom he has
faith for solutions to a very few of his immediate difficulties. He
should never raise hypothetical issues. He may certainly ask if he has
any doubt about a step which he intends to take. If he asks a question
1

The Diary of Mahadev Desai Vol. I, gives only the initial letter ‘‘S” of the
addressee’s name.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

445

about something which has really happened, he should give all details
of the incident. He should not frame a general question on the basis
of the incident, for in doing so he might ignore some relevant detail
of that incident. It would be risky, in that case, to apply to that
particular incident the reply given to a general question.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 188-9

537. DIARY, 19321
JANUARY 4, MONDAY, YERAVDA2

Spun 190 rounds. The police came and arrested me at
3 o’clock in the morning. Left after reciting a bhajan. Elwin3 , Privat,
Mills and others were present. Vallabhbhai also was arrested at the
same time. We met in the jail and are lodged together. I may say I
spent the day resting. I could take a walk for the first time today after
landing. Started reading Will Durant’s book4 . Ate no fresh fruit today.
Had two seers of milk.
JANUARY 5, TUESDAY

Spun 172 rounds. Rested well today also. Sent a note5 about our
wishes in regard to visits, etc., to I. G. just for his information.
Continued reading Durant’s book.
JANUARY 6, WEDNESDAY
Spun 196 rounds. Major Martin called. Got a copy of The Times
of India today. Finished Durant’s book. Commenced another by
Crozier6. Feeling of exhaustion persists. Were weighed—I was 105.
[Ib.] and the Sardar 147.
JANUARY 7, THURSDAY

Spun 197 rounds. Completed Crozier’s book. Commenced
Brailsford’s6 . Good rest still needed. Ate a papaya today. Will start
1

In Gandhiji’s own hand, in Gujarati; for the entries under October 14, 1931,
when Gandhiji commenced this Diary, to January 3, 1932
2
From January 26, 1932 Gandhiji described this as “Yeravda Mandir”. This
place-entry is not reproduced under subsequent dates.
3
Verrier Elwin
4
For the titles of the books, vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 3/8-2-1932
5
ibid
6
For the title of the book, vide“Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 3/8-2-1932

446

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

taking tomatoes tomorrow.
JANUARY 8, FRIDAY

Spun 195 rounds. Telegram to Lady Shaffee on the death of Sir
Mohammad Shaffee. Satavlekar sent Purushartha1 . A Gujarati book
arrived.
JANUARY 9, SATURDAY

Spun 212 rounds. Today completed Brailsford’s Rebel India.
Received two baskets of fruits and vegetables from Trivedi.
JANUARY 10, SUNDAY

Spun 160 rounds. Yesterday commenced reading Mahomedali
Al Haj Salmin’s Imam Hussain. Completed it today. Now am reading
his book on Khalifa Ally. Entered silence today at 3 o’clock. Have
still not gained the strength to spin or work more. Feel like lying
down all the time. Slept thrice during the day. Ate the grapes and
oranges sent by Trivedi.
JANUARY 11, MONDAY

Spun 163 rounds. Received some mail today, namely, letters
from Mira, Kashinath, Kalavati and Prabhavati. A lawyer named Iyer
sent a book on the Scout Movement.
JANUARY 12, TUESDAY

Spun 206 rounds. Some more letters and books arrived today.
Received permission to write letters.2 Wrote to Narandas, Ba, Mira,
Radha, Amina and others. Also to Prabhavati and Kashinath.
JANUARY 13, WEDNESDAY

Spun 185 rounds. Commissioner Clayton called. Received a
letter from Prabhavati. Wrote to Narandas enclosing postcards to
Mahalakshmi and others as also to Chandrashankar and
Hemprabhadevi. Dahyabhai visited Vallabhbhai. Ordered dates today.
JANUARY 14, THURSDAY

Spun 185 rounds. Finished today the letter to the Viceroy which
I had been drafting since yesterday. Completed reading life of Ally
yesterday. Today commenced reading Hoare’s The Fourth Seal.
Received slivers, sandals and carding-bow from the Ashram. Also
wrote a letter to Samuel Hoare. Were weighed today—my weight was
1

A Marathi monthly
The first letter to Narandas Gandhi, however, is dated January 11, 1932; vide
“Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 11-1-1932
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

447

the same, Sardar’s decreased by three pounds.
JANUARY 15, FRIDAY

Spun 194 rounds. Handed over to the Major letters to the
Viceroy and to Hoare. Hoare’s book is nearly finished. Dahyabhai
came again today with a doctor for Sardar.
JANUARY 16, SATURDAY

Spun 163 rounds. Received Kumarappa’s book 1 on the Matar
inquiry. Got The [Bombay] Chronicle today. Received some letters.
Finished Hoare’s book. Commenced MacDonald’s2 .
JANUARY 17, SUNDAY

Spun 196 rounds. I could read a good deal today. Again two
baskets of fruits and vegetables arrived from Trivedi.
JANUARY 18, MONDAY

Spun 166 rounds. The Ashram mail—Narandas, Khushalbhai,
Champa, Pranjivan, Abbas, Parnerkar, Surendra, Balkrishna, Chhotelal,
Durga, Ratilal, Bhansali, Vasumati, Padma, Valji, Prabhudas, Ramdas,
Mira, Chhotalal Gandhi, Mahuwa, Maganlal Shamji, Urmila Devi,
Abdul Majid (Barabanki), Raihana, Kamala Nehru, Nirmala Joshi,
Hakim Abdul Latif (Dasuya), Surbala Desai (Surat), Prof. Trivedi.
Completed MacDonald’s book.
JANUARY 19, TUESDAY

Spun 228 rounds. Received today intimation regarding
newspapers, visits, etc. Seems to be satisfactory. Received letters from
Pyarelal and others. Received fruit from Lady Thackersey.
Commenced yesterday the book about the Matar Taluka inquiry.
JANUARY 20, WEDNESDAY

Spun 173 rounds. The Collector paid a visit today. Wrote letters to
The Tribune, The Leader and The Hindu for copies. Completed
Kumarappa’s book, Ramanathan’s pamphlet and Hayes’ Indian
Bibles. Started Ruskin’s Guild of St. George3 .
JANUARY 21, THURSDAY

Spun 205 rounds. Ashram letters arrived today and also one
from Kashinath. Stanley Jones sent me his new book. Wrote letters
yesterday and today: Lester, Hopkinson, Sir George Barnes, Narandas,
1
2
3

448

J. C. Kumarappa”s Survey of Matar Taluka
Travelogue
A slip for St. George’s Guild
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

(Kusum, Pyarelal, Maitri, Mahavir), Esther Menon, Wrench, Mary
Lauder. Today completed Ruskin’s book about the Guild.
Commenced Shah’s1 Federal Finance.
JANUARY 22, FRIDAY

Spun 231 rounds. Sent yesterday’s letters for posting. In
addition, wrote to Ramananda Babu, the Chronicle, Marie Petersen.
Col. Steele examined both of us.
JANUARY 23, SATURDAY

Spun 153 rounds. Did not take milk today. Again a basket of
fruit has arrived. Wrote a letter yesterday to Sir Frederick Sykes and
handed it to the Major today. Wrote a few letters during the day for
the Ashram. Received today letters from Hemprabha Devi and others.
Also from Raihana.
JANUARY 24, SUNDAY

Spun 160 rounds. Cresswell called this morning. Did not take
milk even today. Wrote a number of letters for the Ashram in the
afternoon.
JANUARY 25, MONDAY

Spun 201 rounds. Completed the Ashram mail. It contained 61
letters and a talk on Chapter XIV [of the Gita]. The other letters are to
Prabhavati, Raihana, Hemprabha, Kangani2 Sundaram and Vishvanath
Thanorkar. A number of books arrived again today, including a
volume of Ingersol’s speeches. Wrote to Josiah 3 acknowledging
receipt of these books.
JANUARY 26, TUESDAY

Spun 211 rounds. Handed over yesterday’s letters for posting.
Took milk today. Ordered dates. The Gita number of Purushartha
arrived. Prepared draft of letter to Emerson. It was so long and I was
so much engrossed in it that I did not hear the clock strike seven.
Hence prayer was delayed by half an hour. Wrote letters to Vichchhan
Charan Patnaik, Kashinath, Edith Scott, Hope and also to Narandas,
having forgotten to enclose Chapter XIV with the letter to him.
Commenced The Ruin of Egypt.
1

K. T. Shah
Literally, “jobber”
3
Dr. Josiah Oldfield, editor of The Vegetarian, President of Bayswater
Vegetarian Society founded by Gandhiji during his stay in England for studies; vide
“An Autobiography”
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

449

JANUARY 27, WEDNESDAY

Spun 190 rounds. Handed over yesterday’s letters to the
Superintendent. Today wrote one to Prof. Shah and handed over this
also to him. Mira, Pyare Ali, Noorbanu and Radha paid a visit.
Received copies of The Hindu and The Leader. Received the Ashram
mail. Wrote a postcard to Narandas about the Giri family. Wrote some
letters.
JANUARY 28, THURSDAY

Spun 172 rounds. Handed over to the Superintendent letters to
Emerson and Narandas. Wrote letters. Received a copy of The Leader.
JANUARY 29, FRIDAY

Spun 179 rounds. Received The Tribune today. More books
arrived. Received letters from Narandas and Prabhavati. Airey [sic]
received orders to go to Bombay. I asked him to carry Hoare’s book.
Wrote some letters. I still feel sleepy.
JANUARY 30, SATURDAY

Spun 168-rounds. I fed great need for sleep. Wrote some letters
during the day.
JANUARY 31, SUNDAY

Spun 207 (two hundred and seven) rounds. Completed The
Ruin of Egypt. Commenced Hayes’ book 1 on the cow. Among some
letters received from abroad was one from Esther, too.
FEBRUARY 1, MONDAY

Spun 235 rounds. Wrote letters and got them ready. The
Ashram packet—Manilal (Dhiru, Mangal, Gulab), Chintamani, The
Hindu, Kali Babu, Prabhavati, Kamla Nehru, Chandrahas, Kevalram
Dave (along with his sisters’), Emma Harker, Khushal Shah, Swami
Chidatmananda, Virendranath, Hariram Mohandas, Prabhakar,
Biharilal, Kantilal Trivedi. Received five books from Shah. The
second mail that arrived contained Manilal’s letter from South Africa.
Quinn went to Visapur. Dahyabhai met the Sardar.
FEBRUARY 2, TUESDAY

Spun 164 rounds. Wrote to Lady Vithaldas not to send fruits.
Handed other letters to the Superintendent for posting. Completed
A. E.’s Candle of the Vision. Commenced Kinley’s Money. Wrote
1

450

The Book of the cow
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

letters to Joan Widdikiss, Gertrude Keller, De Valera, Rev. W. Hayes,
Prof. Hoyland, Carla, rmani1 .
FEBRUARY 3, WEDNESDAY

Spun 152 rounds. I do not know how I spun fewer rounds
today. There was the correct number of slivers. Handed letters written
yesterday to the Superintendent for posting. The magistrate called.
Were weighed. Vallabhbhai’s weight was 144.5 lb., mine 107. Read
the life of Shri Bhupati Nath. In the afternoon, Lady Vithaldas, Prof.
Trivedi, Damodar and Vidya called. Mira sent leather for the soles and
honey. 190 persons, including Ramdas, Chhaganlal Joshi, Surendra
and Somabhai came from Sabarmati [jail]. Mani, Lilavati, Nandubehn
and others arrived and they were transferred to Belgaum [jail].
Received the Ashram mail.
FEBRUARY 4, THURSDAY

Spun 210 rounds. Wrote some letters to the Ashram. Wrote a
separate one to Mira. Two bottles of honey came from Lady
Thackersey.
FEBRUARY 5, FRIDAY

Spun 210 rounds. Spoke to the Superintendent about meeting
fellow-prisoners, wrote to him a letter. Received copy of The Modern
Review. The Superintendent gave me oil for applying on the elbow.
FEBRUARY 6, SATURDAY

Spun 244 rounds. Today commenced reading biography 2 of
Zaka Ullah. Wrote letters to the Ashram; also to Mary Barr,
Karimnagar, Ramananda Babu.
FEBRUARY 7, SUNDAY

Spun 180 rounds. Wrote out summary of Chapter XVI of the
Gita. Felt miserable upon reading the painful news of a girl’s attempt
on the life of the Governor of Bengal. Translated speech about God.3
FEBRUARY 8, MONDAY

Spun 241 rounds. Wrote letters to Anjana Devi, Lalita, Buken,
Agatha Harrison, Zenkoff, Davis, Nagardas, Esther, Raihana,
Khandelwal, Ambikaimukkam, 36 for the Ashram. Completed
Kinley’s Money. Commenced Shah’s Sixty Years of Economic
1

The first letter is illegible in the source.
Zaka Ullah of Delhi by C. F. Andrews
3
Vide”Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 3/8-2-1932
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

451

Administration of India. Did not take milk or curds today. Took
almond paste.
FEBRUARY 9, TUESDAY (RAMZAN ID)

Spun 192 rounds. Sent for posting letters which were made
ready yesterday. The Major did not attend office on account of Id.
Received news of Prabhudas’s arrest.
FEBRUARY 10, WEDNESDAY

Spun 185 rounds. Punjabhai, Juthabhai, Shankar, Amina and
Kanti called on me today. Received the Ashram mail. Kanti gave a few
books among which was Sangitshastra of Barve sent by Panditji.
Received letter from the Governor of Bombay. We were weighed
today. I was 105_ [lb.] and Vallabhbhai 141.5.
FEBRUARY 11, THURSDAY (VASANT PANCHAMI)

Spun 170 rounds. Got Lilavati Munshi’s letter. Letters— Mira,
Manu Trivedi, Narandas, Lilavati Munshi.
FEBRUARY 12, FRIDAY

Spun 183 rounds. Despatched yesterday’s letters. Continued
Ashram mail today. Wrote quite a number of letters.
FEBRUARY 13, SATURDAY

Spun 207 rounds. Prof. Glen Clarke sent me his books. One or
two other books arrived. Wrote Ashram letters this afternoon also.
Vallabhbhai passed blood in stool. The Major, therefore, examined it.
FEBRUARY 14, SUNDAY

Spun 201 rounds. Wrote letters during afternoon. Translated
Chapter XVII in the evening.
FEBRUARY 15, MONDAY

Spun 217 rounds. There are 68 letters for the post. Narandas for
the Ashram, Chapter XVII, and also to West, Narsi Premji, Jivraj
Mehta, Philip Hartog, K. T. Shah, Chhaganlal, Metalbhai, Gertrude
Keller, Rasiklal Chunilal, Velshi Ranshi, Harilal Govindji, Maganlal
Mehta, Nirmala Pandya.
FEBRUARY 16, TUESDAY

Spun 189 rounds. Major Martin paid a visit today. The question
of my meeting other prisoners was discussed. As a result, I wrote a
letter. Handed over yesterday’s letter to the Superintendent. Received
copy of the Golden Book of Tagore as also of the biography of A.
Gray [sic]. Telegram to the Maharaja of Bikaner. Wrote letters to
452

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Narandas, Jhaverchand, Chakechake [sic], Hanumanprasad, Gosibehn,
Ramananda Babu, Mrs. Gael.
FEBRUARY 17, WEDNESDAY

Spun 171 rounds. Handed over yesterday’s letters to the
Superintendent. Mira, Valji and Lilavati came to see me today. There
was some argument about Valji and Lilavati. In the end they saw the
point. Mira will be arrested tomorrow. Valji brought a book on
astronomy and three letters. Received honey and papaya from Lady
Thackersey. Mira brought soap powder and almonds.
FEBRUARY 18, THURSDAY

Spun 160 rounds. Received Gandiva wheel from Lakshmidas.
Received a letter from Andrews. There is an enquiry on about the
people coming to see me. Received the Ashram mail. Started writing
letters for the Ashram. Were weighed today—Vallabhbhai was 142
[lb.] and I, 106. Wrote letters to Lakshmidas and Damodardas.
FEBRUARY 19, FRIDAY

Spun 150 rounds. Handed over yesterday’s two letters for
posting. Dahyabhai paid a visit to Vallabhbhai. Received four books
from Maithilisharan. Received a telegram from Magan about going
abroad. Wrote Ashram letters.
FEBRUARY 20, SATURDAY

Spun 205 rounds. The District Magistrate called. Wrote letters.
Talked with the Superintendent about Ishu. Someone has sent a book
about Mussolini.
FEBRUARY 21, SUNDAY

Spun 160 rounds. Completed summary of Chapter XVIII.
Practically finished Ashram mail. Took white gourd as the fifth item.1
Changed bed-cover which had got completely worn out.
FEBRUARY 22, MONDAY

Spun 160 rounds. G. N. Gokhale has sent his book on the
Dharmashastras. Letters to the Ashram totalled 32. In addition to
[letter to] Narandas and the summary of the Gita chapter, the others
include those to Ghanshyamdas, Kamla Nehru, Rani Vidyavati,
Maithilisharan, Jerajani, Rameshwarlal Bajaj, Raihana. Completed
1
The reference is to Gandhiji’s vow to take not more than five items in his
day’s food, which he had taken in 1915 during his visit to the Kumbha Mela in
Hardwar; vide “Diary for 1915”

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

453

Shah’s Sixty Years of Economic Administration of India and
Maithilisharan’s Panchavati. Commenced Saket.
FEBRUARY 23, TUESDAY

Spun 183 rounds. Ishu has been sent for a night. Spoke with the
Superintendent about visits. Sent yesterday’s letters.
FEBRUARY 24, WEDNESDAY

Spun 159 rounds. The Civil Surgeon examined me. Received
the Ashram mail. Commenced writing letters.
FEBRUARY 25, THURSDAY

Spun 222 rounds. Sir Samuel’s letter arrived, also one from
Mira. Today Yashwantprasad, Jivanlal, Lady Vithaldas were to pay a
visit but did not because of Superintendent’s objection. Wrote to Mira,
Harjivan, Babalbhai and Ranchhodbhai Kunvarji’s maternal uncle—
and of course the Ashram letters. Yesterday began Salvemini’s book
on Mussolini, having finished Saket.
FEBRUARY 26, FRIDAY

Spun 176 rounds. Wrote letters for the Ashram. Handed over
yesterday’s letters to the Superintendent. Received 24 postcards
today. Received some Hindi books from Kalyan Press.
FEBRUARY 27, SATURDAY

Spun 195 rounds. Dahyabhai called. I also met him. Received
[Life of] Henry George1 and some other books from America.
Received some letters. Wrote and sent a postcard to Ba. Wrote letters
for the Ashram.
FEBRUARY 28, SUNDAY

Spun 206 rounds. Ate bread today. Discontinued tomatoes
because of stomatitis. Wrote letters for the Ashram and some others.
Wrote letters to Sir Fazli and Sir Samuel Hoare.
FEBRUARY 29, MONDAY

Spun 163 rounds. Handed over two letters of yesterday to the
Superintendent. Today received letters from Munshi and others.
During these days wrote letters to Lilavati (Munshi), Hemprabha,
Esther, Jessie Jones, Sumangal, Lakshmidas, Purushottam, Maganlal
Pranjivan, Bhagwanji Anupchand, Mulchand Parekh, Kanu Munshi,
Madhavdas Gokuldas, forty-two for the Ashram in addition to
1

454

American economist
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Narandas’s and on Socrates’s ideas about death1 .
MARCH 1, TUESDAY

Spun 153 rounds, Completed [book] about Mussolini.
Commenced Delisle Burns’s Democracy. Handed over yesterday’s
letters to the Superintendent. Received dates from Ghanshyamdas.
Wrote letters to Radha, Rukhi, Benarsi, Parasram, Tehelramani,
Mahulikar, Dinkar Mehta, Trivedi, Lady Vithaldas.
MARCH 2, WEDNESDAY

Spun 163 rounds. Lady Ramanathan sent me her book, The
Ramayana, Iyer sent a book on exchange and Sathe on morality.
Wrote postcards to all the three. Narandas’s letter about
Khushalbhai’s illness. Today commenced “Bal Gita”2 .
MARCH 3, THURSDAY

Spun 217 rounds. Ba and Shanta called on me. Fruit arrived
from Lady Thackersey. Dinkar brought honey and dates. Received
the Ashram mail. Wrote Ashram letters. Sent yesterday’s postcards for
posting and a telegram to Khushalbhai.
MARCH 4, FRIDAY

Spun 205 rounds. Some books arrived. Letters from Sir George
Barnes and from Ghanshyamdas. Oranges arrived from Wardha.
Wrote the Ashram letters. Dahyabhai and Yashoda paid a visit.
MARCH 5, SATURDAY

Spun 160 rounds. Five of the skeins today are likely to be short
by three rounds. Government orders regarding visitors from outside
[the Ashram] received today. Wrote a letter to Narandas. The other
letters were for the Ashram.
MARCH 6, SUNDAY

Spun 195 rounds. Today resumed almonds which I had given
up for some time. Wrote a letter to Major Bhandari about receiving
visitors. Handed over for posting letter to Narandas. Completed
Democracy yesterday. Commenced Upton Sinclair’s Wet Parade.
MARCH 7, MONDAY

Spun 180 rounds. 37 Ashram letters, “Reminiscences of Imam
1

Vide “Death, A Friend”, 29-2-1932
Gandhiji wrote “Reminiscences of Imam Saheb” instead; vide “Imam Saheb—
I”, 7-3-1932; 14-3-1932 and 21-3-1932 also “Letter to D. B. Kalelkar”, 7-3-1932
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

455

Saheb”, and letters to Birla, Quinn, Kusum, Mrs. William Donaldson,
Upton Sinclair, Ishvarbhai.
MARCH 8, TUESDAY

Spun 196 rounds. Today got another improvement effected in
the spinning-wheel, that of the spring. Received letters from
Lakshmidas, Raihana, Manmohan and others. Wrote to Raihana,
Manmohan, Lakshmi and Ramachandra, Gertrude Kellersching,
Agatha Harrison, Aubrey Mony, Ramgopal Mehta, Nagardas, Kantilal
Shah, Rambiharilal, Lakshmidas.
MARCH 9, WEDNESDAY

Spun 215 rounds. Today I weighed 105.5. Vallabhbhai was
139. Handed over yesterday’s letters for posting. Ramdas called.
Discussed what would be my duty in case separate electoral rolls were
prepared for untouchables. Also prepared draft of a letter to be
addressed to Sir Samuel Hoare. Received the Ashram mail.
MARCH 10, THURSDAY

Spun 189 rounds. Today spun on the old spinning-wheel, It
took a lot of time. Major brought Emerson’s letter. Jaisukhlal and
others will come to see me. Received grapes from Trivedi. Mahadev
came. Revised letter to Sir Samuel.
MARCH 11, FRIDAY

Spun 160 rounds. Today the Major examined Mahadev’s leg.
Despatched letter to Sir Samuel through the Governor. Vallabhbhai
was willing neither to stop the letter nor to agree to its being sent,
either. If his vote counted, it would be a negative one. Mahadev said
having regard to my nature such a letter ought to go. Commenced
Ashram letters.
MARCH 12, SATURDAY

Spun 207 rounds. Dahyabhai called. Got the book sent by
Barnes. Wrote letters for the Ashram.
MARCH 13, SUNDAY

Spun 203 rounds. Wrote the Ashram letters, and one to
Emerson.
MARCH 14, MONDAY

Spun 185 rounds. Wrote 41 letters for the Ashram; in addition
to these letters, one to Narandas and “Reminiscences of Imam
Saheb”, [letters to] Sir George Barnes, Shanti Mehta, Bhanumati,
Radha, Benarsi, Rukhi, Evelyn Wrench, Keelan [sic].
456

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

MARCH 15, TUESDAY

Spun 155 rounds. Today Kashi, Jamna, Moti, Lakshmi,
Lalitabehn, Jaisukhlal, Durga, Babla and Prabodh paid a visit. Wrote a
letter to Martin to the effect that I should receive a reply about seeing
Haridas and others by Friday. Today received fruit from Trivedi.
Completed Wet Parade. Commenced Carpenter’s Adam’s Peak to
Elephanta. Wrote letters to Hemprabha, Alexander Gary and
Dinkarrao.
MARCH 16, WEDNESDAY

Spun 185 rounds. Major Martin’s reply regarding Haridas
arrived. Received reply from India Office on behalf of Evans [and]
Rogers.1 Dictated letters [to] Shah, Mulchand Parekh, Oriental
Eucalyptus Company, Champaklal, Syed Mustafa Husain, Napoleon,
Prithuraj, Shankarsagar. Handed over yesterday’s letters for posting.
MARCH 17, THURSDAY

Spun 221 rounds. Handed over yesterday’s letters. Received the
Ashram mail and a letter from Dhiru.
MARCH 18, FRIDAY

Spun 160 rounds. Decision about visiting prisoners is received.
Received a painful letter from Champa. Commenced letters for the
Ashram. Wrote letters to Narandas, Petavel2 and Harjivan.
MARCH 19, SATURDAY

Spun 162 rounds. Handed over yesterday’s letters for posting.
Met Joshi, Narasinhbhai and Haridas. Sent dates to Haridas. Received
Stokes’s book. For the present agreed to content myself with letters
from women prisoners instead of meeting them.
MARCH 20, SUNDAY

Spun 195 rounds. Completed Adam’s peak to Elephanta.
Completed Anagh. Wrote letters for the Ashram.
MARCH 21, MONDAY

Spun 207 rounds. Letters for the Ashram and letter to
Gangabehn. Sent Federal Finance, Money and Sixty Years of
Economic Administration of India to Chhaganlal. Commenced
1
The reply was presumably an acknowledgement of the gifts sent by Gandhiji
to them after his return to India; vide footnote 2 on “Letter to Mirabehn”, 12-1-1932
2
Captain J. W. Petavel

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

457

Stokes’s Satyakama1 .
MARCH 22, TUESDAY

Spun 220 rounds. Wrote four more letters for the Ashram and
another to Vithaldas. Handed over these for posting. Shah sent a book
about Egypt. Someone sent Jnaneshwari. Wrote letters to Lester, Devi,
Aristarchi, Muthu, Dinkar, Mettler, Agatha, Hemprabha, Madanmohan,
Hiralal, Hanumanprasad, Jethalal.
MARCH 23, WEDNESDAY

Spun 170 rounds. Handed over for posting yesterday’s letters
and the one written today to Jayakar. Gangabehn paid a visit. Women
prisoners have commenced a fast. Had a rather sharp discussion about
this with the Major. Sent dates to Haridas. Received the Ashram mail.
MARCH 24, THURSDAY

Spun 159 rounds. Commenced Ashram letters. Prepared drafts
of letters to Major Martin and Dr. Norwood. Received Fors
Clavigera2 . Received news of breaking of the women’s fast.
MARCH 25, FRIDAY

Spun 177 rounds. Handed over for posting letters to Edith Scott,
Major Martin, Raihana, Evelyn Wrench, Horace and Dr. Norwood.
Wrote letters for the Ashram. Completed Stokes’s book. Commenced
Fors. Today asked for almonds and dates.
MARCH 26, SATURDAY

Spun 214 rounds. The Major informed me that I could write to
fellow-prisoners. Hence I wrote letters to Mira, Mani, Jamnalal, Devdas
and sent them over. Sent a telegram to Shankerlal on Dhirajlal
Banker’s death. Got Gangabehn’s letter. Sent her slivers. Received
dates from Vithaldas, and honey and papaya from Lady Vithaldas.
Today finished the old stock of almonds. Received from Rameshwar
Rolland’s Life of Vivekananda and Ramakrishna. Received some
other books also.
MARCH 27, SUNDAY

Spun 181 rounds. Received Ashram letters and a telegram from
Shankerlal. Wrote to him and Lilavati, and also to Emerson, Raghavan.
Proofs of the autobiography [for children].
1
2

458

Satyakama or “True Desires”
By Ruskin
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

MARCH 28, MONDAY

Spun 177 rounds. Got yesterday’s letters. Fuss over giving dates
to prisoners. Wrote letters for the Ashram. In one of them wrote about
Ruskin. Letters to Taramati, Narasinhbhai’s Vimala, Amtul.
MARCH 29, TUESDAY

Spun 208 rounds. The surgeon examined me. Explained about
the dates to the Major. Handed over letters for the Ashram, etc.
MARCH 30, WEDNESDAY

Spun 174 rounds. Wrote to the Major about visits. Harjivan and
Sharda called. Received letter from Mathuradas. Completed proofs of
the autobiography for children.
MARCH 31, THURSDAY

Spun 163 rounds. Wrote to Mathuradas. Received Jayakar’s
letter. Commenced letters for the Ashram. Have now stopped
receiving goat’s milk.
APRIL 1, FRIDAY

Spun 184 rounds. Today met Qureshi and two Maharashtrian
gentlemen for two hours. Two seers of almonds arrived.
APRIL 2, SATURDAY

Spun 201 rounds. Dahyabhai paid a visit. Telegram to Nargis
about Jal. Wrote letters for the Ashram. Received letters from Lester
and others.
APRIL 3, SUNDAY

Spun 190 rounds. Wrote and also dictated letters for the
Ashram. Dictated letters for some Americans.
APRIL 4, MONDAY

Spun 186 rounds. Handed over for posting letters to Kamla
Nehru, Jayakar, Radha, Kanu Desai, Jamu Dani, Chaturbhuj Sharma,
52 for the Ashram. Also a letter to Narandas along with [an article on]
“A Saintly Woman of Russia” 1 , and letters to Lovan, Rev. Skudder,
Henarsa, Prabhavati, Jerajani, Raihana (Pashabhai), Savitri Standenath2 ,
Shambhushankar, Rev. Smiley.
APRIL 5, TUESDAY

Spun 182 rounds. In addition to yesterday’s letters, handed over
1
2

By Mahadev Desai; vide “Letter to Premabehn Kantak”, 3-4-1932
Francisca Standenath

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

459

letters for Shah and Elwin. Dictated letters to Maithilisharan,
Ghanshyamdas, Gandalal, Andrews, Tyagi and Gopaldas. Started
history of the Ashram. Received books from Santaram and others.
APRIL 6, WEDNESDAY

Spun 192 rounds. Handed over yesterday’s letters for posting.
Added to them a postcard to Durga. I fasted today. Today got a
mattress made to serve as a seat for me. Received honey from Lady
Thackersey. Completed the first book of Fors. Completed
Narasinhbhai’s letters, Samarpan and Buddha and Mahavir.
Commenced second part of Fors.
APRIL 7, THURSDAY

Spun 198 rounds. Wrote a letter to Lakshmanrao Kane.
Commenced Ashram letters. Cresswell sent two books on astronomy.
A carpet arrived from Armenia. Received three seers of almonds.
Received letter from Mira. Received a book on Vedanta from Jayakar.
Received letter from Nanabhai. Dictated letters to Nanabhai Bhatt,
Kartar Singh, Moto Edith, Roberto1 .
APRIL 8, FRIDAY

Spun 234 rounds. Handed over yesterday’s letters for posting.
Major Mehta arrived. Received letters from Jamnalal, Esther and
Nargis. Wrote Ashram letters. Dictated letters to Hanumanprasad,
Rameshwar, the Hungarian priest and Ambalal Modi.
APRIL 9, SATURDAY

Spun 235 rounds. Dahyabhai paid a visit. Received books on
astronomy and a letter from Hiralal. Major Mehta examined my hand
and Mahadev’s leg. Applied iodine to both. Dictated a few letters.2
APRIL 10, SUNDAY

Spun 237 rounds. Wrote letters for the Ashram. Dictated letters
to Mangal Singh, Bhailal, Dinkar, Nageshwarprasad, Charubabu,
Induprasad, Jamnalal, Brijkisan.
1
2

460

The Armenian who had sent the carpet
Here, in the source, followed the following prayer by Prahlad:

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APRIL 11, MONDAY

Spun 383 rounds (194+189=383). Today completed 375
rounds of yarn without a break. So far a skein was completed on
alternate days but today and yesterday there was one skein daily. I
intend to keep this up if possible. Received Sir Samuel’s reply to my
letter about the caravan 1 , etc. Completed letters for the Ashram.
Handed over yesterday’s letters to the Superintendent. Have passed on
a telegram for Kamla Nehru. It will go to the I. G. Wrote about
“Watching the Heavens” for the Ashram.
APRIL 12, TUESDAY

Spun (186+187)=373 rounds. The first figure within brackets is
that of the rounds counted today. The second is that of today’s on the
spindle. Handed over letters for the Ashram. The letters numbered 28.
Dictated to Vallabhbhai letters to Gangabehn and Chhaganlal. A
postcard to Shankarlal Marwadi. Handed these three together to the
Major. In the afternoon dictated letters to Khambhatta, Nargis,
Narandas, Lalita Subbiah, Shanti Mehta, Shankarbhai, Major Martin
and Hiralal.
APRIL 13, WEDNESDAY

Spun (188+207)=395 rounds. This morning wrote letters to
Hiralal, Ramdhari, Lakshmi Raja, Dhiru Revashankar. Letters and
copies of “Watching the Heavens” to Gangabehn and Chhaganlal.
Handed over these and yesterday’s letters to the Major. I am fasting
today. Still I weighed 104.5 lb. Last Wednesday I was 103.5. Received
the Ashram mail.
APRIL 14, THURSDAY

Spun 168+217=385 rounds. Handed over letters to Radhika,
Esther and Hemprabha Devi for posting. Today met Mohanlal,
Manibhai and Dhurandhar. I saw Shankarrao Deo who has been
fasting. He did not listen to me. Bali, Manu, Kunvarji and Kusum
called on me.
APRIL 15, FRIDAY (RAMANAVAMI)

Spun 158+248=406 rounds. Received a telegram from Ranjit,
wrote a letter to Deo, sent Mahadev to Deo. He gave up his fast. Wrote
an acknowledgement to Khagendra Priya Barua and acknowledged
1
Sir Samuel Hoare, in his broadcast on January 28, 1932, had said: “Our
policy is simple, straightforward and sympathetic. It is a policy of progress
combined with firmness. . . . Though dogs bark, caravan passes on.”

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

461

receipt of khadi. Received three seers of almonds. The earlier stock is
not yet over.
APRIL 16, SATURDAY

Spun 127+282=409 rounds. Major Proll called. Dahyabhai paid
a visit. Received letters from Khambhatta, Hiralal and some others.
APRIL 17, SUNDAY

Spun 93 rounds. Today spun with the left hand. There was
considerable strain but as there had been some extra rounds every day
the skein could be completed. The object in turning the wheel with the
left hand and drawing the yarn with the right hand is to spare exertion
to the left elbow which is paining. Today Major Mehta gave electric
treatment to both the hands. Dictated postcards to Khambhatta,
Mahavir, Hiralal and Shakarabhai.
APRIL 18, MONDAY

Spun with the left hand 85 rounds. Wrote letters for the Ashram.
Today started eating from the new stock of almonds. Today worked
till 11 o’clock. Handed over for posting yesterday’s letters and an
earlier one.
APRIL 19, TUESDAY

Spun with the left hand 85 rounds. Handed over 39 Ashram
letters as well as “Watching the Heavens” and the letter to Narandas
[for posting]. About a hundred books arrived from Nanabhai. Got the
Government’s permission to see five people not belonging to the
Ashram, and Trivedi whenever necessary. Letters from Chhaganlal,
Ramdas. Reply to Ramdas. Electric treatment is being continued.
APRIL 20, WEDNESDAY

Spun 112 rounds. Received the Ashram mail. Wrote to
Gangabehn, Chhaganlal Joshi and Surendra. Handed over the letters
to the Major. Received the Ashram mail. Dictated letters to
Ghanshyamdas, Nanabhai, Nagardas and Chaturbhuj. Sent letters to
Sumangal and Kanta.
APRIL 21, THURSDAY

Spun 92+33 rounds. Sent two letters to Col. Doyle, about Kaka
Kalelkar and others and about visits. Wrote to Lady Thackersey about
cotton, to Nanabhai, Ghanshyamdas, Nagardas and Chaturbhuj.
APRIL 22, FRIDAY

Spun 182 rounds. Today I tied up in a bundle all the 28 skeins I
462

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

had spun up to the 17th. Completed a skein of yarn spun by left
hand. Sent for posting letters to Raihana, Maganlal Pranjivan, Ba,
Mithubehn and Kanti. Received letters from Maithilisharan, Verrier,
Mani, Kaka.
APRIL 23, SATURDAY

Spun 135 rounds. Letters—Mani, Narahari, Prabhudas, Amethia
and Khambhatta. Dahyabhai paid a visit. Received books on
astronomy from Shivaji and Hiralal. A book by Ford from Pashabhai.
Completed second Urdu reader.
APRIL 24, SUNDAY

Spun 27+141=168 rounds. Wrote a good many letters. Almost
all pending letters have been dealt with. Commenced third Urdu
reader. Commenced Heath’s Astronomy.
APRIL 25, MONDAY

Spun 171 rounds. Letters—Taramati, Devdas, Kunvarji,
Harjivan, Janakibehn, Bindheshwariprasad, Satyendra Nath Ganguli,
Chandrashankar, Elwin, Brijbhushan Chaudhari, Sharda Kotak,
Ramananda, Lakshmidas, Sushila Nayar, Radha, Vaidehisharan and
Mathuradas. Received books on the Buddha sent by Nair.
APRIL 26, TUESDAY

Spun 63+93=156 rounds. Letters for the Ashram, along with
“Necessity of Drawing up a Balance-Sheet”, and letters to
Maithilisharan, Dastane, Hiralal (Shankar), Hemprabha, Shankerlal.
Today the new Magistrate paid a visit. Received books on massage
sent by Khambhatta. Received the Ashram mail.
APRIL 27, WEDNESDAY

Spun 182 rounds. Letters—Maude Royden, Dr. Nair, “Apana
Sabu’’ 1 , Dyer, Doyle and Natarajan. Vallabhbhai wrote a letter to the
Major asking him to call in a nose specialist for him. I also wrote one.
Received letter from Mills today.
APRIL 28, THURSDAY

Spun 100+101=201 rounds. Sent for posting letters to Narandas
and Harilal. Triveni called. Vallabhbhai changed his timings of meals,
so that he could eat three meals. Received letter from Maganlal.
1

Trade-mark name of a soap

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

463

APRIL 29, FRIDAY

Spun 203 rounds. Letters—Maganlal Pranjivandas, Polak,
Narandas, Dinkar Mehta, Santok. Wrote a long letter to Gangabehn.
Sent her a lot of books. Spent two hours today with Ramdas, a teacher
of the Tilak Vidyalaya and Gokuldas Talati. Received letters from
Samuel Hoare and Percy Bartlett. Almonds sent by Bhimji were
exhausted today. A new stock of three pounds arrived yesterday,
which will be utilized from tomorrow. Received Upton Sinclair’s
autobiography.
APRIL 30, SATURDAY

Spun 71+126=197 rounds. Dahyabhai paid a visit. Urdu
copy-book arrived. Began eating from new stock of almonds.
MAY 1, SUNDAY

Spun 208 rounds. Received Bernard’s letter and Francis
Adam’s poems. Wrote and dictated letters.
MAY 2, MONDAY

Spun 41+196=237 rounds. Received telegram about Yashoda’s
death. Handed over for posting letters to Hoare and Sankey.
MAY 3, TUESDAY

Spun 179+16=195 rounds. 43 letters for the Ashram; they
include “Lesson of the National Week”, [letters to] Prabhavati,
Dahyabhai, Bernard, Bhagirathi Shirodkar. Received the Ashram mail.
Received honey from Parikh Dashrathlal.
MAY 4, WEDNESDAY

Spun 239 rounds. Letters—Mathuradas, Noorbanu, Lakshmidas,
Manjukesha, Doyle, Agatha, Taramati, Kamala of Broach, Surbala,
Mills, Lakshmidevi, Kamu, Hemprabha, Bartlett, Ramdas. Mani Parikh
and Shankerlal Parikh visited Mahadev. Received some books, slivers
and a dhoti from the Ashram. Trivedi sent dhotis.
MAY 5, THURSDAY

Spun 120+82=202 rounds. Letters—Sharda, Narasimhan,
Lakshmi, Shankerlal, books to Chhaganlal, “Watching the Heavens”,
Marathi Purusharth, Bhajanavali, and the Gita number to Gangabehn
and letter to Anasuyabehn. Mani Parikh, Vanamala, Mohan, Kusum,
Girdhari paid a visit. Brought clothes, fruits, etc. Received Magan
spinning-wheel. The almonds were over today.
464

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

MAY 6, FRIDAY

Spun 24 rounds on the Magan spinning-wheel. Letters— Walsh,
Damji, Dasharathlal, Shankar, Nanabhai of Akola, Ibrahimji. Death of
Gangadevi. Spun on the Magan spinning-wheel today. It worked with
difficulty. Today ate ground-nuts. Sarojini’s letter about Jail.
MAY 7, SATURDAY

Spun 56 rounds on the Magan spinning-wheel. Letters—
Hanumanprasad, Chandulal Patel, Prof. Nayak, Narandas, Mira, Col.
Doyle, (about Kaka and about letters which get lost), Gangabehn,
Sarojini Naidu, Chhaganlal Joshi. Dahyabhai paid a visit. Received
“Apna Sabu”. Hiralal sent Mukerji’s book on astronomy. Perhaps
for the first time today spat blood while gargling. It is not likely to
have been from the lungs.
MAY 8, SUNDAY

Spun 71 rounds on the Magan spinning-wheel. Letters for the
Ashram. The ground-nuts are over.
MAY 9, MONDAY

Spun 59 +36=95 rounds. This is the total of those spun by the
left and the right hand. Began eating from the new stock of almonds.
Letters—Upton Sinclair, Benarsi, Hiralal, Harjivan, Evelyn Wrench.
Have almost completed the Ashram letters. Received letters from
Gangabehn and Chhaganlal, a spinning-wheel from Kantawala and
Modi’s book on the Gita. Today finished “Apana Sabu”.
MAY 10, TUESDAY

Spun 102 rounds. I could not at all manage with the right hand
today. Worked for almost five hours. Thirty-eight letters for the
Ashram including the article on “Cleanliness, Truthfulness Purity,
Neatness” and a letter to Raihana. Am reading life of Nabi Saheb1 by
Imam Saheb.
MAY 11, WEDNESDAY

Spun 131 rounds. Today the right hand gave good work.
Mail—letters to Gangabehn and Biharilal Kantawala. A rather sharp
argument with the Superintendent about the specialist for
Vallabhbhai. Received Col. Doyle’s letter about Kaka and others, a
letter from Shardabehn, and Vinayachandra’s books. Today I
weighed 105.5, Vallabhbhai 140.5, Mahadev 147.5.
1

Sirat-un-Nabi

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

465

MAY 12, THURSDAY

Spun 126 rounds, all with the right hand. Letters—Doyle,
Bhikhabhai, Devdas, Lakshmidas, Pyare Ali. Panditji, Lakshmibehn,
Mathuri and Yashwantprasad paid a visit. Received a second packet of
letters from Narandas.
MAY 13, FRIDAY

Spun 90 rounds. Today could not give even two and a half
hours to spinning. Letters—Mira and Shardabehn. Surendra,
Patwardhan and Rabade were with me for more than two hours. Books
by Upton Sinclair and also from Gondal arrived. Commenced
Rolland’s Ramakrishna.
MAY 14, SATURDAY

Spun 97 rounds. Felt very tired. Chhaganlal Joshi, Chandulal,
Dahyabhai paid a visit. Books from Trivedi.
MAY 15, SUNDAY

Spun 78 rounds. Wrote letters for the Ashram.
MAY 16, MONDAY

Spun 90 rounds. Letters—Sushila (Phoenix), Trivedi, Mira. Got
letter from Fulchand and others.
MAY 17, TUESDAY

Spun 115 [rounds]. Forty-five letters for the Ashram, including
an article on self-sacrifice, and letters to Maithilisharan, Natarajan,
Prataprai Modi, Birla, Fulchand Bapuji. Dictated a good many letters
today.
MAY 18, WEDNESDAY

Spun 165 rounds. Getting used to spinning by hand and foot.
Letters—Rameshwar Bazaj, Bindheshwari, Trivedi, Nanabhai M.,
Radha, Narasimhan, Lalita, Nirmala Mashruwala, Barda Yukil, Baldev
Pra[sad] and Ram Mohan Roy (Bezwada). Lady Thackersey, Mani
and Mathew paid a visit. Permission to see Mira has been refused.
Received new stock of almonds today.
MAY 19, THURSDAY

Spun 168 rounds. Letters—Col. Doyle and Mirabehn. Today
started eating from the new supply of almonds.
466

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

MAY 20, FRIDAY

Spun 183 rounds. I now seem to have acquired good control
over the spinning-wheel. Letters—Sumangal Prakash, Tilak,
Mithubehn Petit, Ranchhodji Shastri, Narandas, Govindbhai Chavda,
Kailashnath Katju, Kamla Nehru.
MAY 21, SATURDAY

Spun 209 rounds. Letters—Nargis, Dinkar. Telegram about
Bipin Babu. Dahyabhai and Mani paid a visit.
MAY 22, SUNDAY

Spun 193 rounds. Could write a good-many letters. Completed
Rolland’s Ramakrishna.
MAY 23, MONDAY

Spun 203 rounds. Letters—Taramati M., Raihana, Prabhudas,
Dr. Roy, Hemprabha, Esther, Devichandra, Narayan Pandya,
Ramanandan, Gertrude Keller, Sharda Kotak. Commenced
Vivekananda. Wrote letters for the Ashram, etc.
MAY 24, TUESDAY

Spun 204 rounds. Letters—thirty-nine letters for the Ashram
including an article on “The Cat-A Teacher”, Miss Elizabeth Howard,
Jayaprakash, Maud Cheeseman, Jethalal Govindji, Nanakchand, Rukhi.
MAY 25, WEDNESDAY

Spun 202 rounds. Letters—Gangabehn, Lakshmidas, Abhay,
Mulchandbhai, Satyacharan Law.
MAY 26, THURSDAY

Spun 210 rounds. Letters—Niranjanlal, Siddhanath Pant, Mira,
Shantikumar, Natarajan, Parachure Shastri, Muriel, Agatha Harrison,
Devi West. Yesterday Pyare Ali, Noorbanu, Sharda, Amtul, Prema and
Sushila paid a visit. Received slivers from Chhakkaddas and Vichar
Sagar, Panchadashi, Tilak Panchang from Trivedi. Pyare Ali
brought honey and mangoes.
MAY 27, FRIDAY

Spun 217 rounds. Letters—Krishnachandra Agrawal, Pyarelal, Today
met Mahadev Mailar, Maganbhai and Rabade.Maithilisharan’s books
arrived. Letters from Ghanshyamdas, Devdas, Elwin and others.
MAY 28, SATURDAY

Spun 205 rounds. Letters—Sukhlal, Ghanshyamdas, Elwin,
Devdas, Ba. Sent a spinning-wheel to Lilavati. Dahyabhai and Mani
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

467

paid a visit. Major Proll paid a visit. New stock of almonds arrived.
Completed Mander’s astronomy. Commenced Hindu astronomy.
MAY 29, SUNDAY

Spun 200 rounds. Stopped washing clothes from today on
account of [the pain in] the left arm.
MAY 30, MONDAY

Spun 211 rounds. Letters—Maganlal Mehta, Amtul,
Dawoodbhai and Tilakam, Raja, Lakshmi, Karsandas, Gosibehn,
Esther.
MAY 31, TUESDAY

Spun 220 rounds. Mail—letters for the Ashram (36 including
“Lesson of Death”), Harjivan, Gulchen Lumsden, Tijaray, Sumangal,
Aristarchi, Newham, Renwick. Today started eating from the new
stock of almonds. Completed Rolland’s Vivekananda. Received the
Ashram mail.
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 19337

538. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 1, 1932
CHI. MIRA, 1

Your letter arrived today.
I have now decided to stop the interviews from next week if the
decision is delayed2 . They will be resumed if the decision is
favourable.
The left elbow has proved worse than the right hand. All work
with the left elbow has stopped and presently it will be packed in
splints. Doctors are sure that it is nothing but the strain caused by the
uninterrupted working of the wheel from day to day. I am thankful
that I have now acquired full control over the Magan wheel. Spinning,
therefore, continues and will continue merrily, unless the right elbow
strikes from sympathy.
1

Superscription in this and other letters to Mirabehn is in Devanagari.
Gandhiji had requested the Government to reconsider their decision not to
permit Mirabehn to see him in Yeravda Jail as otherwise he might not avail himself
of the permission to receive other visitors; vide “Letter to E. E. Doyle”, 19-5-1932;
also “Letter to E. E. Doyle”, 9-6-1932.
2

468

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You will be glad to learn that today I weighed 106 1 / 2 lb. This is
a good record. So you see that there is not the slightest cause for
worry even on account of the elbow.
Your saltless experiment is producing interesting results. I
should, however, wait before ascribing all the good results to the
absence of salt.
I wrote to Verrier1 last week care of Khambhatta. I hope he got
my letter. Yes, it is a good idea, his going to England for recuperation.
The sooner he goes the better. It was very wrong of Shamrao to have
had that fever. Have you seen him?
I am sorry about Damodardas. The enclosed is for him..
It is a superstition to think that saltless is tasteless. Salt kills
flavour. I have known pepole not touch things with salt in them. Taste
is a matter of habit. I suppose you do take butter and bread. These do
contain salt. Your experiment is one of reducing the quantity of free
salt. The effect produced on you, therefore, is due to reduction, not
entire absence of salt in your food. But that does not matter. Nor
needyou worry that you are taking some salt somehow. Let well
alone. Do you ever see Manilal? Or is he still not there at all?
Love from us all.
BAPU

[PS.]
Verrier suggested that we should sing a Christian2 hymn every
Friday at evening prayer. So Mahadev began “Lead, Kindly Light”
in Gujarati 3 . And this we shall continue every Friday. Please tell
Verrier this if he has not yet got my letter.
From the Original: C.W. 6224. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9690

1

On May 27
The source has ‘Xian’.
3
Premal Jyoti, by Narasinhrao Divetia; vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”,
8/13-6-1932
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

469

539. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
YERAVDA MANDIR1 ,

June 1, 1932
CHI. PARASRAM,2

I was glad to hear that Nirmala’s enthusiasm for Hindi was
increasing. By all means teach Hindi poems. I do not know whether
the lines on the palms (of our hands) have any significance, but there
is no profit in trying to know what the future holds whether through
these or through astrology or by any other means; on the contrary, it
is definitely harmful. And, one who is a lover of the Gita, i.e., who
leaves the results of one’s work to God, should never desire to know
the future. I have not received the booklet, but will go through it when
I get it. Destruction of small creatures as a result of essential activities
is unavoidable. As far as possible, we should be careful about those
which we can see with our naked eyes; more than this, we cannot do.
Tiny insects like ants are not crushed under our feet when we
walk. They are protected by their very smallness. But larger insects
may be so crushed. Hence it has been regarded as our duty to look at
the ground in front of us while walking. All these precautions are
signs of our kind-heartedness, but non-violence is something more
far- reaching and wonderful. It should be apparent in all our work, in
our relationship with one another and in all our dealings with our
fellowmen. We should remain unconcerned when we see a peacock
devouring a snake. The latter is food for the former and we cannot
interfere with it. Tulsidas’s quatrain3 about women which you have
quoted is not only not applicable to all women but it is not even a
criticism of women. It criticizes man’s sensuality. Tulsidasji’s point in
it is that man, being lustful, thinks only of women, and he has written
these lines to show what man becomes like when he is seized by lust.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati:G.N. 7500. Also C.W. 4977. Courtesy:
Parasram Mehrotra
1
Literally, Yeravda temple, that is, Yeravda Central Prison, where Gandhiji
was imprisoned from January 4, 1932 to May 8, 1933. This place-line is not
reproduced in subsequent letters.
2
A khadi worker and a Hindi teacher; also a member of Gandhiji’s secretariat
for some time.
3
Intellect, valour, virtue and truth are all like fish, while woman is like a bait,
say the wise.”

470

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

540. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS PODDAR
June 1, 1932
BHAI RAMESHWAR,

I got both your postcard and your letter. The conclusion which
you have drawn from my letter is correct. If, instead of attempting a
big leap, we take small steps according to our capacity, our enthusiasm
for the work will increase and with that our self-confidence. I am not
worried about Jamnalalji’s loss of weight, as he otherwise keeps good
health. And, as for Vinoba, let him refrain from milk and ghee so
long as he can maintain his health and strength. I am satisfied with the
message which he has sent.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati:G. N. 179

541. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI1
June 2, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

There is no reply yet regarding Mirabehn. I, therefore, think
that I should stop seeing visitors pending the reply. So do not send
any names for the next week. I will send you a wire if a
favourablereply is received. Mahadev desires that Durga 2 should be
informed about this.
BAPU
S JT. N ARANDAS GANDHI
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM
S ABARMATI
B.B.&.C.I. RLY.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8231. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

1
2

The article “Concerning Titiksha and Yajna ” was sent with this letter.
Mahadev Desai’s wife

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

471

542. LETTER TO FEROZABEHN TALEYARKHAN
June 2, 1932
DEAR SISTER,

I was glad to read your letter. Bhai Nariman had not given me
your message. But since I did not come across you anywhere I
concluded that you might have been out of Bombay. I hope you are
keeping good health. Seeing me will, I think, not be easy. Most
probably all my visitors will be stopped. We shall however know the
actual position when you come. Sardar1 and Mahadev Desai are with
me. Please write to me from time to time.
Blessings from

BAPU
S MT. F EROZABEHN TALEYARKHAN
C/ O P OST MASTER
BODH GAYA
BIHAR
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9775

543. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
June 2, 1932
CHI. PRABHAVATI, 2

I have your letter. I am writing this letter deliberately in Hindi so
that it may be delivered to you without delay. I have written to you at
least twice. The letters have been dispatched from here. I cannot make
out how they failed to reach you. You should take milk and fruit.
Jayaprakash says he is all right. My health is satisfactory. I shall write
at length after hearing from you. Sardar and Mahadev are with me.
Blessings to Sarup, Kisan and Kanta.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRIMATI P RABHAVATI DEVI
‘A’ CLASS P RISONER
C ENTRAL JAIL
LUCKNOW
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 3422
1
2

472

Vallabhbhai Patel
Wife of Jayaprakash Narayan
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

544. LETTER TO VANAMALA N. PARIKH
June 2, 1932
CHI. VANAMALA,

1

As you are left-handed, you should also try to perform every
function with your right hand. The human race increases through
births. Do you know how you came into being? Other men and
women came into being in the same way as you did. Human beings
owe their birth to their parents.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5772. Also C.W. 2996. Courtesy:
Vanamala M. Desai.

545. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Tuesday, May 31/June 3, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

I have practically decided that tomorrow, Wednesday, will be the
last day when I will see visitors. If the Government continue to delay
its reply in regard to Mirabehn, I think I should assume that it will be
negative and should stop seeing visitors for the time being. I can start
seeing them again if finaly the decision is favourable.
If Harilal wants to vent his anger on Bali2 , let him do so. Bali is
strong enough to face it, and knows how to deal with him. Whether or
not that is so, if the path of duty is clear before us we must follow it
without regard to consequences. Is it not because people are
concerned about consequences that they often forsake the path of
dharma? The Gita was composed to drive this one lesson home, and it
repeats the idea again and again in every possible context.
As we gradually understand more clearly the aim behind the
five minutes’ silence (at prayer time), we shall feel its grandeur with
greater and greater force. Vasumati Thakore is being properly looked
after. The doctor said that she must have suffered from the disease for
a long time.
1
2

Daughter of Narahari Parikh, an associate of Gandhiji
Balibehn Vora, sister-in-law of Harilal Gandhi

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

473

If a labourer willingly agrees to obey the Ashram rules, do not
discharge him even if there is no work for him. If he himself wishes to
leave, that would of course be another matter. We should not
discharge any person, who is otherwise good, merely for the sake of
economy. A labourer will never be a burden on us. And the Ashram
may engage paid labourers, but we shall be worthy of its great ideals
only if we continue to work with our own hands or join them in work.
Don’t let Dhiru and Kusum return for some time yet. It will be a
great error to suppose that, after their health has improved a little, they
will be all right in the Ashram, They should return only after their
health has become quite strong. If they observe the Ashram
ruleswhere they are staying and do whatever work their health permits,
that would be as good as living in the Ashram.
Do not waste your time and energy in inquiring about Ba’s
letters. I got one postcard written by her. How many Chharas 1 are
there and where do they live? From what part of the country do they
come? What is their language? We should think what our duty towards
them is, irrespective of whether or not they harass us. See if anything
is possible in this matter.
I have nothing more to say about the Magan spinning-wheel.
My hand seems to be fairly well set on it. I could also guess today
from which part the sound comes. I am using just now the slivers sent
by Chhakkaddas. I am naturally tempted to spin yarn of fine count
from such good slivers. Today I drew 22 rounds from one sliver.
Each sliver weighs less than one anna. The count of the yarn, I guess,
must be about 30. I spun today yarn of that count at the rate of 110
rounds per hour. For yarn less fine than that I have already reached
the speed of 130.
I have preserved Totaramji’s 2 letter. I even made two copies.
One I sent to Gangabehn and the other to Chhaganlal Joshi. If
Totaramji has not kept a copy, I may return the original or send a
copy from here. Because of the uncertainly in regard to visitors, I
have not asked for permission for Chitalia and others. As for Thakkar
Bapa, I am afraid I won’t be able to write about him from here in any
case. It is enough that Bhansali at least sends news about him from
time to time.
Lakshmidas did get my detailed letter in which I had explained
1
2

474

An ex-criminal tribe of central Gujarat
Totaram Sanadhya, a farmer who had come from Fiji and joined the Ashram
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

how the change in the spindle-bearer in the Gandiva spinning-wheel
immediately resulted in improvement in count and speed, for he has
acknowledged it. I, therefore, think that there has been some
misunderstanding. I got a letter from Krishna, but she does not
mention anything in it about Choudhariji, nor have I received a letter
from him. Which Choudhariji did you refer to? Ba seems to have lost
much weight but I hope that she and Navin are improving now. If you
interpreted Mirabehn’s letter to refer to fasting, you were not correct.
She spoke about the mockery of fasting, about eating only one meal
on the 6th and 13th of the National Week1 .
The Narayanappa affair is a shameful one. Now that the guilty
party in this theft has been found out, I suppose we must believe that
Bhagwanji’s suspicion, too, was correct. If, however, Narayanappa is
sincerely repentant and if all of you think that he may be permitted to
stay on, by all means let him do so. The spinning yajna will be
complete if everybody hands over the yarn which he or she spun for
that yajna. There can be no doubt at all that such yajna will remain
incomplete so long as those who take part in it wish to keep back the
yarn for their own use. The rule which I have suggested is that
everybody should hand over all the yarn spun by himself to the
Ashram, and he may get from the Ashram the khadi required for
clothes. One should spin yarn of the highest count that one can, and
accept from the Ashram as coarse a cloth as one’s body can tolerate
or as many fall to one’s share. All this is implied in the vow on nonpossession and in the ideal of self-dedication. However, I do not have
the courage to make this a compulsory rule for all.Moreover I am no
more in your midst and, therefore, since the matter has come up for
discussion, I am merely pointing out what the Ashram dharma
demands. Read this out to all and explain what I have said, and then
leave it to every individual person to accept from it as much as he or
she can. But we can certainly make this rule, that everyone should
wind yarn into neat hanks at the end of each day or week and hand
them over with details of name, place, number of rounds, etc., and,
when one wants to get cloth woven from the yarn, one may ask for the
hanks according to the rule which one may have accepted for oneself.
I think this is absolutely essential for a correct record to be preserved.
What is Rambhau’s speed, with one hand, on the Magan
1

Celebrated in April ever since the starting of the satyagraha movement in

1919.
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

475

spinning-wheel and what is the count of the yarn?
Mahadev’s yarn of 40 counts is piling up for he spins 630
rounds daily. You should get ready rach 1 and fani 2 of the type
necessary for weaving this yarn. We should be able to weave yarn of
40 counts without the least difficulty.
I am of the view that we should build a regular tomb over Imam
Saheb’s3 grave. But you should consult a trustworthy Muslim and find
out what the proper thing would be. Maulvi Saheb Gulam Nadvi4 , who
was a teacher in the Vidyapith for some time and had good relations
with Imam Saheb and who was present at the funeral, will most
probably be in Ahmedabad just now. You may consult him. There is
no hurry, of course. If Pyare Ali5 himself has made any suggestion in
this regard, let me know it.
All the persons whose names you sent to me came and saw me.
Anandlal’s Ranchhod also had joined the party, so they were six in
all. But that may be permitted occasionally. Now send no more names
till you hear from me.
June 3, 1932
Send, by parcel, one pound of asafoetida pills for Gangabehn.
She requires them urgently.
I did not keep a copy of the article6 sent last time, thinking that I
would get one from you sooner or later, but I have not received any
so far.
I hope I shall get one by and by.
BAPU

[PS.]
This is the 29th letter in today’s packet.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8230. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

1

Weaving tools
ibid
3
Abdul Kadir Bawazeer, Gandhiji’s associate since South African period and an
Ashram inmate; vide “Imam Saheb—I”, 7-3-1932.
4
Abu Zafar Nadvi
5
A business man from Bombay
6
“The Cat—A Teacher”, 22-5-1932
2

476

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

546. LETTER TO MANIBEHN N. PARIKH
June 3, 1932
CHI. MANI 1 ,

Patience is learnt through long effort. The secret of regarding
sorrow as joy is learnt by leaving everything to God. It is for this very
reason that those three verses2 have been included in the prayer for
women. I hope you do remember these verses. Through effort, one
can learn to bear suffering.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5969. Also C.W. 3286. Courtesy:
Vanamala M. Desai

547. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
June 3, 1932
CHI. PREMA,

I write this slip merely because I think I must write something
to you. Don’t fortget to send the Urdu books. If visits stop now, send
them by registered book post.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10288. Also C.W. 6736. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

548. LETTER TO D.B. KALELKAR
June 3, 1932
CHI. KAKA3 ,

I do get news about you from time to time. All the same, when
you can next write letters, write to me and tell me how you are. . . .4
The pain in your back must have disappeared now. I hope the rains
have had no ill effect on your health. Who are your companions?
1

Wife of Narahari Parikh
Containing Draupadi’s prayer to Lord Krishna when she was being disrobed
by the Kauravas; vide “Ashram Bhajanavali”
3
Dattatreya Balkrishna Kalelkar (b.1885), popularly known as Kakasaheb, a
co-worker of Gandhiji since 1915.
4
Seven lines here were censored by the jail authorities.
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

477

Recently I have been spinning on the Magan spinning-wheel. The left
elbow is paining and the doctors say all it needs is rest. Since the pain
has been caused by the exertion of drawing the thread in spinning for
many years, I learnt to draw the thread with the right hand on the
Gandiva spinning-wheel. But the doctors advised me not to exert the
left hand even for rotating the wheel. Even otherwise, I had intended
to learn spinning on the Magan spinning-wheel, and this advice gave
me one more reason for taking it up. And so I have started spinning
on it. I had a good deal of difficulty in learining to use it, but I may
say that I have now acquired fairly good control over it. When I had
good slivers, I had attained a speed of 150 rounds [per hour]. Just
now I have been spinning with the worst possible kind of slivers.
Thespeed is less but not much less than 100. I give some time to
Urdu. And daily I read some book or other apart from star gazing. I
have taken up the study in right earnest. I would not now show myself
a complete ignoramus in discussing the subject with you. Among the
books which I have seen, I have found Flammarion’s book the most
useful so far. Dikshit’s book 1 seems to be the result of considerable
labour, but, from a learner’s point of view, it requires a good deal of
improvement. Patwa’s Akashdarshan can be of some help, but the
book is very superficial. There ought to be one good book in
Gujarati, which should also give some information relating to
astronomy. Two separate books in Gujarati for this purpose are not a
practical proposition. We must have a book which would give both
scientific knowledge of astronomy and practical guidance. If you
were with me here, I would have made you write such a book and I
also would have made some contribution to it. I have come to take so
much interest in the subject and perceived such deep religious
significance in this study that, were not my knowledge altogether
inadequate, I myself would have started writing such a book. I
occasionally exchange letters with Hiralal on this subject. He has sent
me two or three books. I read the biographies of Ramakrishna and
Vivekananda written by Romain Rolland. One of them is being read
by Mahadev now and the other by Sardar. (Sardar’s self-chosen job is
to go through newspapers and to make beautiful envelopes from used
brown paper or such other thick paper which we may get. Thus he is
daily adding to the nation’s wealth and dust is being turned into gold,
so to say.)
1

478

Shanker Balkrishna Dikshit’s Bharatiya Jyotishshastra
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Mahadev gives about five hours every day to carding and
spinning. There is a friend of Chimanlal named Chhakkaddas who
loves spinning very much. He has sent us beautiful slivers made from
Cambodian and Navsari cotton. With those slivers Mahadev daily spins
650 rounds, the yarn being of 40 to 45 counts, and also cards an
equal quantity from the cotton which we have received. Hence we
always have a good stock of slivers with us. My experiment of
milkless diet continues. My weight is steady. All three of us are in
good health.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Gangadevi1 passed away about a month ago. She was perfectly
calm at the time of death. Her death was worthly of an Ashraminmate.
Totaramji has sent, at my request, some very beautiful remi-niscences
of her. We can see from them that her life was truly great.
From the Gujarati original:C.W. 9486. Courtesy: D.B. Kalelkar

549. LETTER TO VIDYA R. PATEL
June 3, 1932
2

CHI. VIDYA ,

Raw mangoes become spice or fruit when eaten as such.
Collyrium should not be applied to the eyes for beautifying them. It
can, however, be used as medicine for some eye-complaints.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 9429. Courtesy: Ravindra R. Patel

550. LETTER TO KASHI GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR,

June 3, 1932
CHI. KASHI,

It was very necessary for you to talk to me about Prabhudas.
Because you did so, I have been able to take the necessary steps. That
we should not be unhappy certainly does not mean that we should be
1
2

Wife of Totaram Sanadhya
Daughter of Raojibhai M. Patel

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

479

indifferent. When we see anyone suffering, whether the person is our
relation or somebody else, we should do everything that is within our
capacity and then stop feeling unhappy or worrying. Prabhu wrote to
me a long letter and hence could not write to you. Only one letter
once every three months [permitted]1 .
As for your health, till you are able to digest solid food, live
only on fruit juice. You may take water in which vegetables have been
cooked. Avoiding ‘starch’ means avoiding rice and wheat and
avoiding ‘proteid’ means avoiding pulses and milk. Try this for a few
days. Do not mind if you feel weak.
At night, keep a mud-pack on the abdomen. Have sun-bath with
the body uncovered. If you feel cold that way, remove one garment
after another as the heat increases. Whether lying down or sitting,
gently take deep breaths.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33087

551. LETTER TO BHAU PANSE
June 3, 1932
2

CHI. BHAU ,

I have already answered your letter. Write to me if you have any
fresh doubt.
Both my hands are disabled for plying the takli. The fingers
have grown so weak that for the present I am unable to use them for
manipulating the takli. The future rests with God. Thus I have to
content myself with the reports of the progress made by others.
BAPU
From a photostat of Hindi: G.N. 6730. Also C.W. 4473. Courtesy: Bhau Panse

1
2

480

Presumably, to prisoners. Evidently, Prabhudas was in jail at the time.
He was an Ashram inmate.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

552. LETTER TO D.V. PARACHURE SHASTRI1
June 3, 1932
All three of us were delighted to read our letter. How stupid of
me to mistake Harolikar for Hukerikar. I am very bad at remembering
names and faces. It gratifies me greatly that you are bearing with the
disease so cheerfully. This is what I expected of you all.
I am pained to hear of your wife’s ailment. Is someone looking
after her? Has she any parents? I am sending you a bundle of slivers
prepared by Mahadev. Do not hesitate to ask for more as our stock is
always more than sufficient. Send me a list of the books you want, I
shall try to procure them. Have you quoted that saying in reference to
suicide from some book? My opinion in this matter is as follows: A
person suffering from an incurable disease has the right to commit
suicide if he cannot perform any service whatsover and lives only as a
result of the ministrations of others. Fasting unto death is infinitely
superior to drowning oneself. A person’s strength of character is
tested in fasting moreover it leaves scope for changing one’s mind,
which is both proper and necessary. But as long as he can perform the
least bit of service, he is not justified in putting an end to his life.
Although physical activity is an important and necessary feature of
yajna a physically disabled person can certainly perform mental
yajna which is not totally unfruitful. A man by his pure thoughts
alone can render service. He can also be engaged in giving useful
advice and such like. The thoughts of a man possessing a pure heart
are an activity by themselves and can produce far-reaching results.
[From Hindi]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. 1, pp. 198-9

553. LETTER TO JAL A.D. NAOROJI1
June 4, 1932
If Mr. Cooper’s plough is what he claims it to be, I should have
no objection to its use merely because it is a steel plough and
therefore the village carpenter will be deprived of a portion of his
work. I do not mind the partial deprivation of the carpenter if the
plough increases the earning capacity of the farmer. But I have very
1

The addressee was at this time in the lepers’ ward of Yeravda Central Prison.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

481

grave doubts about the claims made by Mr. Cooper for the invention.
At Sabarmati we have tried almost all improved ploughs manufactured
in India and I think even others, but the claims made for each variety
have not proved true in the long run. An experienced man has said
that the indigenous plough is specially designed for the Indian soil. It
conserves the soil, because it ploughs deep enough for the farmer’s
crops but never deep enough to do damage. Of course I do not claim
to understand agriculture. I am simply giving you the testimony of
those who have had considerable experience in these matters. What we
have to remember is that all improved implements have to meet the
peculiar conditions of India. There is nothing wrong in an engine
plough in itself and it may be a great advantage to a man who owns
thousands of acres of land, and has a cracked caky soil, which will not
yield under the indigenous plough. What, however, we want is an
implement that would suit owners of small holdings from one acre to
three acres. . . .
I do not believe in the doctrine of the greatest good of the
greatest number. It means in its nakedness that in order to achieve the
supposed good of 51 per cent the interest of 49 per cent may be, or
rather, should be sacrificed. It is a heartless doctrine and has done
harm to humanity. The only real, dignified, human doctrine is the
greatest good of all, and this can only be achieved by uttermost selfsacrifice.
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol.1, pp. 200-1

554. LETTER TO ANNE MARIE PETERSEN1
June 4, 1932
“Be careful for nothing” is one of the verses that has ever
remained with me and taken possession of me. If God is, why need I
care? He is the Infallible Caretaker. He is a foolish man who fusses
although he is well protected.
Mahadebhaini Diary, Vol. 1, p. 201

1

482

Member of the staff of the Danish Missionary Society in South India.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

555. CONCERNING “TITIKSHA” AND “YAJNA”1
June 6, 1932
A friend suffering from leprosy writes as follows:
I am daily growing stronger in my faith that the best medicines
for a person suffering from a disease like mine are asanas,
pranayama and such other ordinary exercises and eating food earned
through yajna. I spend my time in reading the Gita, singing bhajans,
meditation and spinning more than 500 rounds of yarn daily. Our
religion enjoins titiksha which means bearing all pains and miseries
without opposing them even in thought, without worrying and without
complaining. I am trying to cultivate such endurance, and I am
discovering from experience that it is difficult to acquire such strength
unless one works regularly for yajna. A person afflicted like me
cannot do other forms of yajna, but, thanks be to God, I can do yajna
by sweeping public roads, removing night-soil and spinning, and I
find my happiness in doing these things and try to bear my
misfortune. However, I often ask myself what my condition would be
when the body became so weak that I could do no useful work. The
Shastras emphatically declare that a life without yajna is as good as
death, that it is a burden and an affliction to the world. You have said
this repeatedly in your speeches and writings and my experience, too,
tells the same thing. If that is so, the question arises: “What is the duty
of a person who is so seriously ill with a disease that he can do no
useful work at all and must live on the service of others?” I even read
in a Shastra that a person who suffered from such an incurable disease
should give up his life by drowning himself or by some similar
means.
This is only a summary in my own language of a beautiful
letter. I wish to draw a lesson for ourselves from this letter, namely,
that all of us should cultivate this friend’s capacity for endurance and,
even when ill with a disease, should go on doing useful work as long
as the body permits. That one must cultivate endurance and must do
yajna—these are age-old ideals. We hear about them constantly in the
Ashram. When, however, we read such things described by a person
2

1
This was sent along with “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 2-6-1932; vide
“Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 2-6-1932
2
D.V. Parachure Shastri; vide “ Letter to D.V. Parachure Shastri”, 3-6-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

483

who is relating his own experience, they seem something new and
fresh and the description has great power in it. We do not expect a
person suffering from leprosy to be able to write in this manner or to
feel thus. In most cases such persons, if they write about themselves,
tell us how they suffer and complain about their misfortune. Here we
find something different altogether, and hence I have summarized the
letter for the inmates of the Ashram. The question which is raised in it
also deserves attention.
We understand by yajna physical work voluntarily done for the
service of others. But this need not be taken to mean that a person
who is physically too weak to do such work performs no yajna. Such
a person can serve with his mental capacities in many ways, and his
work would most certainly be yajna. But we can conceive of a case in
which the person does not have the necessary degree of purity or
sufficient mental strength for such yajna, and yet he is extremely
eager to do it, has lost the desire to live, dislikes having to be served by
others and is convinced that his disease is incurable. I think that, in
such circumstances a person who has the necessary strength of mind
may certainly give up his life, one may even say that it is his duty to
do so. But to tell anybody that it is his duty to give up his life will
probably shock him. It is not right for a healthy person to tell another
who is suffering from a disease that it is his duty to give up his life.
Such a remark may even upset that person. But I think that is not
likely to happen in this case, and so I have cautiously stated what
seemed right to me. It is certainly desirable that we should cease to
fear death and give up the intense clinging to life which impels us to
try to save it by trying every possible remedy and at the cost of
infinite trouble to people around us. My attitude in what I have written
is that, if a thoughtful person afflicted with an incurable disease
regards it his duty to give up his life, we need not think that what he
does is absolutely wrong.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./11

484

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

556. LETTER TO G.D. BIRLA
June 7, 1932
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I have your letter. My health seems to be well enough. The
weight is satisfactory. I weighed 106 1 /2 lb. today. Doctors tell me that
I am suffering from tennis elbow as a result of spinning continuously
for years; rest is the only cure for it. So I have to give complete rest to
my elbow for 3-4 weeks. I started using the Magan spinning-wheel for
this reason. Before that I was using my left hand for plying the wheel
instead of holding the sliver. The doctors were not satisfied with this
but they agreed to my turning the wheel with the foot. But now my
elbow has been put in splints in order to prevent the least movement.
Let us see now if the doctors’ diagnosis is correct or otherwise. You
have no cause for worry, there being no pain except in moving the
arm. Do send me the khadi woven out of the yarn spun by your
sister. I overlooked writing on this matter as your letter was not in
front of me. I have decided to study economics as much as I can while
I am still here. I took up the study of other books in the expectation
of a long stay here. Anyway I shall start on economics very soon.
I follow what you say about running the mill all day and night.
So often have I had the idea of making a detailed observation of your
mills but it came to nothing. I wish to watch the condition of the
labourers with my own eyes. We are all doing well.
BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 7899. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

485

557. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
[June 8, 1932] 1
CHI. MIRA,

Your letter came in today. Yes. the left arm is in splints. The
passers-by who do not know the cause must be pitying me. If the
packinig of the elbow does not improve it, I might have try milk. If I
do, I shall also try the saltless experiment. But only when I learnt that
there was no such thing as a thorough saltless experiment, I accepted
the medical friends, advice and began taking salt. Milk contains plenty
of salt as does water. And at a seaside place, you continually drink in
salt. And yet there is decidedly some advantage in not taking
additional free salt as a condiment. What we get in water, milk and air
is perhaps quite enough for the system. I have a prejudice in favour of
saltless diet. Only I do not want to abstain from it religiously, unless I
feel the necessity. Meanwhile your observations are accumulating.
They will be useful.
I do not quite understand the position about Verrier. What does
he propose to do now? If the extension is only up to July, what is to
happen thereafter? I have never understood the passport intricacies. If
he cannot go to England, he must go to a hill station. Almora may be
a suitable place. If he is and is to remain vegetarian, he must copy
your diet as closely as possible. Very little starch, no vegetable proteid
in the shape of pulses, plenty of milk and fresh green vegetables. No
potatoes and such other starchy vegetables. No condiments. Has he
had my letter?
What may be regarded as final answer has been received about
you. The Government say they are informed that you were directing
the movement before imprisonment and therefore you could not see
me. I have combated that statement2 and have said that you were under
instructions not to take part in civil disobedience movement and that
you were confining yourself to the khadi work and sending reports to
friends! If I have erred, please correct me and I shall have no
1

The source has “8-5-1932” which is a slip. Gandhiji’s arm was put in splints
of June 5, 1932; vide entry under date June 5, 1932 in “Diary, 1932” appearing at the
end of this volume. Bapu’s Letters to Mira also gives this date.
2
Vide “Letter to E.E. Doyle”, 9-6-1932

486

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

hesitation in correcting myself.1 I do not know whether anything will
result from my letter. Anyway, I am regarding the reply as a final
decision and have accordingly asked N[arandas Gandhi] not to send
anybody. I stopped interviews last week in anticipation, i.e., I did not
see Manibehn and Dahyabhai.
You should rejoice in this additional trial and be thankful that
we can write to each other. But we should rejoice even if that stops.
Nothing happens without divine permission. And how can we grieve
over what He permits?
You should correspond with Radha regularly. I believe your
reading of her. I must not write about it. It will upset her. She may
take things from you. You should make time for writing to her. I
believe that her expenses are met from the Ashram and that she has
not been now for some months a burden on Damodardas.
You will have another talk with Damodardas and leave his place,
if it will at all ease his burden.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6220. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9686

558. LETTER TO H.S.L. POLAK2
June 8, 1932
She 3 has aged considerably—in some respects perhaps more
than I have. Spiritually she has made wonderful progress. . . .
It will take me many incarnations to become disillusioned with
the slowness of the charkha. The slowness of the charkha is perhaps its
most appealing part for me. But it has so many attractions for me that
I can never get tired of it. It has a perennial interest for me. Its
implications are growing on me and I make discoveries of its beauties
almost from day to day. I am not using a sewing machine in its place
or at all. I know how the mistake crept into the papers. My right
elbow, having been used for turning the wheel, almost without a break
for over ten years, began to give pain, and the doctors here came to
1

According to the addressee this was correct.
Henry Solomon Leon Polak, a close associate of Gandhiji during the South
African struggle. He had written to Gandhiji: “London papers report that you have
taken up the sewing machine having been disillusioned with the slowness of charkha. I don’t believe it for a moment. But it needs a prompt denial”.
3
Kasturba Gandhi
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

487

the conclusion that the pain was of the same type that tennis players
often have after continuous use of the racquet. They therefore advised
complete rest for the elbow. That might have meant cessation of
spinning for some time, but for Prabhudas’s invention. You know
Prabhudas, Chhaganlal’s son. His invention consists in turning the
wheel with a pedal and thus freeing the right hand also for drawing
the thread and practically doubling the output of yarn. I forestalled
the doctors by having this wheel brought to me, and before the
peremptory order to stop all work with the right elbow came, I was
master of the pedal charkha called ‘Magan charkha’ after the late
Maganlal. A stupid reporter who knew nothing about the invention,
when he heard that I was moving the wheel with the pedal, came to the
conclusion that I was working at the sewing machine and since there
are Pressmen good enough to imagine many things of me and impute
all sorts of things to me, they improved upon the false report by
deducing disillusionment about the charkha from it. Now you have
the whole story.
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 208-9

559. A LETTER
June 8, 1932
Whatever your financial condition, bear this in mind:
(1) One who earns money has the right to lose it.
(2) There is no shame in losing money, but it is shameful, even
sinful, to hide the fact of one’s loss.
(3) One should never live beyond one’s means. Though one
may be living in a bungalow today, one should be prepared to live in
a hut tomorrow.
(4) We need not feel ashamed if we do not have enough money
to pay our creditors.
(5) Anybody who hands over to his creditors everything without
keeping back a single pie for himself has fully repaid his debt.
(6) Wisdom lies first in not starting a business with borrowed
money, but in case one has already done it, the next wise thing is to
give away what one has and free oneself from one’s debts.
You may go to the Ashram whenever you wish to.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 209-10

488

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

560. LETTER TO E.E. DOYLE
June 9, 1932
1

DEAR COL. DOYLE ,

Major Bhandari2 has infromed me of the Government’s decision
about Shrimati Mirabai (Slade). I appreciate the frank reasons given
for the decision. I do not know what the Government would call being
“actively engaged in the furtherance of the civil disobedience
movement”. It is likely too that the Government are misinformed.
Obviously Mirabai has had no chance of refuting the information
given to them. I can only reiterate my statement that like several other
companions of mine she has been intentionally, and for the movement
itself, kept out of its civil resistance part. But if Mirabai at any time
was, or is now, actively engaged in the furtherance of the civil
disobedience movement, my wife and my two sons were taking an
active part in it. Yet if they were not in prison, being members of my
family, they would, I presume, be allowed to see me. As I have made it
clear to the Government in previous communications, I have long
ceased to make any distinction between family members and others.
My co-workers are as much members of my family as the members so
called.
Unless therefore the Government see their way to revise their
decision, I must deny myself the pleasure of having weekly visitors. I
enforced the self-denying ordinance on Saturday last. Indeed under
the ruling given by the Government in Mirabai’s case it would be a
serious thing for me to take the responsibility of deciding in the case
of Ashram inmates who should and who should not see me.
Yours sincerely,

M. K.GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(2), Pt. I, p.109

1
2

Inspector-General of Prisons Bombay Presidency
Superintendent of the Yeravda Central Prison

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

489

561. LETTER TO NATHURAM TRIKAMDAS
June 9, 1932
BHAI NATHURAM,

I felt happy on reading your detailed letter. I am glad that you
have gone there to learn khadi work. Learn it well and properly. If
you get mere superficial knowledge, on your return you will not be
able to teach it to others. You will be able to do that only if you
acquire mastery over the smallest details. Observe the Ashram rules
carefully.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

562. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS PODDAR
June 9, 1932
BHAI RAMESHWARDAS,

I got your letter. I had also received your previous letters. You
must have received my replies. Repeating Ramanama certainly does
not mean repeating it mechanically with the lips. The preceptor of
Ramanama believes that if a person repeats it mechanically but with
faith, his faith itself will some day carry the name below the throat and
right down to the heart. So long as this has not happened, one cannot
have true peace. I know of no other remedy which could give you
peace. You should cut down your intake of food as a medical
necessity at least, and if even then you do not keep well you should
try fasting, etc. I wrote a postcard to Pyarelal only a few days ago.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 180

490

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

563. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
June 9, 1932
CHI. PARASRAM,

I got your two letters pinned together. I find that the short letter
with paragraph headings is a summary of the first one and that it
would be enough to read that alone. But it appears that you have also
sent the original letter so that I may know more details if I wish.
You should certainly not strain your will to use the limb which
pains, that is, use it disregarding the pain. If you feel that because of
such self-restraint the pain is gradually decreasing, you may conclude
nothing else is necessary. If the pain does not decrease gradually even
though you take care not to use that limb, there is no option but to
take complete rest.
There can be no one rule for all as to the time required for a
meal. If somebody’s meal consists only of milk, it would take him
only five to seven minutes to sip it. If somebody else’s meal consists
only of one pomegranate and he has no teeth but has to eat the seeds
instead of extracting the juice and drinking it, he may even take an
hour to do so. Hence the following should be the rule: A meal should
take up as much time as is required for chewing it properly, taking
into consideration the type and quantity of the food. Ordinarily,
twenty to thirty minutes should be regarded enough for those who
have good teeth and who eat rotlis1 , dal, rice and vegetables. I have no
faith in the common belief about sleeping with the head in a certain
direction. I have never followed that rule.
It is my belief that the peepul tree is considered sacred because
it is very big, covers a large area with shade and can be grown almost
everywhere.
I understand what you say about the Hindi translation of my
letters, etc. I shall be satisfied if everybody else is satisfied in this
matter.
I used to keep cloves and sugar crystals in my mouth merely to
prevent my voice getting hoarse. They were discontinued when I
1

Chapatis

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

491

stopped making so many speeches and to such large audiences and I
never resumed the practice afterwards.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7501. Also C.W. 4978 Courtesy:
Parasram Mehrotra

564. A LETTER
June 9, 1932
As you say, you are continually assailed by impure thoughts
and feel miserable because of that. This is what is called self-made
hell. This contains the replies to both your questions. It makes clear
why I said what I did and also why such a state of mind is described as
hell. If you understand the nature of this hell, it will also be easy for
you to understand how you can come out of it. You should not brood
over the fact that you get impure thoughts. Instead, you should go on
as if they never troubled you. If a person who stumbles while walking
does not stop to find out the cause of his stumbling, no harm will
follow. If, on the contrary, such a person sits down on the road and
goes on thinking why he stumbled, he will make no progress in his
journey. But he will forget that he had stumbled if he does not think
much about the fact and continues his journey. Since he is advancing,
he gradually gathers strength and consequently stumblesless.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 211

565. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
June 10, 1932
Most of the manual work in the Ashram is done by the inmates
themselves. There are a few hired labourers, but only those men who
follow the Ashram rules fairly well have remained to work in that
capacity and the inmates of the Ashram work with them. Gradually
they are acquiring mastery over all types of work. Children also
contribute their share
Newcomers are first required to learn prayers, bhajans, etc. It is
only after they have learnt these that those among them who wish to
learn English may do so.
492

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

All the inmates spin for yajna in company for one hour. Yarn
of less than twenty counts cannot be included as part of one’s
contribution through the spinning yajna. The yarn spun on a day has
to be handed over to the depot on the same day. I have now suggested
that, if all the people agree, no one should be permitted to buy the
yarn spun by himself or herself for his or her own use.1 I have always
believed that our yajna remains incomplete because of this freedom to
buy one’s own yarn.
Beginning last week, it has been decided to maintain an account
of everybody’s labour at the rate of one anna per hour of work
irrespective of the nature of work, though it has not been decided to
make actual payments at this rate. Just now my suggestion to
Narandas was merely that, if he agreed, he should immediately start
keeping the records. These records will be in addition to the general
records which are being kept now, and for the present we will merely
note the results. They will give us much useful information and may
also help us to realize the ideal of equality of work. In other words, all
types of social service, whether spinning or weaving or cleaning
lavatories, should be valued at the rate of one anna per hour of work.
You probably remember that we have discussed this subject in the past
at great length. Recently I have been writing to Narandas on a variety
of subjects and among them I brought up this one again for
discussion. It seems to me that Narandas’s capacity for responding to
such idea has increased considerably these days. He, therefore,
welcomed my suggestion. These records do not require much time to
maintain and, if the present experiment reaches the stage of
implementation, the keeping of accounts would be so easy that even a
person of ordinary education in Gujarati would be able to do the
work. Success in maintaining accounts of this nature depends on the
honesty of the people. If a person has not really worked for the
number of hours which he enters against his name or supplies to the
account-keeper, or if he has done the work carelessly, it is plain that
the account will not be correct. That is, it will be like good and bad
coins getting mixed up. I have been writing from here a great deal
about children’s education too. I cannot tell how much of it the
inmates of the Ashram will be able to adopt. It would require much
time to discuss all that here, and I cannot spare it. Have patience in this
matter.
1

Vide ‘Letter to Gangdevi Sanadhya”, 12-1-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

493

All of us should make the right use, according to our lights, of
this priceless opportunity which we have got. The best use we can
make of it is to cultivate the power of reflection. Our minds are
oftenvacant and at such times the only thing we like to do is either to
read or to talk. Some of us do think, but they only build castles in the
air. Really speaking, just as reading is an art so is thinking. All our
thoughts should occur to us at the right time. Just we do not read
useless books, so also we should not let our minds run after idle
thoughts. The power which is produced and conserved by such
control over one’s thoughts can not be measured. I have felt during
each term of imprisonment that it was the best time for learning to
think in this manner.
I, therefore, advise all of you to master the art of deep reflection.
If you do so, you will not find it necessary to consult me frequently.
But let no one misunderstand my meaning. I do not wish to forbid
anyone to consult me. I only wish to cure people of excessive
dependence on me. In case of necessity, however, my advice will
always be available. It is your right and also your duty to take
whatever advantage you can of my experience and the results of my
reflection concerning matters of which I have had more experience
and over which I have reflected more deeply than others.

[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. 1, pp. 211-3

566. LETTER TO MATHURADAS PURUSHOTTAM
June 11, 1932
CHI. MATHURADAS 1 ,

Why do you regard yourself responsible for Meghji’s2 death? If
you are responsible, how much greater is my responsibility? But even
supposing you are, why grieve over it now? One should not keep
thinking about the past. After drawing the proper lesson from it, one
should forget it.
It will be better to keep a fixed time every day for writing the
1

Mathuradas P. Asar, an expert carder and khadi worker of the Ashram
One of the children in the Ashram who had died of smallpox; on Gandhiji’s
advice they had not been vaccinated.
2

494

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

book on weaving and not spend the whole day on it. What is written in
haste often turns out to be ill-digested. If one’s thoughts are perfectly
clear, one always writes well and only such writing impresses.
I always prescribe the same medicine. For all diseases, though
known by different names, have one and the same cause. Hence the
medicine for all of them must be one.
I want you to become perfectly vigilant, build up strong health
and start working regularly.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3754

567. LETTER TO NANABHAI I. MASHRUWALA
June 11, 1932
1

BHAI NANABHAI ,

I got your postcard. I have not yet received Manilal’s letter. I
have completely stopped seeing visitors. Even if this had not been the
case, Medh could not have seen me without special permission.
Nevertheless, when I receive Manilal’s letter, I will form some opinion
from it if I can. From the fact that there has been no cable from
Phoenix, I had concluded that Manilal and Sita2 were quite well.
About the latter, I came to know only from your postcard. I had heard
from Surendra that he was well in Visapur.
Blessings to you both from

BAPU
From a Photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6684. Also C.W. 4329 Courtesy:
Kanubhai Mashruwala

1
2

Manilal Gandhi’s father-in-law
Manilal Gandhiji’s Daughter Dhairyabala

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

495

568. LETTER TO NARAYAN M. KHARE
[June 11, 1932] 1
CHI. PANDITJI2 ,

In the article on death Kaki’s 3 name was included later, on my
being reminded of her death by Mahadev. As I had already drawn the
moral from the other deaths described, I did not write more about her.
A few other names of persons who had died were also left out. A
complete list can be made only in the Ashram.
Rasik’s 4 death could not be mentioned in that article, since he
had died outside the Ashram. Why I mentioned Maganlal’s is
explained in the article itself. Mathuri5 was all right when I saw her.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 230. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare

569. LETTER TO JAMNABEHN GANDHI
June 11, 1932
CHI. JAMNA 6 ,

I am very glad that you have gone to Ranavav. Now you must
not leave that place for quite some time. To whom does the
sanatorium belong? Where is it situated? Are there any people living
in the neighbourhood? Do you have to pay any rent? You should not
feel sad at having had to go there. You should get acquainted with the
poor living there. If possible, try and serve them. If that is not
possible, study on your own and increase your knowledge and
improve your ability to work. It is very good indeed that Purushottam7
is with you.
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 855. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

1

The source has “11-5-1932” which is a slip. From the reference to the article
on death (“Lesson of Death”, 30-5-1932) it is evident that the letter was written later.
2
Music teacher at the Ashram
3
Wife of D.B. Kalelkar
4
Harilal Gandhi’s son who died in 1929
5
Addressee’s daughter
6
Narandas Gandhi’s Wife
7
Addressee’s son

496

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

570. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
June 12, 1932
CHI. PREMA,

I did not consider your letter too long, for you have given in it
an account of your visits such as I had wanted you to give. I have
been to Sinhagarh thrice. Once I went there while the Lokamanya was
also there1 , and we met each other a good many times. I saw his house.
You have certainly described a few things about which I did not know.
I did meet Hari Narayan Apte2 . I certainly with to read his novels,but I
do not have the courage to take up anything new just now. Urdu,
economics, watching the sky, spinning and writing letters—these keep
me busy enough. And off and on I take up something extra to read.
What you say about the Superintendent 3 is correct. I saw and
understood everything. But we should tolerate all that. As a man he is
certainly not bad. But authority is an evil thing. And, besides,
authority over whom? We should , therefore, reason thus: How good is
it that even in unfavourable circumstances a little measure of humanity has survived? Who knows to what depths we would have
descended if we were in his place? You will frequently get the kind of
experiences you had. It is through such experiences that we learn to
cultivate forbearance, generosity, patience and courtesy. In favourable
circumstances, everyone can behave in a manner which will win him
or her the good opinion of others.
There was no special meaning behind my question. “Are you
satisfied now?” I asked the question only casually. Sushila may not
have felt hurt, but I myself felt sorry. Having permitted her to come
with you, I should have talked with her a little. But I had no time and
so contented myself with an inquiry about Jamnadas. My blessings to
her.
I certainly intended to write on the subject of sex. But it would
be better if you ask me specific questions. We need not stop the
teaching of English. All that I meant was that we should not teach it to
new pupils before they have learnt the other things. I have written
more about this in my letter to Narandas.
1

Vide “Letter to Sarrladevi Chowdhrani”, 1-5-1920
A Marathi novelist
3
Of the Yeravda Central Prison, Major Bhandari.
2

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

497

Your body ought to be [as red] as copper. If you have no
objection to fish and if you think you can maintain good health by
taking it, you may go out to eat it. 1 Imam Saheb used to do that. If
you wish to discuss this subject further with me, you may.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10289. Also C.W. 6737. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

571. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 8/13, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

I had got your postcard before I received the other post from
you today, but I did not reply to it in a separate letter since I had
written in detail about Narayanappa in the letter which was dispatched
yesterday along with the other letters. I have now received a negative
reply in regard to Mirabehn. It was good, therefore, that I had already
decided provisionally not to see visitors. That being so, though Durga
and Anandi2 had come today to see us, Vallabhbhai and I could not
see them. Mahadev went and saw them. We certainly felt unhappy but
it is only by swallowing such bitter draughts that one can preserve
dharma. I, therefore, welcomed the pain that I felt.
I am very happy that you have decided to follow the method of
calculating the value of work at the rate of one anna per hour. I think
we shall make some important discoveries by following it. In order
that the account may be properly kept, everybody should know
exactly how long one has worked. That means that you will have to
strike the bell for each hour or will have to devise some other method
so that everybody can know how much time has passed. Secondly, the
information about the hours of work supplied by every inmate must
be correct. If it is clearly realized that time is money, it will be seen
that giving wrong information will be like passing off counterfeit
coins. Our records will be wrong and, in consequence, our conclusions
will be wrong too. I think for at least one month the slips received
from everybody should be preserved. To facilitate this, I suppose all
the inmates are supplied slips of the same size. The slips should be
1
A Physician had pointed out that she had been losing weight because she had
given up fish.
2
Daughter of Lakshmidas Asar of the Sabarmati Ashram

498

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

filled in clear handwriting. Now that I think about the matter as I
dictate these lines, I feel that you yourself need not keep a daily
record. Your record will be the slips. If we decide to preserve them
permanently, they can be pasted [in an account book] but I do not
think that is necessary at all. As the slips are received, the hours
mentioned in them may be entered in the ledger. If you object that, in
that case, we would not know for how many hours each type of work
was done, you may enter the hours under separate heads of work.
However, to be able to use that information you will have to maintain
a double-entry account, that is, keep the record under each name and
each type of work separately. Only then will you be able to draw up
quickly a summary every month showing the hours given by each
person and the total number of hours spent on each type of work. I
do think that for our purpose information under both heads will be
necessary. At the moment I cannot think of any other suggestions
besides these. Your account of your own daily work seems all right.
If necessary, you may reduce yajna work from two hours to
something less. If anybody gives money equal to the value of the yarn
spun by him, instead of the yarn itself, his yajna is certainly imperfect,
since it is marred by his desire to wear cloth woven from his own yarn.
That is, he spins yarn of the fine count through his selfish desire to be
able to wear cloth woven from such yarn. Ideally,one should not wish
to all to derive any personal benefit from work done for yajna or
from any gift made as yajna. Anybody who works for yajna may take
from what he produces only as much as would be the share of each if
the total quantity were divided equally among all the persons for
whom he works. We claim that we work for the 300 millions of our
countrymen. If so, we may certainly have 1/300 millionth share of the
yarn which we spin, imagining that that share is mixed with the yarn
from which the cloth of our garments is woven. I know that many
arguments have been advanced, from the point of view of increasing
the production of fine khadi, against my stand, and I admit the force
of those arguments. That is why I have tolerated yajna which is only
half pure. But I have always felt within myself that such yajna is
imperfect. If you clearly see the imperfection to which I am drawing
attention, you should hand over all the yarn which you spin and
overcome your desire to get cloth woven from it for your or Jamna’s
use. When all the yarn received is mixed together and woven into
cloth, you may take from it what you require. If you see any error in
my reasoning, please point it out to me. And you need not follow my
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

499

suggestion though you may agree with me, if you feel that it is
beyond your capacity at present to do so—irrespective of whether the
reason is Jamna or yourself. If we voluntarily start doing something
which we had not been doing up to now, we experience nothing but
intense joy from that and feel that a heavy load has been taken off our
head. Do not act upon my suggestion till you feel thus. As I stated ina
previous letter, I want everybody’s yajna to be perfect, but I should
like to wait till all people are convinced of the correctness of my view.
I see from your letter, however, that they have now come so far that it
should not be difficult to take that last step, if it is not implied in what
they have agreed to. I have interpreted your letter to mean that
everybody would spin for yajna in the porch between 12.30 and 1.30
and hand over there and then the yarn spun by him or her. Literally
understood, this means that one cannot even buy back that yarn. If
this is to apply to all, you also will have to hand over the yarn spun by
you. Your statement, however, that the yarn spun during that time will
be handed over may also mean that a person may buy back his or her
yarn for personal use. If so, the arrangement will have the
imperfection which I have remarked above. I should be happy if all
agree to remove this imperfection. If they agree, however, everybody
should understand that he will have to spin in future even more
carefully than he had been doing up to now when he knew that he was
spinning the yarn for his own use.
I have been spinning for the last ten days or so with such bad
slivers as I have never used before. I am doing this purposely. I wrote
to Premlilabehn requesting her to send me some cotton, and in reply
she immediately sent slivers. The slivers with which I have been
spinning are from this lot. It certainly cannot be thrown away as
useless. That would mean being light-hearted about work, Nor can I
send these silvers to the women prisoners. If the slivers are good
enough for them I would say that they were twice for me. I, therefore,
decided to use them up. I realize from my experience the great
difference between good slivers and bad slivers. Theoretically I always
understood it, but I realized it from experience only now, for
ordinarily I would always get good slivers. Whenever I myself have
carded cotton I have done so very carefully. Hence I do not
remember to have spun with such bad slivers any time in the past. And
I see from Mahadev’s spinning what difference good cotton can
make.
My purpose in writing about all this is to point out that, if we
500

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

wish to spin for yajna the finest yarn that we can, the slivers with
which we spin should be of the best quality and the cotton must be
perfectly clean. The spinning-wheel also should be in good condition.
If these conditions are fulfilled, no one will find the one hour of
spinning boring. On the contrary, the smoothly rotating spinningwheels would make such sweet music when so many persons spin in
complete silence that the hour would pass as but one minute and give
perfect joy. Even the most interesting activities will only bore a
personwho does not understand their value or who feel aversion
towards them. Here ends my sermon on account-books and on yajna.
I have already said above that I will not see visitors now. Do not
worry about my hand till I tell you that the condition is serious
enough to cause worry, for I am keeping back nothing about it. I see
no necessity to keep back anything. We aspire to learn to bear
everything that may happen to us. If so, it would be altogether wrong
to keep back anything relating to illness or pain. The left elbow is in
plaster just now. I, therefore, present a pitiful sight, though there is no
reason at all to pity me. If the cause of the pain in the elbow is no
other than the excessive work I have done with that arm, it is obvious
that it should be given complete rest. Since the only way of doing that
is to put it in plaster, that has been done. We shall know the effect in a
week or two. If the elbow requires only rest, the officials themselves
will obtain whatever external aid may be required. In other respects
my health is very good. The weight is 106 1 / 2 pounds, that is, it has
been increasing. Though I can work only with one arm, and despite
the trouble which bad slivers give, I can spin more than 200 rounds
daily. I can also read for a while. I practise, like a child, writing large
Urdu letters in a copy-book. I would not be able to do all this if my
health was not good. The mind would simply not work.
I think your decision regarding Jayantiprasad’s daughter is
perfectly all right. You should not assume new responsibilities just
now. If the girl were capable of looking after herself and were healthy,
I would have certainly felt tempted to take her in.
Chimanalal1 should improve his health anyhow.
Leave Parnerkar2 to solve his problem by himself. If he can stay,
we certainly want him to do so. If he cannot, we need not press him.
The verse in the Gita which asks what avails a man to force himself
1
2

One of the oldest inmates of the Ashram, a patient of asthma
Yashwant Mahadev Parnerkar, Specialist in animal husbandry

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

501

beyond a certain point applies in this case too.
The fact that you do not find Savitribehn’s address there means,
I suppose, that you have not been getting any letters from her
recently. But her connection with the Ashram is not recent. You may
find some of her old letters lying somewhere. Moreover, if correspondent’s addresses are being preserved in the Ashram, her address
must have been written down somewhere. If anybody goes to thepress,
we are bound to have her address on its record. She has also written a
book about me, in which she has reproduced some of my letters. You
may possibly find her address in these. However, I do not want you to
spend too much of your time in finding it.
Father Elwin has not explained why he suggested Friday for a
Christian prayer. On Sunday evenings pious Christians will have gone
to churches and will be attending special services, so that Sunday may
not suit them for the purpose of the public communion which he has
in view. Moreover, Friday is the day of Jesus’s crucifixion, and Father
Elwin may have selected it for that reason. But this is only my guess. I
very much like the idea that we should fix one day in the week for a
Muslim prayer. If Friday is not available now for that purpose, we
may fix Thursday. Thursday means Jummerat, and I think that day
also is holy for Muslims. To us, however, all days and hours are
equally holy. It is enough if we pray with sincere devotion.
We also had read here in the papers about the suitcase. Hence
Mahadev believes that we must have lost one. Aluvihari was with us all
the time and was one of the party. It seems that, having read about the
suitcase in the papers, he went and claimed it. Mahadev cannot
guess— and if he cannot, how can I?—whose clothes and books it
contains. Well, it is safe now. Aluvihari will probably send it to you, or
may use his judgement and do with it what seems best to him. I expect
to hear from him.
I have always considered that the rule that newcomers should
not be permitted to start immediately on English is a correct one. My
stand is that they may learn English, must learn it, but only after they
have acquired a working knowledge of Sanskrit, Hindi and the Urdu
script, learnt music well enough to join in singing bhajans and
mastered all the processes relating to spinning. I think a person of
average ability would take one year to complete this programme,
though it is likely that some may take more than that and some less.
Those who have joined the Ashram for life or have joined it
502

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

temporarily with the aim of training themselves for service should
have no special attraction for English. If anybody feels it, he should
know that he cannot satisfy his desire in the Ashram. Nobody should
understand from this that we proscribe English from the Ashram or
do not love it as much as others do. Our only aim is to see that it does
not occupy a place which does not belong to it. For many persons
knowledge of English is essential even for the purpose of service,
butwe can give instruction in it in the Ashram only in a manner
convenient to the Ashram and consistent with its aims. We are entitled
to expect this patience in all inmates of the Ashram.
June 11, 1932
Regarding Imam Saheb’s tomb, Pyare Ali asked Khatib Saheb
for his opinion. The latter said that Islam does not approve of the
erection of tombs. You should, therefore, put a few blocks of stones
on the spot to mark it off and to prevent the ground being used for
any purpose. Take or send some Muslim to the place and ask him to
arrange a few stones. If there is no objection to our laying them,
somebody from among ourselves may arrange them.
Silence Day, June 13, 1932
I got you letter today. Since tomorrow (Tuesday) is a holiday, I
will dispatch the post today. Read the letter which I have written to
Sitala Sahay1 . However, in the end do what you think proper. I think
it is best that in this matter I should not decide from here what should
be done. I will approve of whatever you do. I may not even have the
necessary data for taking a correct decision.
Where is Madhavlal at present? I thought he was in jail. But I
hear from Vithal that he is not in Jail.
I am not sending any article this week. I have no time to write
one, and moreover, this letter to you has become something like an
article
The plaster on the left arm has been removed. There has been
no improvement. The cause of the pain, therefore, must be something
else. But there is no cause whatever for worry. Mirabehn is on saltless
diet at present, and therefore, had been pressing me to adopt it. I
started it yesterday. For me it is child’s play to live on such diet, for I
1

A khadi worker from U.P.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

503

have done that for eight years. I shall have fresh experience of it now.
If there is anything to write about, I will do so before the next letter is
due.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8232. Courtesy
Narandas Gandhi

572. LETTER TO BHARATI
June 13, 1932
I got your letter written in beautiful handwriting. I cannot have
too many such letters.
I would certainly be pleased if you brothers and sisters became
as strong and sturdy as steel and could endure heat and cold. But I
cannot all at once make such and experiment on you in the heat (sic)
of Simla. Training in such endurance would be fruitful only if it is
undergone methodically and step by step. It is a grave error to believe
that a person who generally lives a sheltered life can suddenly become
hardened when the need arises. That would be going against nature. I
remember hundreds of instances of persons who made such mistakes.
I would certainly enjoy reading literature. During my school
days I could not read anything outside the syllabus. After that I got
involved in so may activities one after another that I could get little
time to read,. Whatever I did read was in jails. But I do not think that I
have lost much because of this. I got a great deal of time for thinking.
And, moreover, what one learns in the school of experience is always
more useful than reading.
Even those who profess to cultivate art for its own sake are not
really able to do so. Art has a place in life though what is art is a
different question. But, art and such other things are mere means in
the path that we with to tread. When they become ends in themselves
they become shackles and drag us down.
God is Truth. For the past few years I have been saying that
‘Truth is God’ instead of saying that ‘God is Truth’. I feel that this is
a more logical way of putting it. Truth is the only reality in this world.
Here Truth should be given a wider connotation. It is something
living. This Truth that is God and the laws of God are not distinct
1

1

The addressee had asked Gandhiji whether he was interested in literature,
whether art could be pursued for its own sake and what his concept of God was.

504

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

from one another but are the same thing. Hence Truth, too, is a living
thing. Thus it means the same thing to say that this world is
governedby Truth or by God’s laws. There is infinite power in that
Truth.According to Chapter X of the Gita, it may be said that the
world is sustained by just a fraction of that power. You will, therefore,
understand that I mean by God if you read, “Truth” wherever the
word “God” occurs.
If God exists—though we call Him Truth—it is our duty to
worship Him. We become like that which we worship. Prayer means
nothing more than this. But does not that meaning of prayer explain
everything? Truth dwells in our hearts, but we are not aware, or fully
aware of the fact. This awareness comes through sincere prayer. . . 1
Do you find it difficult to read my handwriting? The envelope
in which this letter is sealed was made by Sardar. He spends a great
deal of his time in putting to this use any useless paper he can lay his
hands on.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 214-5

573. LETTER TO MAITRI GIRI
June 14, 1932
CHI. MAITRI 2 ,

I got your letter. There was no reason whatsoever for you to
feel hurt. The question which I asked you, I put to all grown-up girls.
If any girl wishes to get married, I regard that as natural. Would it not
be better to tell me frankly rather than repine inwardly? But I am
certainly pleased if a girl does not wish to get married. I asked you so
that you may have no fear on that account. If, however, you positively
do not, at present, wish to get married, that is indeed the best. You
should know, however, that in order to preserve such purity, it is very
necessary to cultivate devotion to God and to keep oneself engaged in
some work for the service of people. All of you should improve your
health. How is Krishnamaiyadevi’s3 health?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6236
1
2
3

Omission as in the source
Daughter of Dalbahadur Giri
Widow of Dalbahadur Giri

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

505

574. LETTER TO SHAMAL R. RAVAL
June 14, 1932
1

CHI. SHAMAL ,

I got your letter. However much your brother or others may
press you, you should cling to your decision, and refuse to get
married as long as you can control your mind. You may request
Anasuyabehn2 to help you in this matter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3141. Also C.W. 2877. Courtesy:
Shamal R. Raval

575. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 14, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,

After I had dispatched the post yesterday, I got a letter from
Mahavir 3 in which he says that he has not received the money. He has
estimated the expenditure at Rs. 15 per head. You may decide what it
should be. Maitri informs me that she has not the slightest wish to
marry just now.
Personally, I think we should let them stay in Darjeeling as long
as they wish.
BAPU
C HI. N ARANDAS GANDHI
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM
S ABARMATI
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8233. courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

1

A worker in the Navajivan Press
Sister of Ambalal Sarabhai, a mill-owner of Ahmedabad. She was associated
with the Labour Union of Ahmedabad.
3
Son of Krishnamaiyadevi
2

506

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

576. LETTER TO TARAMATI MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
June 14, 1932
CHI. TARAMATI,

I have your letter. I am not worried that Mathuradas has lost
weight. It is sufficient if other things are all right. Did Mathuradas
receive my letter?
Since Mirabehn is not being permitted to have visitors I am
compelled to stop having visitors myself. If the restriction is removed,
I shall let you know at once.
All the three of us are well.
Blessings from

BAPU

577. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
June 15, 1932
1

DEAR AGATHA ,

I have your letter. You are quite right in scrupulously
honouring the restrictions. Indeed by a long course of habit I have
lost all curiosity. For a prisoner’s curiosity can only be idle, as he can
do nothing even if he came to know certain things through indirect
of illegitimate means. And what is perhaps more, I have abundant
faith in friends doing their very best so long as they believe in the
justice of the cause.
Yes, Mahadev was able to see both his wife and son only last
week. He is entitled to a visit per month
Love from us both.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1454

1

Secretary of the India Conciliation Group (1931)

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

507

578. LETTER TO BHAU PANSE
June 15, 1932
CHI. BHAU,

I could not reply to your letter of the 6th last week. Meanwhile,
I got another letter from you this week. I understand your reason for
discontinuing to send Vinoba’s discourses. His prohibition is right.
Yes, there was some misunderstanding on my part regarding the
paintings of scenes from the Ramayana. I do not see anything
objectionable in meditating over a figure drawn as purely imaginary.
If, however, meditating on the Gita can satisfy you, where is the need
for any other object of meditation? There are two ways of meditating
on the Gita. Since we look upon the Gita as Mother, you may
meditate on a painting or photograph of your mother, you require
one (and if your mother is dead), thinking of her as the kamadhenu 1
in the form of the Gita. Alternatively, you may have an imaginary
picture of the Gita in your mind. You may even think of her as
Mother Cow. I think it would be better if you could follow the second
way. You may, at that time, meditate on any verse or phrase from the
chapter of the Gita which you may have recited on that day or from
any other chapter. All the words in the Gita are so many ornaments on
the body of Mother Gita and, therefore, meditating on any one of
them amounts of meditating on the Gita herself, just as meditating on
an ornament worn by the woman whom one loves amounts to
meditating on herself. But one may also meditate on the Gita in any
other way that one can think of. There are as many ways as there are
brains. No two persons meditate in the same way even on one and the
same object. There will always be some difference between the exact
pitures of the object imagined by them and their descriptions of it.
According to Chapter VI, even the least sadhana is not wasted,
and we resume our sadhana in our next life from the point where we
had stopped. Similarly, a person who desires to turn towards spiritual
living but lacks the necessary strength for the purpose will have
greater strength of mind in his next life. I have no doubt about this at
all in my mind, but it does not mean that we can relax our effort in
this life. If we think in that manner, our desire for a spiritual living is
1

508

Mythical cow that yielded whatever one asked for
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

not sincere. Or, it is a desire of the intellect and not of the heart, and a
desire of the intellect has no value at all. It will not survive one’s
death. On the other hand, a desire which has been accepted by the
heart cannot but inspire sincere effort to fulfil it, though it is quite
possible that owing to various cirmustances or weakness of the body
our desire may not be fulfilled during this life. We have experience of
this every day. But the desire will cling to the soul when it leaves the
body, and in the next life the difficulties which stood in the way of
itsfulfilment during this life will diminish and the desire will be
fulfilled or will at least become stronger. Thus a person who aspires
after spiritual life is ever advancing.
It may be that Jnaneshwar Maharaj meditated on Nivrittinath 1
while the latter was alive, but I am strongly of the view that we should
not follow his example. If we meditate on a person, he must have
attained perfection. It is altogether improper, and also unnecessary to
ascribe perfection to a living human being. It is possible, however, that
Jnaneshwar Maharaj did not meditate on the real Nivrittinath, but
meditated on the perfect Nivrittinath of his imagination. But why
should we need at all concern ourselves with this problem? when the
question is about the propriety of meditating on a living human being,
we need not bring in the question of meditating on our mental image
of that person and any reply on the propriety of that is likely to
confuse the reason of the other person.
The names which are given Chapter I are, according to me, more
the names of certain qualities than of real persons. While describing
the divine and the demoniac forces in our nature, the poet has
personified them. In saying this, I do not deny the possibility of an
actual battle between Kauravas and Pandavas having taken place near
Hastinapur. My belief is that the poet took a well-knwon event of that
age as an example and used it as material for his immortal work. I
may be mistaken in this belief and all those names may be the names
of real persons. If so, it was not improper for the poet to give those
names at the commencement of his historical narrative, and, since the
first chapter is necessary for introducing the subject, it is necessary to
recite it as part of ceremonial recitation of the Gita.
If we spin with slivers made by somebody else, our spinning
yajna is certainly imperfect. A person like me may not be able to
make his own slivers at present owing to physical weakness, but those
1

Jnaneshwar’s elder brother, a jnanayogi

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

509

who can should make their own slivers.
I consider it necessary for everybody to learn spinning on the
takli and gain mastery over it. I know that Vinoba regards it as a much
easier means for the yajna of spinning. I have not come to a final
decision about this, nor do I wish to do so without discussing the
matter at length with Vinoba. I am, therefore, not particular either
way. You should, however, discuss your suggestion with Narandas. I
also will do so.
BAPU

[PS.]
Write to me about your constipation.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6731, Also C.W. 4474. Courtesy: Bhau
Panse

579. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
June 15, 1932
1

CHI. MANU ,

I got your letter. I cannot understand why you did not get the
letter that was sent with my letter to Jamnadas2 . Your courage is being
tested fairly well. But there is nothing to be afraid of. You should tell
very plainly that you have been living with Ba and Bali since
childhood, and that you do not with to live with Harilal at all. Even
parents cannot claim custody of grown-up children. Hence it depends
on your own wish where you will live. Nobody can force you to
marry against your will. You should, therefore, always remember that
it is in your own power to save yourself. I can write in this way and
give you courage, but as prisoner I cannot give anything in
newspapers. Nor will my letters help you in the court. But rest assured
that you will need no such help.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1514. Courtesy: Manubehn
Mashruwala
1

Daughter of Harilal Gandhi
Jamnadas Gandhi, younger brother of Maganlal Gandhi and Principal of
Rajkot Rashtriya Shala
2

510

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

580. A LETTER
June 15, 1932
Like you, some others also believe that I live a life of selfcontrol and observe brahmacharya, and that, therefore, I was sure to
live long. This belief about me is not correct, or it is correct only
partially in contrast with how other people live. I indulged in sexual
pleasure nearly up to the age of 30. Nor can I claim that I exercised
self-control in eating. I used to eat all kinds of delicacies for themere
pleasure of the palate. Then I steadily drifted towards restrain. But this
does not mean at all that I have overcome the cravings of the senses.
All I can claim is that I have learnt to hold them under control. Thus,
self-indulgence had already had its effect on my body, but it has been
counteracted in the measure that I have acquired self-control. My
contemporaries who do not exercise even that much self-control
naturally wonder at my self-control such as it is and do not observe
my weakness. . . 1
The privileges which I enjoy as a prisoner are not because of my
being placed in a particular class. I am not treated as an ordinary
convict. Prisoners of my category 2 are entitled to many privileges.
This, of course, is no defence of what I do. Though the Government
does give certain privileges to a prisoner like me, it certainly depends
on the prisoner himself whether or not to avail himself of those
privileges. Hence the misunderstanding which you mention is quite
natural. But I regard it in public interest to continue to avail myself of
the privileges even at the risk of incurring such a misunderstanding.
But it should not be necessary for me to defend this point of view. Its
correctness should be self-evident. Even if it is not, I should cling to it
so long as I believe it to be earnest. This reasoning applies to every
captain of a ship. A captain cannot always explain the reasons for the
cours which he is following. But he would not deserve to be a captain
if he listens to the advice of others and give up what he believes to be
the right course. Such captains are known to have wrecked on rocks
the ships under their charge. Hence persons like you may certainly
caution me whenever they have doubt about the propriety of my
actions. If, however, I do not change my policy even after that, they
should have faith that what I am doing is right. It does happen
1
Here follows Mahadev Desai’s comment introducing the next paragraph but
does not indicate if any portion in omitted here.
2
State prisoners detained under Regulation 25 of 1829

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

511

sometimes that such faith proves to be misplaced. But there is no other
way of managing public affairs. At the moment I am confident that,
when I feel that I ought not to avail myself of a particular privilege or
of any of them, I shall have the strength to renounce it or them. In
South Africa I spent fairly long periods of imprisonment as an
ordinary prisoner.
From whom did you hear that story about Krishnadas1 ? There is
no truth in it at all. Krishnadas was certainly not sent away. For
somereasons he himself asked for leave to go. But though he has left,
our relations have remained the same. It is against my nature to take
any such step at somebody’s instigation. And nobody instigated me
to take such a step in regard to Krishnadas. All the same I wish to
know the source of this story. If you think you can tell me, please let
me know.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 218-20

1

512

Gandhiji’s secretary in 1921-22
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I
LETTER FROM SIR SAMUEL HOARE 1
April 13, 1932
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

I write this in answer to your letter of 11th March and I say at once I realize
fully the strength of your feeling upon the question of separate electorates for
the “Depressed” Classes. I can only say that we intend to give any decision that may
be necessary solely and only upon the merits of the case. As you are aware, Lord
Lothian’s Committee has not yet completed its tour and it must be some weeks before
we can receive any conclusions at which it may have arrived. When we receive the
report we shall have to give most careful consideration to its recommendations and
we shall not give a decision until we have taken into account in addition to the view
expressed by the Committee the views that you and those who think with you have so
forcibly expressed.
I feel sure if you were in our position you would be taking exactly the same
action we intend to take. You would await the Committee’s report, you would then
give it your fullest consideration and before arriving at a final decision you would
take into account the views that have been expressed on both sides of the
controversy. More than this I cannot say. Indeed I do not imagine you would expect
me to say more.
As to the Ordinances, I can only repeat what I have already said both publicly
and privately. I am convinced that it was essential to impose them in the face of the
deliberate attack upon the very foundations of orderly government. I am also
convinced that both the Government of India and the local Governments are not
abusing their extensive powers and are doing everything possible to prevent
excessive or vindictive action. We shall not keep the Emergency measures in force
any longer than we are obliged to for the purpose of maintaining the essentials of law
and order and protecting our officials and other classes of the community against
terrorist outrages.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI, ESQUIRE
The Bombay Chronicle, 13-9-1932
1

Vide “Letter to Sir Samuel Hoare”, 11-3-1932 and “Letter to Sir Samuel
Hoare”, 2-5-1932
VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

513

APPENDIX II
CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN R. V. MARTIN AND R. M. MAXWELL 1
(A) R. V. MARTIN’S LETTER TO R. M. MAXWELL
INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF PRISONS,
BOMBAY PRESIDENCY,
POONA,
March 15, 1932
MY DEAR MAXWELL,

I enclose a letter I have just received from M. K. Gandhi. May I please have a
reply by return regarding interviews with other prisoners? He seems to be getting
very agitated on the subject.
I have no knowledge regarding the illness of the prisoner he mentions
Yours sincerely,
R. V. MARTIN
R. M. M AXWELL, ESQ. C.I.E., M.A. (OXON), I.C.S., J.P.
SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT
HOME DEPARTMENT, B OMBAY
HOME SECRETARY .
Orders have already been passed. Please see that they issue promptly.
R. M. M AXWELL
16/3

(B) R. M. MAXWELL’S LETTER TO THE INSPECTOR-GENERAL
OF PRISONS
P. 147 NO. S. D. 2357

HOME DEPARTMENT (POLITICAL),
BOMBAY CASTLE,
March 16, 1932

FROM

R. M. M AXWELL, ESQUIRE, C.I.S., I.C.S.
ACTING SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
HOME DEPARTMENT
TO

THE INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF PRISONS
BOMBAY PRESIDENCY
SUBJECT: Interviews between Mr. Gandhi and other prisoners in theYeravda
Jail or Camp Extension.
SIR,

In continuation of my letter No. S. D. 1568, dated the 4th March 1932, I am
1

514

Vide “Letter to R. V. Martin”, 15-3-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

directed to state that Mr. Gandhi may be allowed to see other prisoners in the Yeravda
Main Jail or Camp Extension on the conditions suggested by you, namely:
1.
2.

3.
4.

Interviews to be permitted with not more than three prisoners at one
time, and not oftener than once in two weeks.
The interviews not to be treated by either side as a means of enquiring
into the treatment or conduct of other prisoners in the Jail. The Jail
arrangements, discipline and political subjects not to be discussed.
The interviews to take place in the office of the Superintendent of the
Prison.
Interview time: 20 minutes.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
R. M. MAXWELL
16/3
ACTING SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT

Bombay Secret Abstract, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40), Pt. I

APPENDIX III
EXTRACTS FROM MIRABEHN’S LETTER 1
April 8, 1932
Received a letter from Mirabehn with 24 pages, every line of it instinct with
spotless devotion. She would not be happy unless she lived with and rendered
personal service to Bapu. But Bapu wants her to get rid of this desire, as otherwise she
would feel herself stranded when Bapu was no more with us. This controversy has
been on ever since Mirabehn came to India. In today’s letter she has poured out her
wonderfully transparent heart:
Bapu, I am never without that thought in my mind, as to how best to serve
you. I think and pray and reason with myself, and it always ends the same way in my
heart of hearts. When you are taken from us, as in jail, an instinct impels me to work
with all my strength at outward service of your cause. I feel no doubt and no difficulty.
When you are with us, an equally strong instinct impels me to retire into silent

1

Vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 8-4-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

515

personal service—trying to do anything else, I feel lost and futile. The capacity for
the former depends on the fulfilment of the latter. The one is the counterpart of the
other, and something continually tells me that it was for fulfilment in that way that I
was led to you. The instinct is so strong that I cannot get round it or through it or
over it. It is difficult to ask you to have faith in it as the full proof of its correctness
can only leave it at that. This much I know full well that during this struggle my
strength, capacity and inner peace and happiness are much greater than last time,
because I had been able to serve according to my instinct (except for one short spell
of anguish since your previous release). The fact that I was on the point of a
breakdown when I came here had nothing to do with this question. It was sheer
over-work, because when I saw that I was shortly going to be arrested, I simply spent
my strength recklessly, knowing an enforced rest was coming. And there was more
than enough work around me to be reckless over.
Who knows if it is all delusion! But a woman has to go by instinct. It is
stronger with her than any amount of reason, and her full strength can only be
harnessed and brought into service if her nature is able to express itself. I have no
thought, no care, no longing in all the world except for you— (you the cause—you
the ideal.) To serve that cause in this life and to reach that ideal in after-life, Godwho
has brought me from utter darkness to the light of your path will surely not answer my
prayers by leaving me now to follow a wrong instinct. I have not written all this for
the sake of argument, but simply to share with you the result of my ceaseless
strivings to (understand) since I have been in jail.
The Diary of Mahadev Desai, Vol. I, pp. 62-3

APPENDIX IV
LETTER FROM E. E. DOYLE 1
Confidential
D.O. NO. 332

I NSPECTOR-GENERAL OF PRISONS
BOMBAY PRESIDENCY,
POONA,
April 23, 1932

DEAR MR.,

Reference your D. O. of 22nd instant.
I have written to Belgaum for detailed particulars regarding the persons in
whom you are interested—and hope to be in a position, within the week, to let you
have the information you desire.
If circumstances permit, I intend visiting Belgaum as early as possible, and
will then be able to give you first-hand information.
1

516

Vide “Letter to E. E. Doyle”, 22-4-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I can find no reply to Major Martin’s letter so I presume, an answer was
addressed to him by name, and is now chasing him to England. I trust, though, that I
shall soon have all the information you require.
Yours,
E. E. DOYLE
MR . M. K. G ANDHI
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No. 9

APPENDIX V
LETTER FROM E. E. DOYLE 1
No. 356 of 1932

I NSPECTOR-GENERAL OFPRISONS,
BOMBAY PRESIDENCY,
POONA,
April 28, 1932

DEAR MR.,

I have just received a report from the Superintendent, Belgaum Central Prison,
in reply to my letter. This does not give me all the details I desired, so I have asked
for a further and more precise report by return post. All four persons have lost weight
since admission to jail custody—but as reasons for this are not stated, I have asked
for them to be supplied.
Three of the four are on special diet as shown below:
D. B. KALELKAR—

Loaf bread

12 oz.

Milk

2 lb.

Molasses
Olive Oil
MANIBEHN PATEL—

2 oz.
1

/ 2 oz.

Milk

2 lb.

Rice

1 lb.

PRABHUDAS GANDHI— Wheat bread

1 lb. 2 oz.

Dhall & Vegetables
Milk

1

8 oz.

Vide “A Letter” 25-4-1932

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

517

I shall communicate with you again on this subject, as soon as I hear from
Belgaum Central Prison.
Yours,
E. E. DOYLE
MR . M. K. G ANDHI
YERAVDA
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No. 9

APPENDIX VI
LETTER FROM E. E. DOYLE 1
No. 365 of 1932

I NSPECTOR-GENERAL OFPRISONS,
BOMBAY PRESIDENCY,
POONA,
May 2, 1932

DEAR MR.,

I have received the further information I required and am now in a position to
assure you that you need have no cause for worry in respect of any of the persons you
named in your letter to me.
D. B. Kalelkar’s previous medical history is known to the Medical Officer at
Belgaum, who is watching his health carefully and has prescribed treatment and diet
as is necessary.
P. Gandhi was in hospital from 9-3-1932 to 12-3-1932 with malaria, which
has left him slightly anaemic—but he is being treated for this—and is doing well.
Manibehn Patel suffered occasionally from lumbago for which she was treated
and has obtained relief. Also [she] is habitually constipated. This is treated as
necessary with laxatives and change of diet.
N. D. Parikh is reported as being quite fit in spite of a small loss in weight.
I trust this will relieve your mind.
Yours,
E. E. DOYLE
MR . M. K. G ANDHI
YERAVDA
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No. 9

1

518

Vide”Letter to E. E. Doyle”, 4-5-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX VII
RABINDRANATH TAGORE’S APPEAL 1
VISWABHARATI,
SANTINIKETAN,
BENGAL,
March 22, 1932
From the depths of the present atmosphere of suffering the cry has come for
the inauguration of a new age of faith and reconciliation, for a fellowship of
understanding between races and nations alienated by cruel politics and diplomacy.
We in India are ready for a fundamental change in our affairs which will bring
harmony and understanding into our relationships with those who have inevitably
been brought near to us. We are waiting for a gesture of goodwill from both sides,
spontaneous and generous in its faith in humanity, which will create a future of moral
federation, of constructive works of public good, of the inner harmony of peace
between the peoples of India and England.
The visit of our friends from England has confirmed the immediate possibility
of such an intimate fellowship and truth in our mutual relationship, and I feel called
upon to appeal to all who have the welfare of humanity at heart to come forward at
this critical hour and courageously take upon themselves the task of fulfilling the
moral responsibility, which is before us, of building upon the bare foundation of
faith or acceptance of truth in a spirit of generous mutual forgiveness.
The memory of the past, however painful it may have been for us all, should
never obscure the vision of the perfect, of the future which it is for us jointly to
create. Indeed, our experience of the futility of suspicion and hostility must inspire us
with a profounder belief in the truth of the simple fellowship of hearts, in the mighty
power of creative understanding between individuals as well as nations inspired by a
common urge of love.
Advance, 23-6-1932

1
Vide”Letter to Percy W. Bartlett”, 4-5-1932. The message was given to the
Society of Friends Deputation at Santiniketan in March. Dr. Tagore asked them to
take it personally to Gandhiji but permission was refused by the Government of India.

VOL. 55 : 10 FEBRUARY, 1932 - 15 JUNE, 1932

519

