1. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
April 27, 1933
CHI. MIRA,

This is Thursday morning before prayer. Your letter came in
yesterday with Ba’s.
A book on Astronomy is being sent to you. I enclose also a map
for the month. You will find herewith so Dr. Saunders’s 1 letter. It is
satisfactory on the whole.
Letter for Ba will also accompany this.
You may pursue the conduct of the Ashram as much as you
like. It won’t tire me. It will assist me. It will enable you to understand
my viewpoint better. You must not accuse yourself of want of faith in
me or my wisdom because you do not see a point of mine at once or
because having seen it you cannot agree with me. I am not a perfect
being. Why should you see eye to eye with me in my errors? That
would be blind faith. Your faith in me should enable you to detect my
true error much quicker than a fault-finder. What I would like your
faith to do is that when you cannot convince me of my error you
should think that it is likely that I see more clearly than you do in
matters where I have thought and experienced more. That would give
you peace of mind. Therefore you should not paralyse your thought
by suppressing your doubts and torturing yourself that you do not
agree with my view in particular things. You should therefore pursue
the discussion of the Ashram till you have the clearest possible grasp
of all my ideas about it.
You need not have argued about the man being the worse sinner
of the two. I have always held that view against most, if not all, of my
male friends who have expressed their opinion on the point. of course
I agree with you also that man’s superiority, if it is that, over the brute
creation, consists in his capacity for observing brahmacharya. It must
therefore be an Ashram ideal to be attained immediately if that were
possible.
There is therefore complete agreement. between us so far as the
fundamental thing is concerned. The difficulty or the difference
1

The specialist at London who had treated Mirabehn for tubercular glands in
1907. Vide “Letter to Dr. Arthur Saunders”, 5-3-1933.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

1

comes in when we begin to devise ways and means of encompassing
the ideal.
I am becoming more and more confirmed in the view that it
must go on as it is now doing, with ample liberty to the manager to
regulate fresh admissions. Our life should become daily simpler and
not more complex. We should be progressively more self-restrained.
But we should remain a composite family that we now are.
The present composition is not the hindrance. The hindrance is
that we have so few real complete brahmacharis. All were broken
vessels, all had their own individual passions to conquer. But I hold
that most of them were and are sincere strivers. Therefore we are blind
leaders of the blind and ever stumbling. When some of us have, by
constant striving, become at least matriculates in the effort, we shall
certainly do better. Therefore the problem resolves itself into each one
of us striving to the utmost to approach the ideal. Remember my
definition of brahmacharya. It means not suppression of one or more
senses but complete mastery over them all. The two states are
fundamentally different. I can suppress all my senses today but it may
take aeons to conquer them. Conquest means using them as my
willing slaves. I can prick the ear-drum and suppress the sense of
hearing by a simple, painless operation. This is worthless. I must train
the ear so that it refuses to hear gossip, lewd talk, blasphemy, but it. is
open to the celestial music, it will hear the most distant cry for succour
from thousands of miles. Saint Ramdas is said to have done so. Then
how [to] use the organs of generation? By transmuting the most
creative energy that we possess from creating counterparts of our flesh
into creating constructive work for the whole of life, i.e., for the soul.
We have to rein in the animal passion and change it into celestial
passion. Read here Chapter II, Verse 64, of the Gita. The burden of
the Divine Song is not “fly from the battle but face it without
attachment”. Therefore you and I and every one of us have to stand
unmoved in the midst of all kinds of men and women. There is no
physical seclusion except temporarily for some. The Ashram is all
right where it is but we must branch out for larger growth. But that
would be a natural evolution coming in its own time.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From a photostat: C.W, 6269. Courtesy: Mirabehn

2

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

2. LETTER TO HARRY BOWMAN
April 27, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your long letter1.
I had one visit from Miss Mayo when she was in India. I have
read her book and I wrote also a review2 on it which at that time had
attracted considerable attention. It is my firm conviction that the book
is filled with half-truths, innuendos and deductions drawn from stray
facts as if they represented a universal situation.
Yours sincerely,

HARRY BOWMAN, E SQ.
BEATRICE, N EBRASKA [U.S.A.]
From a photostat: S.N. 19055; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800 (40) (3), Pt. IV, p. 379

3. LETTER TO YVONNE PRIVAT
April 27, 1933
MY DEAR BHAKTI,

I was delighted to have your letter which you consider is long
and which for us is too short. I see that you are one in your happiness.
You are one also in your erosion though you tell me that both of you
had the ‘flu, at the same time. You still remain the strangest pair I have
ever had the good fortune to meet. one reads of such couples in
Persian poetry but does not meet them in flesh and blood. May you
for ever remain inseparables.
Yes, I know, you in Europe are going through very hard tinues,
both economically and spiritually. But I believe literally in the Biblical
saying that “God would not destroy Sodom and Gomorrah so long as
there is one good man the” I know that you have in Europe true men
and women in all the odd nooks and corners of the Continent. I,
therefore, feel that-in the end all will be well.
1

Dated March 12, 1933 (S.N. 19009), expressing his indignation at Katherine
Mayo’s Mother India. The addressee had written: “. . . advise me if
Miss Mayo sticks to truth in this deplorable bool or is she only after publicity
money. . . .”
2
Vide “Drain Inspector’s Report”, 15-9-1927.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

3

I am glad you have got a copy of my little book, Guide to
Health. It is an indifferent translation and then there are some
chapters I would like to revise, and if at all I get the time and
permission, I would certainly do so.
Nature cure has made great strides since Kuhne’s time, and I
should like to incorporate the results of new experiments. We are all
keeping well, and all of us send you and Anand 1 our love. I do hear
from Mira every week and write to her in return. To correspond with
me every week she forgoes the pleasure of writing to and meeting
other friends. I will certainly convey your love to her. A letter is going
to her today.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU

[PS.]
Love from Mahadev who is being released on the 19th May.
From a photostat: G.N. 2336

4. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
April 27, 1933
MY DEAR C. R.,

I wish that under the coloured chart you had given the figures
for the population of the respective castes and divisions and as there is
no hurry of publishing the chart, I would like you to give me that
information. I could find it myself but I do not know your own
figures. They may not be quite what I would find.
In your letter you have said nothing about Narasimhan2 or
3
Papa . I expect to see Devdas tomorrow.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. C. R AJAGOPALACHARIAR
From a photostat: S.N. 19052

1
2
3

4

Son and daughter of the addressee
Edmond Privat, husband of the addressee
ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

5. LETTER TO G. R. KHAN
April 27, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter 1 together with the enclosures. I send you
herewith a letter to my son. I have written to him already directly, You
will see that in my letter to my son I have asked him to introduce you
to Messrs Sorabji & Pather. I am not therefore sending you separate
letters of introduction. In my letter to my son I have also mentioned
Seth Omer Jhaveri.
Yours sincerely,

MR. G. R. K HAN
H. H. THE AGA KHAN , S BUNGALOW
NESBIT R OAD , M AZAGAON, B OMBAY
From a microfilm: S.N. I 9054

6. LETTER TO HARKISENDAS
April 27, 1933
MY DEAR HARKISENDAS,

Sjt. Sastri, whom the office sent me as shorthand assistant is
leaving me at the end of this month. Having got from Advocate
Bhulabhai’s son his typist, I am disengaging Sastri two or three days
earlier so that he can attend to what little things he has to in Bombay,
but you will please pay him his pay to the end of the month.
I have-not yet heard from Sjt. Dhirubhai how he has sent his
typist to me. I shall therefore write to you later about the terms under
which the new stenographer is to work. Of course in no case will he
cost the Board more than Sastri, but I am expecting that he will
cost less.
Sastri is leaving me only because he wants to attend to his old
father and family affairs, not having gone there for some years.
Latterly, he lost a brother-in-law. But he would gladly like to be able
1
Dated April 25, 1933, in which the addressee had asked Gandhiji to write to
Manilal Gandhi to obtain legal opinion on “whether a Mahomedan making a will
against Islamic Law can be held valid in the Supreme Court at Duraban” (S.N. 19039).

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

5

to return if he fails to get something better inside of four months. His
wants are much larger than Rs. 100 but he knows that at the present
moment even Rs. 100 is. a considerable sum. This is merely for your
information.
If at the end of four months or earlier I cannot keep the present
typist on any account and if Sastri is free to come, I would naturally
take him back. He has given me full satisfaction.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19056

7. LETTER TO J. D. JENKINS
April 27, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for an inscribed copy of Jeans’s The Stars in Their
Courses. I had a glance at it before, but of course I shall prize the
book you have sent me. I see it is interspersed with marginal pencil
lines. The passage that you have marked at page 152 had, when I first
read the book, made a good impression on me.
As I was finishing your letter and leaving aside the book for the
moment, I saw that the copy comes out of your own collection. I shall
prize the book all the more for that knowledge.
Yours sincerely,

J. D. JENKINS , E SQ.
HAMMERTON HOUSE
23 KAHUN R OAD
P OONA
From a photostat: S.N. 19057

8. LETTER TO M. R. JAYAKAR
April 27, 1933
DEAR MR. JAYAKAR,

I enclose herewith my opinion1 on Dr. Ambedkar’s proposal to
revise the Yeravda Pact in so far as the panel system is concerned. I
1

6

Vide “The Yeravda Pact”, 27-4-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

hope you will agree with me that Dr. Ambedkar’s proposal is no
substitute for the panel system, and that under the guise of joint
electorate it sets up an effective separate electorate. The proposal
copies in my opinion all the worst features of the late Maulana
Mahomed Ali’s formula leaving out all its relieving features. In my
opinion so long as the Harijans are filled with suspicion, and they have
every reason to entertain suspicion, as to the conduct towards them of
caste Hindus, they have a perfect right to have the first say in the
choice of candidates, and for that, the panel system, in my opinion,
cannot be excelled.
Yours sincerely,

Enclosure
Copy to Dr. Sapru also
From a photostat: S.N. 21072

9. LETTER TO B. R. AMBEDKAR
April 27, 1933
DEAR DR, AMBEDKAR,

In accordance with my promise I send you herewith my
opinion 1 on your proposal. I hope you do not mind my having dealt
with the matter publicly. I thought that the issue raised by you was of
such momentous importance that if I discussed it at all, I should do so
publicly.
Yours sincerely,

Enclosure
From a photostat: S.N. 21074

10. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
April 27, 1933
CHI. KAKA,

I heard the same news from Chandrashankar 2.I am happy to
know that you are not permitted to read. Let them prevent you from
reading, talking and dictating. Dr. Porter has emphasized this to a
1
2

Vide “The Yeravda Pact”, 27-4-1933.
Chandrashankar Pranshankar Shukla, Editor, Horijanbandhu

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

7

great extent and I feel there is a lot of truth in it.
You must be knowing that N. is here. Today one German lady
Dr. Spiegel has arrived. I have asked for permission to send both of
them to the Ashram. Today I sent a wire1 to the Ashram.
Chandrashankar will give you the details about the German lady
and N.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9476. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

11. LETTER TO PREMLILA THACKERSEY
April 27, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

I got your letter just now. N. Devi and her son are having their
meal with me, and there will be some delay in their reaching your
place. Kindly forgive me for that. I am asking Dr. Spiegel also to
accompany them. I was very glad to read your letter. If you can be
frank like this with me, I would feel no hesitation any time. on the one
hand, there would be no limit to my begging as I am admittedly a
beggar. But, while making immediate demands, I should also like to
respect fully the donor’s own inclination. I, therefore, always try to
put the prospective donor at ease whenever I hold out my begging
bowl.
I am first sending Shri Nair to the Servants of India Society and
inquiring of them. If they can accommodate him, I will keep him
there. In any case a car does have to come daily from there. This will
mean only one trip more, and I don’t think there will be any
difficulty about that. I will not fail to avail myself of your offer if
there is any difficulty.
I did not know about the mangoes. I do not eat them regularly,
but generally depend on papaya. I will ask Sardar and let you know
how the mangoes were. However, I do not want you to worry about
such small matters. None of us has a delicate palate. We eat what we
get and offer thanks to God.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4829. Courtesy: Premlila Thackersey
1

8

Vide “Telegram to Narandas Gandhi”, 27-4-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

12. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 27, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got the big post yesterday. You must have received the long
letter which I dictated for you yesterday. I very much liked your letter
which arrived in the big post. You have exercised good restraint in
your language. There are signs of impatience here and there, but not
much to speak of. Your reply is pointed and brief. I did not require it
at all, but, since I have received it, it will help me to pacify Chhaganlal.
It will not be necessary for me now to send his complaints to you. I
will struggle with him in my own way, and try to remove his error. I
will not waste your time, I have wasted enough of it.
I suppose you have read Shri Rajbhoj’s 1 letter. I liked it very
much. He says in it that we have used more logic than the heart in
dealing with Ramji2. Since you have welcomed his suggestion, the
problem is over. Rajbhoj may be mistaken in his view. But it is also
possible that we have been at fault. We should be able to prove to an
inpartial Harijan the correctness of our treatment of Ramji in all
respects. I am writing this not to find fault with anybody, but only to
suggest how we should behave in future. How can I blame anybody
without knowing all the facts? Read the letter3 to Rajbhoj which I am
going to write. He has suggested a change in the hour for the prayer.
That suggestion also deserves careful consideration. His
argument is that everybody should get time to answer the call of
nature immediately after getting up. He has, therefore, suggested that
45 minutes should be set apart for this purpose instead of 20 as at
present. This is what he says:
Before answering the call of nature one is less likely to be
able to concentrate at prayer-time. People also feel very sleepy.
If the prayer is kept at 4.45, lassitude, the feeling of uneasiness
arising from not having answered the call of nature and
restlessness, all these three things will disappear.

1

P. N. Rajbhoj, a Harijan leader
A Harijan weaver in the Ashram
3
Vide “Letter to P.N. Rajbhoj”, 27-4-1933.
2

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

9

This suggestion was made even before. But Rajbhoj has put it in
a new way. He seems to be a thoughtful man. He is a fresh worker and
is alert, and I also see in him good power of observation. He has
discrimination, too. You should, therefore, have a long talk with him
first and if you see some point in his suggestion, make the change
suggested by him. It was I who insisted on the prayer being kept at
4.20—and I still insist on it—but the lesson of experience should
prevail. If so many persons require to answer the call of nature before
coming to the prayer, 45 minutes should be allowed for the purpose.
Anyone who does not feel the need may use the time in any way he
likes. If you decide to make the change, I will make some suggestions
about the prayer. The chief thing is that you should have a detailed
discussion with Rajbhoj.
His other suggestion is as follows:
A meeting of all new workers should be held at least twice
in a month. In these meetings there should be discussions as to
how they should work, how they should serve meals, what the
Mangalprabhat discourses are about, the significance of the vow
of silence, etc. I have often observed that the volunteers who
serve meals do not do their work courteously and patiently, they
throw the vegetables down so carelessly that they fall outside the
plate and they let the milk spill over, or serve these items in
more than, or even less than, the required quantity. Those who
are entrusted with washing the floor are so impatient to finish
their work that they show no regard for slow-eaters and drops of
water splash on the latter. It is the duty of the chief of this
section to explain to the-volunteers from time to time how they
should work.
To save time in dictating I have given a Gujarati translation. of
the sentences instead of the original Hindi. However, the translation is
literal. The complaint which Rajbhoj makes could also be made with
equal justification when I was in the Ashram and used to take my
meals in the common kitchen. I had thought that there would not be
much ground for such a complaint now. But since that has not
happened, I can easily guess the reason. The volunteers change
frequently, and it is very necessary that they should do so. But if that
is necessary, supervision over them is equally necessary. I myself have
observed vegetables being served in greater or lesser quantity than
required. I have also observed too much hurry when serving. I have
10

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

observed rotlis being thrown into the plate as if at a beggar, and milk
being spilled on the floor. And even while a fairly good number of
people were still eating, the volunteers used to start washing the floor.
Inquire about this and do whatever is possible. I had a letter
from . . .1 and I have replied to him. He is not likely to come round as
quickly as I had thought. He also feels troubled about . . .2 and I have,
therefore, replied to him that all of them have decided to leave the
Ashram of their own accord. Even now they can stay on if they are
ready to observe the Ashram rules. I have even advised that . . . should
come and stay in the Ashram for some time. Have a talk with . . . .
The key is held by him. If he comes, I will be relieved. But I certainly
wish that, if he comes, he should do so with a full sense of his
responsibility.
I am eagerly awaiting your reply regarding N. If she is to come
to the Ashram, I don’t wish to detain her here longer. If you have not
written to me about this before you get this letter, send me a wire.
You say in your letter that Narahari has written to me. But the
post received from you did not contain any letter from him. Did he
post his letter separately? or is it that he intended’ to write but forgot
to do so?
I have found Narahari’s letter in the post received today after I
had written this letter.
I am sending a wire3 about N. and Dr. Margaret Spiel.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8364. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

1
2

The names have been omitted.
Vide”Telegram to Narandas Gandhi”, 27-4-1933.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

11

13. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
April [27] 1, 1933
CHI. NARAHARI,

What is the matter with Mohan? What is wrong with his hands?
What is the cause, according to the doctor, of their becoming
powerless? I did not worry about him so far, thinking that he suffered
from ordinary fever; but now I feel a little worried and want to
understand what exactly is the trouble with his hands.
I have read your letter to Narandas. I liked some of the
suggestions you have made in it. I suggest that you should discuss the
subject with Narandas. It was of course good that a meeting was held,
but the person who is expected to execute them should understand
them fully. I should like unity of hearts between you, if that is
possible. I fail to notice it at present. Try your best to bring it about.
Do not give up the attempt in despair.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9059

14. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
April 27, 1933
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

You kept me waiting a long time for your letter which I have
now received.
You do not seem to have had any letter from Satyavati. Do not
be impatient. I hope you have realized that even if your parents give
their consent to your proposal for marriage I will have to obtain
permission. If I do not get such permission, the wedding ceremony
cannot be performed here. But you may of course come to ask for
my blessings. If Chaturbhai comes along, I will certainly see him.
If Devidutt etc. are there, they as well as you should tell any
guests who may arrive that no provision has been made by the
Ashram for the necessary expenditure on the facilities to be provided
1

From the reference to addressee’s letter to Narandas Gandhi; vide the
preceding item.

12

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to guests. So, everyone who comes will have to meet his or her own
expense of staying, or will have to get the required amount from the
Ashram. We have no right to stay in any way other than that. We
cannot lead a pure life in any other way. Even if a person like Pantji
sends anyone, you may ask him, too, whether or not he or she will
bear his or her own expense. Just now, you have to learn the art of
living within the limit of your estimated expense and cultivate the
habit of plain speaking for that purpose. We are beggars and not rich
people; servants and not masters.
The Devidutt Brothers have no right to ask for Rs. 60 from us if
they cannot get that much from elsewhere. The people who live with
us should be persons of abstemious habits. They should, therefore, be
content with less from us than what they would get elsewhere. If they
get more elsewhere, by all means they should go there. You see the
truth of this, don’t you? You will certainly get servants to help you in
your work. They will look after the Ashram and also cultivate the
land.
It is necessary to be moderate in spending money even in the
field of service. I think you are not at present keeping good health to
be able to take up the secretaryship of the Harijan Sevak Sangh. Be
content with what you can do without taking it up. Let me know how
you are keeping. We will consider other things later. It will also have
to be seen how you keep after your marriage. For the present, it is
advisable that you have all your time to yourself.
I have not the least desire to dispose off the Ashram lands.
However, if the Ashram buildings become too costly to keep, we may
sell them off and put up huts on the remaining land. Jamnalalji is now
out of prison. Do as he advises.
Give up your rather fond desire to call over Ramdas there. If he
comes of his own accord, it would be a different matter.
Does the Bengali gentleman live there at his own expense? It is
good that Navin feels at home there. He does not work beyond his
strength, does he? I do have a machine for shredding vegetables in
mind. As for a machine for grinding groundnut, we do have one.
However, I would not think of spending money on buying such
things. If, however, the expense can be incurred without
inconvenience, I would not deliberately avoid buying them.
Inter-dining and inter-marriage is not an essential part of
varnashrama. It is and has always been a subject unconnected with
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

13

varnashrama. One is not bound to eat or marry where one does not
wish to. However, one does not violate one’s dharma merely by eating
where it is convenient for him or her to do so or by entering into a
marriage relationship which he or she chooses as suitable for himself
or herself; nor does he or she violate the principle of the varna
system. This is all that I mean. There is no doubt that in practice more
people limit themselves to eating and entering into marriage
relationship with persons belonging to the same varna. It is quite right
to say that varna has no place in a sannyasi’s dharma.
Do not be tardy in writing to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33024

15. LETTER TO P. N. RAJBHOJ
April 27, 1933
BHAI RAJBHOJ,

Your letter I find is very much to my liking. I have written1
today to Narandas about this matter. Enquire from him fully and then
write to me. It is bound to pain me if Ramji has not been treated
generously. Do make yourself well acquainted with Mathuradas2.
Mathuradas is gifted with great tolerance, he does not at all believe in
untouchability. If in spite of this there has been some shortcoming in
the treatment meted out to Ramji it shall of course be rectified.
Mathuradas is a gentle, sacrificing and sensible man. He is quite
capable of realizing his own mistakes; open out your heart to him too.
Now let me give you my experience of R.3 I was responsible to a
great extent in bringing him to the Ashram. I am very fond of him
and Gangabehn; he has earned well in the Ashram. To my knowledge
he has been paid adequately for his living. I have always instructed
that people like R. should be paid liberally; but R. is greedy, hottempered and suspicious. It is extremely difficult to disabuse him of a
notion once it gets into his head. You may take it that Lakshmidas4 has
become a Harijan. Someone asked his daughter Anandi as to her
1

Vide “Leter to Narandas Gandhi”, 27-4-1933.
Mathuradas P. Asar
3
The name has been omitted.
4
Lakshmidas P. Asar
2

14

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

identity and she called herself a Harijan girl. This happened only
recently. I know it that R. harassed Lakshmidas badly. I am not
writing this to point out R.’s faults. He is just like a son to me. But
you have evinced such interest in the well being of the Ashram and
because I have found you to be simple-hearted, I am writing all this so
that you may reach the correct conclusion and guide me.
I have replied1 to several of your questions in Harijan [Sevak],
which you must have seen. I now answer the rest of your questions.
Spiritual progress is possible only through incessant effort. The study
of philosophical works is helpful in the endeavour but I do not regard
it essential because spiritual progress does not depend on the intellect
but on the heart. The people were unlettered in ancient times but
nobody holds the view that none of them could be spiritually
advanced. We have had hundreds of saints, they were not all learned
men. Jesus, Mahomed and others were unlettered. It should not at all
be taken to imply that I am opposed to formal learning but the
importance given to it today is beyond proportion. Hence I express
my opinion whenever questions about learning are asked.
In my opinion Malaviyaji’s and Dr. Moonje’s aim in teaching
the mantras and so on is the same as that of the Arya Samajists, but
untouchability has become so deep-rooted in the Hindu world that
mere teaching of the mantras would not suffice. They may teach the
mantras, or do whatever they please, but who can bring round the
Hindus? We have not yet reached the stage when this act will
necessarily carry conviction with the public. Even the shuddhi
performed by the Arya Samaj does not go very far although there is
certainly some effect. Now we notice that the poison of untouchability
has spread among the Indian Christians too. God willing, we shall, by
strenuous effort and even more strenuous penance, remove this
widespread poison. The yajna started in September last2 has not come
to an end but is still continuing, it can end only when untouchability is
eradicated and no one is considered touchable or untouchable, high
or low by birth.
It is good that letters from Thakkar Bapa and Kakasaheb keep
coming. Do ask unhesitatingly whatever doubts arise in your mind.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 785

1
2

Vide “Five Questions on Varnadharma”, 21-4-1933.
The reference is to the fast which Gandhiji began on September 20, 1932.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

15

16. WHY NOT `ARYA’?
1

A friend writes:
Perhaps the correspondent does not know about the origin of
the term ‘Harijan’. I must ask him to go through the first number2 of
Harijan Sevak and see how the term originated. The term ‘Harijan’
was suggested by a friend who is a Harijan himself and I accepted it.
The term has not been coined with a view to perpetuating the separate
identity of Harijans. They have a separate identity today and a
separate label to describe them. The term ‘untouchable’ savours of
contempt. We wish to eradicate untouchability and it is not right to go
on using the term ‘untouchable’. But in so far as untouchables have a
distinct identity we must have a name by which to call them. Having
accepted the necessity for such a name, what name to choose? In my
view we can find no better name than ‘Harijan’. ‘Arya’ will not do
because it is the name of a sect. A general name ‘Hindu’ is already
there. The pity is that today a separate identity of the so-called
untouchables is necessary. In Government offices they have a separate
list. Everywhere they are kept separate. Let us pray that this
separateness may be done away with so that all of us may become fit
to be called ‘Harijans’— men of God. A friend rightly said that today
caste Hindus have become ‘Arijans’—enemies of Hinduism.
[From Hindi]
Harijan Sevak, 28-4-1933

17. FIVE QUESTIONS BY A YOUTH
A youth asks the following five questions:
1. When it is our claim that there is no caste among the Hindus which
can be called untouchables, why should we fight unnecessarily over this word?
2. When it is our contention that varna is determined by the nature of
work, why should we not reform the work of the so-called untouchables? When
their work is degrading, what is the point in fighting with the higher varnas
by taking sides with the untouchables?
3. When untouchability can be abolished through inter-dining and
intermarriage, why should we not resort to these too?
1
The letter is not translated here. The correspondent had suggested that it
would be more appropriate to call the untouchables ‘Arya’ rather than ‘Harijans’.
2
Dated February 23, vide Why Harijan”, 23-2-1933.

16

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

4. Can the question of temple-entry by Harijans be not solved by
building separate temples for them?
5. Will the orthodox allow Harijans to enter temples when the
temple-entry Bills are passed?
I hope you will be able to set my doubts at rest.

Whether I shall succeed or not, I do not know. But I shall
certainly try to satisfy that youth and others like him. Success lies in
the hands of God.
1. The claim that there is no such caste as untouchables is made
by the reformers, not by the sanatanists. Unfortunately, the caste
Hindus have dubbed several Hindu castes as untouchables. And today
in Government offices also these castes are entered as untouchables.
Therefore, so long as we are not able to convince our sanatanist
brothers, it becomes the duty of the reformers to fight for the
abolition of this caste-born untouchability.
2. Whether varna is determined by work or otherwise, is a
question which does not arise here. Therefore I am leaving it. Those
who wish to know my opinion in this matter should please read the
previous issue1 of Harijan Sevak. So far as the work of the so-called
untouchables is concerned, if by reform of their work it is meant that
they should give up their trades, it is not only unnecessary but also
harmful, because these trades are of the nature of public service. The
washerman, the barber, the cobbler, the Dom 2, the scavenger are all
true servants of the people. If they were to give up their work, the
people would be doomed. The reformers believe that in treating these
people as untouchables, caste Hindus have made a mistake. It is the
firm conviction of the reformer that the work of the scavenger and the
Dom is sacred. It is the duty of the caste Hindus to improve their
work. The mother removes the excrement and does the washing. The
doctor cuts flesh, bone and skin. But the mother and the doctor do
their work neatly and wash themselves afterwards. While doing their
work they become untouchable. We should treat scavengers, etc., in
exactly the same way. Just as mothers and the doctors are not
untouchables by birth, so also the sweeper and others are not born
untouchables, even though while doing their work they may be
untouchable. When we look upon the sweeper and others as our
1
2

Vide “Five Questions on Varnadharma”, 21-4-1933.
The lowest among Harijans working at cremation-grounds

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

17

equals, we will not segregate them from ourselves; on the other hand
we shall embrace them with love and we will endeavour to improve
their work and their condition. Today, in segregating them we
perpetrate tyranny on them. We do commit violence against them,
offend society and bring into contempt the fundamental principles of
Hinduism. Therefore, it becomes our sacred duty to work for the
cause of the Harijans.
3. I do not agree that inter-dining and intermarriage can bring
emancipation to anyone. Inter-dining and intermarriage are a separate
question. It has no connection with caste or untouchability. It has a
separate code. In any case, removal of untouchability as we have
defined it today does not include inter-dining and intermarriage.
4. When we consider it our duty to remove untouchability, why
should we build separate temples for Harijans? They have as much
right to worship in common temples as others have.
5. No one ever said that with the mere passing of the Bills the
orthodox will permit the Harijans to enter temples. But the existing
law is such that even if one Hindu among the orthodox raises an
objection, no public temple can be thrown open to the Harijans. When
the Bill is passed this obstruction can certainly disappear.
[From Hindi]
Harijan Sevak, 28-4-1933

18. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
April 28, 1933
DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,

I have several applications for financial assistance from Harijan
students but I feel perplexed without an Education Board whose
formation I have suggested. Will you please set up one as quickly as
possible and announce the appointment, constitution and rules?
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19059

18

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

19. LETTER TO T. TITUS
April 28, 1933
MY DEAR TITUS,

I cannot recall any letter of yours remaining unanswered. You
must, therefore, repeat your questions and I shall gladly answer. I shall
search my file and if I discover any letters I shall give my reply
without waiting for a copy of your previous questions.
You have missed my point about ‘Allopathic’ and ‘Homoeopathic’. Personally I would prefer Homoeopathy any day to Allopathy. Only I have no personal experience of its efficacy and I have
told you so. Perhaps if you-have confidence in yourself, and if you
can really spare time from the daily work for attending to
Homoeopathic remedies, so far as I am concerned I do not mind your
trying them. You may discuss this thing with Narandas and if you are
interested in the simple treatment of diseases I would like you to
understand Dr. Sharma’s system. He has great confidence in his own
method and if his experiments in the Ashram succeed it will be a great
gain.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19060

20. LETTER TO MRS. A. S. CHAUDHARY

1

April 28, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter.
It is very difficult for me to say anything on the strength of the
scrappy letter that you have sent me. I would, therefore, advise you to
see Seth Jajuji of Wardha and secure his recommendation. Then I will
have to send your papers to the Central Board and your application
1

Presumably in reply to the addressee’s letter (S.N. 21061) dated April 25,
1933, requesting grant for higher studies at Delhi
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

19

will be considered by them. You will give Seth Jajuji as much
information as you can about yourself.
Yours sincerely,

MRS. A. S. C HAUDHARY
NAWI WASTI, N AGPUR
From a microfilm: S.N. 19061

21. LETTER TO RAMCHANDRA
April 28, 1933
MY DEAR RAMACHANDRA,

I have your letter of the 25th instant.
You are asking me to do something which I cannot do at the
moment. I would ask you, therefore, to study carefully the pages of
the Harijan and I think you will understand from them my idea of
‘Reformed Hinduism’. I always believe in a concrete programme. We
have this in the big untouchability work. If we succeed in tackling that
root of all evil in Hinduism, the rest will be incredibly simple and easy
The work of reformation will proceed apace as soon as many of us
realize that we must concentrate our energy on that single reform. You
will see how I have dealt with your question about a model temple1.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19062

22. LETTER TO DUNCAN GREENLEES
April 28, 1933
I have your letter.
I understand and appreciate all you say. I shall look forward to
the report of your impressions. Let it be as critical and exhaustive as
you can make it. So far as I am concerned there is no limit to your
stay there. Indeed the longer you stay the better for the work that I
would have from you whether under my direct guidance or in
association with me.
1

20

Vide “A Model Temple”, 29-4-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I do not mind that you are not likely to go to Madanapalli. As
you have reduced your wants to uttermost simplicity, there can be no
dearth of work for you to your liking.
I am glad you visited the Harijan quarters with Bhagwanji 1. I
have seen many. No description, therefore, staggers me. I know how
Herculean the task is before me but then I have an excuse because I
am one of the many tools in the hands of God. My concern is,
therefore, to keep myself a fit instrument to be found ready to do His
command at a moment’s call. Dr. Sharma’s idea always has been
mine and that is why I took charge of Lakshmi 2 so many years ago,
almost inside of an year of my arrival here,3 and I have been teaching
as many Harijans as I could lay my hands on. Several have been
already fixed up in life but that too is a big job. It is so difficult to
keep them even though they are given to you by their parents. I am
not surprised at all these untoward results in several cases and, as you
very properly say, it is all due to the sin of the caste Hindus.
Of course it does not do to go for the dirty boys. Neither they
nor their parents know any better and those that have some notion of
hygiene and cleanliness have no convenience for conforming to the
laws of hygiene. I am glad you are there during Dr. Sharma’s visit. I
would like you to know him and his message. If it is substantial it
would be a great thing fox serving public institutions. I am a fanatical
believer in nature’s methods and I never missed an opportunity of
having a training. Whatever I know has been picked up from books. I
was never able to read from page to page but I made copious
experiments on myself and my companions, and have very much
benefited from those methods. I have been always anxious to secure
someone who would share my idea and develop the method in the
interest of the poor. Dr. Sharma is reported to be the man and so he is
at the Ashram. I would therefore like you to study the method in so
far as he would let you do so.
BAPU
From a microfilm: S.N. 21078

1
2
3

Bhagwanji P. Pandya
Daughter of Dudabhai Dafda
In October 1920; vide “Speech to Students and Teachers, Surat”, 6-10-1920.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

21

23. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 28, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I do not have time just now to write a long letter. I got your
postcard. N.’s son is five years old and is mischievous. Were he not so,
he is capable of looking after himself. If, therefore, you hesitate to
admit her because of him you need not hesitate. Personally I hope
that both the mother and the son will be able to adapt themselves to
the condition there very well. If N.’s sinful life in the past has a share
in your hesitation, have no fear in taking her in. Vallabhbhai has
interpreted your postcard to mean that you are not against admitting
her but have merely expressed your fear. I have interpreted it to mean
that you do not wish to take her in. However that may be, I must be
cautious. If, therefore, I do not receive a clear reply to my yesterday’s
wire1, I will await the reply to this letter. Reply by wire. Read all the
accompanying letters before passing them on.
BAPU

[PS.]
Letters for Kusum, Parachure, Duncan and Titus.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8365. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

24. NOTES
INCONSISTENCIES?

A correspondent who is a diligent student of my writings finds it
difficult to reconcile my recent writings about inter-caste dining and
inter-caste marriage and corresponding writings of some years ago.
He quotes from my article 2 on “Hinduisum” contributed to
Young India of 6th October 1921. I give the quotation below with his
omissions:
Though, therefore, varnashrama is not affected by inter-dining and
intermarriage, Hinduism does most emphatically discourage inter-dining and
1
2

22

Vide “Telegram to Narandas Gandhi”, 27-4-1933.
Vide “Notes”, 6-10-1921.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

intermarriage between divisions. Hinduism reached the highest limit of
self-restraint. It is undoubtedly a religion of renunciation of the flesh, so that
the spirit may be set free. . . . By restricting his choice of a bride to a
particular group, he exercises rare self-restraint. . . . Prohibition against
intermarriage and inter-dining is essential for a rapid evolution of the soul.

And then he quotes from my statement1 dated the 4th November
last year, which was circulated to the Press. I give the quotation again
with his omissions:
Restriction on inter-caste dining and inter-caste marriage is no part of
Hindu religion. It is a social custom which crept into Hinduism when perhaps
it was in its decline.... Today these two prohibitions are weakening Hindu
society, and emphasis on them has turned the attention of mass mind from the
fundamentals which are vital to life’s growth.... Dining and marriage
restrictions stunt Hindu society.

As I read them with a detached mind, I find no contradiction
between the two statements, especially if they are read in their full
context. In the statement of 1921, I wrote on Hinduism and gave the
briefest outline of it. On the 4th of November, I had to apply myself
to the innumerable castes and caste restrictions. The mode of life in
the Ashram in 1921 was absolutely the same as it is now. Therefore
my practice has undergone no change. I still believe that restriction
imposed by oneself upon inter-dining and intermarriage is an act of
renunciation of the flesh. There is one word that perhaps I would
change if I was writing the article of 1921 today. Instead of
‘prohibition’, I should repeat the expression used in the same article
just a few lines before and say ‘self-imposed restriction against
intermarriage and inter-dining is essential for a rapid evolution of the
soul’.
In spite of my statement of 4th November last, I would say that
inter-dining and inter-caste marriage are in no way essential for the
promotion of the spirit of brotherhood or for the removal of
untouchability. At the same time, a super-imposed restriction would
undoubtedly stunt the growth of any society, and to link these
restrictions to varnadharma or caste is undoubtedly prejudicial to the
freedom of the spirit and would make varna a drag upon religion. But
having said this, I would like to say to this diligent reader of my
writings and to others who are interested in them that I am not at all
1

Vide “Statement on Untouchability-I”, 4-11-1932.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

23

concerned with appearing to be consistent. In my search after Truth I
have discarded many ideas and learnt many new things. Old as I am in
age, I have no feeling that I have ceased to grow inwardly or that my
growth will stop at the dissolution of the flesh. What I am concerned
with is my readiness to obey the call of Truth,’ my God, from moment
to moment, and therefore, when anybody finds any inconsistency
between any two writings of mine, if he has still faith in my sanity, he
would do well to choose the later of the two on the same subject.
Harijan, 29-4-1933

25. NOTES
C ARRION -EATING

Sjt. Hiralal Shah has collected writings from different sources
condemnatory of carrion-eating and showing how carrion-eating has
repelled people.
His first text is from Bhavprakash, Part II, verse 88:

The flesh of an animal dead from natural causes is debilitating, heavy
and liable to cause diarrhoea.

From Kautilaya he sends me many elaborate rules from which I
take the following:
The flesh of animals which have been killed outside slaughter-houses .
. . and the flesh of animals which have suddenly died shall not be sold.

From the Ain-i-Akbari Sjt. Shah sends me several texts
recounting ten divisions among Hindus. The last division is classed as
that of Chandalas, being ‘low caste, eating carrion’.
The other quotations are from James Forbes’s Oriental
Memoirs. From these, I take the following:
From the religious order of Brahmins, I descend to the caste of
Chandalas or Pariahs. These people are considered so abject as to be employed
in the vilest offices, and held in such detestation that no other tribe will touch
them; and those Hindus who commit enormous crimes are excommunicated
into this caste, which is considered to be a punishment worse than death.

Describing the Pulaiyas the author says:
Constant poverty and accumulated misery have entirely debased the
human form, and given a squalid and savage appearance to these unhappy
beings. Yet debased and oppressed as the Pulaiyas are, there exists throughout

24

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

India a caste called Pariahs, still more abject and wretched. If a Pulaiya by any
accident touches a Pariah, he must perform a variety of ceremonies and go
through many ablutions, before he can be cleansed from the impurity . . . nor
do they eat together; although the only difference in their epicurean banquet is
that the Pulaiyas eat of all animal food, exceptbeef, and sometimes of that
which dies of itself, the Pariahs not only feast upon dead carcasses, but eat
beef and carrion of every kind.

Harijan, 29-4-1933

26. A MODEL TEMPLE
It was impossible that side by side with the-movement for
temple-entry by Harijans there should not be a demand for temple
reform. The modern Hindu temple is a hot-bed of superstition, as are
more or less other ‘Houses of God’. I published1 the other day a letter
from an American friend, gently pleading with me not to have
anything to do with the temple-entry movement. A friend who is a
devout follower of Islam has carried on a long correspondence with
me, trying to do with me in his own way what the American friend did
in his own. There is undoubtedly a great deal of substance in what
they have said. But I have not been able to subscribe to their
corollarythat the remedy for the abuse lies in the destruction of
temples.
But by far the largest number of persons believe in the reform,
not destruction, of’ temples. I mentioned only the other day an
ambitious scheme set on foot for a model temple in Rajkot. 2 Several
correspondents have taken me to task for advocating temple-entry for
Harijans without emphasizing the necessity of temple reform. There is
no doubt that temple reform is necessary. But here, again, there is
need for caution. Some of them think that it is possible to replace all
the existing temples with new ones. I do not share that view. All
temples will never be alike. They will always vary, as they have done
in the past, with the varying human needs. What the reformer should
be concerned with is a radical change more in the inward spirit than in
the outward form If’ the first is changed the second will take care of’
itself: If’ the first remains unchanged, the second, no matter how
1
2

Vide “Are Temples Necessary?”, 11-3-1933.
Vide also “A Model Temple”, 29-4-1933.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

25

radically changed, will be like a whited sepulchre. A mausoleum,
however beautiful, is a tomb and not a mosque, and a bare plot of
consecrated ground may be a real Temple of God.
Therefore the first desideratum is the priest. My ideal priest
must be a man of God. He must be a true servant of the people. He
should have the qualifications of a guide, friend and philosopher to
those among whom he is officiating. He must be a whole-timer with
the least possible needs and personal ties.
He should be versed in the Shastras. His whole concern will be
to look after the welfare of his people. I have not drawn a fanciful
picture. It is almost true to life. It is based on the recollection of my
childhood. The priest I am recalling was looked up to by the prince
and the people. They flocked round him for advice and guidance in
the time of their need.
If the sceptic says such a priest is hard to find nowadays, he
would be partly right. But I would ask the reformer to wait for
building the temple of his ideal till he finds his priest.
Meanwhile let him cultivate in himself the virtues he will have in
the priest of his imagination. Let him expect these from the priests of
existing temples. In other words, by his gentle and correct conduct, let
him expect his immediate surroundings with the need of the times and
let him have faith that his thought, surcharged with his own correct
conduct, will act more powerfully than the mightiest dynamo. Let him
not be impatient to see the result in a day. A thought may take years
of conduct to evolve the requisite power. What are years or
generations in the life of a great reform?
Now, perhaps, the reader will follow my view of a model temple.
I can present him with no architect’s plan and specification. Time is
not ripe for it. But that does not baffle me and it need not baffle the
reformer. He can choose the site for his future temple. It must be as
extensive as he can get it. It need not be in the heart of a village or a
city. It should be easily accessible to the Harijans and the other poor
and yet it must not be in insanitary surroundings. If possible, it should
be higher than its surroundings. In any case, I would aim at making
the plinth of the actual temple as high as possible. And on this site I
should select my plot for daily worship. Round this will come into
being a school, a dispensary, a library, secular and religious. The
school may serve also as a meeting or debating hall. I should have a
dharmsala or guest house connected with the temple. Each one of
26

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

these will be a separate institution and yet subordinate to the temple
and may be built simultaneously or one after another as circumstances
and funds may permit. The buildings may or may not be substantial.
If labour is voluntary, as it well may be, with mud and straw a
beginning may be made at once. But the temple is not yet built. The
foundation was laid when the site was procured, the plot for the temple
was selected and the first prayer was offered. For the Bhagavata says,
“Wherever people meet and utter His name from their hearts, there
God dwells, there is His temple.” The building, the deity, the
consecration, is the province of the priest. When he is found, he will
set about his task, but the temple began its existence from the time of
the first prayer. And if it was the prayer of true men and women, its
continuous progress was assured.
So much for the temple of the future. The reader who cares to
study the Rajkot scheme will find that the outward form of my model
temple materially corresponds to that in the scheme. Indeed, there is
nothing new in my idea or the Rajkot scheme. The village temples of
yore had almost all the adjuncts suggested by me.
But we must also deal with the existing temples. They can
become real Houses of God today, if the worshippers will insist on the
priests conforming to the ideal presented by me.
Harijan, 29-4-1933

27. HUMAN MANUFACTURE [-I]
The section regarding Depressed Classes in the Bengal Census
Report, Part I, is an illuminating document, from which at the moment
I reproduce only paragraphs 2 and 3 below, and I hope to occupy the
reader’s attention over this portion of the report for a week or two
longer.
MEANING OF THE TERM ‘DEPRESSED C LASSES’
The expression ‘Depressed Classes’ is of comparatively recent coinage
and is in many respects unfortunate. It does not translate an-y actual vernacular
term in common use in Bengal, nor does it describe any class the members of
which can be defined with accuracy. It is a term in itself indefinite. In European
countries it is applied to the chronically indigent portion of the population
and connotes an economic condition. It can be applied anthropologically in a
psychological sense to describe that state of mind engendered in a primitive
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

27

people when it finds itself in contact with a dominant society based upon
principles entirely different from and disregarding the traditionally accepted
sactions of tribal life. This psychological condition has been convincingly
put forward as one at least of the elements leading to the depopulation of
Melenesia and it has an interesting counterpart in the ‘discouragement’ from
which Mr. George Bernard Shaw makes visitors to the island die off in contact
with the civilization of the ancients in “Back to Methuselah”. In general use,
however, the term in India, though not applying to exactly similar strata of
population in different parts, is used to describe those members of the
community who in common social estimation are considered to be inferior,
degraded, outcaste, or not fit in any way for social and religious intercourse on
reasonably equal terms with members of the clean or higher castes. It
represents a problem which arises only within the fold of Hinduism, namely,
the problem of those Hindu groups who by the accident of birth are denied and
never can by any individual merit achieve social consideration or spiritual
benefits which are the birth-right without consideration of personal merit
equally of all persons born into the higher castes.

THE C RITERION OF THE DEPRESSED C LASSES
It is, however, by no means a simple matter to devise a satisfactory
criterion by which to distinguish the Depressed Classes. The problem itself
being essentially social and religious, the criteria, which have been at various
times suggested, themselves depend upon social observance or social
precedence. During the census of 1901 the castes in Bengal were distinguished
into Seven groups upon an elaborate classification. The first group contained
Brahmins only as the acknowledged superiors of all other classes in the caste
hierarchy. In the second group were placed castes whose respectability was
never in question and who are either twice-born or were held to be superior to
all other Shudra castes. A third group consisted of the so-callcd navashakha, or
nine branches, now indeed containing more than nine groups but all
characterized by being held worthy to offer water the drinking of which would
not pollute the higher classes. Below this third group were distinguished a
fourth containing clean castes with degraded Brahmins; a fifth containing
castes lower than group four whose water is not usually accepted, a sixth
comprised low castes abstaining from beef, pork and fowls, and seventh
embracing castes by whom forbidden food were eaten and who pursue the most
degraded occupation as scavengers, etc. In 1911 the Census Commissioner for
India directed provincial superintendents to enumerate castes and tribes
returned as Hindus who do not conform to certain standards or are subject to
certain disabilities, “leaving the reader to draw his own inferences”. They were

28

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

asked to prepare a list of all but the minor castes which qua castes:
1.

deny the supremacy of the Brahmins;

2.

do not receive the mantra from a Brahmin or other recognized Hindu

3.

deny the authority of the Vedas;

4.

do not worship the great Hindu gods;

5.

are not served by good Brahmins as family priests;

6.

have no Brahmin priests at all;

7.

are denied access to the interior of Hindu temples;

8.

cause pollution (a,) by touch, (b) within a certain distance;

9.

bury their dead; or

guru;

10. eat beef and do not do reverence to cow.
The enquiry was intended to furnish material, if possible, from which an
answer could be given to the difficult question: `Who is a Hindu?’ Up to 1916
in Bengal at least the expression ‘Depressed Classes’ was unknown. In 1916
however the Bengal Government was invited to prepare a list of the Depressed
Classes and submitted a list including certain criminal tribes and aboriginals
and amounting in all to 31 groups This list was used by the Commissioner for
Education in writing his quinquennial report on the progress of education in
India for the years 1912-17. The term thusintroduced remained and both the
Calcutta University Commission (1917-19) and the Census Report for 1921
contained lists of the Depressed Classes. In neither of these last instances,
however, was any clear criterion set forth to show on what grounds the groups
were included. The Indian Statutory Commission, without giving any definite
criterion, referred to them as the “lowest castes recognized as being within the
Hindu religious and social system . . . . Their essential characteristics is that
according to the tenets of orthodox Hinduism, they are, though within the
Hindu system, untouchable—that is to say, that for all other Hindus they cause
pollution by touch and defile food and water. They are denied access to the
interior of an ordinary Hindu temple (though this is also true of some who
would not be classed as ‘untouchable’). They are not only the lowest in the
Hindu social and religious system, but with few individual exceptions are also
at the bottom of the economic scale and are generally quite uneducated. In the
villages they are normally segregated in a Separate quarter and not infrequently
eat food which would not be touched by any section of the Hindu community.”
At a later date the Franchise Committee, driven to lay down simple
criteria, adopted No. 7 and 8 of the distinctions made in the Census Report of
1911. For Bengal these distinctions have been elaborated on behalf of the
Depressed Classes Association as follows:

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

29

(a) castes from whose hands the three high castes or even the
navashakha (that is, the caste Hindus) would not accept water and whose
presence either in the kitchen or in the room where water and cooked food are
kept would pollute the same according to their estimation;
(b) castes who would not be allowed into any public temple and whose
presence there would defile articles of worship;
(c) castes who would not be allowed to enter or to have their meals
inside the dining room of an hotel or eating-house run by caste Hindus;
(d) castes at whose socio-religious functions Shrotriya Brahmins
(that is, the priests) officiating in such functions in the house of the caste
Hindus would not officiate; and
(e) castes who would not be served by the Shrotriya Napit (that is, the
barber) whose services are necessary in various socio-religious functions of
the Hindus.

Harijan, 29-4-1 933

28. MORE DONATIONS
Seth Ghanshyamdas Birla writes to me saying that he has
received from Lala Kamalapat a donation of Rs. 3,000 and a donation
of Rs. 2,000 from Seth Rameshwar Prasad Bagla, both of Cawnpore.
These can be utilized for the David Scheme or general education
work, the only condition being that the donations will be utilized for
the Harijans of that Province.
A sum of Rs. 2,500 has been received from Seth Soniram
Poddar of Rangoon to be used at my discretion for education work
amongst Harijans. This amount also is available for the David Scheme
or for general education work amongst the Harijans, no matter in what
part of India.
There is not, therefore, any dearth, at least for the present, of
scholarships for suitable Harijans, and Seth Ghanshyamdas is bringing
into being a special educational board for the examination and
selection of Harijan candidates for scholarship, more especially of
those coming under the David Scheme.
From Europe £8 have been received from the same friend whose
letter I published in the Harijan a month ago. The letter bringing the
notes says:
30

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am enclosing with my loving Easter wishes £8 that I have saved to
send you at Easter for the Harijans. I am not sending them directly to Delhi as
it is not worth while, and I would rather you disposed of them where you
thought best. I scarcely dare send you such a small sum, but you know I have
saved it with my deepest prayers and love for the holy cause that I have made
my own. You know this now. All my prayers and penances are to try to help
you, and I can so well feel all the difficulties and disappointments you have to
live through. Last Monday on receiving Harijan of 18th March, I had the
feeling so deeply that I was overwhelmed with emotion that I could not
explain. I have read the issue through and through and thank you for it. What
you say of the Ramji Mandir of your childhood is very beautiful. I know so
well that feeling myself. It carries one through life.

Harijan, 29-4-1933

29. LETTER TO BEHRAMJI KHAMBHATTA
April 29, 1933
BHAI KHAMBHATTA,

I got your letter. I hope you are better now. It will help you if
you live only on milk. You may certainly drink fruit juices with it. If
the milkman brings the animal to your house and milks her in your
presence, you should drink such fresh unboiled milk without heating
it. Keep me informed.
Why were you upset about that one rupee? It was a mistake on
Chandrashankar’s part to have mentioned it, but you should not pay
any attention to the matter. There is no reference to the sum of
Rs. 500. Never mind if anybody who reads about that one rupee says
that Khambhatta has now become a miser or beggar. On the contrary,
wouldn’t it be a good thing?
Blessings from

BAPU
DR. B EHRAMJI KHAMBHATTA
KEKUSHRU C OTTAGE
LORDWICK P ARK, M AHABALESSWAR
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6604. Also C.W. 4394. Courtesy:
Tehmina Khambhatta

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

31

30. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 29, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your postcard. I will ask Devdas about Manilal’s bill
Panditji and Lakshmibehn came and saw me. Narmada also was with
them. I was pained to hear about Amina. I will write to her. Read that
letter and give it to her if you approve of it. If I cannot write today, I
will write later when I get time. Meanwhile, manage as you think best.
They told me about Ramabehn also. I intend to write 1 to her too.
Show as much love as you can. But human love must have some limit
also, for how can we know when love may become moha 2? One’s love,
therefore, should never be at the cost of one’s duty, no matter even if
such conduct seems cruel. If anybody who looks at the matter
superficially were to believe that I am being cruel to . . .3, I would not
blame him. At present . . .4 is bound to think me cruel. But what can I
do? My regard for dharma will not let me adopt any other course.
What is true of me is also true of you. You should, therefore, follow
what seems to you to be your dharma even at the risk of being
accused of cruelty or inviting my criticism.
I got yesterday your letter about N. It proved that Vallabhbhai’s
interpretation was correct. I am, therefore, making preparations for
sending her. I shall probably be able to send her on Monday.
Assuming that she will arrive on that day, send a cart to the station.
Probably Dr. Margarete Spiegel also will accompany her. Even if I
don’t receive your consent about her, I will assume it. At the
[Ahmedabad] station they will get into the metre gauge train which
connects with the Gujarat Mail. You should remember that both the
ladies are to be trained for Harijan work. You must strictly follow the
rule that neither they nor any other European whom we may admit
should be permitted to have any connection with the civil
disobedience movement. I am specially writing to the Government
about those two women. They and others who may join the Ashram
should I strictly follow the Ashram rules and you should see that they
do so. If they do not observe the rules or become a source of trouble
1
2
3
4

32

Vide “Letter to Ramabehn Joshi”, 1-5-1933.
Ignorant attachment
The names have been omitted.
ibid.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to you, I don’t at all intend that you should still let them remain. If
that happens, inform me immediately. The food requirement of both
is simple. I very much doubt if they will be able to digest jowar and
bajri. You will have to provide fruit and milk to both in fairly good
quantities, otherwise they will not be able to keep up their strength. N.
does not include milk and ghee in her diet at present. Both cat with
relish thick wheat rotlas without ghee or butter, nine inches in
diameter and baked twice till they are crisp and without ghee or
butter. They eat these rotlas and chew them without the help of any
liquid. N. does not drink milk or eat ghee at present. Her food is such
rotlas, papaw, oranges, and uncooked vegetables like cucumber,
tomatoes, cabbage, carrots, etc. She will, however, drink milk there if
necessary. Her son gets three pounds of milk daily. He also eats
toasted rotli and fruits. If we coax him very much, he eats a little
uncooked vegetable. He doesn’t care for sweets at all, but greatly
enjoys drinking fresh unboiled milk. He eats every article one by one.
I hope nobody will spoil this child by teaching him to drink tea or
coffee or eat sweets. His energy is boundless. We have in the Ashram
other children who are as self-willed as he is, but he does not cling to
his mother all the time. He has produced on me the impression that he
can live with anybody. It is very desirable that nobody there should,
out of false love, tempt him to eat unwholesome things. For the rest,
we should trust to his and our fate. I am sending N. there with great
hopes. I have cherished her like a daughter for the last three or four
months. I have preserved many of her letters. There is nothing in her
life which she wishes to hide. I have advised her to bury the memory
of all persons who had fallen under her spell. But she has assured me
that she does not wish to hide from me a single guilty action or
thought of hers, and thereby won my initial confidence. But I can give
no guarantee about her future conduct. I am acting on the basis of
complete trust in her. Give her suitable work from time to time within
her capacity. She has great ability. She is extremely active and wants
to do good. If she can reduce herself to a cypher, she will be able to
do much. If she becomes proud of her ability or her noble intentions
or good work, she will fall. For the present give her such manual work
as she can do. Make arrangements to help her to pick up Hindi
quickly. Her power of grasping is very good. She already knows a
little Hindi.
Margarete is of a different type. She is 35 years old and,
therefore, her character is practically formed. She is a woman of great
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

33

learning and is quick in learning things by heart, but she is not very
intelligent. She is obstinate, but her motives are pure. I think her life
has been blameless. She has great love for the Ashram. But she has no
sense of proportion when she speaks. Ever since she has been here,
she has been talking about the Ashram in season and out of season.
She has left the country and come to India because of the movement
in Germany against her but she has no plan before her. I-am sending
N. there willingly and with great joy. I don’t feel such joy in sending
Margarete, but we cannot turn her away. She has come merely with
the intention of living in the Ashram. What can we say to her? She will
of course do whatever work she is physically capable of. She has been
a teacher for some years and so you can immediately give her the
work of teaching English. She is eager to do teaching. Even as a
teacher, however, N. is more capable. But since she is joining the
Ashram to atone for her past life, I feel slightly doubtful whether you
should immediately give her such work. If you do wish to give it, you
may certainly do so.
No other instructions seem necessary.
I have become fairly frightened about Kusum 1. They are now
talking about tuberculosis of the intestines. I can put no faith in these
amateurs. I cannot guide you or Kusum very much from here. At
present you are her guardian for every thing. Kashi cannot take any
decision, and I am afraid Kusum is not fit now to decide for herself.
Even as her relation, therefore, you are in the place of her father.
Personally I think that, both from the point of view of our ideals in the
Ashram and from a practical point of view, we should not think of
taking Kusum somewhere else. We should do whatever is possible in
the Ashram itself. Carry out without any hesitation whatever decision
you come to, after discussing the matter with Kusum and Kashi. I can
make one suggestion from here. Tell Talwalkar that he should now
obtain the opinion of some other doctor. He should have a joint
consultation with Haribhai2 and Kanuga and prescribe treatment
according to the opinion of all three of them. If he does not agree to
do this, have a talk with Dr. Kanuga and Dr. Haribhai and, with
Dr. Talwalkar’s permission, get their advice and follow the treatment
which they suggest. If, after the experience that you have had about
Dr. Sharma, you think favourably of him and if he agrees, put Kusum
1
2

34

Daughter of Vrajlal Gandhi
Dr. Haribhai Desai
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in his hands. If he agrees, however, he should not leave the Ashram till
Kusum begins to respond to his treatment. My first suggestion is such
as will meet the approval of practical people. The second will not, but
it is consistent with my attitude in such matters. You probably
remember that when Manu was practically on death-bed, ignoring the
advice of doctors I put her under the treatment of “Ice Doctor” 1. I
have experimented with such impractical treatments on many others,
so I don’t hesitate to make the foregoing suggestion in this case.
However, since I am not on the spot, you should not attach any weight
to my opinion. You should decide independently. I will accept any
decision which you arrive at. I will have no objection at all if you
decide to cling to Dr. Talwalkar’s treatment and trust Kusum’s life
completely to him. I have no doubt at all about his goodness of heart,
nor about his careful attention. Only, he has not been able to impress
me by his methods of treatment and other doctors also do not follow
these. However, we are dealing with the human body which is a thing
as brittle as a glass bangle. Its fate is not in the hands of any doctor,
but rests on the will of one Power alone, so that there is no harm in
believing that ultimately medical treatment is for our satisfaction only
and makes little difference to the result. Don’t we, moreover, sing
every week?—
Lukman2 on being asked, “How many days he had lived”,
Wringing his hand sorrowfully answered, “A few”.

And the Muslim world believes that there has been no hakim in
the world the equal of Lukman, but even he could not save himself. If
that is so, what can Talwalkar or other doctors do?
This part of the letter is positively not for Kusum. It is only for
you to think over. Even if Kashi and others read it, they will
unnecessarily become nervous and get frightened to death. I have
written such alarming things in the full confidence that not a hair on
your body will turn.
The two European ladies will hardly have any letters to write.
Dr. Spiegel will drop a postcard to her mother. N. is not likely to have
any person to whom she might want to write. All the same, you should
personally help them in all such matters.
BAPU
1
2

Dr. M. S. Kelkar
Unani physician

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

35

[PS.]
[Letters for ] Dr. Sharma, Keshu1 and Parnerkar enclosed.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8367. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

31. A SACRED ACTIVITY
I give below an interesting but touching account2 from a Harijan
worker’s experiences which I have been giving from time to time in
these columns.
I will not spoil the picture by writing more on it. It is possible
that because of a long-standing bad habit some may feel disgust on
reading this. Medical books are full of such descriptions. He who does
not read them will not master the science of biology. Moreover, no
one should be shocked because I have described the activity as a
sacred one. That activity itself may appear dirty like that of removing
filth. But just as removal of filth is for purposes of purification, this
activity is meant for cleaning or purifying society. Innocent city
dwellers do not realize that they won’t be able to live for a moment if
these workers do not perform many activities which we despise.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 30-4-1933

32. A MODEL TEMPLE
When Smt. Vijayalakshmi Pandit set foot in Kathiawar for
Harijan welfare work, a scheme to build a model temple in Rajkot was
discussed. I have already made a reference to this. Shri Parashuram
Gopal Masurekar, the well-known lawyer of the place, had taken a
leading part in the deliberations. Under his signature a public appeal
has been issued in connection with the scheme. The following point3
claims our attention.
1

Keshav Gandhi, son of Maganlal Gandhi
This is not translated here. The correspondent had described the process of
skinning animals.
3
This is not translated here. The scheme proposed a temple devoid of any
decorations or jewellery and one which was meant for the entire Hindu population,
irrespective of caste or community. The priest would be a person who did not believe
in untouchability. And as the aim of the temple was to be service, there should be a
night school for adults, a library, a free dispensary, and a religious school attached to
it.
2

36

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

It is mentioned in the statement that even some from among
those who believe in untouchability have welcomed the scheme and
have also agreed to give financial help. Shri Masurekar deserves
congratulations on this scheme. I hope that he will translate it into
reality. It should not be that the beginning would be made only when
many people join the scheme. To my mind, a model temple means an
ideal priest. Bricks and mortar do not make a model temple. If the
priest is good, even a rough hut will shine forth and earnest devotees
will find solace there. And when there is no such priest, even a marble
temple inlaid with mosaic would be a desolate structure. There are
today a number of such famous ruins in India. There are such ancient
places in Mysore which at one time must have been great temples. The
caves of Karla, Ajanta and Gharapuri were temples once. God has
disappeared from there because of want of the priest and instead of
devotees connoisseurs of art go there to see the works of art. Hence I
hope: that the proposed temple at Rajkot will get a good priest.
But whether such a priest is available or not, the scheme for the
temple can be taken up for execution from today. The first task is to
obtain a vast plot of land in the open. I would regard it as
advantageous if it is at a little distance from the village. After selecting
a plot for the temple, other institutions mentioned in the scheme can
be constructed there. To my mind, the foundation-stone of the temple
will have been laid if the people working in this institution get
together in the plot reserved for the temple and repeat the name of
God, because there is a dictum in the Bhagavata that God dwells
where five people get together and repeat the name of Vasudeva. And
where He dwells, there the temple stands.
The Rajkot scheme for the temple is an excellent one whether it
materializes or not, whether it materializes early or late. Everyone can
help implement it to a certain extent. The existing temples can come
alive if the devotees and the priests are in harmony. These days most
Of the temples arc lifeless. Other institutions can be started around
them. The foundation-stone can be laid of the new kinds of temples
suggested by me for the villages. Ancient temples appear to have
come into existence in this very way. Each temple embodies the
conception of a devotee. They built the temples in accordance with
their faiths. The history of some of the temples of Madras is available
today. These temples have Agamas of their own in which we can find
the plan of the temple, the shape of the idol, its size, the ritual of
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

37

worship and rules of purification. And the faith of the Hindus
recognizes these books or pamphlets as divine scriptures.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 30-4-1933

33. STATEMENT ON FAST 1
[April 30, 1933] 2
A tempest has been raging within me for some days. I have been
struggling against it. On the eve of the ‘Harijan Day’ the voice
became insistent, and said, ‘why don’t you do it?’ I resisted it. But the
resistance was vain. And the resolution was made to go on an
unconditional and irrevocable fast for twentyone days, commencing
from Monday noon the 8th May and ending on Monday noon the
29th May.
As I look back upon the immediate past, many are the causes
too sacred to mention that must have precipitated the fast. But they are
all connected with the great Harijan cause. The fast is against nobody
in particular and against everybody who wants to participate in the joy
of it, without for the time-being having to fast himself or herself. But
it is particularly against myself. It is a heart-prayer for the purification
of self and associates, for greater vigilance and watchfulness. But
nobody who appreciates the step about to be taken is to join me. Any
such fast will be a torture of themselves and of me.
Let this fast, however, be a preparation for many such fasts to be
taken by purer and more deserving persons than myself. During all
these months since September last, I have been studying the correspondence and literature and holding prolonged discussions with men
and women, learned and ignorant, Harijans and non-Harijans. The evil
is far greater than even I had thought it to be. It will not be eradicated
by money, external organization and even political power for
Harijans, though all these three are necessary. But to be effective, they
must follow or at least accompany inward wealth, inward organization
and inward power, in other words, self-purification. This can only
come by fasting and prayer. We may not approach the God of Truth
in the arrogance of strength, but in the meekness of the weak and the
helpless.
1
2

38

This was published under the title, “Fast for Purification”.
From The Bombay Chronicle, 1-5-1933; also A.I.C.C. File No. 429
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

But the mere fast of the body is nothing without the will behind
it. It must be a genuine confession of the inner fast, an irrepressible
longing to express truth and nothing but truth. therefore, those only
are privileged to fast for the cause of truth who have worked for it and
who have love in them even for opponents, who are free from animal
passion and who have abjured earthly possessions and ambition. No
one, therefore, may undertake, without previous preparation and
discipline, the fast I have foreshadowed.
Let there be no misunderstanding about the impending fast. I
have no desire to die. I want to live for the cause, though I hope I am
equally prepared to die for it. But I need for me and my fellowworkers greater purity, greater application and dedication. I want
more workers of unassailable purity. Shocking cases of impurity have
come under my notice. I would like my fast to be an urgent appeal to
such people to leave the cause alone.
I know that many of my sanatanist friends and others think that
the movement is a deep political game. How I wish this fast would
convince them that it is purely religious.
If God has more service to take from this body, He will hold it
together despite deprivation of earthly food. He will send me spiritual
food. But He works through earthly agents, and everyone who
believes in the imperative necessity of removing untouchability will
send me the food I need, by working to the best of his or her ability
for the due and complete fulfilment of the pledge given to Harijans in
the name of caste Hindus.
Let co-workers not get agitated over the coming fast. They
should feel strengthened by it. They must not leave their post of duty;
and those who have temporarily retired for much needed rest or for
being cured of ailments are as much at the post as healthy workers
serving in their respective quarters. No one should come to me unless
it be for necessary consultation on matters connected with the
movement.
It is, I hope, needless for me to pray to friends that they will not
ask me to postpone, abandon or vary the approaching fast in any way
whatsoever. I ask them to believe me that the fast has come to me
literally as described above. I, therefore, ask friends in India and all
the world over to pray for me and with me that I may safely pass
through the ordeal and that, whether I live or die, the cause for which
the fast is to be undertaken may prosper.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

39

And may I ask my sanatanist friends to pray that, whatever be
the result of the fast for me, the golden lid that hides Truth may be
removed?
Harijan, 6-5-1933

34. DISCUSSION WITH VALLABHBHAI PATEL1
April 30, 1933
For some time now, I have been vacillating between twentyone
days and forty days. After all, does one express, can one express, all
one’s thoughts to others? Three days have passed since I lost my
sleep. Could it be that I cannot sleep? But, for the last three days I
have not been getting any sleep for hours at a stretch; I might get up
at two in the morning and start work but not once would I doze while
I dictated in the morning, nor even would I want to stretch my limbs,
as if for the last three days I were preparing myself for the great
deluge! It is difficult to say since when the excitement started. On
many occasions, however, thought of a fast would repeatedly come to
my mind and I would drive it away. In the night when I retired I had
no idea that something was coming up today. But after eleven I woke
up, I watched the stars, repeated Ramanama but the same thought
would persistently come to my mind: ‘If you have grown so restless,
why don’t you undertake the fast? Do it.’ The inner dialogue went on
for quite some time. At half past twelve came the clear, unmistakable
voice: ‘You must undertake the fast.’ That was all. Now having
resolved to make it a twenty-one days’ fast, I took no time in deciding
that as a prisoner I should undertake it after eight days’ [notice].
Without it the task of Harijan service is just impossible. If I don’t do
this much the rot in Harijan work will reach the heart and destroy it
altogether. I, therefore, got up and immediately began to write out the
statement 2 and I, had just finished the last sentence when you came up
for the prayers.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 7-5-1933

1
2

40

Extracted from the Gujarati “Sparks from the Sacred Fire’’
Vide “Statement on Fast”, 30-4-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

35. TELEGRAM TO SECRETARY, HOME DEPARTMENT,
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
April 30, 1933
S ECRETARY
HOME DEPARTMENT
S IMLA
FOR
REASONS
WHOLLY
UNCONNECTED
WITH
GOVERNMENT
AND
SOLELY
CONNECTED
WITH
HARIJAN
MOVEMENT
AND
OBEDIENCE
PEREMPTORY CALL
FROM WITHIN
RECEIVED
ABOUT
MIDNIGHT
I
HAVE TO TAKE TWENTY-ONE DAYS’ UNCONDITIONAL IRREVOCABLE
FAST WITH WATER SODA AND SALT BEGINNING FROM NOON EIGHTH
MAY NEXT ENDING NOON TWENTY-NINTH MAY. FAST MIGHT HAVE COMMENCED
AT
ONCE
BUT
FOR
MY
BEING
PRISONER
AND
MY
ANXIETY
TO ENABLE LOCAL AUTHORITY RECEIVE
NECESSARY INSTRUCTIONS
FOR
ARRANGEMENTS
DURING
FAST
AND
AVOID
ALL
POSSIBLE
EMBARRASSMENT
TO
GOVERNMENT.

Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No. 20-X

36. TELEGRAM TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
May 1, I933
S ATIS DAS GUPTA
15 C OLLEGE S QUARE , C ALCUTTA
YOU
GOD

HEMPRABHA CONTINUE
PROGRAMME
MY
COMPANION
DURING
FAST.

WITHOUT

INTERRUPTION.

BAPU
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(3), Pt. IV, p. 387

37. TELEGRAM TO URMILA DEVI
May 1, 1933
URMILA DEVI
24 R AMESH MITTER R OAD , B HAWANIPUR
C ALCUTTA
YOU

MUST

NOT

WORRY

OVER

IMPENDING

FAST.

WHY NO LETTER?

BAPU
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(3), Pt. IV, p. 389
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

41

38. TELEGRAM TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
May 1, 1933
S HETH JAMNALALJI
S HAILA ASHRAM, A LMORA
YOU
HOPE

MUST

NOT

DISTURB

PROGRAMME

REST

FOR

IMPENDING

FAST.

PROGRESSING.

BAPU
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(3), Pt. IV, p. 391

39. LETTER T0 RAOJIBHAI PATEL
May I, 1933
CHI. RAOJIBHAI,

The fast which commences from Monday is intended as
punishment for those also who believe that they are too weak to fulfil
the vow they have taken—not to reproach them but to help them.
Lakshmibehn has complained against you that you have been
talking ill about the Ashram. I am sure there must be some error in
this.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9000

40. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
May 1, 1933
CHI. LILAVATI,

I got your letter. Be happy instead of being sad at the news of
my fast. If you have Narandas’s permission for whatever you do in
the Ashram, you need not fear any criticism. Do not listen to any
criticism. If you hear any against your wish, immediately tell
Narandas about it. That will give vent to your anger. Try to overcome
during the fast whatever shortcomings you have. The fast is being
42

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

undertaken to help everyone to overcome his or her shortcomings.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9573. Also C.W. 6545. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

41. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
May 1, 1933
CHI. RAMA,

I got your letter. If you think that Dr. Sharma’s treatment
worsens the condition of the arm, you should give it up.
I understand about Dhiru.
From my talk with Panditji and Lakshmibehn, I see that they
believe that you have a good deal of stiffness in you, that you are not
sufficiently frank, that you have a fairly good measure of pride and
that you enjoy harassing, and if possible, humiliating Narandas. I have
stated all this in my own words. But this is the impression I formed
from what they said. If there is any truth in this, you should get rid of
that weakness. We may endure that disease of the bone from which
you are suffering, but we ought not to tolerate such weaknesses in
ourselves. For the bone disease, we require the services of a doctor
other than ourselves; for an internal disease, however, we should be
our own doctor. In other words, we have to depend upon our own
resources. I certainly wish that my intended fast should produce this
result, namely, that all the impurity in the Ashram may he washed
clean.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5350

42. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
May 1, 1933
CHI. PREMA,

My fast will be for all the inmates of the Ashram, including you.
You should, therefore, get rid of all your diseases.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

43

I assume that you have kept a copy of your questions1 and so I
give here only brief replies to them. I am hard pressed for time today.
1. If persuasion does not succeed, you may become silent and
pray in your heart for that person, whether she is a girl or a grown-up
woman. This will help you to overcome your impatience.
2. We should know what is meant by ‘necessity’ in this question.
Suppose that I am reciting Sanskrit verses and leading a prayer, and
just then I see a snake. It is necessary that I should catch it, and I may,
therefore, stop reciting the verses and violate a rule. I may also do that
if I feel an immediate call of nature at that time. If, however, I feel
thirsty, I should control my desire for some time and go on reciting
the verses. You felt something in the throat and yet continued. That
was worse than foolishness.
3. We may disregard any social practice or custom which
obstructs our quest for truth.
4. If you have absolute faith in me, you should believe that what
you regard as the voice of your conscience may not be so. If,
however, that voice is so direct as to be more powerful even than your
faith in me, you should follow it whatever the cost.
5. It is not possible to reply to this question categorically.
6. I do not follow this question.
7. If a person is often found telling lies or shirking work, even a
1
Which read: (I) What should one do and how should one overcome one’s
impatience if someone older, younger or of the same age misbehaves despite
persuasion and thereby creates a bad impression on others and time is wasted and
work delayed? (2) How would it affect others if a person violated Ashram rule or
discipline under some necessity while doing one’s duty? (3) How far should we pay
regard to social practice or custom in the path of satyagraha? (4) What would be my
duty as a satyagrahi when I disagree with a renowned mahatma like you on a certain
step which I find to be right according to the voice of my conscience and which might
violate the rules of the institution? (5) Should one love the individual for the sake of
the institution or the institution for the individual? (6) By what test can one find out
that one has bad thoughts about others? (7) If a person is found on every occasion
telling lies, or shirking work or being selfish, and others too have complained about
it, would it be proper for a satyagrahi to have doubts about him? (8) What is the limit
for simple living? To embroider one’s sari, to wear fashionable blouses, to adorn the
hands and neck with flowers, wear chappals —should this be considered as love for art
or breaking the Ashram principles? (9) Would it be slander or violence if in the
Ashram one person finds fault with another and commits the same fault himself, i.e.,
indulges in mutual fault-finding? (10) As those who join the Ashram do so with
different motives, should we judge each of them from his own standpoint?

44

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

lover of truth will suspect him of doing the same on another occasion,
but will, despite his suspicion, love him and continue to give him
opportunities.
8. There can be no one rule for all people in this matter. It
depends on one’s attitude. However, simplicity should not be
sacrificed for the sake of art.
9. Mutual fault-finding is always bad. It is petty-mindedness to
retort, ‘You are no better.’
10. This is implied in ahimsa.
Thinking that you may have had no time to keep a copy of
your questions, I return them with this.
I am sending two women1 to the Ashram. I hesitate very much to
do so, but I send them because I feel that I ought to. I do hope that
they will not increase your work but will help you. Make some
arrangement to help them to learn Hindi.
I should like Sushila2 to spend this vacation in the Ashram. That
is likely to give rest to both of you. I hope you know the English
saying that change of occupation is rest. There is a good deal of truth
in it. Treat this only as brain-wave which I got while writing this letter.
If Sushila has made some other plan, I certainly don’t want her to
abandon it to please me.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10342. Also C.W. 6781. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

43. LETTER TO JAMNABEHN GANDHI
May 1, 1933
CHI. JAMNA,

You have completely relieved me by your excellent letter. After
your giving a certificate to Narandas, I don’t require one from
anybody else. But I hope you know who can give a certificate. Can a
person who does not know how to cook give a certificate to a cook?
Looking at the matter from that point of view, you should have a
1
Margarete Spiegel and N.; “vide also “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”,
29-4-1933.
2
Sushila Pai

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

45

higher degree of yoga, equanimity and concentration, than Narandas.
If it is so, it means I have two persons instead of one who may be
described as sthitaprajnas1.
If Dr. Purushottam has left, haven’t I sent you Dr. Sharma? He
seems to have filled you with colours indeed. Even if you do pot
benefit from his treatment, it will certainly do no harm. Continue it
with complete faith. Try whatever changes in diet he may suggest. If
the result is not satisfactory, he himself’ will ask you to give them up.
Try to win over Keshu if you can.
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 878. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

44. LETTER TO AMINA QURESHI
May 1, 1933
DEAR DAUGHTER AMINA,

I hear from Panditji that you do not keep or show accounts, and
spend too much. As you know I have given you full liberty. I shall be
greatly pained if you misuse it.
The doctor writes that you have lost all that you had gained by
the fast. Do not behave thus. Give up tobacco. Give up rice. If you
control the craving for some time, you will feel you are all the better
for having given up those things. Remember whose daughter you are
and where you were brought up. You are not one of those modern
girls. You have been with me since the Phoenix days. I have dandled
you on my knees. Do not disappoint me.
A thousand blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 10778. Courtesy: Gulam Rasul Qureshi

45. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS 2
May 1, 1933
Almost the first question asked by the Pressmen was, whether it was possible
for him under any circumstances to abandon his fast. Gandhiji replied:
1

Literally, ‘of steady intellect’. For the full meaning of the phrase.
The source had reported: “Gandhiji received Pressmen inside the jail cell,
where, for the past few days, he has been holding his office. The mango tree is not
providing the requisite protection against the increasing heat.”
2

46

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Humanly speaking, there is absolutely no possibility of my
abandoning the fast.
This was followed by more questions on his statement. Asked, if he could
throw light on the “shocking cases of impurity” referred to in his statement, Gandhiji
said that it was not possible for him to do that; but he had no grievance against
anybody in particular and, if he had any grievance at all, it was against himself.
Gandhiji proceeded:

I went to bed that night without the slightest feeling that I would
take such a step. No single event can be held responsible for this
decision, but-it undoubtedly is the result of the accumulation of a
long series of events extending over a fairly long period. It is not that
I was blind to them before. They were producing their silent and
unconscious effect on my mind.
Replying to another question, the Mahatma said:

I do expect that my fast is merely a precursor of many such
fasts, and if I survive this, I may feel called upon to undertake another
fast. 1
All these twenty-one days I will be sipping Ramarasa2. If it
does not sustain me, how is the juice of mosambis going to help? One
who wants to destroy the Ravana of untouchability must partake of
Ramarasa every now and then. And if my devotion to Rama is
sincere—and it certainly is—He will not let my body drop for I still
wish that Rama will sustain this body dedicated to Him. You Harijans,
however, must remember one thing. You should be amenable to the
infallible remedy which I have adopted. Realize that for you too there
is no other way. And let the ‘touchable’ Hindus say and do what they
like; you on your part should cleanse your body and soul and
become true Harijans. Your saviour as well as mine is the Lord above.3
It would be blasphemy to regard me as your saviour. And I said to
you that the love of God is life-sustaining, but then, if you would
allow me to say it, what does it matter if the body withers away? Do
not dead men continue to do work?
1
The following paragraph is extracted from Harijanbandhu, 7-5-1933, which
had reported that Gandhiji was replying to some of the questions put by Harijans.
2
Literally, ‘juice of God’s name or God’s love’. This was in response to a
suggestion from a Harijan that during the fast Gandhiji should allow him. self the
juice of two mosambis daily.
3
This was in reference to a fear expressed in the Harijan’s statement that with
Gandhiji’s death the Harijans would have no protector.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

47

At this stage, it is necessary for the public to understand the very
vital difference between the September fast and the impending one.
The September fast was a conditional one, made for a particular
purpose. But in this case, it is not directed to any concrete purpose at
all.
Therefore, this fast can be undertaken at any moment and it is
after the manner, common enough in Hinduism. Whenever a great
reformation and revival is going on, people in order to ensure purity
and acceleration of their object, undertake a fast. Such a fast is
universally acknowledged to be a good thing in itself. It is its own
justification and my fast claims no more merit. I might have
undertaken it without the tussle I was engaged in, but perhaps, I had
no courage.
I was weighed down with the tremendous responsibility and,
therefore, though the prompting came to me more than once, I
resisted it. A religious movement does not depend for its success on
the intellectual or material resources of its sponsors, but it depends
solely upon the spiritual resources, and fasting is the best known
method of adding to these resources. Not every fast brings about the
desired result.
I have given some of the conditions in my statement, and it is
claimed in my statement, and it is claimed by those who have
conducted religious movements that intellectual, material and other
things follow spiritual capital but should never be independent of it.
Asked, if he hoped to survive the 21 days’ fast, Gandhiji reassuringly said:

Oh! I survived the twenty-one days’ fast 1 that was undertaken
ten years ago. Weaker men than myself have undertaken longer fasts
and survived. Spiritual sustenance has great possibilities.
At this stage, Gandhiji was reminded of his condition during the September
fast when six days’ fasting brought him almost to the verge of collapse, but he
humorously replied:

The age of miracles is not yet over.
He felt more than optimistic about his ability to go through the ordeal. Asked
whether he would remain in Poona in case Government released him, Gandhiji replied
that it was very difficult for him to say that, because he did not contemplate any
release.
To a suggestion that his fast, which coincided with the sitting of the Joint
Select Committee, would be taken as an act dictated by political motives, Gandhiji
replied that he had not embarked on the fast voluntarily. It had not been in his plan.

1

48

From September 18 to October 8, 1924.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

He had not compassed it. He tried to resist it even that night, but he could not and for
three days before taking the decision, he could not sleep properly. He did not know
what was happening to him. Surely, it was not indigestion. But after he took the
decision on Saturday night, he slept well.1
The Bombay Chronicle, 2-5-1933; also Harijanbandhu, 7-5-193S

46. TELEGRAM TO MIRABEHN 2
[May 2, 1933] 3
TELL

BA

WEIGHT
HER

HER

FATHER

WOULD

LOVE.

SHE

IMPOSED

HAVE

KILLED

MUST

REMAIN

ON

HER

ANY

A

OTHER

COMPANION

WOMAN.

COURAGEOUS

TO

I

END.

WHOSE

TREASURE

FOR

YOU

I

HAVE NOTHING BUT ONLY THANKS TO, GOD FOR GIVING YOU TO ME.
YOU

MUST

NEWEST OF

PROVE
GOD’S

YOUR

BRAVERY

MISSIONS

FOR

BY

ME.

SUSTAINED

JOY

OVER

THIS

LOVE.

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6271. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9737

47. TELEGRAM TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 2, 1933
S ATYAGRAHAASHRAM
S ABARMATI
HOPE

N.

WITH

CHILDREN

SEE

EXTRA.

NONE

RUPEES
SHOULD
AND

REACHED.

DERIVE

PARASHURAM
ME.

GIVE

SHOULD

STRENGTH

SHOULD

HIM
BE

FARE

LEAVE
FOR

DISTURBED

FOR PURIFICATION

NEXT

POONA

OVER
GREATER

FAST

AND
BUT

TRAIN
FOUR
ALL

RENUNCIATION

DEDICATIONTION.

BAPU
From a microfilm: M.M.U./I; also S.N. 21132

1

For Gandhiji’s talk with the Times of India representative, vide Appendix
“Interview to the Times of India”, 2-5-1933.
2
This was in reply to the addressee’s telegram dated May 2, 1933, which read:
“Got news of fast only today. Ba wishes me say she greatly shocked. Feels decision
very wrong but you have not listened to any others so will not hear her. She sends her
heartfelt prayers. I am stunned but know it is the voice of God and in that sense
rejoice even in midst of anguish. Deepest prayers. Love. Writing” (S.N. 21110).
3
From S.N. 21110; the original, as delivered, bears the date “May 4, 1933”.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

49

48. TELEGRAM TO G. D. BIRLA
[May 2, 1933] 1
GHANSHYAMDAS BIRLA
GWALIOR
DELIGHTED
CALCUTTA

YOUR
FOR

TELEGRAM 2 .
TREATMENT.

STRONGLY
LET

ADVISE

THAKKAR

YOU

PROCEED

IF

THOUGHT

COME

NECESSARY.

From a copy: C.W. 7936. Courtesy: G. D. Birla. Also S.N. 21113

49. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 1/2,1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got a letter from you today also, along with Duncan’s. He
should have taken your permission, but how could he know that it was
necessary to do so? The best thing would be to have a complete list of
the rules to be observed both by newcomers and the old inmates, so
that a copy of the rules could be given to every newcomer as soon as
he joins. If you draft the rules in Gujarati, I will translate them into
English. Or Duncan himself may do that. He is certainly a capable
man.
It was very bad indeed for so many persons to harass one
person. Since you have already explained that to the people, I will not
write anything concerning it. However, read my letter to Duncan and
explain its substance to everybody.
I have gone through Titus’s report. I like his suggestions. I
think it would be better if the accounts relating to his work were kept
separately, though under your supervision.
1

From S.N. 21113; the original, as delivered, bears the date “May 3, 1933”.
Dated May 2 from Delhi which read: “Have just received news. I fully believe
with God’s blessings you are sure to survive the ordeal successfully. I assure you,
since the September fast there has been wonderful awakening all round which should
have given you nothing but immense satisfaction. Yet, I feel nothing but undiluted
good will come out of the present fast, although on personal grounds am somewhat
nervous. Hope you will write me special information, if any. Am thinking of
cancelling Calcutta programme and reaching Poona about eighth. Thakkar Bapa is
here.”
2

50

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Titus should be given one assistant to help him.
It would not be a bad idea to buy a mule or pony for carrying
milk. So far as I can see, ultimately there will be a motor-van.
I also approve of his suggestion for buying two machines.
I had never approved of the business in Bidaj. I, therefore, fully
approve of his suggestion.
Is cows’ urine being utilized now? There ought to be a hut for
storing milk as suggested by him. Think over all these suggestions
and implement as many of them as seem good to you. Jekibehn’s
sons will not come to the Ashram. They are studying. I had a postcard
today from Mahalakshmi. She says that she will arrange after she is
released in two months’ time.
My hand has got tired with the effort of writing this much, and
so I must be brief with the rest.
I had a long discussion with Panditji and Lakshmibehn. From
among the suggestions discussed, the following should be carried if
they are not already being followed. If the bread generally remains
half-baked, the bakery should be closed. The persons who work in it
should not keep changing. If it gets too hot near the furnace, there
must be some defect in it. There should be no emission of heat at all.
The use of potatoes and other tubers as vegetables should be stopped.
They may be served as substitutes for rotli.
We must grow the required vegetables in the Ashram even if it is
more expensive to do so than to buy them. Tomatoes and one bhaji
should grow in the Ashram all the year round. Ultimately we shall not
incur any loss by doing this. We must buy no vegetables from outside
except for persons who are ill. In my view, unboiled milk and wheat is
a complete diet. Nothing else is necessary. It is not necessary to have
all the items in one’s food every day. Sometimes one may have only
milk and sometimes only rotlas. And it is also essential for physical
and spiritual health to eat only one thing during the whole day
occasionally. I would not fix any particular days for such monodiet,
but serve it according to convenience. If a large quantity of milk
happens to be left over, I would keep the kitchen closed on that day.
And if a large stock of potatoes has accumulated, I would not serve
rotlas on that day.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

51

When no vegetable can be served, I would have tamarind fruits
plucked from the trees and serve chutney prepared from their pulp
crushed with salt. Eating tamarind daily may be harmful, but eating it
occasionally can do nothing but good. However, nobody ought to
pluck even one tamarind fruit to gratify his or her palate.
I will write more about prayers after I get your opinion.
It would be more convenient if diners sit in the kitchen in rows
according to the items to be served. There should be one row of
people who want rice and another for those who are to be served the
normal menu. You may ask a guest in advance what food he will have.
Or he should be offered all the items at the time of the meal, and he
may accept whatever he likes. I know that this would be a little too
complicated.
The news that my fast of 21 days will commence from the 8th
will have become old by the time you get this letter. Let nobody be
upset by it. On the contrary, all should wake up.
I expect most from the Ashram. There is plenty of impurity in
it. This impurity must be banished. This fast is addressed to all
co-workers, and the Ashram is naturally included. If we had as much
of the spirit of dedicated service in the Ashram as we need, I would be
dancing with joy today and be sure that, when the time comes, all the
inmates would go and plant themselves on the sands of the Sabarmati
with unshakable determination of fast unto death. My impending fast
is preliminary to similar fasts by other people.
Everybody should do the following:
The people should either concentrate completely on the prayer
or not attend it at all. Those who bring only their bodies to the prayer
and leave their minds behind violate truth. Instead of doing that, let
them follow their own inclination. The best thing, of course, would be
for such persons to leave the Ashram. Nobody should talk ill about
others behind their backs. If impure thoughts disturb anybody, he
should confess them to you at least if to nobody else. Or he may write
a note and inform you. If he cannot control such thoughts and
remains pure only outwardly, he should leave the Ashram Those who
do not like any of the Ashram rules must leave. If, moreover, we can
fix a code of conduct during this period of self-purification, it should
be accepted. An inmate of the Ashram who is ill should be satisfied
with whatever treatment is possible in the Ashram itself. At the most he
or she may be sent to one of the branches of the Ashram if absolutely
necessary.
52

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Nobody should shirk work or steal anything or hide anything.
Everybody should be content to eat the food that is served, and should
eat all food as medicine and not for the pleasure of the palate. It
should be remembered that pulses, rice and tubers are not essential.
Spices, sugar and jaggery also are unnecessary. Wheat or bajri or
jowar and unboiled milk constitute complete food. It will be enough
if vegetables and fruits are occasionally included.
Envy or malicious criticism of one another should be regarded
as sin. Everybody should do some Harijan work. In short, I will expect
the Ashram to get rid of all spiritual maladies during this fast. If it
cannot do this, I have no right to expect anything from other people.
Show this portion to all the inmates. I have decided to send N. and
Margarete. But I will reconsider the matter if I get a letter from you
tomorrow conveying your decision against such a step. Give the ladies
the clothes, utensils and other things which they may require. And see
also that satisfactory toilet arrangements are made for them. In regard
to their food, it is not necessary to do anything more than prepare one
or two things specially for them in addition to the normal menu. I
have already explained other things. The child will easily mix with the
other children. It will be enough if he does not learn any bad habit.
Since Jamna herself has given you a testimonial, I am sure you
will not worry. Don’t let anybody run down here.
BAPU

[PS.]
Tell Duncan the history of both the ladies and take whatever
help you require from him.
May 2, 1933
I wrote the foregoing yesterday, but could not dispatch the letter
owing to heavy pressure-of other work. N. will have reached the
Ashram before you get this letter. I got your letter yesterday too. I
have started writing this before the prayer. I got up at a quarter past
one.
Your letter is heart-rending. There is no limit to my hard
heartedness. You will have received the wire1 which I sent today. I have
asked you to send Parashuram here immediately on receipt of it. You
must have done that. I have called the children too. I have also asked
you to give him the railway fare from Ahmedabad to Poona plus four
1

Vide “Telegram to Narandas Gandhi”, 2-5-1933.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

53

rupees. We need not tolerate such persons in the Ashram, for it is
beyond our capacity to reform them. If they are with me, I can get
some work out of them’ too. But that would serve no useful purpose.
If there are others like him, ask them all to leave. You may clean up
everything. Henceforth, only those who willingly and scrupulously
observe the rules may stay in the Ashram. My hope is that in the
Ashram itself there will be persons who will have cultivated sufficient
fitness and will undertake an indefinite fast when the time comes. I see
that time drawing near. Such is the nature of my intended fast. It is the
first step in self-purification. If the Ashram will not be the first to
bring that self-purification, whom else can we expect to do so? This is
a much more difficult task than fighting for salt. Only those who are
eager to cultivate fitness for offering themselves as sacrifice may stay
in the Ashram.
You will have to think about the old families in the Ashram who
may not be ready to join in this. You can stop admitting newcomers.
Those persons who joined the Ashram for the specific purpose of
learning some work may be asked to leave if they are not without
other means of support. Persons who have beers living in the Ashram
because they have no other means of support may remain, namely,
Narmada Rana. But please treat all these as passing thoughts which
occur to me in my solitude here. Do only what you think proper and
what appeals to you and is within your capacity. I have given you
complete freedom. I don’t want you to be burdened with too heavy
responsibility for the affairs of the Ashram during the 21 days of the
fast. Nobody should expect you to humour him or her. If any of the
old families living there do not wish to join in this work of
self-purification, you may permit them to cook their own meals. An
allowance should be fixed for them after careful calculation and they
should live within that sum. Any saving they make will be theirs, and,
if they overspend during one month, they should meet the balance
from the allowance for the next month. If you cannot get a full-time
worker for the departments, such as the dairy, which must be
continued, engage paid workers and maintain them. Or you may
reduce the work in these departments to the extent necessary.
Personally, I don’t think that will be necessary. However, I cannot
dictate the final decision in this matter. Call all the people together
and think over these suggestions with them. There should be no
coercion in regard to anything. From the very beginning it has been
54

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

assumed that the Ashram may have to sacrifice itself one day in this
manner. Probably some of the inmates will remember that I have
often explained this possibility. I am not, therefore, putting forward an
altogether new suggestion. Even those who agree to join should
knowthat, though they may be ready to undertake an indefinite fast
with irrevocable determination, they must go on with their work for
the time being as if they expected to live for ever. As we always go on
working even though we know that one day we shall receive the
summons from Death, so should we do now, and with all the greater
devotion now since we should be prepared to die of our own free will.
Duncan, being a guest, may be exempted from many things, but
that certainly does not mean that he should be free to approach me
directly. Tilakam is an unhappy man, and, moreover, he is a Harijan
and a worthy man in other respects. I think highly of both these
persons. If your experience is different, please let me know.
I feel confused in my mind regarding . . . 1. I don’t like his
venture. It is certainly a violation of his pledge. You may give him the
capital that he wants, but I suppose it will be on personal security. That
doesn’t seem to me proper. We cannot assume that he will necessarily
succeed in his enterprise. He doesn’t seem to have learnt any
humility. If he has done so, he should accept a job anywhere.
Ambalalbhai2 would certainly offer him one as fitter. If there is
nobody in the Ashram now to utilize the equipment which we have,
Ranchhodbhai or Ambalalbhai can remove it to his factory. They will
at least keep it safe, if they do not buy it up. But I may be mistaken
even in assuming this. I have written this only for your information
You are free to ignore the suggestion completely. It is possible that
you have understood . . . better and that I am doing injustice because
I am disillusioned with him. If, however, I am right in my view, it is
possible that . . . will not immediately be able to earn enough to
support the whole family. If so, the Ashram must meet the balance of
his expenses. We certainly cannot leave him on the street. I am
thinking only of our dharma in this matter. After all, doesn’t that
family mean . . .3 himself? Of course I will not abandon it because . .
is no more with us, but I would certainly make it submit to as much
hardship as it can endure.
1
2
3

The name has been omitted.
Ambalal Sarabhai
The names have been omitted.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

55

Have I forgotten about Joshi completely? This is known to
happen to persons who are nearing their death.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8369. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

50. LETTER TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE
May 2, 1933
DEAR GURUDEV,

It is just now 1.45 a.m. and I think of you and some other
friends. If your heart endorses contemplated fast, I want you blessings
again.1
My love and respects.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 4638

51. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
May 2, 1933
MY DEAR BROTHER,

Dare I ask for your blessings for the coming yajna2? It is now
nearing 2 a.m. I have left my bed among other things to write this
begging letter. If the fast does not meet with your approval, I know
you are too true a brother to grant my request merely to please me.3
With love,
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
Letters of Srinivasa Sastri, p.,252
1
In his reply, Rabindranath Tagore had written: “It is not unlikely that you are
mistaken about the imperative necessity of your present vow, and when we realize
that there is a grave risk of its fatal termination, we shudder at the possibility of the
tremendous mistake never having the opportunity of being rectified. I cannot help
beseeching you not to offer such an ultimatum’ of mortification to God for His
scheme of things and almost refuse the gift of life with all its opportunities to hold up
to its last moment the ideal of perfection which justifies humanity. My misgivings
may be the outcome of a timidity of ignorance” (Mahatma, Vol. III, pp. 247-8).
2
The proposed 21-day fast
3
For the addressee’s reply, vide Appendix “Letter from V. S. Srinivasa Sastri”,
7-5-1933.

56

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

52. LETTER TO MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA
May 2, 1933
BHAI SAHEB,

It is getting on to 2 in the morning. Do send me your blessings
for the coming yajna if you can. I am only trying to do what I learnt
from my parents since childhood. Mother spent almost half her life in
fasting. What can I do? I am unable to serve the cause of the Harijans
through intellect alone.1
Your younger brother,

MOHANDAS
From Hindi: C.W. 9668

53. LETTER TO RADHA GANDHI2
Between 1-4 at Night, May 2, 1933
None of you should get upset by the news about my fast. The
strength of the Ashram lies in it and it protects dharma. Fasting is an
essential feature of Hinduism. I would not be surprised if thousands
like me sacrifice themselves in this great yajna for the uplift of
Harijans. Even if I cannot write again, you should know that none of
you will be out of my thoughts even for a moment.
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9535. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Joshi

1

The addressee’s telegram in reply to this read: “God bless you. As I have said
in my fast-day public speech, I am fully convinced that He has guided you in your
decision. I have been praying that He may grant you strength to go successfully
through your great vrata and have faith that He will. Pray become ananyabhava. Shut
out, as much as you can, all thought except of Him, who is our sole shelter and
support. In addition to japa or Dwadashakshar Mantra, please practise during part of
the day ‘soham’ with every inhalation and exhalation. This will help to keep up the
stream of life within. Some great tapasvis are watching you with tender care, and vast
millions are praying for you. Please let the atmosphere about you be disturbed as
little as possible by any talk except of ‘Vasudeva’ who dwells in all sentient beings.
Remember His injunction and promise: Matchittah sarva durgani matprasadat
tarishyasi (Fixing thy thought on Me, thou shall surmount every difficulty by My
grace). Will meet you as soon as health permits” (The Hindu, 11-5-1933).
2
Daughter of Maganlal Gandhi, married to Deepak Dutt Chowdhri
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

57

54. LETTER TO NANIBEHN P. JHAVERI
Between 1-4 at Night, May 2, 1933
I hold neither life nor death dearer than each other. Whatever
happens will be for good. Be more alert.
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9536. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Joshi

55. LETTER TO KUSUMBEHN DESAI
Between 1-4 at Night, May 2, 1933
If I survive the fast, I will write to you as I have been doing. Do
not be upset by the fast. Life and death are in God’s hand. If He does
not want to take more work from me, then He will not and the body
will perish. Have you understood Chapter XI [of the Gita]? How God
devours human beings and destroys them? Sooner or later that will be
the fate of us all. Let mine be so for the cause of Harijans.
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9537. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Joshi

56. LETTER TO RAMJI
Between 1-4 at:Night, May 2, 1933
I felt very much pained on reading a summary of the letters. It
is difficult to believe their contents. Is this the result of my labour of
all these years? I feel pained if all this, or even a part of it only, is true.
It would mean that persons like Mathuradas1 and Narandas are utterly
worthless; on the other hand, if these allegations are false, it is a pity
that Ramji has not softened in spite of so much having been done for
him. However, if your heart does not soften, the fault must be mine
and not yours. Was I not born in a community which is among those
that have suppressed the Harijans? Let my fast do what I could not do
otherwise.
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9538. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Joshi

1

58

Mathuradas P. Asar
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

57. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
Between 1-4 at Night, May 2, 1933
If your betrothal with S. 1 has not been broken off, you may
certainly marry. I will approve of your doing so even during the fast.
You will continue to serve even after you get married. After marriage
try to observe as much self-control as you can. Continue to write to
me. You should not grieve if I die. The ‘I’ will not die. What will it
matter if the body perishes?
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9540. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Joshi

58. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
Between 1-4 at Night, May 2,1933
I hope you have fully understood the significance of my fast.
Go on working without worrying about me. Request Father and
Mother to send their blessings to me.
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9541. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Joshi

59. LETTER TO N.
May 2, 1933
2

May this fast strengthen you. You will entrust to N. , even an evil
thought if it comes to you. But it won’t come if you will lose yourself
in Him, the Truth and in His work as it may be pointed out to you by
N.
From a copy: C.W. 9767. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Joshi

60. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
May 2, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

As I was struggling against the coming fast, you were before me
as it were in flesh and blood. But it was no use. How I wish I could
1
2

The name has been omitted.
Narandas Gandhi

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

59

feel that you had understood the absolute necessity of it. The Harijan
movement is too big for mere intellectual effort. There is nothing so
bad in all the world. And yet I cannot leave religion and therefore
Hinduism. My life would be a burden to me, if Hinduism failed me. I
love Christianity, Islam and many other faiths through Hinduism.
Take if away and nothing remains for me. But then I cannot tolerate it
with untouchability—the high-and-low belief. Fortunately Hinduism
contains a sovereign remedy for the evil. I have applied the remedy. I
want you to feel, if you can, that it is well if I survive the fast and well
also if the body dissolves in spite of the effort to live. What is it after
all—more perishable than a brittle chimney piece. You can preserve
the latter intact for ten thousand years, but you may fail to keep the
body intact even for a minute. And surely death is not an end to all
effort. Rightly faced, it may be but the beginning of a nobler effort.
But I won’t convince you by argument, if you did not see the truth
intuitively. I know that even if I do not carry your approval with me, I
shall retain your precious love during all those days of ordeal.
I had your letter which I had thought I would answer at leisure.
Well, God had willed otherwise. I had talks with Krishna. Of Sarup’s
work in Kathiawar I think I wrote to you. Kamala has not even sent
me her address. There has been no letter from her for many days
now. When you see her please give her and Indu my love. Kamala
must not worry over the fast. If possible send me a wire.1
Love from us all.
BAPU
A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 110-l

61. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
May 2, 1933
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I cannot write a long letter today. Your letter requires no reply. I
hope the news about my intended fast has made you happy. Your turn
1

Dated May 5, the addressee’s telegram read: “Your letter. What can I say
about matters 1 do not understand? I feel lost in strange country where you are the
only familiar landmark and I try to grope my way in dark but I stumble. Whatever
happens my love and thoughts will be with you” (Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933). For
Jawaharlal Nehru’s letter of the same date, vide Appendix “Letter from Jawaharlal
Nehru”, 5-5-1933.

60

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

also will come. But that will be after some time. This fast is of a
different character from all the previous ones. Our forefathers used to
fast without much ado, to remove the cause of external troubles or for
self-purification. This fast is exactly of the same kind. Just now I feel
that, if people come forward to fast, I should ask them to do that one
after another. Now you can certainly come to see me. Come whenever
you wish.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 8803. Courtesy: Gangabehn Vaidya

62. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
May 2, 1933
CHI. SHARDA,

Your letter. Being very sensible, you must have felt happy
reading about the fast. Should we not feel happy when anyone does
something in the spirit of religion? Consider it an act aimed also at
your purification.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the
G. Chokhawala

Gujarati

original:

C.W.

9966.

Courtesy:

Shardabehn

63. LETTER TO NANIBEHN JHAVERI
May 2, 1933
CHI. NANIBEHN JAHVERI,

Because I am not writing ‘blessings’, do not think you do not
have my blessings. I said once that the inmates of the Ashram should
take my blessings for granted. Hence, they should not mind if I do
not put it in writing. If I avoid writing that in some letters, it is merely
because it saves me the effort.
Do not be frightened by the fast.1
There is nothing small or great about life or death. Whatever
1
Gandhiji was to commence the fast for purification of himself and his
associates on the noon of May 8 and end it on the noon of May 29; vide “Statement
on Fast”, 30-4-1933

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

61

happens is only for the good. You must become more enlightened.
BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Manavtana Prahari—Pannalal Jhaveri, p. 28

64. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
May 2, 1933
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

You should be happy about my fast. Keep on doing your work.
If your betrothal with S[atyavati] has not been broken off, you may
certainly marry. I will approve of your doing so even during the fast.
You will continue to serve even after you get married. After marriage,
try to observe as much self-control as you can. Continue to write to
me. You should not grieve if I die. The ‘I’ will not die. What will it
matter if the body perishes?
BAPU
S HRI P RABHUDAS GANDHI
S HAIL ASHRAM
ALMORA, U.P.

[PS.]
My blessings to Janakibehn and Jamnalalji. I am waiting for
their wire.
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33045

65. LETTER TO P.N. RAJBHOJ
May 2, 1933
BHAI RAJBHOJ,

You must not get agitated over my fast. Remain there and be
prepared for intelligent service. If I survive I shall attempt to use this
body for further service but will consider it a blessing of God even if I
succumb. My mission will not end with death. The yajna of Harijan
service that has been commenced can never end. Even the death from
fasting of thousands of savarna Hindus will not be too much in my
62

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

opinion. There is little possibility of my writing but you may continue
to do so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 780 ‘

66. LETTER TO HIRALAL SHARMA
May 2, 1933
BHAI HIRALAL SHARMA,

Your Hindi letter made me extremely happy. It is astonishing
that your first letter in Hindi is in such a clear hand. And your Hindi
too is quite good; how is it so? I have read your letter and the
prescriptions with care.1
The Gandhi family is not unacquainted with nature cure. But
this is only a polite statement. Their faith is not much, but that too
cannot be said of all. What can they and other poor fellows do?
Whatever knowledge and love of nature cure they possess is only
because of me. But my knowledge is so incomplete that I become
helpless in emergency cases. I have never had the time to make a
systematic study of the science. But I have acquired a smattering of it
because of my interest in it. Owing to my deficiency I have ever been
in search of an expert in nature cure. One such doctor was Hanumanta
Rao, a devoted and a good man. He died a victim of his own cures.
His knowledge was insufficient but his faith was unique. Next came
Gopala Rao. He has established a clinic and settled at Rajahmundry.
Pinning my faith on him I conducted a foolish experiment. I gave an
account of it in the newspapers too. 2 The acquaintance with Gopala
Rao has disheartened me. Gopala Rao is a man of conviction but his
knowledge is very limited, and the pity of it is that he is not fully
conscious of his limitations. Now I have found you. I do not want you
to leave me. I want you to stay on in the Ashram and recognize with
humility the extent of your knowledge. First win the confidence of the
1

The addressee had under Gandhiji’s instruction sent a report ailing Ashram
inmates. He had also expressed surprise over the sceptical attitude of the members of
Gandhiji’s family towards nature cure.
2
Gandhiji’s experiment of subsisting on raw and uncooked food war conducted
during the summer of 1929. He frequently wrote about it in Young India.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

63

Ashram inmates and then invite the public for your cures. If you are
not urgently required to return, you can cure a few patients at any rate
before going away. But you can certainly stay on if you like the
Ashram and Narandas takes a liking to you. I am not concerned
whether your understanding of nature cure is perfect or incomplete.
What I want is Truth. There is no harm if we proceed only to the point
within our reach, and remain content with that. There is no reason why
your wife should not come and live at the Ashram if she is prepared to
abide by its rules. I shall write a letter to her too and enclose it with
this.
You did well in going to the Harijans with Bhagwanji. If
possible, you should come to see me at the earliest possible
opportunity before you leave the Ashram. We can then discuss what
should be done about the health problems of the Harijans You may
come on any day except Sunday. We can meet in the afternoon.
I am awaiting your suggestions regarding the Ashram diet. I
want to make the diet there complete in respect of health
requirements. The idea of keeping Harijan children in the Ashram has
always been there but not many such children can be found You can
advise those who conceal their ailments to bring it to light; and those
who cannot subdue their passions may leave for good.
I am considering what to do about Kusum. As regards
Ramabehn1 you can prescribe the treatment you choose if you have
no doubts as to the diagnosis and the cure of her trouble. The same
applies to Jamnabehn2. It will be excellent if you can induce Amina 3
to give up rice and other starchy foods and tobacco. She uses it in the
morning to clean her teeth. What you did about the report in Bombay
newspapers of your arrival was all right and quite fitting.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsha, pp. 39-41

1
2
3

64

Ramabehn Joshi
Jamnabehn Gandhi
Amina G. Qureshi
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

67. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
May 2, 1933
MY GOOD DAUGHTER,

Though you have sent a new bhajan for the second fast, it
cannot be sung. You know that such bhajans, unless they are sung
well, fail to make any impression on my heart. I shall sing the same
old one 1. Well, you can now send me the good wishes from Father,
Mother, and you girls and boys.
BAPU
From the Urdu original. Courtesy: National Archives of India. Also from a
photostat: S.N. 9657

68. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
[On or after May 2, 1933] 2
DAUGHTER, AMTUSSALAAM,

I have your letter. You should not be perturbed on hearing of
my fast. Now I will be unable to write letters but my heart will be with
you. Keep writing to me. May God make you well. Great service is to
be taken from you. But God knows better about everything. Whatever
He does will be for our good.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: G.N. 283

1

Beginning “Uth jag musafir bhor bhai”; “arise, awake, O traveller, it is
morning now.”
2
From the similarity in contents of this and the other letters of May 2, it
appears that this was written some time between May 2 and May 8.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

65

69. LETTER TO K. NATARAJAN
May 3, 1933
DEAR MR. NATARAJAN,

I thank you for your letter.
The fast was a call I could not resist. I remember your warning
against over-emphasis upon the material considerations. 1 Do please
come with Kamakoti before your departure for America where I hope
you will have great success. I am glad Kamakoti is to accompany you.
It will be good in every way.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. K. NATARAJAN
KAMAKSHI HOUSE
BANDRA , B OMBAY
From a photostat: S.N. 19073

70. LETTER TO J. D. JENKINS 2
May 3, 1933
DEAR MR. JENKINS,

I thank you for your kind letter.
It requires a political argument to show you why I cannot take
the step you advise and, as a prisoner, I may not enter into any
political discussion. You will, therefore, forgive me.
I hope you received my previous letter3.
Thanking you for the book you sent me,
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 19074
1

The addressee had pointed out at the Bombay Conference that the workers for
anti-untouchability could accomplish more by welcoming Harijans to their houses
than by collecting or giving donations for the fund. This remark followed the
announcement of Madan Mohan Malaviya to collect Rs. 25 lacs for the
anti-untouchability fund.
2
This was in reply to the addressee’s letter (S.N. 21088) dated April 30, 1933,
appealing to Gandhiji to give up civil disobedience and to co-operate with the
Government in order to work out the constitution outlined in the White Paper
published on March 17, 1933.
3
Vide “Letter to J. D. Jenkins”, 27-4-1933.

66

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

71. LETTER TO P. R. LELE
May 3, 1933
MY DEAR LELE,

I thank you for your postcard and your good wishes. I know
that you will throw yourself heart and soul into the drive against the
monster.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. P. R. L ELE
WADEKAR BUILDING,
BOMBAY 4
From a microfilm: S.N. 19075

72. LETTER TO MAHAVIR GIRI
May 3, 1933
CHI. MAHAVIR,

I was very glad to get your letter. I hope you will write like this
from time to time.
I am making inquiries regarding the luggage. I can’t
understand why you did not get it. A letter is going to the Ashram
today itself.
If you work honestly, I am sure you will go forward.
When you say that milk and ghee are not available, do you
mean that all of you do without them? What do you eat?
Does Dharma Kumar do anything? Does he play much
mischief?
It is very good indeed that Mother works.
You will be happy if you observe the rules.
I suppose Maitri and Durga write to you. They do write to
me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6239

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

67

73. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
May 3, 1933
CHI. PREMA,

I got your heart-rending letter. How shall I calm you? It is
extremely difficult for me to let you go. I have built high hopes on
you. But it would be selfish on my part and harm the ideals of the
Ashram if I pressed anybody to stay on in it when it was not for his or
her good to do so. The Ashram represents the sum of the good of all
its inmates and the means of its achievement, hence your good and
that of the Ashram cannot be mutually contradictory. If, however, you
feel that this is not so in so far as I am concerned, I have no doubt at
all that you should leave the Ashram. If your fast is still continuing, I
want that you should give it up. I will accept whatever decision you
arrive at. I will not make the final decision; it will have to be made by
you.
As I have loaded Narandas with excessive responsibility, he has
loaded you. He has not broken down. If you break down, I would be
unhappy, for I, too, would be as much responsible for that result as
anybody else. Narandas was helpless.
Even if you decide to stay on, you ought to reduce the burden
on yourself. It is contrary to dharma to accept more work than one
can do; there is pride, too, in doing so. There is greater harm in doing
that than in eating more than one can digest. There is of course this
difference between the two: 99 out of every 100 persons eat
excessively, whereas 99_ per cent people do much less work than they
can. Hence one does not always know whether one has taken upon
oneself more work or less than one can do. All the same, the ultimate
result will be as I have stated. If I eat excessively, I alone would suffer.
If, on the contrary, I take upon myself more Harijan work than I can
do, not only the four crore Harijans but probably the whole world
would suffer.
May God give you peace of mind and show you the right path.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10343. Also C.W. 6782. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

68

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

74. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 3, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter. I hope you will get without delay the big
packet of letters which I dispatched yesterday.
Read the letter that I have written to Prema. In view of what
I have written in it I will not say anything about the matter in this
letter.
Just now I am thinking about the changes which I suggested in
my letter1 yesterday. I have discussed them with Panditji. Even apart
from the question whether the Ashram has the capacity or is fit to
keep up a chain of fasts, my view expressed in yesterday’s letter
remains unchanged. The burden on you must be lightened. If that is
not done, we shall not be able to cultivate even the fitness that we hope
to do. You should, therefore, stop admitting newcomers, ask those who
cannot observe the rules to leave the Ashram if they are recent
entrants or to cook in their own kitchens if they are old inmates. I
don’t like separate kitchens at all. But I feel that we have no option
but to tolerate the old families.
The view which I have expressed about Keshu also remains
unchanged. If you feel that it is your duty, as his guardian-father, to
help him from your personal money, I think that that money should
not be treated as part of Ashram funds just now. I feel, too, that the
money which you possess should be treated as reserved for one single
purpose, namely, for the support of your parents, and should be
earmarked as gift to the Ashram after their death. It should not
become the property either of Jamna or Purushottam and others. If
you have not made this resolution till now, you should do so at the
commencement of the yajna of purification that is about to begin.
You should discuss the matter with Jamna. You may consult
Purushottam, too, if you think it necessary. But the chief thing is that
you yourself should sincerely desire this. Your ability to give private
help to any relation of yours will be harmful to the Ashram, to you
and to the person whom you may help. I don’t see anybody else in
the Ashram, besides you, who possesses all the other requisite qualities
in the degree required. The fact that, though you have money of your
own, you have not misused it and have remained unaffected by it
1

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 1/2-5-1933.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

69

shows your fine sense of justice and your impartiality. But even God
will fall if He regards anything as His personal possession. The vows
of non-possession and non-stealing seem trivial outwardly but they
are as important as the other three vows. The entire plan of
[Patanjali’s] Yogasutras seems wonderful to me. I do not understand
its later portion. But it seems likely that every aphorism of his is based
on long experience. If God had not ordained my duty in another
field, I would have closely studied and memorized such holy books of
Hinduism. But who can say what would have been better for me? Even
such a thought betrays lack of faith in God. I must be perfectly
contented with the ability that God has given me. But all this is beside
the point. I am convinced that Keshu’s good does not lie in starting
an independent factory just now with the help from the Ashram.
What can be done about Kusum? How can I call her over here?
If she is eager let her go to Almora. I have stated my own view, and I
cling to it. Dr. Spiegel may come there. I am watching her. She is very
sincere, but has strong likes and dislikes. We should, however, support
her as long as she observes the rules. If she shapes well, she will do
very well indeed. Both these ladies are certainly instrumental in
persuading me to undertake the proposed fast. Among them N.’s
share is probably greater. But all this is my fancy. Who can know
beyond doubt whether a certain step is inspired by God or the Devil? I
only give probable causes of what is past and over.
I expect Parashuram to arrive here today.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8370. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

75. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA
May 3, 1933
I am looking forward to the fast in the happiest frame of mind
and with the greatest of confidence in the necessity for it.
Asked what he would have his associates to do during the fast, Gandhiji said:

They should simply conduct the drive against untouchability
and that in the gentlest manner possible so that the heart of the
sanatanists may be won over.

70

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Asked if he was making his own arrangements for medical and other help
during the fast, he said that everything depended on the authorities, nor had he any
idea what arrangements he would make if he was released.

The Bombay Chronicle, 4-5-1933

76. TELEGRAM TO DR. M. A. ANSARI 1
[May 4, 1933] 2
DR. A NSARI
DELHI
YOU ARE MAN OF FAITH. I WANT YOU TO BELIEVE ME WHEN I SAY
THIS FAST IS NOT OF MY WILL. IT IS GOD’S
THEREFORE HE
HIS

WILL

ATTENDANCE

GOOD

PHYSICIAN

PROPHET3 IN

HOUR

BE MY

INVISIBLE

DOES

NOT

SAVE

AND

DESCENDANT

ME

OF HIS NEED DO?

PEREMPTORY COMMAND.

MEDICAL

OF

WHAT
THOSE

ATTENDANT
WILL
WHO

EVEN

AND

IF

YOU

A

HELPED

THE

LOVE.

GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 21128 a

77. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 4, 1933
CHI. MIRA,

So you could secure the permission to send me that loving wire4.
I did not even try. I thought it was better that you suffered in silence
than that I should secure special permission to send you a soothing
message. Later I shall hope to have the permission to send you and
1
The telegram was in reply to the addressee’s, which read: “As old friend,
fellow-worker and medical man your grave decision has shaken me deeply. Having
read statement my difference with you on moral issue persists but you are best judge of
it. I do not ask you give up decision but consider unfit to bear strain. Your statement
refers to your desire not to die and on basis of its implication I want
your promise to break your fast if and when medical attendants regard your life in
danger.”
2
From Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 284
3
Ansaris are the descendants of the Sheikhs who succoured the Prophet in
Medina after his flight from Mecca.
4
Vide 1st footnote to “Telegram to Mirabehn”, 2-5-1933.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

71

some others daily messages.
You have understood the sacred necessity of the step. Ba has
responded magnificently. Her courage has been a source of the
greatest strength to me.
Your letter is before me. Though written before you had any
knowledge of the step, I trace in it a sorrowing mood. You have to
surmount it. If you have a living faith in a living God, you would
feel His never-failing presence protecting you. Till that state is
reached, even faith in an individual clothed in flesh and bone is
not of any avail. It is relying on a broken reed. You should first
think this out clearly and then get the heart to co-operate with the
intellect.
When your time comes, you will certainly throw yourself heart
and soul into the movement. Whilst I would call you a Christian you
are sufficiently Hindu to render you eligible for full service of the
Harijans. You need not worry about this.
I wish I had time to tell you something about N. and Margarete
Spiegel. But I must economize my time and also energy. Naturally the
Ashram will undergo thorough cleansing. I have sent proposals 1 to
Narandas.
Tell Ba not to worry about me at all. She and I and all of us are
in His hands. It is well if we live and it is equally well if we die. We are
born only to die and we die only to be born again. This is all old
argument. Yet it needs to be driven home. Somehow or other we
refuse to welcome death as we welcome birth. We refuse to believe
even the evidence of our senses that we could not possibly have any
attachment for the body without the soul and that we have no evidence
whatsoever that the soul perishes with the body.
I can go on no longer. Visitors have come in.
I hope you received the book on astronomy.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6270. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9736

1

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 1/2-5-1933 and “Letter to Narandas
Gandhi”, 3-5-1933..

72

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

78. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
May 4, 1933
CHI. MANUDI, .

I don’t mind your having left school. Since you survived a
serious illness, you have lost your power of memory. I don’t set much
store by your studying. I shall be satisfied if you remain good and
pure and maintain good health.
Nobody should be upset by my fast.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1521. Courtesy: Manubehn
Mashruwala

79. LETTER TO BEHRAMJI KHAMBHATTA
[May 4, 1933] 1
BHAISHRI KHAMBHATTA,

I shall be in God’s hand during the fast and, therefore, nobody
should worry. It would be excellent if you can arrange to get a cow
milked in your presence in a dean utensil after washing the udders.
Do not take anything except milk and fruit juice. My blessings to you
and Tehmina.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6605

80. LETTER TO BALIBEHN M. ADALJA
May 4, 1933
CHI. BALI,

I got your letter. I am writing this only to reassure you that I
cannot forget you. I have no time at all to write more. I have written a
letter to Kumi at Bombay. You are a brave woman. Always remain so.
1

From the postmark

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

73

I do hope you will get all right. Manu’s betrothal is out of the
question just now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gajarati: C.W. 5056. Courtesy: Surendra Mashruwala

81. LETTER TO AMINA AND GULAM RASUL QURESHI
YERAVDA ,

May 4, 1933
CHI. AMINA,

I have your letter. It is surprising that the children are not
recovering. I will definitely make some arrangement for you after
Ramzan. Where would you yourself prefer to go? Would you prefer
to go to the Sharada Mandir if it can be arranged? And will the
children go back to Noor Banu in that case? Consider these things and
write to me.
CHI. QURESHI,

You must keep me informed about your experiences with the
doctors. I am always curious to know these things. In any case I
should not be ignorant of the experiences of the Ashram inmates,
happy or unhappy. And you should also know that God always
grants a person the strength that he needs to bear the burden which it
is his duty to bear. Both the children should have recovered by now.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 10782. Courtesy: Gulam Rasul Qureshi

82. A HARIJAN’S QUESTIONS
l. What should be done to unite the sub-castes which exist among
Harijans ?
2. Wherever, in big cities, sewerages is introduced, the livelihood of
Harijans is jeopardized. What should they do in such a situation?
3. In some towns caste Hindus object to Harijans going riding on such
occasions as weddings. You have written about what caste Hindus should do.
Please be so kind as to say also what the Harijans should do.

74

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The above questions have been sent by a Harijan correspondent.
They are all three difficult questions to answer.
So long as caste Hindus remain divided in hundreds of
sub-castes, as they are today, it seems unlikely that caste distinctions
among Harijans can be done away with. Of course if there is a sudden
awakening among the Harijans and they show a marked advance, that
would be a different matter. I long to see such an awakening and
when it comes they will be far in advance of the caste Hindus. But the
question applies to the present context.
In the existing conditions all that can be said is that
Harijans belonging to the castes that are considered superior should
try to come closer to those belonging to lower castes. Mahars, for
instance, should try to draw closer to Mangs, to inter-dine and
intermarry with them. A Mahar thus mixing with Mangs should be
fearless and should be ready to face any hardship that this course may
entail.
The second question is a public question. In this transitional
period a number of trades are bound to die out. A number of new
trades are bound to be born. This has always been going on. This
question of sewerage cannot apply to villages. Sewerage is peculiar to
the city. It is in cities that Bhangis in any number are to be found. I
believe that wherever sewerage is introduced some employment or
other is found for the Bhangis. It becomes the responsibility of the
municipality to find employment for the Bhangis thrown out of work.
My advice also is that Bhangis should train themselves in some other
arts, for instance, weaving. In Gujarat I notice that Bhangis, wherever
they lost their traditional occupation, have taken up weaving. But there
can be no uniform answer for all. Much depends on individual
aptitudes.
The third question is a particularly difficult one. The underlying
idea behind the question is that Harijans are wholly in the power of
others and living in fear. If this is the case the only advice that may be
given is that they should seek police help. Dr. Ambedkar told me that
the police, coming as they do from caste Hindu communities, often do
not help, which is likely to be true. Under the circumstances all that
one could say is that where the police are hostile or apathetic, where
no one from among the caste Hindus is ready to help, and where the
Harijans themselves have not generated enough strength in themselves,
the only thing possible is for the Harijans to have patience. The only

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

75

consolation which can be offered is that for every individual and
society a time comes when no alternative is left but to be patient.
Otherwise man would become an atheist and forget God. Therefore,
where there is no non-violent recourse possible the Harijans should
pray to Hari.
[From Hindi]
Harijan Sevak, 5-5-1933

83. TELEGRAM TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 5, 1933
S ATYAGRAHAASHRAM
S ABARMATI
SHARMA’S
STAY

EXPLANATION

ASHRAM

REPORT

N.’S

DURING

COMPLETELY
FAST.

HOPE

SATISFACTORY.
PREMA

ADVISE

COMPLETED

HIS
FAST.

CONDITION.

BAPU
From a microfilm: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8373. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

84. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
May 5, 1933
DEAR COL. DOYLE,

I would like, if you can give permission today, to write
daily to and hear from Mrs. Gandhi, Shrimati Mirabehn (Slade,
Sabarmati), Shrimati Manibehn Patel, (Belgaum), Shrimati Vasumatibehn Pandit (Thana), Sjt. Pyarelal 1 (Nasik) and Sjt. Surendraji?
(Visapur), as I used to during the September fast. I have restrained
myself up to now. But I know how anxious friends must be as
Monday approaches.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No. 10, 1933

1

76

Pyarelal Nayyar

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

85. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI 1
May 5, 1933
MY DEAR C. R.,

You are dearer to me than life itself. I wounded you 2 and
Shankerlal deeply yesterday. It is no use my saying “Forgive me”.
Your forgiveness I have before the asking. But I will do the very thing
that I resisted like an ass. I will submit to the examination now and
any time you like by any doctor, provided, of course, the Government
permit it. I feel that the result of such examination should not be
published for fear of political use being made of it. I must say, too,
that the medical examination, if it comes, is not likely to affect the
commencement of the fast.
More when we meet. This is just to relieve my soul of the
impurity that crept in yesterday.
Love to you and Shankerlal.
BAPU3

Harijan, 13-5-1933

86. LETTER TO JAMNABEHN GANDHI
May 5, 1933
CHI. JAMNA,

Your impatience for my letters pleases me very much. God
willing, I will satisfy your desire fully after the fast. Stick to the
doctor’s treatment and cure your disease. Let my fast redouble your
efforts to cure it. Whether I live or die, you will have to continue to
serve. I hope Purushottam writes to you.
BAPU
From a copy of the Gajarati: C.W. 880. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

1
This appeared under the title, “Sparks from the Sacred Fire-II (Another
Interview with Mahadev Desai)”.
2
For Gandhiji’s talk with C. Rajagopalachari, vide Appendix “Talk with C.
Rajagopalachari”, 4-5-1933.
3
The report in Harijan adds: “The next day, however, C. R. came laughing and
said ‘there was no occasion for the apology, the irritation was more on our side than
yours, and we have now decided to have no examination’ ”

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

77

87. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[May 5, 1933] 1
CHI. NARANDAS,

I wanted to but could not write to you yesterday. I understand
what you say regarding Chhaganlal’s criticism. Though you have
replied as I desired you to do, I see that some of his remarks have
hurt you. They were in the nature of allegations and were prompted
by anger. But how can I advise you or anybody else? What right have
I to do so? Yesterday, while talking to a friend like Rajaji whom I love
so much, I became impatient and lost my temper with him and with
Shankerlal. I see now that the matter was of little importance, and that
it was I who was foolish. What they said or advised was prompted by
their love for me. They had no other thought but my own good. If I
lose my temper with them, how can my words of advice to you, when
you get angry at Chhaganlal’s thoughtless allegations, have any effect
on you? It was seen yesterday that the serpent of anger is alive in me
and is aroused whenever it is provoked. That is why you have not
been able to see the anger in your words which I pointed out. 2 Your
faith that it must be there since I say so does credit to your love for
me, but it also proves that I do not deserve it. I will not lose heart. I
will strive to deserve the love of my co-workers. The forthcoming
yajna is a part of such striving. I see every moment that this yajna is
absolutely necessary for my own purification. I cannot forget that the
imperfection of the Ashram is a faithful reflection of my own
imperfection. If I do not know how to take the Ashram forward, there
is no meaning in my living on. To leave the Asham or to close it down
would be nothing but cowardice. I must learn the wisdom how to take
the Ashram forward. I cherish the hope that I shall acquire that
strength by the proposed yajna. If I succeed in this aim, I may hope
to succeed in the other things. If I fail in this, I cannot hope to
succeed in anything else. That will be the meaning of this yajna. I
should like you to make your full contribution to it. You need not get
ready just now for a fast, but should only cultivate the fitness to
undertake one when the time comes. I think you are doing that.
1

As given in Bapuna Patro-9: Shri Narandas Gandhine, Pt. II. Also from the
reference in the letter to Gandhiji’s talks with C. Rajagopalachari and Shankerlal
Banker on May 4, 1933.
2
Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 26-4-1933..

78

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Wherever you see your shortcoming, attack it and get rid of it. Do not
worry about me. A daily report about what happens there will give me
great peace of mind. Such reports will be my food during the days of
the fast.
I think Duncan and Sharma have something in their minds
which they wish to discuss. Have a talk with them.
Margarete Spiegel may leave for Ahmedabad on Monday.
She is a good woman, but not very intelligent. She is very obstinate.
She has very little khadi with her. Give her what she needs. She will
have to think what dress to wear. At present she wears a sari. If she is
not eager to start wearing khadi immediately, you also should not
insist that she should do so. Personally I like N.’s dress. I myself had
suggested it to her. She knows sewing very well. If she can take
interest in it, she can do much useful work in that field.
Margarete does not like that dress. For the present, let her
borrow a thick sari from one of the women there and try it. Such sari
will not require a skirt. If there is an underwear with it like the one I
use, it will be enough. Or she may wear, like Mirabehn, a skirt, blouse
and a thick scarf as upper garment. Mirabehn is very economical
indeed in using khadi. A skirt is certainly not a complete dress.
Anybody who wears it should also use an undergarment. You will now
be able to guide Margarete.
She had some money with her, which I have taken away. I have
taken away one chain, too. I have handed over both to Harijan
Shastri 1. If she comes, she will travel by the same train by which N.
travelled. If Ramji wants to leave the Ashram, let him go. If he
remains, he must behave properly. Don’t press Kusum at all in regard
to her hair. Getting it cut will be for her good only if she does that
willingly.
I trust Shanti is well now.
BAPU

[PS.]
Parashuram arrived yesterday. There is no sense in what he
talks. I have been disccussing things with him. If there is anything to
write about, I will do so.

1

R. V. Shastri, Editor, Harijan

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

79

I am sending a wire1 today regarding Sharma. Keep me
informed about how N. behaves.
What do you propose to do about the teaching of Hindi? There
ought to be some provision for it in the Ashram. N. will have to be
taught Hindi.
Letters for Jamnabehn, Dr. Sharma, N. (2) and Shanti are
enclosed.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8371. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

88. LETTER TO HIRALAL SHARMA
May 5, 1933
BHAI SHARMA,

I have your letter. I am sending a wire today.
I would advise you to stay on at the Ashram during the fast and
overcome lethargy. Activity is the only remedy for that. The Ashram
can provide enough work.
Acquaint Narandas with all that you observe in the Ashram.
I heard of your fast;2 it was all right but discipline requires that
the manager be consulted in such matters.
My faith in nature-cure goes back to forty years ago. What I
meant3 was that my faith in your cure will be strengthened by its
success in the Ashram. Do write the pamphlet for the Ashram.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsha, p. 44

1

Vide “Telegram to Narandas Gandhi”, 5-5-1933..
The addressee was planning to go back to Delhi and had undertaken a fast in
accordance with his practice to fast for a day or two before commencing a journey
which involved change of climate.
3
Vide “Letter to Hiralal Sharma”, 2-5-1933.
2

80

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

89. LETTER TO P. N. RAJBHOJ
[May 5, 1933] 1
BHAI RAJBHOJ,

I have your letter2. You are doing good work.
If the question of the Poona Pact comes up, I shall certainly
obtain the opinion of other Harijan leaders.
I like your suggestion about the temples that have been thrown
open. I will refer to it in Harijan Sevak.
There is no point in publicizing the Sarada Act among the
Harijans at present. We shall be able to do that only when we have
done some more work.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
You must not worry over my fast. Remain absorbed in your
duty.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 794

90. MESSAGE TO ARYA SAMAJ CONFERENCE3
[On or before May 6, 1933] 4
I sincerely hope that God will guide your conference to devise
means for banishing untouchability from India.
The Hindu, 8-5-1933

1

As given in an unknown hand at the end of the letter in the source
The addressee had requested Gandhiji to call a meeting of Harijan leaders to.
consider Ambedkar’s proposals regarding the Poona Pact and had suggested that joint
meetings and bhajans by caste Hindus and Harijans should be held in temples thrown
open to Harijans.
3
Held in Delhi under the presidentship of Dr. B. S. Moonje. Among others,
the conference passed a resolution expressing concern over Gandhiji’s proposed fast
and appealed to every individual to eradicate untouchability.
4
The massage was reported under the date-line: “New Delhi, May 6, 1933”.
2

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

81

91. HUMAN MANUFACTURE [-II]
I am sorry I shall not be able to analyse, as fully as I had
intended to, the able monograph on ‘Depressed Classes, in the Bengal
and Sikkim Census Report by Mr. A. E. Porter of the Indian Civil
Service, from which I reproduced two sections last week.1 In Section 4
the author points out the defects of the criteria suggested on different
occasions by different Census Commissioners and others. Says Mr.
Porter:
They reduce themselves naturally to religious or social disabilities and in not a
single instance is there any criterion put forward which prima facie ought to
attract the attention of the administration.

For they “are entirely matters of social and religious consideration” and, therefore, “they would be entirely irrelevant to any
consideration by Government of the problem of the Depressed
Classes”. He then goes on to the consideration of some of the criteria.
Temple entry occupies the first place. The whole of the Section is
interesting. It ends with this significant conclusion:
Disabilities regarding the right to worship or enter into temples are largely
conventional or not immune from change, and in any case do not properly
constitute a title to special consideration in the body politic, so long as they
are confined purely to the social and religious life of the community.

I must skip over the Section regarding the service of Brahmins
and barbers. Even there the author shows that the practice is erratic, in
no sense universal and subject to constant change.
Then comes the Section regarding pollution by touch. Says the
author:
There is a similar conventionality and flexibility about the idea of
uncleanliness and pollution.

The extent to which members of the higher caste feel themselves
polluted differs in respect of the same group from place to place. The
same thing is applicable to food and drink taboos.
It should be borne in mind that Mr. Porter has considered the
question purely with a view to examining the vexatious question as to
who should be included among the ‘Depressed Classes’. He,
therefore, says:
1

82

Vide “Human Manufacture [-I]”, 29-4-1933.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

As a social question, therefore, the problem of the Depressed Classes is
primarily one for Hindu society to tackle for itself. As an administrative
problem demanding the cognizance of Government, social and religious
disabilities are unsatisfactory as a test of the classes to be included, whilst the
extent to which the Depressed Classes are denied participation in the
advantages and conveniences maintained by the administration is so small as
to be negligible. For the administration, in fact, the problem of the Depressed
Classes in Bengal practically does not exist, save in so far as special measures
are necessary to improve their economic condition and standard of education.
The prominence which it acquires-is largely due to the questions raised in
comparatively recent years as regards separate representation in the
Legislatures for members of the Classes. For Bengal at least, therefore, the
attempt to treat any social usage or any civic disability as a clear criterion1 by
which to distinguish the Depressed Classes is bound to fail and some other
distinction must be sought. It is necessary to retain the untouchables since the
Census Commissioner has explained Depressed Classes as “castes contact
with whom entails purification on the part of the high-caste Hindus”.

He added:
It is not intended that the term should have any reference to occupation
as such but to those castes which by reason of their traditional position in
Hindu society are denied access to temples, for instance, or have to use
separate wells or are not allowed to sit in schools but have to remain outside or
have to suffer similar social disabilities.
The question of preparing a list of the Depressed Classes for each
Province was discussed at a meeting of the Superintendents of Census
operations in January 1931. As a result of this discussion the Census
Commissioner announced:
“For the purposes of the census of India I propose at present to retain the
term ‘Depressed Classes’ to indicate untouchables, whether of the milder or of
the more severe degree of untouchability.”
It was decided also that Muslims and Christians should be excluded and
that generally speaking the hill and forest tribes who had not become Hindu
but whose religion was returned as ‘tribal’ should also be excluded.

He then goes on to show why the expression ‘Depressed
Classes’ should include not only the untouchables conforming to the
various social and religious tests examined by him, but all those of
whom
1

The source has “contention”.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

83

in the terms of His Majesty’s Instrument of Instructions to the Governor of the
Province it would still be true that from their lack of educational and material
advantages they rely specially upon the protection of Government and cannot
as yet fully rely for their welfare upon joint political action.

Section 17 contains a most informing comparison between the
lists of Depressed Classes in 1921 and 1931. In the British districts
only of Bengal, l,801,7l2 persons who are included in the list of 1921
have been excluded from that of 1931 and the number belongs to
eight castes, the largest being Rajbangshi. Similarly there are some
groups who have been for the first time included in the list of 1931.
In the group ‘A’ alone of the ‘Depressed Classes’, with which for the
moment we are concerned, there are 48 castes in the Census Report of
1931 as against only 19 in 1921. The comparison covers other reports
also, but I have confined myself to the Census reports only. A careful
perusal of the whole of this report dealing with Depressed Classes is
necessary for the diligent student. He will be amply repaid for his
trouble.
But what I have given is, I hope, sufficient to show that the
untouchables are a human manufacture and that, too, by census
enumerators, who have nothing to do with religious untouchability,
and in accordance with instructions, which were received from their
superiors and which varied from time to time, so that an untouchable of yesterday ceases to be an untouchable of today and he
who was not an untouchable yesterday through these census
operations finds himself to be an untouchable of today. I commend
this information to honest sanatanists and ask them whether they are
satisfied with this state of things or whether they are satisfied with the
varying definitions of untouchability or with the fact that the
untouchability, in accordance with a particular definition, varies from
place to place even regarding the same persons. Can all this be
enjoined by the Shastras? It is possible to multiply this suggestive and
awkward question, but I forbear.
The one thing that should force itself upon the attention of
every thoughtful reader is that the State or the Law should have
nothing to do with untouchability and that, therefore, the Abolition of
Untouchability Bill is a peremptory necessity. A custom that is
repugnant to the moral sense of mankind, that varies from place to
place, from time to time, both in its incidence and in its application to
individuals, cannot and ought not to have the sanction of the law of a

84

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

secular State representing those who at the one end believe in
untouchability, no matter how capricious, and, at the other, regard it as
a negation of religion. Withdrawal of State recognition of such a
custom in no way interferes with the personal belief of any single.
individual or his social practice. It will still be open to a person to
regard his fellow as an untouchable at religious and social functions
without any interference from law. That should satisfy the most
orthodox of people, and the reformer would be crossing the limits of
justice if he asks for more.
Another thing that clearly comes out of Mr. Porter’s
monograph is that the disabilities for inclusion in the term ‘Depressed
Classes’ should not include untouchability. They should be disabilities
of a civic, political, economic and non-religious character, of which
the State can and should take notice and for which it is not only
possible but it is also the duty of the State to find a remedy. That
would purge the Depressed Classes list of untouchability and yet
enable the State to deal with its incidences that are common to people
other than untouchables.
If the Census operations ignored untouchability, as they should,
the wind will be taken out of the sanatanists’ sail. Happily for them
and for mankind, nature has no indelible mark whereby an
untouchable can be detected from the rest of his fellows. So far as I
can see from my study of various Census Reports and of the general
law of the country, there is absolutely no legal difficulty in achieving
this end so ably put forth by the author in the monograph under
discussion. It should be remembered too, that the definition of
‘Depressed Classes’ contemplated in the Yeravda Pact has not yet
been arrived at.
Harijan, 6-5- 1933

92. HIS WILL BE DONE
General Smuts is reported to have made a pathetic appeal to me
to desist from the impending fast. Kunwar Maharaj Singh is said to
have backed it. I have not yet received the telegram.1 But there seems
to be no doubt about the authenticity of the report.
1

For the telegram from Kunwar Maharaj Singh, India’s Agent General on
South Africa, vide “A Confession and a Warning”, 6-5-1933.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

85

Dr. Ansari binds me with a tie of love capable of standing the
severest strain. 1 When I seemed to be forsaken by the ‘Siamese
Twins’2, through whom I came to know the great and good Hakim
Saheb Ajmal Khan and then Dr. Ansari, the latter never wavered in his
faith in my supreme regard for Mussalmans of India as if they were
my blood-brothers, as in fact they are, born of the same
Madar-i-Hind. He as “an old friend, fellow-worker and medical
man” makes a pathetic appeal to me to vary my vow.
Chakravarti Rajagopalachari, the keeper of my conscience, sends
me a long telegram attacking the very basis of the fast.
Add to these the fervent personal appeal, strengthened by a
copious flow of tears, of Devdas, my youngest son and valued
comrade.
If these typical appeals have left me unmoved, the reader should
have no difficulty in perceiving that there must be a force which has
overpowered me and prevents me from responding to these and such
other appeals.
Underlying them is undoubtedly a distrust in my claim that this
fast is prompted by God.3 I do not suggest that they do not believe in
my word. But they believe me to be under selfdelusion—a prey to my
own heated imagination made hotter by the suffocation produced by
the cramping walls of a prison. I cannot deny the possibility of such a
thing. But it can make no appeal to me whilst I believe to the contrary.
I am a habitual prisoner. Prison walls have never been known to have
warped my judgment or induced in me a habit of brooding. All my
imprisonments have been periods of intense activity leaving me no
time for brooding. I have undoubtedly brooded over the wrongs of
Harijans. But such brooding has always resulted in definite action on
my part. The action that I was contemplating on the day preceding
that fateful night was certainly not any fast.
My claim to hear the voice of God is no new claim.
Unfortunately there is no way that I know of proving the claim except
through results. God will not be God if He allowed Himself to be an
object of proof by His creatures. But He does give His willing slave
the power to pass through the fiercest of ordeals. I have been a willing
1

Vide “Telegram to Dr. M. A. Ansari”, 4-5-1933.
Shaukat Ali and Mahomed Ali
3
Vide “Statement on Fast”, 30-4-1933.
2

86

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

slave to this most exacting Master for more than half a century. His
voice has been increasingly audible as years have rolled by. He has
never forsaken me even in my darkest hour. He has saved me often
against myself and left me not a vestige of independence. The greater
the surrender to Him, the greater has been my joy.
I, therefore, feel confident that in the end these kindest of
friends will recognize-the correctness of the action I am about to take.
And this whether I die or live. God’s ways are inscrutable. And who
knows that He may not want my death during the fast to be more
fruitful of beneficial results than my life? Surely it is highly
depressing to think that a man’s ability to serve dies with the
dissolution of the body which for the moment he is inhabiting. Who
doubts that the spirits of Ramakrishna and Dayananda, Vivekananda
and Ramtirth are today working in our midst? It may be that they are
more potent today than when they were in our midst in the flesh. It is
not true that ‘the good that men do is oft buried with them’. We burn
the evil that men do with their mortal remains. We treasure the
memory of the good they do, and distance only magnifies it.
And why should exaggerated importance be given to the
services of one single person, however good or able he may be? The
cause of Harijans is God’s cause. He will throw up men and women as
they may be required to do His will.
I, therefore, invite General Smuts and all other friends to believe
with me that I am not acting under hallucination and beseech them to
send up their prayer to the Almighty that He may give me the strength
to pass safely through the ordeal. I feel sure that, if I am wanted on
this earth yet for a while for any service whatsoever, He will spare me
notwithstanding the fears of medical friends.
Since the above was in type, the cable from Sir Kunwar Maharaj
Singh has been received. The Press version omits some words. Here is
the text:
The following telegram has been sent to me by General Smuts, in his
private capacity, for transmission to you:
“May I appeal to you most earnestly to delay your announced fast? Your
work for removal of untouchability has already achieved a measure of success
which exceeds highest expectations. With patience you may yet carry
complete accomplishment of the greatest reform of our time. Moreover, India
stands on the threshold of a new period which makes your wise guidance in
future more essential than ever before. Endangering your life might lead to a

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

87

dreadful calamity and an irreparable setback at the most critical moment. I
appeal for old friendship’s sake and for the great causes you have championed
so successfully.”
In forwarding this telegram I wish on my own behalf and, I feel sure, on
behalf of the Indian community in South Africa, to endorse the sentiment
expressed by General Smuts.

MAHARAJ S INGH
AGENT OF GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

Harijan, 6-5-1933

93. A CONFESSION AND A WARNING
Though I had read about the coming of this lady 1 to India and
her acceptance of Hinduism and yearning to go to the Ashram at
Sabarmati, she had never corresponded with me till after the
September fast. When the possibility of the second fast to start on the
2nd of January last was announced, she wrote to me a long letter
telling me that she would join me in the fast. I wrote to her, strongly
dissuading her from the course and inviting her to see me, if she was
not convinced. I asked her in one of my letters to let me know
something about her past. She wrote a long letter in reply. Meanwhile
she had started Harijan work in Bangalore with some young men to
help her. She wrote to me about it. This interested me more in her.
And I wrote back in praise of her work. Thus our correspondence
grew.
Suddenly a friend who had just returned from Mysore warned
me that my letters were being exploited and that N. was a mere
adventures of doubtful character. Thereupon I wrote to her an urgent
letter telling her of the report and asking her to come at once to
Poona. I felt that the Harijan work was in danger by her association, if
the report was true. She came promptly in answer to my letter. Her
behaviour was strange as she came in. I straightaway told her what I
had heard about her character. She repudiated all the charges. I
thought there was an end to the matter and began to enquire more
about her work. But as the conversations grew, my suspicion was
roused and I frankly told her about it. That led to most painful
revelations one after another. Her life was one of lewdness, untruth
1

Gandhiji’s comments were preceded by a letter from her intended for
publication in newspapers.

88

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and extravagance. The lewdness did not seem to repel her. She was
brought up in a Bohemian family, where the very name Jesus was
taboo. (N. is only 24, was married in Greece at the age of 17 and has a
son who is with her.) She seemed now to realize the amazing
contradictions of her life. I put it to her that she was doing an
irreparable damage to the faith of her adoption, injuring the Harijan
cause and corrupting the morals of the youths who had gathered
round her. I believe that she saw the force of what I urged. She
decided at once to break with the past, run the risk of being
prosecuted by her creditors and to live among Harijans for their
service and bring up her boy for the same work. She went back to
Bangalore. She wrote a brief letter of confession for the Press, which
the latter would not publish. She removed to Harijan quarters in
Bangalore and, coming under the spell of a vicious man, fell again.
She then went to a Harijan village near Chitaldrug. She was neglected
by the person who took her there. She very nearly collapsed. During
this period she was keeping up regular correspondence with me. She
saw that it was impossible to serve Harijans or to hold herself together
without proper guidance. I felt that it was my clear duty to work out
the logical extent of the advice I had given and that if she was to live
the life of service to the lowliest, she must go to the Ashram, where she
had dreamt of going long ago. I could not possibly ask any friend or
other institution to run the risk of taking a foreign young emotional
girl with a black past hardly yet out of sight. With the consent of the
manager of the Ashram, therefore, I have sent her there, though not
without hesitation. Nor is it without hesitation that I am sharing her
letter with the public. It is difficult to believe that all her terrible past is
dead for ever. But sudden changes have happened in men’s lives
before. Let us hope that N. will prove to be one more such case. What
is impossible for man is possible for God.
Needless to say that she goes to the Ashram without the slightest
intention of taking part directly or indirectly in the civil disobedience
movement. one word to the young men who fell under N.’s spell. She
has given me the naked details of her past life. Youth will be
emotional all the world over. Hence the utter necessity of
preconceived and deliberate brahmacharya during the study period,
i.e., at least 25 years. Let the youth of the country know that this
Harijan service is the most difficult of all humane services. I do not
publish one-tenth of what comes under my notice of the moral
degradation to which the criminal neglect of caste Hindus has reduced
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

89

them. The work, therefore, demands the highest purity and the
greatest simplicity on the part of the workers. Let the young men and
women who are working for the cause take heed from the example of
N.
Harijan, 6-5-1933

94. FOR A HEART AWAKENING
I am writing this on the morning of Saturday 1. I have heard
counsel of a number of friends. Through attachment or love they
want me not to undertake the mahayajna that is in the offing. The
inner voice says: ‘It will be a sin to draw back. God, in whose name
the resolve was taken will fulfil everything according to His wish.’
Outwardly what I see convinces me that I must fast, come what
may. Pandit Santhanam has sent me a report of the work in the
Punjab. It contains three points which Lala Mohanlal has made. These,
in brief, are as follows:
l. In the Punjab the Arya Samaj, the Sanatana Dharmis, the
Sikhs, the Mussalmans and the Christians all want to draw
Harijans into their respective folds.
2. Harijans have produced leaders who are so covetous that,
it is impossible to satisfy them.
3. There are rival organizations in the Punjab working for
the same cause.
It may occasion some surprise among readers that my proposed
fast is an answer to the above situation. The Harijan Sevak Sangh must
understand that this work is purely religious and must be carried on in
a religious spirit. Once this is granted the above three points are
automatically answered. I do not consider as religious the work that
people of other communities and sects are doing. If Harijan sevaks
work with religious spirit they will see the fruit of service in service
itself. They can weigh themselves only in the scales of justice. If
therefore Harijan leaders or others use pressure they will not be
affected by it. Work done in a religious spirit cannot but have an
effect on the rival organizations. What is the definition of such
wonderful religion ? Religion is what purifies the soul, in which there
is no hankering for fruits of action, which generates indomitable faith,
1

90

May 6, 1933

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and in which there is not an iota of selfishness. Only activities
conforming to such religion can be said to be religious. In activities of
this kind the service of Harijans takes on the character of purification
of the caste Hindus, an expression of their repentance. If this is clearly
understood there remains nothing further to ask. Let every individual
and organization become pure through the service of Harijans; let no
one speak ill of others or bear malice towards others. There can be no
place here for considerations of political profit.
But this is easier said than done. It means that religion is to be
grasped not by the intellect but by the heart. For an awakening of the
heart the only effective means is tapasya. Tapasya is the extreme form
of renunciation. Tapasya begins with fasting. Tapasya means to take
on suffering. Only those who fast know the suffering of fasting. I
hope to teach through tapasya, that is, fasting, what I cannot teach
through arguments.
But whether I succeed or not I see no peace for myself except in
fasting. I am convinced that that is what God wills me to do. If in the
course of the tapasya I succumb I shall understand—and so must
people understand—that my work is finished, and my responsibility is
over. That will be no occasion for grief and sorrowing. And what can
be more fortunate for me as well as for the cause of Harijan service if
I give up my life in that cause? If the tapasya is consummated without
any obstacle it will add to my self-confidence and give me further
strength for service. In either case it will become clear that the work of
Harijan Sevak Sangh is a religious one, that for caste Hindus it is in
the nature of repentance and that those who are not pure have no
place in this work.
Let no one think that there is any strength to be derived from
merely abstaining from food. Thought and word should collaborate
in fasting. only a fast undertaken in thought, word and deed can be an
effective means of self-purification. That is why I have been
explaining in a number of articles that everyone does not have the
right to fast.
[From Hindi]
Harijan Sevak, 12-5-1933

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

91

95. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 5/6, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I had a fairly long discussion with Parashuram. Before
explaining the conclusion to which I have arrived as a result of it, I
will narrate to you a shocking thing which he told me. I told him that
I did not believe him at all, but asked him to give his story in writing if
he wished to do so. He did that. What he says is that Dr. Sharma is
more busy in criticizing the Ashram than with treating the patients,
and that too in talking unclean things about it. Parashuram says that
Dr. Sharma had come with certain fixed prejudices against the
Ashram and that he had been talking with several people there and
trying to induce them to tell him things by talking to them against
other inmates or coaxing them in other ways. According to Dr.
Sharma, slave mentality prevails in the Ashram and all of you are
deceiving an ‘old fool’ like me by nodding ‘yes’ to everything I say.
You are, he says, under Prema’s influence and are guided by her in all
things. He calls Prema “Her Excellency” and always uses that phrase
when talking about her in her absence. I didn’t have time to talk more
about this with Parashuram, but I have given you the substance of
what he said.
All this has had no effect on me whatsoever. But I have
mentioned it because I thought it necessary that you should know. Dr.
Sharma has not given me the slightest impression of being a man of
this type. In the letters which he wrote to me from Delhi, I saw his
humility and his sincerity, and I have always believed that he has come
to the Ashram prompted by a spirit of service. I would be very much
shocked if what Parashuram says is found to be true, though of course
there is little room for being more shocked than I have already been.
And from Monday in any case I shall be enjoying supreme peace.
About you and Prema, Parashuram has nothing to say except
that there is temperamental incompatibility between him and you two.
At any rate that is what he says just now. The word in his diary is not
rakshasi 1 but rajasi2 and you seem to have read it wrongly. Nor has he
1
2

92

Monster-like
Imperious

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

charged you with wickedness. He keeps saying that he has got fed up
with Prema’s temper. However that may be, I have told him that he
should exercise the utmost control on his pen and tongue and stop
writing such a rotten diary, and that he can return to the Ashram if he
is ready to throw himself on your goodwill and promise unreserved
co-operation with you in future. I have also advised him to write one
letter to you. I have not yet received any such letter.
May 6, 1933
Parashuram says that he does not wish to leave the Ashram with
the stigma of failure. He seems to be coming round completely now.
Moreover, the fast also is approaching and so he is eager to secure a
testimonial from you and return to the Ashram. I am writing this early
in the morning. Parashuram will see me in the course of the day. If I
think it advisable to send him back, I will do so. Have a talk with him
and take him in again if he satisfies you. You are, of course, not
bound to do so at all. Take him in only if you yourself feel that his
heart has become completely clean. If, moreover, what he says about
Dr. Sharma is nothing but a fabrication by him or a complete
misreading of the facts on his part, you may think whether it would be
advisable to take in again a man of such a confused mind.
If, however, what he says about Dr. Sharma is found to be true,
you will have to think a great deal. Whether or not you take
Parashuram back, give him enough time and listen to all that he has to
say. If he is a good man, we should not let him go. But I also know
that, though good, if he is utterly confused in mind, we cannot keep
him in the Ashram. You are, therefore, completely free not to take him
back again. I am permitting him to come to you only because I don’t
wish to reject his eager entreaties to do so. But I have made my
condition clear to him. He can stay only if he satisfies you.
I continue to get letters from Dr. Sharma and see from them that
several people have indeed talked to him and told him many things.
He says that he has found some persons to be suffering from even
venereal diseases. He should give the names of such persons to you. I
also was going to ask for them, but meanwhile came this fast. Hence I
leave that job to you. Read the letter which I am writing to him.
Panditji is returning there. Narmada does not intend to return at
all. Lakshmibehn has taken a vow, when leaving the Ashram, that she

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

93

will not return for one year. Hence she will not return before that
period is over.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8372. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

96. TELEGRAM TO HARILAL GANDHI1
May 6, 1933
HARILAL
NIZAMIAH HOTEL
225/26 H ARBOUR BUILDING, F RERE R OAD , B OMBAY
YOUR

LETTER

PURE LIFE

IT

TOUCHES
WOULD

ME.
BE

IF THIS

DOUBLY

FAST MEANS
BLESSED.

SEE

YOUR

RETURN

TO

ME.

SHALL

TRY

I

GUIDE YOU. GOD BLESS YOU.

BAPU
From a photostat: S.N. 21200

97. TELEGRAM TO NARANDAS GANDHI
P OONA ,

May 6, 1933
STRONGLY

DISSUADE

MR.

RAJBHOJ

AND

OTHERS

THEY AND ALL SHOULD CLEANSE THEMSELVES
THEY

WILL

FAST

WHEN

THEIR

IN

FROM

FASTING.

SPEECH AND

DEED.

TURN COMES.

The Hindu, 8-5-1933

98. LETTER TO SURENDRAJI
May 6, 1933
DEAR SURENDRAJI,

Ramdas told me that you had tears in your eyes when he
conveyed my message to you. I am sure that in your eyes there
cannot be any tears but of joy. There was no way out of this fast and
this was the auspicious occasion. It seems to me impossible to destroy
1
In reply to his letter dated May 5, 1933, which read: “Your fast has posed a
question for all, ‘what is my dharma?’ I undertake to do anything you would ask me to,
but please do give up the fast” (S.N. 21175).

94

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

a hydra-headed demon like the untouchability by any other means.
Ravana had ten heads only but this demon has a thousand. It is not
necessary to explain to you what these thousand heads are. It is
impossible to bring about its permanent destruction by ordinary,
time-honoured means. We must, therefore, perforce, resort to ancient,
valuable weapons. This is as clear to me as a mathematical axiom. Is it
possible to change the heart of sanatanists by collecting a crore of
rupees? Only a true votary can bring about this reform and not
hundreds of so-called ones. The Ashram through which I am hoping
to overcome this evil must not stand divided on this question. Harijans
are in mortal dread at present. Those who have given up fear have
become shameless. If these latter run into a fury, it would be no
surprise. To destroy all these evils we cannot too often and too
determinedly draw on our spiritual possessions. If it is God’s pleasure
that I alone can bring about this desired end, I shall only be too
pleased for such a sacrifice. But I am not sure that I have so much of
purity in me. If hundreds and thousands of persons like me can
undertake as many fasts, then alone we can bury the sin that has
accumulated through centuries.
I expect a lot from you and people like you. But I must make
one thing clear that no one must follow me during my fast. Your duty
is to remain peaceful and try to be as pure as possible in mind, deed
and word. This letter has been written by Mahadev and he will
continue to do so everyday. I shall sign it as long as it is possible for
me to do so. I have obtained Government’s permission that I can write
to you everyday and so also you can.
My blessings to all.
BAPU
Government of Bombay Home Department I.G.P. File No. 10, 1933

99. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Special letter for Mirabehn

May 6, 1933

CHI. MIRA,

Mahadev is writing this for me, as he will do everyday from now,
and whenever possible take my signature. You can also write daily and
Ba too. I am enclosing a letter for Ba.
You don’t need any argument from me. If any is needed you
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

95

will read it 1 all in today’s Harijan. It is clear to me as daylight that the
fast had to come. I am only surprised that I did not take the decision
earlier. I wrestled with myself all these days. The struggle grew acute
during the last three days and a little after midnight the voice came
clear to me that I must take the plunge. I see what agony you are
going through. I knew Ba would be brave. But your joint telegram
and your letters have already begun to provide me spiritual sustenance
for the pilgrimage. If you want me to come out victorious in the
struggle of the spirit with the flesh, you too have to share in the
struggle. I know how agonizing the effort is for you but I know too
you will come out triumphant and help me to be triumphant too. But
what is our triumph? As you have rightly begun your letter and
perhaps I wrote the heading of my article just when you wrote those
words there—not our will but His will be done.
Let me have a line from you both everyday.
Love.
BAPU2
From the original: C.W. 6272. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9738

100. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 6, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter.
The absence of any letter from N. worries me. She was to write
to me daily. I very much hope she will acquit herself well. Keep an
eye on her. Send me reports about her even during the fast. I want her
also to send a slip to me occasionally. If you find that she is not
behaving properly, let me know immediately. You may even ask her to
leave the Ashram if you think it necessary to do so. You must have
read the letter which I wrote to her yesterday. I hope you have
supplied her ink, pen, paper and other things which she will need.
You ask me what I desire during the period of the fast. our
outward activities may go on as usual, but I see the need for inner
purification by all. All our activities directly or indirectly bear on the
1

Vide “Statement on Fast”, 30-4-1933 and “His Will be Done”, 6-5-1933.
For letters to Gomatibehn Mashruwala, Ramji G. Badhia, Anasuyabehn
Sarabhai and Lakshmibehn M. Sharma, presumably written on May 6, 1933.
2

96

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

welfare of the Harijans. But see if you can think of a concrete field of
work for their service.
But my chief desire is to see the reforms which I have suggested
in the Ashram carried out. You should think over my suggestions
about persons who do not observe the Ashram rules being asked to
leave, etc., and take the necessary steps to implement them. If as a
consequence of such action the physical activities of the Ashram have
to be reduced to some extent, never mind. Discuss, calmly, the
problems a little more still and make the Ashram safe from the point
of view of purity of standards. Think over the suggestions 1 made by
Rajbhoj and persuade the inmates of the Ashram to get ready to
sacrifice themselves by fasting indefinitely.
I cannot think of anything more to say.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8374. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

101. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
May 6, 1933
CHI. MANI,

Like last time, this time too, I am permitted to send you a letter
every day during the fast and you too can write to me daily. I may be
unable to write or dictate a letter daily but Mahadev will write and, if
possible, get it signed by me. Every such letter will be for both you
and Mridula2. This letter also is being taken down by Mahadev.
Both of you are brave girls. I am sure you will not be unnerved.
You need not worry at all on my account. I think that I am fresher and
stronger this time than I was at the time of the previous fast. Raja
strove hard with me. He is calm now and is leaving today. But he will
return in a few days’ time. Vallabhbhai is bearing it all very calmly
and has promised to Mahadev that he will co-operate with me—maybe
by keeping silent— without entering into any argument. I like this
attitude of his. For a few days he carried his silence too far. Even the
fountain of his humour seemed to have dried up. But it has welled up
1
2

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”,27-4-1933.
Mridula Sarabhai

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

97

again.
The fast was absolutely necessary. I have no doubt that this was
the best time for it. I have thought about the matter from every point
of view and am fully convinced of the correctness of my decision.
The fast is not directed against anybody. I do not even know what
event pained me and precipitated the fast. Many things had their felt
or unfelt influence on me. The point is that if the workers doing
Harijan work under my guidance are not perfectly sincere, the cause
must be some impurity in me. Moreover, the monster of
untouchability is more frightful than Ravana. The latter had only ten
heads, but this one has hundreds of them. They cannot all be cast off
by any number of organizations or any amount of money collected
for the purpose. It is not enough to secure rights for Harijans. What is
wanted is a change of heart among caste Hindus if they and Harijans
are to embrace one another as blood-brothers. This great spiritual task
can be accomplished only if we spend all the spiritual strength we
possess. This is an ancient and well-trodden path. The wonder is that I
did not think of it before.
Remain calm both of you and contribute your share when the
time comes. A fast in sympathy with me is out of question.
Blessings to both from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—4: Manibehn Patelne, pp. 105-7

102. LETTER TO GOMTIBEHN MASHRUWALA
[May 6, l 933] 1
I hope you have understood the significance of the proposed
fast. 2 What is Nathji’s 3 view? He did not approve of my last fast. I
don’t know if he approved of it afterwards. The proposed fast is of a
different kind. If you know Kishorelal’s view, write to me about that
too.
1

As given in the source. However there appears to be some doubt as to its
correctness. According to Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 255 the idea of the fast
mentioned in the letter came to Gandhiji on April 30.
2
This was to commence on May 8, 1933
3
Kedarnath Kulkarni, Kishorelal Mashruwala’s guru

98

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You should not get nervous. Try to purify yourself as much as
you can. Do some work of service. Do not get upset at all. Take care
of your health. If I die, you will have to complete this yajna. How you
may do that, I myself don’t know very well. I have explained to Kaka.
I have also written about this to the inmates of the Ashram. I have
explained to Mahadev and Chhaganlal, too, as much as I understand. I
don’t have time to write more.
From Gujarati: C.W. 9530. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Joshi

103. LETTER TO RAMJI G. BADHIA
May 6, 1933
Your fast will not do any good either to you or to anyone else,
and it cannot but cause pain to me. Even fasting has its rules. If I have
any influence with you, give up the idea of fasting and do as I have
advised. Banish suspicion and anger from your mind and understand
Mathuradas and others. One who fails to understand his well-wishers
cannot be happy. If you have so much faith in me, why should you
not have equal faith in Narandas, Mathuradas and others? I hope you
have faith in Rajbhoj at any rate. If you have, you should follow his
advice at least. It will definitely sustain me in my fast if your mind is
at peace.
From Gujarati: C.W. 9533. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Joshi

104. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
[May 6, 1933] 1
I understand your feelings. Association with me can be very
painful. I myself am not a free agent. I am never sure of what will
happen the next moment. My very freedom seems bondage to me,
whereas slavery to the God of Truth seems freedom to me. Though I
didn’t at all wish to undertake a fast, I had to do so. But the lightness
of heart which I felt after I had taken the decision is beyond words.
You should, therefore, rejoice at the fast. I am sure, nothing will
happen to my body. But what even if my expectation proves false? In
that case, you should think that God had no more service to take
through this body. Please, therefore, do not feel unhappy. The human
1

Vide 1st footnote to “An Example to Copy”, 29-7-1933.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

99

body is a thing more brittle even than a glass bangle, and the atman
that dwells in it is the only imperishable reality. Keep this thought
constantly in your mind and go on doing what service you can. You
and Shankerlal should take rest just now. Come during the last days.
From Gujarati: C.W. 9531. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Joshi

105. LETTER TO LAKSHMIBEHN M. SHARMA
[May 6, 1933] 1
CHI. LAKSHMI,

I get several complaints against you. You spent Rs. 40 on saris
and have bought so many bangles that you would not be able to wear
them even in your whole lifetime. You forget that you are married to a
poor man and are a poor father’s daughter. I am poorer than even
Dudhabhai. You should know that my proposed fast will be for you
also. I will be fasting for all who are connected with me. Moreover,
you are a Harijan girl. You ought to understand your duty. You will
cause me much pain if you tell lies or learn extravagance. Wake up.
Do write to me.
From Gujarati: C.W. 9532. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Joshi

106. MESSAGE ON DECISION TO FAST 2
May 6, 1933
I am not anxious to die. I will not die. Don’t worry yourself
about me.
The Hindustan Times, 7-5-1933

107. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS 3
[May 6, 1933] 4
Unfortunately for me, God or Truth has sent me this fast, as it
1

Vide 1st footnote to “An Example to Copy”, 29-7-1933.
To numerous friends and admirers who called on him from 8 a.m. till sunset
3
Extracted from “Sparks from the Sacred Fire-II (Another Interview with
Mahadev Desai)”. On being asked how far this fast inaugurated “a new era in the
socio-religious movement’” Mahadev Desai explained that he would only repeat
“what Gandhiji said in a compact little Press interview”.
4
From Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, PP. 293-4
2

100

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

appears to me, much later than it should have come. But as I cannot
be the judge of God Himself, I have submitted to His peremptory
injunctions. In my opinion, however, I should have undergone a fast
like this at the time of the inauguration of the Harijan movement after
the sealing of the Yeravda Pact. But that was not to be and it came
now. It is undoubtedly a preparatory yajna (sacrifice) after the fact, it
is also a purificatory yajna and it had to be so because it was overdue.
You should understand that all this is argument after the fact. When I
felt that I had received a peremptory call, I had no such reasoning in
front of me. The call simply came and overpowered me. ‘Is it not
rather an explosion of grief ?’—you ask. The answer is quite simple
and easy. Most emphatically it is not an explosion of grief. Penance it
undoubtedly is, for in impurities as I call them, improprieties as you
call them, but it is included in the purificatory part of it. This, too, was
inevitable because of the absence of the inaugurative fast. ‘Have not
the shocking cases of impurity you have referred to in your statement
led to the fast?’ This is your last rider. I tell you it is absolutely
incorrect and I can say this with the greatest assurance, because I can
give you the dates on which the shocking incidents came to my notice
and at that time I felt there was no warrant for me to fast on account
of those individual cases. There were decisive reasons why as a
prisoner I should not take up the fast for individual cases, as I have
done before now. But in a great movement like the Harijan movement,
it would be beyond the power of a single human being to cope with
individual cases by fasting in each case. There is, therefore, no doubt
in my mind that, whilst these cases must have subconsciously prepared
the ground for the fast, I am unable to lay my finger on any one of
those single incidents as having been wholly or principally responsible
for this sacrifice. It is predominantly an inaugurative fast overdue, and
subordinately, because it is overdue by way of purification of self and
associates. I commence the fast at 12 noon Monday, if Monday sees
me alive. 1
Harijan, 13-5-1933

108. THE BEGINNING OF THE YAJNA
From my childhood I have been taught that good deeds —
religious acts—must begin with the purification of the body and the
1

This sentence is translated from the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

101

soul. The fast of September last cannot be described as a yajna of this
kind. The purpose of that fast was to bring about a change in the
Government’s scheme. Other service to the Harijans necessarily
flowed from it. There was no alternative for me but to undertake it.
The purpose was fulfilled with the alteration in the scheme and the fast
too was terminated. That fast had a condition attached to it and was, to
that extent, inferior to the present one.
The work of Harijan service began later. I now feel that it
was a poor beginning. There was no shuddhi-yajna behind it. It is
possible that owing to lack of that yajna, the war against
untouchabilily did not take on a wholly religious form.
I was not aware of this when the call to fast came. It is difficult
to name any one thing which was the cause of the fast. This fast of
mine is distinct from all my other well-known fasts. Its only object is
self-purification. If I die during this fast, I would regard it as a
welcome, though unforeseen, consequence. And I would like
everyone else to regard it as such. If I give up my life thinking of
Harijans and with the idea in my mind of doing pure service to them, I
would regard it as a good beginning of the work of service. However,
in this yajna, it is not my intention to render service by dying but by
living. If God has willed otherwise, who can prevail against Him? Just
as I have the courage to serve in life, so also have I in death.
We should therefore look upon life and death as one and the same
thing.
Those who tremble at this fast should give up their attachment to
the body. Giving up the body does not mean giving up the work. If
that were the case, what would be the good of living? The body
perishes but the atman does not. It is the atman which acts or does not
act. It lives for ever; it is immortal. Whether we are aware of it or not,
whether we wish it or not, all effort is related to the soul—whether it
may be uplifting or degrading. At the moment, I have only one
burning desire, viz., that we should all realize that this task of
abolishing untouchability is a religious one and cannot be achieved
except through religious means. The purification of all other Hindus
lies in the service of Harijans. Hinduism will not be purified,
notwithstanding the improvement in the economic and political
condition of the Harijans, if other Hindus are not rendered pure. If the
filth of untouchability is not swept away, it will devour Hinduism. In
order to achieve this, it is necessary to bring about a change of heart
among the countless Hindus.
102

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

It should be clear as daylight to everyone that this filth cannot
be got rid of except through self-purification. The best way to make
this clear is to take up the yajna of fasting in thought, word and deed.
Mere bodily fasting is suffering in vain. It may be mere hypocrisy.
Anyone who does not mentally crave for cereals or fruit, finds that his
body readily gives up this craving. Anyone who does not actually
partake of these, but who mentally thinks of nothing but these, may be
said to be constantly eating despite the fact that his body is fasting.
Many fasts are of this nature. From the standpoint of dharma, these
are futile and there is every likelihood of their being harmful. Hence,
it is absolutely essential that the mind should be fully prepared when
undertaking a religious fast. My soul is witness that I am prepared in
this manner. It is possible that many persons may perish during such
yajnas. Nevertheless, without many such yajnas, the abolition of
untouchability cannot be accomplished, the filth that has become
embedded through centuries cannot be removed. It is only right that I
should make a beginning in this yajna.
If my physical self does not survive the twenty-one days’ fast,
the reader must conclude that it was useless for this or any other
service. Faith is of the utmost importance here. Blind faith is of course
to be found in plenty and, as a result, faith itself has become an object
of criticism. But just as a person with sight is not useless merely
because he is amidst many who are blind, but rather becomes the
guide of the latter, similarly, the clear-sighted faith of one individual
can overcome the blind faith of millions. I wish to acquire such faith.
Other men and women should also make that effort. In order to do so
one or more fasts involving thought, word and deed will be useful.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 7-5-1933

109. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
May 7, 1933
CHI. MARY, 1

You do not expect or want a long letter. This will be my last for
four or at least three weeks. Let not the fast disturb your well-earned
1

In the source, the superscription is in Devanagari.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

103

rest. I expect you to return to the Ashram refreshed for much
concentrated work.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3329. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr. Also G.N. 6003

110. EXTRACT FROM LETTER TO
PRINCESS EFY ARISTARCHI
May 7, 1933
. . . So you could not help yourself. But I forgive that long
cable. Poor Harijans. They say your love for them is not as great as it
is for one among many of their servants. Is not their complaint just? I
shall tell them that you will do better next time.
I know I have your prayers with me. Such prayers will sustain
me. I shall be more than half through by the time this reaches you, if
such is His will. If He has willed otherwise, it is also equally well. This
body will then cease to function, not the spirit. This fast is God’s will,
gift. I want you to share the joy of it. May God’s peace be with you.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

111. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
May 7, 1933
1

I treasure your loving message. I seem to have more than
enough food to last me during the ordeal. Man does not live by bread
alone.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

112. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
May 7, 1933
MY DEAR CHILD,

I know what you are passing through. I look upon the
coming fast as the richest gift God has yet blessed me with. I must not
write more. You should know that it is well whatever the result.
1

104

Polak and his wife had sent their prayers.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Love for you both and kisses for the children.
BAPU
From a photostat: No. 122. Courtesy: National Archives of India. Also My
Dear Child, p. 101

113. LETTER TO MURIEL LESTER
May 7, 1933
MY DEAR MURIEL,

Just to ask you to be with me in spirit to sustain me during the
forthcoming ordeal. This will be in your hands after I am more than
half through. That does not matter when spirit speaks to spirit. Then it
is a question of asking and receiving in the same breath. My love to
you all.
BAPU
MISS MURIEL LESTER
KINGSLEY HALL , B OW
LONDON
From a photostat: G.N. 1016

114. LETTER TO HORACE G. ALEXANDER
May 7, 1933
MY DEAR HORACE,

I know I have the prayers of all of you in the ensuing ordeal. I
look upon it as a great gift from God.
My love to you all. I must not attempt a separate letter to
Hoyland.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1421

115. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
May 7, 1933
MY DEAR AGATHA,

You do not expect a long letter from me. I know that I shall
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

105

have your spiritual co-operation during the coming ordeal.
With love from us all,
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1465

116. LETTER TO VERRIER ELWIN
May 7, 1933
MY DEAR VERRIER,

I cannot enter upon the ordeal without talking to you. It is a
matter of great joy to me that I have the prayers of many true friends
to speed me on—Truth is God and He will give me all the food I shall
need during the fast. I wish I had time to talk more to you.
I must not write separately to Mary.
I hope you are all well.
Love to you all.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 8929; also The Tribal World of Verrier Elwin, p. 83

117. LETTER TO BHUJANGILAL CHHAYA
May 7, 1933
CHI. BHUJANGILAL,

I got your letter. Do not worry about me. Cultivate increasing
purity and be a true servant.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI BHUJANGILAL C HHAYA
P ORBANDAR S TATE VAKIL
R AJKOT
KATHIAWAR
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2601

118. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
May 7, 1933
There are more verses than one in the Gita which imply that
106

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

God always helps us to complete whatever work is undertaken in His
name and at His prompting. He is the sole author of everything. We,
therefore, are responsible for nothing.
If somebody assaults another with a stick, it is the person using
the stick and not the stick that does so. Similarly, if we put our body
in God’s hands and if He uses it to get some work done, it is God who
does the work and not the body. Credit for success and discredit for
failure will be His.
You should, therefore, understand that He who has prompted me
to undertake this fast will enable me to complete it.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 295

119. LETTER TO NIRMALABEHN B. MASHRUWALA
May 7, 1933
I know that countless men and women are unhappy. But can
there ever be a birth without agony? We are struggling for a new birth.
I, therefore, expect nothing but good from this great agony. Remain
patient and do whatever service you can.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 294-5

120. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
May 7, 1933
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I got your two letters at the same time. I got the wire too. I am
very glad that you are staying on there. You should always live like
this without worrying. I am confident that I shall come through the
fast safely.
It also seems advisable that you should consult some vaid or
hakim for your complaint. Many persons get discharge from the ear
for some time and then it stops of its own. It is nothing to be afraid of.
It will be enough if you are careful about your food. If a cow is
brought in your presence and milked after washing the udders, you
should drink fresh, unboiled milk. Take care about food and eat
nothing between meals. Avoid dal and spices, and always include
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

107

some uncooked vegetable in your food. Tomatoes and salad are
good. Dr. Deshmukh strongly advises the consumption of uncooked
onions.
How does Janakibehn1 spend her time? Does she move about?
Does Om2 learn anything? What is Prabhudas doing?
I have written a letter of condolence to Shanti Ruia.
Radhakrishna gave me the sad news.
Somebody will write to you regularly and send reports.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2915

121. LETTER TO GANGABEHN B. JHAVERI
May 7, 1933
CHI. GANGABEHN JHAVERI,

I got your letter.
If you observe proper rules about eating and remain calm, your
health must improve.
It is very necessary that you should be consistent in any
treatment which you try.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3954

122. LETTER TO NANABHAI I. MASHRUWALA
May 7, 1933
BHAI NANABHAI,

I got your letter. No one should be upset by my fast. Try to do
as much more service as you can.
Should my friends wish me to refuse a God-given gift or to
welcome it?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6687
1
2

108

Wife and daughter of the addressee
ibid.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

123. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
May 7, 1933
CHI. PREMA,

You must have got my letters. I hope you have given up your
fast and calmed down. But I expect a still better result of your fast.
You know what it is.
Cultivate close contact with N. I believe that sincere love will
reform her and keep her on the right path. There was no limit to her
sins. Likewise, there is no limit to her good aspirations. But she has
lost everything as a result of her immorality. She has lost control over
her mind. I am responsible for having brought about this great and
sudden change in her life, hence I do wish that she should be able to
bear it.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10344. Also C.W. 6783. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

124. LETTER TO JAMNABEHN GANDHI
May 7, 1933
CHI. JAMNA,

Your letters are worthy of a woman of understanding and please
me very much. Now make a determined effort to improve your
health. I will then give you plenty of work. I have no doubt that you
can improve your health.
You have convinced Keshu thoroughly well. I never knew that
he was so immature. I did discuss with him the question of marriage. I
am surprised to hear that he says I didn’t. I had even placed before
him Sardar’s opinion. But he himself refused.
You should continue to write to me even during the fast.
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 879. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

125. LETTER TO VINOBA BHAVE
May 7, 1933
Every moment I receive proof of the propriety of my fast. I
have already hinted in my article1 about the necessity of another such
1

Vide “The Beginning of the Yajna”, 7-5-1933.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

109

fast. That idea is becoming stronger. I feel that an unbroken chain of
such fasts should be maintained till untouchability is completely
abolished. As soon as one man or woman ends his or her fast, another
should start and thus a chain should be kept up. Write to me and let
me know what you think about this plan. I see the absolute necessity
of such a living flame so that a religious movement may be carried on
in a religious spirit. Who else if not the inmates of the Ashram, should
shoulder the responsibility of keeping such a flame alive? We must
make a beginning in this matter. If I survive the fast, I will join you
and others in discussing this plan. If I die, however, you, Kaka and
others who are out of jail will have to think at that time. If you feel
that you should see me, you may come.
From a copy of the Gajarati: C.W. 9543. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Joshi

126. LETTER TO NARMADABEHN RANA
May 7, 1933
CHI. NARMADA,

See that you work properly during the fast, and do not let any
evil thought enter your mind.
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 2777. Courtesy: Ramnarayan N. Pathak

127. LETTER TO MADHAVDAS AND KRISHNA KAPADIA1
May 7, 1933
Even if I never fast, I am bound to die one day. And why should
we assume that I shall die during the fast? Have faith that whether I
live or die, it will be for our good. Is it not better to die performing a
yajna than to die of a disease? Have courage, lead a pure life and do
what service you can.
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9549. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Joshi

1

110

Brother and sister-in-law of Kasturba Gandhi

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

128. LETTER TO SHAMAL R. RAVAL
May 7, 1933
CHI. SHAMAL,

I got your letter. You should not worry about me. Be good
yourself and serve people. That will assuredly help the Harijans. If
God wishes to save me, who can destroy my life?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarat: G.N. 3147

129. LETTER TO RADHA GANDHI
May 7, 1933
During this fast I have decided not to worry about outside
affairs, but I will certainly continue to inquire after the health of those
who are sick.
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9548. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Joshi

130. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL AND KASHI GANDHI
May 7, 1933
CHI. CHHAGANLAL AND KASHI,

I couldn’t write to you for want of time, but soon I got your
reminder. You have my blessings, of course. Your contribution at
present is to go on doing your duty devotedly. I am discussing more
detailed plans with Narandas. I will write to him and tell him to send
you all the information.
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9223. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Gandhi

131. LETTER TO D. V. PARACHURE
May 7, 1933
You cannot fast on my behalf. The person who has started a
yajna should himself undertake self-purification. It was I who started
the yajna for the abolition of untouchability and, therefore, it is my

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

111

duty to make myself fit for it by a fast.
But a time will come when I will welcome your fast. For the
present, examine yourself more closely and get a little more settled in
the Ashram. Then you may certainly fast. I will help you in taking the
decision if I survive this fast. If I don’t, then Kaka, Vinoba, etc., will
be there to help you. Take the decision with their help. I have already
written to Narandas about this. I shall be happy if the inmates of the
Ashram carry on the fast in an unbroken chain, one at a time at
least. Just now, however, you should only prepare your mind for this
yajna.
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9547. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Joshi

132. LETTER TO ANANDI L. ASAR
May 7, 1933
The fast is certainly for you, but it is for myself too. Why should
you die? Live and demonstrate your purity and strength of mind. I
am confident that you will do so. My fast will help you in that effort.
You also will have to fast when you have become fit for doing so. Our
aim will not be realized by my fasting alone. You should, therefore,
start working after you have improved.
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9546. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Joshi

133. LETTER TO V. L. PHADKE
May 7, 1933
Go on doing as much service as you can. I am planning for all
the co-workers to join in the yajna of fasts.
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9544. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Joshi

134. LETTER TO SULOCHANA A. SHAH
May 7, 1933
CHI. SULOCHANA,

I got your letter. Go on working hard and doing good service,
and observe the rules strictly.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 23369

112

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

135. LETTER TO P. N. RAJBHOJ
May 7, l 933
BHAI RAJBHOJ,

Ramji suggested that you two should go round among the
Harijans in the countryside. I do not like it. In my opinion you should
stay at the Ashram, learn whatever is worth learning and immerse
yourself completely in the Ashram life. Ramji is in a very unhealthy
state, he has no confidence in anyone, and does not want to observe
discipline. What good will his touring bring ?
Talk him out of it and persuade him to do peacefully what he
can in the Ashram. You may do whatever is possible in this matter.
If, in spite of all this, you are set on touring you may do so but
on your own, not as representing the Ashram. Speech-making does
not fall within Ashram activities at the moment.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 793

136. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 7, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I wrote one letter to you yesterday. Afterwards Ramji and Dr.
Sharma came and saw me. Amtussalaam and Duncan are in Bombay.
Ramji insists that, if he is not permitted to fast, he may be
permitted to tour villages and also wants that Rajbhoj should
accompany him.
I have asked him to obtain your permission. If you approve, let
them both go. But nobody should go in the name of the Ashram. On
behalf of the Ashram only what is arranged by you should be done.
However, I will respect your experience more than my reason. You
may, therefore, do what you think best. Read the accompanying letters
and pass them on to the persons concerned. You will have to send a
wire, of course.
I knew that N. had fallen in Bangalore. She had written about
that, but I grasped the full meaning of her remarks only the day
previous to the day on which I sent her there. If she is really pregnant,

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

113

I will welcome that. That will test her and us too. If her heart has
become pure, it is our duty to shelter her. Read my letter to her. Open
all letters addressed to her and read them before giving them to her.
The letters written by her may be passed and posted only if they are
absolutely necessary. Reduce your other work and do some work
regularly in a Harijan locality.
The meeting with Dr. Sharma was not a happy one. I did not
like the way in which he talked. I found that there was much truth in
what Parashuram had said. 1 I see that he had come with a strong
prejudice against the Ashram. I could not have a sufficiently long talk
with him. I will have a little more discussion with him again tomorrow.
He will not return there now. Bhagwanji has praised his work in his
letters to me. The letters which Dr. Sharma wrote from there also
seemed good. Have you not been able to judge him? Did he come
here with your permission? It seems useless now to ask these
questions. I will not worry about the Ashram during the fast. You will
have to do that. Do what you think best. If you want help, you can call
Kaka or Vinoba. You may introduce any changes that you like. If you
don’t get much time to think, find some. I should like to hear about
Kusum, Anandi and N. Give me other news, too. Mahadev will reply
as he thinks fit. Do what you wish. You know what I desire.
Even if Parashuram comes there, ask him to leave if you don’t
want him. Perhaps he may not come. All kinds of unexpected things
keep happening here. Nobody, therefore, can foresee what will
happen after two hours. That lady, Spiegel, has gone away to Madras.
May God give you equanimity and the strength which you require.
He who has equanimity will get the strength. That is the Lord’s
assurance. You may expect one more letter still in my handwriting.
And then, if it is God’s will, I will write to you after the 29th.
BAPU

[PS.]
N. says in her letter that she is not able to go to the lavatory
when she gets up at three. If the gates of the hostel are kept closed at
night, there must be some arrangement inside. A removable commode
can be kept in a corner of the yard or in a room.
1

114

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 5/6-5-1933..

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

It would be desirable to supply to everybody who wants the
green vegetables which can be eaten uncooked.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8374. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

137. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
May 7, 1933
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

I can understand your suffering. Keeping my company is
disastrous. I myself am wholly in other hands, not knowing what will
happen the next moment. I feel my freedom as slavery and slavery to
the God of Truth as freedom. I did not have the slightest desire to
undertake a fast, and yet I have had to do so. But now that I have
undertaken one, the load that weighed on my mind is lifted in a way
that defies description. You should therefore rejoice at the fast.
Nothing untoward will happen to my body, but what even if my faith
proves misplaced? In that case you may know that there was not
further service to be taken from this body. Do not therefore feel
troubled. Keep your mind fixed on the thought that the body is more
fragile than a glass bangle and the atman which inhabits it is the only
reality, and go on doing whatever service you can. Just now
Shankerlal and you should rest. Come during the last days of the fast.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: G. N. 11560

138. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
May 7, 1933
CHI. LILAVATI,

I have received two letters from you. Do not be afraid. Find
strength from my fast. This fast will be for the welfare of all of you. It
is my wish that all of you may qualify yourselves for this fast.
Steady your mind and do whatever you can.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

115

139. TELEGRAM TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 8, 1933
S ATYAGRAHAASHRAM
S ABARMATI
STRONGLY
RAMJI

DISSUADE

SHOULD

CLEAR

RAJBHOJ
HIMSELF

RAMJI
OF

GO

SUSPICIPON.

PROPAGANDA

TOUR.

1

BAPU
From a microfilm: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8377. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

140. CABLE TO “INDIAN OPINION” 2
[May 8, 1933]
“INDIAN OPINION ”
P HOENIX (NATAL )
REJOICE.

DO

DUTY

THERE .

BAPU
From a photostat: S.N. 19084

141. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
May [8,] 3 1933
MY DEAR CHARLIE,

This is Monday morning. It is not yet 3 a.m. Yours is the first
letter I commence. This has come naturally and it pleases me. I
treasure the telegram you sent me.4 I was wondering how the decision
would react upon you. I was thankful to God that you had understood
it. I did not know except vaguely why I was being made to take the
fast. But as time passes, more and more proof is coming to me in
justification. I stand or seem to stand calm in the midst of the events
that would but for the approaching fast have rent me in twain. I am
1
2

Vide also “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 7-5-1933.
In the source, this and the preceding telegram have been drafted on the same

sheet.
3

The source has “7”, but the letter was written on “Monday”, which was May
8, 1933. Vide also the following item.
4
The cable from London read: “Accept your decision. Understand. Lone.
Charlie.”

116

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

now able with much greater assurance than before to lay them all at
the feet of the great white throne.
I know you and our many friends are praying for me. These
prayers will be my food during these days.
I hope your brother is better. Whether he is or not, it must be a
great relief to the members of the family that you are so near.
With my love to you and all the friends to whom I cannot write.
Yours,

MOHAN
From a photostat: G.N. 985

142. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 8, 1933
CHI. MIRA,

It is now 3.10 a.m. and I have finished my first letter. That is to
Andrews. Not only I but we are all thinking of you. People write to
me or speak to me about you suggesting that I should abandon the
fast for your sake. It is a great tribute to your love for me but also an
unintended reflection. I want myself and everyone who knows you to
feel that your love is so deeply true and knowing that it can stand the
strain of physical separation no matter of what duration. I know that
this will come, is coming. It cannot come through reason. It will come
through the heart. Essential love depends wholly on the spiritual part,
though it at first comes through the sense perception. I want you to
feel with me. that this fast is a gift greater than God has ever made to
me. That I approach it in fear and trembling is a sign of my weak
faith. But this time there is in me a joy which I have not known
before. I want you to share that joy with me.
Do not therefore deprive yourself of any food. Eat your food
thankfully and keep yourself fit for service. Time for you may come
when you might have to take up a similar fast. Under certain
circumstances it is the one weapon which God has given us for use in
times of utter helplessness. We do not know its use or fancy that it
begins and ends with mere deprivation of physical food. It is nothing
of the kind. Absence of food is an indispensable but not the largest
part of it. The largest part is the prayer—communion with God. It
more than adequately replaces physical food.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

117

Mahadev will drop you a line, as far as possible, daily.
May God give you strength.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Letter 1 for Ba herewith.
[PPS.]
I hope you got my letter 2 written on Saturday. One was sent to
Ba also.
From a photostat: C.W. 9690. Courtesy: Mirabehn

143. LETTER TO PREMLILA THACKERSEY
May 8, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

I got your letter. It overflows with your love. If such a time
comes, at the moment I can think only of your house, though as I
have already told you I should like a Harijan locality best.3 But I see
many difficulties in that.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 78. Also C.W. 4830. Courtesy:
Premlila Thackersey

144. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
[May 8, 1933] 4
CHI. MANI,

I wrote to you on Saturday. 5 You and Mridula too, can write to
me everyday if you wish. Let none of the women feel unhappy about
the fast. Everybody should try to wash off whatever impurity may be
1

Vide “Letter to Kasturba Gandhi”, 7-5-1933.
Vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 6-5-1933.
3
The addressee had invited Gandhiji to stay in her bungalow in the event of
his release, Vide also “Interview to Associated Press of India”, 8-5-1933.
4
As in the source
5
Vide “Letter to Manibehn Patel”, 6-5-1933.
2

118

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

lurking in herself. Someone or other will be writing to you everyday.
I enjoy complete peace of mind. We are all well.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 107

145. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
May 8, 1933
CHI. PREMA,

Need I write anything more to you? You should defy the whole
world and do what you think is for your good. According to me, it
will be easy for you to pursue your good in the Ashram. However,
that alone which seems right to you will be the best course for you.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10345. Also C.W. 6784. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

146. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 8, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

If you have not been sending to Chhaganlal and others
summaries or copies of my important letters, please send them. I see
that Chhaganlal doesn’t know anything. Probably it must be the same
with Vinoba. Make some arrangement for copies being made.
You will find enclosed a letter from Mary Barr. If she returns
there, welcome her.
The other letter is from Nandlal Bose regarding Dhiru. It seems
from it that Dhiru will not be able to go before July. In July he may
certainly go. The letter refers to Rs. 15 as boarding charge. I couldn’t
understand exactly what it means. However, nothing need be done just
now. If I come through the fast and if it is necessary, I will write and
get a clarification. Otherwise you may do so. I am sending the letter
so that Dhiru may have patience. For the time being, let him do what
he can in the Ashram. He should purify himself during these three
weeks.
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

119

You will have to give more time to N. Try and understand what
is in her heart. If any letters are received for her, open and read them.
She is not likely to hide anything deliberately. But she has little
control over her mind. I see that she has had a large share in
persuading me to undertake this fast. I did not know this. If there is
anything which can give her strength, it will be this fast, and, if I have
made any mistake in sending her there, the fast is the only thing which
can undo it. I think that it will save many young men. If she is
pregnant, the cause is one Harijan priest named . . .1. It is difficult to
judge as to who tempted whom. According to me, if she is pregnant
and if she can accept the prospect calmly, the experience will or can
change her life and save her. Shower on her as much love as you can
and rear the plant.
Margarete has left and gone away to Madras. She has held out a
threat that she will go on a fast there. If she fasts, that will certainly do
her health good. She will lose some of the excessive fat on her body.
Duncan’s belief is completely mistaken. I will explain the matter
to him.
Please carry out my suggestions about the kitchen and the dairy
if they have appealed to you.
Even if you don’t make changes in the prayer, you should
divide it into three parts, namely, the recitation from the Gita, the
Sanskrit verses and bhajans. Only those may attend the recitation
from the Gita who are ready to join in it. There is no moral obligation
at all on the others to attend. However, those who wish to attend
should give their names. The Gita should be followed by the Sanskrit
verses. In this also only those who wish to join and who can recite the
verses may attend. Then should follow the bhajans and Ramdhun.
Each of these three things, if done properly, will take ten minutes.
Thus the only part of the prayers which all should attend is the last
one. If all the persons give their names for the parts which they wish
to attend, you will know who keep their resolutions. A lamp, a tall
desk and a register should be placed near the gate and everybody who
comes should put a cross or sign his name if that is preferred, in the
appropriate column. Those who do not have sufficient faith in prayer
to join even in the last item should not be eager to remain in the
Ashram. Anybody who lacks faith in what is an inseparable part of the
1

120

The name has been omitted.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Ashram will get no benefit from the Ashram and will be able to
contribute nothing to it.
Nobody should stay merely from a wish to be useful to the
Ashram. A son or daughter who consciously thinks ‘I may be useful
to my mother’ will not serve her. only those who look upon the
Ashram as their mother or their all in all, should stay in it. If
everybody in the Ashram reflects sincerely in this manner and decides
to stay, the coming three weeks will be well spent there. It is the
Ashram which can make the best use of this period and benefit from
it, and it ought to do so. I want everybody to maintain perfect truth. If
you feel short of workers for carrying on the activities of the Ashram,
you may engage paid men and women, look upon them as your own
brothers and sisters, share their joys and sorrows and be one with
them. Probably such a relationship will be more natural. Any activity
which can be dispensed with may be stopped. However, the cultivation
of fruits and vegetables, as also the dairy and the agricultural work
connected with it, ought not to be stopped. All the processes relating
to spinning are forms of yajna. You may stop admitting children. The
entire Ashram is a school. I, therefore, cling to the view which I have
expressed before. We should be able, and we are able, to give the
necessary training required for living as a labourer. It should be
enough to make sufficient provision for this. It is because we have not
understood the full significance of this idea that we remain
discontented and all the difficulties arise. If we but realize that our
children are labourers and that it is our aim that they should grow up
as such, I believe many of our problems would disappear. The
training imparted for this purpose is bound to be different form the
ordinary type of education. This is enough for the present. Even from
this, accept only as much as you can and throw away the rest.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Guajrati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8378. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

121

147. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
May 8, 1933
BHAI THAKKAR BAPA,

The letter and telegram form Ghanshyamdas said that you were
coming.1 Hence I did not write. I got your letter now. Get the
substance form newspapers, you are not likely to get much in them.
At least 75 per cent of the newspaper reports should be discounted.
The news in the papers should be corroborated by local informantes.
If we have trustworthy informants at various places and if they send us
reports, I would like you to send me the gist. Anyway carry on you
own experiments. You will yourself realize that it does not yield any
fruit. Since you are there, I am easy in my mind. Rama, Rama, Rama.
BAPU
S HRI A. V. THAKKAR
S ERVANTS OF UNTOUCHABLES ’ S OCIETY
BIRLA MILLS
DELHI
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 10449. Courtesy: Harijan Sevak Sangh. Also
from a photostat: G.N. 1121

148. STATEMENT EXPLAINING OBJECT OF FAST 2
May 8, 1933
Every day brings me fresh justification for the ordeal that God
the Truth has sent me. The discoveries I am making would have
paralysed me, but for the fast. Whatever it may mean for the cause, it
will certainly be my saving. Whether I survive the fast or not, is a
matter of little moment. Without it I would, in all probability, have
been useless for further service of Harijans, and for that matter, any
other service.
Those friends who have sent me urgent wires dissuading me
from the step will, I hope, appreciate the fact that for a person built as
1
2

Vide “Telegram to G. D. Birla”, 2-5-1933.
The statement was issued at 12 noon, soon after Gandhiji had commenced

his fast.

122

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am, such fasts are indispensable. This I say apart from my claim, by
which I stand, that it was God’s call.
The senders of wires will forgive me for not sending individual
acknowledgments. The pressure upon my time has been so great that
it has been physically impossible for me to cope with all wires that
poured in upon me.
Now that the fast will begin within two hours of writing this, I
invite all friends and well-wishers to pray for strength for enabling me
to go through the ordeal without weakening. I confess that I have no
strength except what God may give me. That He has never failed me
hitherto gives me the confidence that He will not fail me now.
A telegram was received by me from a Harijan Association that
my fast was unnecessary, as the Harijans do not stand in need of
assistance from the caste Hindus. From its own standpoint, the
Association is right. Only it should be clearly understood that the fast
is taken not to oblige the Harijans, but for purification of self and
associates.
Harijan service is a duty the caste Hindus owe to themselves. It is
a part of the penance they must do for the wrongs they have done to
their own kith and kin. I can well understand the indignantrepudiation
by some of the Harijans. Let me hope that it is not yet too late for the
vast majority to accept the penance. The numerous messages I have
received from them leave no room for doubting such an acceptance.
Sanatanist Hindus scent further coercion in this fast. When they
realize that it cannot be broken before its period, even if every temple
was opened and untouchability wholly removed from the heart, they
will perhaps admit that it cannot be regarded as in any way coercive.
The fast is intended to remove bitterness, to purify hearts and to make
it clear that the movement is wholly moral, to be prosecuted by wholly
moral persons. May God bless the ordeal and fulfil its purpose.
The Bombay Chronicle, 9-5-1933

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

123

149. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA1
May 8, 1933
It came upon me suddenly and therefore I was not prepared.
Having seen the Weekly Times yesterday, Sardar Vallabhbhai
Patel and I discussed for a moment where I should stay, if I was
suddenly discharged. My first thought was to go to Sabarmati and live
near the Ashram, and if that was not feasible or advisable then to
accept Lady Thackersey’s invitation. Of course the invitation of the
Servants of India Society is there, as also from the Depressed Classes
Mission, but when Col. Doyle gave me the information I felt that the
best thing would be to go to Lady Thackersey’s, and here I am.
The Bombay Chronicle, 10-5-1933

150. STATEMENT SUSPENDING CIVIL
DISOBEDIENCE MOVEMENT
May 8, 1933
I cannot regard this release with any degree of pleasure. As
Sardar Vallabhbhai rightly remarked to me yesterday, how can I take
advantage of this release in order to prosecute the civil disobedience
campaign or to guide it? This release, therefore, puts upon me, as a
seeker after Truth and a man of honour, a tremendous burden and
strain. This fast has to continue. I had hoped, and I still hope, not to
excite myself over anything and not to take part in discussions of any
nature whatsoever. The whole purpose of the fast will be frustrated if I
allowed my brain to be occupied by any extraneous matter, that is,
any matter outside the Harijan work. At the same time, having been
released, I should be bound to give a little of my energies to a study
of the civil disobedience movement.
Of course, for the moment, I can only say that my views about
civil disobedience have undergone no change whatsoever. I have
nothing but praise for the bravery and self-sacrifice of the numerous
civil resisters, but having said that, I cannot help saying that the
1

The source had reported: “At Lady Thackersey’s house, Gandhiji told the
Associated Press representative that he was informed of his release only at quarter to
seven by Col. Doyle, Inspector-General of Prisons. Asked if he will be staying at
Lady Vithaldas Thackersey’s house throughout the fast, Gandhiji said that he was not
now sure about this.”

124

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

secrecy that has attended the movement is fatal to its success. If,
therefore, the movement must be continued, I would urge those who
are guiding the movement in different parts of the country to discard
all secrecy. I do not care if, thereby, it becomes difficult to secure a
single civil resister.
There can be no doubt that fear has seized the common mass.
The ordinances have cowed them down, and I am inclined to think
that the secret methods are largely responsible for the demoralization.
The movement of civil disobedience does not depend so much upon
the quantity as on the quality of men and women taking part in it, and
if I were leading the movement, I should sacrifice quantity and insist
on quality. If this could be done, it would immediately raise the level
of the movement. Mass instruction on any other terms is an
impossibility.
I can say nothing as to the actual campaign. The reflections I
have given, I had bottled up all these many months, and I can say that
Sardar Vallabhbhai is one with me in what I have said. One word I
would say. Whether I like it or not, during these three weeks, all civil
resisters will be in a state of terrible suspense. It would be better if the
President of the Congress, Bapuji Madhavrao Aney, were to officially
declare suspension for one full month or even six weeks.
Now, I would make an appeal to the Government. If they want
real peace in the land, and if they feel that there is no real peace, if
they feel that Ordinance Rule is no rule, they should take advantage of
this suspension, and unconditionally discharge all the civil resisters. If
I survive the ordeal, it will give me time to survey the situation, and to
tender advice both to the Con-gress leaders and if I may venture to do
so, to the Government. I would like to take up the thread at the point
where I was interrupted on my return from England.
If no understanding is arrived at between the Government and
the Congress as a result of my effort, and civil disobedience is
resumed, it will be open to the Government, if they so choose, to
revive the Ordinance Rule.
If there is the will on the part of the Government, I have no
doubt that a modus operandi can be found. Of this, so far as I am
concerned, I am absolutely certain that civil disobedience cannot be
withdrawn so long as so many civil resisters are imprisoned. No
settlement can be arrived at so long as Sardar Vallabhbhai, Khan
Saheb, Abdul Ghaffar Khan and Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and others
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

125

are buried alive. Indeed, to call off civil resistance is not within the
power of any of the men who are out of prison. It is possible only for
the Working Committee to do so. I refer to the Working Committee
that was in existence at the time I was arrested.
I shall say no more on the civil disobedience movement.
Perhaps, I have already said too much, but if I was to say anything, I
could say so only whilst I have strength left in me. I would urge
Pressmen not to worry me any more. I would urge also would-be
visitors once more to restrain themselves. Let them regard me as being
still in prison. I shall be unfit for holding political discussions or any
other discussions.
I would like to be left in perfect peace, and I would like to tell
the Government that I shall not abuse the release. If I come safely
through the ordeal, and if I find the political atmosphere as murky as
it is today, without taking a single step secretly or openly in furtherance of civil disobedience, I shall invite them to take me back to
Yeravda to join the companions whom I almost seem to have deserted.
It was a great privilege for me to have been with Sardar
Vallabhbhai. I was well aware of his matchless bravery and his
burning love for the country, but I had never lived with him as I had
the good fortune to do during the last sixteen months. The affection
with which he covered me recalls to me that of my own dear mother. I
neverknew him to possess motherly qualities. If the slightest thing
happened to me, he would be out of his bed. He superintended every
little detail in connection with my comforts. He and my other
associates had conspired to let me do nothing, and I hope that the
Government will believe me when I say that he always showed a
remarkable compreh-ension of the difficulties of the Government,
whenever we discussed any political problem. His solicitude for the
farmers of Bardoli and Kaira I can never forget.1
A.I.C.C. File No. 429, 1933. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

1

The statement, as desired by Gandhiji, was released at 11.30 p.m. after its
approval by M. S. Aney, Acting President of the Indian National Congress. For
Aney’s statement suspending the civil disobedience movement, vide Appendix “M.
S. Aney’s Statement on Suspending Civil Disobedience”, 9-5-1933.

126

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

151. TELEGRAM TO VIJAYALAKSHMI PANDIT 1
[May 9, 1933] 2
I

NEED

STAY

YOUR

THERE

PRAYERS BLESSINGS. I
AND

WORK

FOR

WOULD

HARIJANS

LIKE

DURING

YOU

AND

SUSPENSION

RANJIT
JUST

ANNOUNCED.

From a photostat: S.N. 21228

152. LETTER TO DUNCAN GREENLEES
May 9, 1933
I was sorry that I could not talk with you longer than I did.
This morning I read your report carefully. I do not mind it at
all. I like the frankness about it. Some of your suggestions are also
valuable, but can you grow in it? In spite of all the good that can be
said about the Ashram it strikes me that if the evil described by you is
as extensive as you suggest you can only freeze there. If Narandas is a
mere business man or even predominantly so, he is like salt that has
no savour. If he has not, the Ashram is undoubtedly dead. But my
reading of him is wholly different from yours. He has the rare talent
of combining business with spirituality. This, however, is one instance
out of the many in which your reaction is so hostile that the sum total
of the effect left on one’s mind is that it is an institution where one’s
growth is stunted. But you know best your own feeling in spite of
your report. If, therefore, you feel that you can remain in the Ashram
and grow, by all means it is good. Discuss the whole of your report
with Narandas and let him make what changes you can persuade him
to make. My faith in him remains unabated. But if you remain there
you must go through the discipline consistently with your health
before you earn the right to demand a change. Today you can only
recommend it as a result of first impression and your experience
elsewhere. I wish I had time to correct many of your statements which
are not true to fact, but that would be more strain on me. If you have
1

The telegram was in reply to the addressee’s received on May 8, 1933, which
read: “Long to be with you. Will await your message. Love from me and Ranjit”.
2
From the reference to the suspension of civil disobedience, which was
announced on this date
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

127

faith in Narandas’s bona fides, you should exhaustively discuss all
those points about which you may feel keenly.
Love.
BAPU
MR. D UNCAN
From a microfilm: S.N. 21260

153. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
C/ O LADY VITHALDAS THACKERSEY,
‘PARNAKUTI’, POONA ,

May 9, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I have been released a little unexpectedly, otherwise Mahadev
would have written a letter and a long one. But now I myself must
dictate one. I got your letter. Please go on writing to me daily.
Anybody who has something special to write about may also write. I
welcome the changes which you say have been introduced, but there is
one danger. Read about it in my letter to the women. If all the people
have accepted them willingly, there will be no difficulty at all and their
health will soon improve. Everybody should eat as one takes
medicine, and be fully satisfied with the type and the quantity of the
food that he gets. Any item which one does not like should be
declined. It is not likely that one will not like anything from among
milk, wheat, fruit and uncooked vegetable. If that happens, the only
remedy for such a person is a fast. I have not known any person who
did not like fruits. Let everybody start drinking fresh, unboiled milk
without any fear. The person who is in charge of cooking should take
care that every item is well cooked. If anything is not cooked
sufficiently well, it should be thrown away. You should make it a
general rule to serve only the vegetables which grow in the Ashram
itself. Totaramji1 should know that he must supply tomatoes, salad,
etc., all the year round. I will not mind if this means more expense just
now. Similarly, fruit-trees also should be planted. While everybody
should realize the necessity of learning self-control, care should also
be taken to see that the fruittrees are not raided.
1

128

Totaram Sanadhya, an Ashram inmate
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I have sent you a wire regarding Parashuram. As he was very
keen, I have permitted him to go there. If he does not abide by the
conditions which you impose and gives you the least trouble, ask him
immediately to leave. He need not come to me again. Give him the
railway fare for Delhi or Kanpur or any other place where he may
wish to go. Nobody should stay if he cannot feel happy in the
Ashram. You should not have the responsibility at such a time of
pleasing anybody so that he might stay. It is, of course, your duty to
see that everybody receives love and courtesy. However, those who
cannot be pleased should be permitted to leave. This rule applies to
Dr. Sharma and Duncan also. I have not been satisfied with the
former. He has not impressed me as being truthful or polite. 1 had
written a note to him asking him to leave and go to Delhi. But he
seems to have returned there. I have expressed my dissatisfaction in
my note to him. Even if he remains there, he should not treat N.,
should not touch her or talk with her. If I get time, I will write to
Sharma also and tell him this plainly. Read that letter1. I will mention
it in my letter2 to N., too.
Duncan seems to be a really good man, but I have found that he
is not very intelligent. I am afraid only of Sharma. I am returning
today by registered post the report about cowprotection. Don’t let
anybody give up milk or ghee. The truth is that those who can
willingly accept the changes which I have suggested need not give up
anything. It is not a great thing to give up this or that thing. What is
necessary is to train one’s mind so that one learns to eat as one takes
medicine, to eat only to keep the body alive. Moreover, when we give
up every article of food which is unnecessary for health, there is no
need to practise further self-denial. What I have been begging from
the Ashram just now is a big thing. I want inner purity, control of the
mind itself. Explain fully to everybody the sixth verse of Chapter III
[of the Gita].
Those who restrain the sense-organs but dwell in their minds on
sense-pleasures are hypocrites. The seventh verse, on the other hand,
says that those who keep their minds under control and let the limbs
and organs of the body function without attachment, are hailed as
karmayogis. These two verses explain the secret of how we should
live. If, while fasting, I dwell in my mind on the pleasures of the palate
1
2

Vide the following two items.
ibid

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

129

and keep thinking when the 21 days will be over, my fast will be only
the outward show of an ignorant man. It would not benefit the world
and earn for me a sinful existence in my next life. What is true, in the
wider context, about my fast, is also true, in a limited context, about
the rules of self-control being introduced and followed in the Ashram.
Anybody who stops eating rice and dal but dwells on their pleasure in
his thoughts does not practise self-control by refraining from eating
them. Such exclusion may be beneficial physically, that is, from the
point of view of health. But the various forms of self-denial which are
being practised in the Ashram just now are intended as a preparation
for undertaking indefinite fasts. Those who cannot join in that need
not take their meals in the common kitchen. If anybody who does not
eat in the common kitchen but observes as much self-control as he
can in his own home in the matter of food, I will regard him as
bringing honour to the Ashram. For, his conduct will be truthful and
not unnatural. There will be humble confession of his weakness in it.
It should be remembered that the self-control which I have advised
does not apply to anybody who is ill.
Explain this repeatedly to the women on my behalf. No woman
should undertake anything beyond her strength. The women, and
others too, should understand that what we are doing at present is to
try to prepare the ground for a chain of indefinite fasts. If anybody
practises self-control for my sake for a short time and gives it up
afterwards when somebody else in the Ashram may be fasting, how
bad would that seem! I am far away, but fasts following mine will be
going on in the Ashram. Everybody, therefore, should practise only
such self-control as he can keep up. Nobody should go further than
that at all. I don’t expect more from anybody. Let us not attempt too
much and fail. It would be better to rise step by step. I don’t insist any
more now that the old families ought to take their meals in the
common kitchen. My fast ought not to result in any kind of coercion
on anybody. On my behalf, you should see that it does not. Tell
Ramdas that gradually he will understand the complete propriety of
this fast. Even if the fast is like a pistol, it is worth firing. I believe that
dharma cannot be saved in any other way.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8379. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

130

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

154. LETTER TO N.
May 9, 1933
MY DEAR N.,

I can’t put you out of my mind. I do not want to repeat what I
have said in my previous letters.
Dr. Sharma is there. I have asked 1 Narandas not to ask him to
treat you at all. If it does become necessary to procure medical advice
a doctor will be called in, but you will tell if his presence and sight
excite the emotion you describe. If they do I will have to see what can
be done. But I am writing to him about this emotion so that he can be
on his guard. I hope you do not mind this. I am interpreting you
literally. You have not a single thought in your mind which you want
to keep not only from me but from the whole world including about
whom you may harbour a thought. However distasteful it may be, I
know that that is the only way for a truthful person.2
Your letter written in ink has arrived. You should treat poor
mother at least as well as strangers. But, of course, children sometimes
write to their parents with their fingers, using their blood as ink.
God be with you.
Love to you and kisses to S.
BAPU
S MT. N.
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, S ABARMATI
From a microfilm: S.N. 21257

155. LETTER TO HIRALAL SHARMA
May 9, 1933
BHAI SHARMA,3

I was surprised when Devdas told me you had gone to the
Ashram.4 I gave Devdas a letter for you, which he had to post. I hope
you got the letter. In that letter I told you I had deliberately omitted to
say one thing. It has now become my duty to say that to you.
You know N.’s life. I have sent her to the Ashram so that she
1

Vide the preceding item.
In the source, what follows is in Gandhiji’s hand.
3
In the source, the superscription is in Devanagari.
4
Gandhiji had sent him a note suggesting that he should return to Delhi; vide
“Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 9-5-1933..
2

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

131

can be, if at all possible, protected against herself. In her letter
received day before yesterday she told me that when she met you, you
excited in her the animal passion. This need not mean any condemnation of you at all. How can a man help himself if a woman on seeing
him have her lustfulness excited? It is given only to the rarest human
beings to possess such innate purity that they would never be the
occasion for exciting the lust of even the most depraved women. I
write this, therefore, not to blame you but to warn you against having
anything whatsoever to do with N.
I hope you will take my letter that Devdas had posted to you in
the right light. Your letter which you left to be given to me confirms
the opinion I formed of you after our meeting1. Let me add that
somehow or other you created a bad impression on everybody you
met here. But all that may be utterly unjust to you, so long as
Narandas truthfully guides you and you him and the Ashram in
general. If, on the other hand, he does not like you or you do not like
him or the Ashram in general, you should shun it, even though you
are treating some patients there. If you have developed a dislike for
the Ashram, the whole purpose of your being there is frustrated. It
would be too selfish for me to have you there for the sake of a few
patients.
There was no time to write in Hindi.2
From a microfilm: S.N. 21258

156. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
May 9, 1933
SARDARJI,

I slept well last night. This place is much breezier and cooler
than Yeravda. I slept out in the open. Work has accumulated. I shall
have to work for two days or so. After that, I have decided, I will not
even work. I don’t feel any weakness as yet worth speaking of.
Please do not worry about me in the least.
You gave me a mother’s love.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 17
1
2

132

On May 6; vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 7-5-1933..
In the source, this sentence is in Hindi.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

157. TELEGRAM TO KASTURBA GANDHI 1
Express

[May 10, 1933]

READ YOUR WIRE. HAVING LIVED
SHOULD
GOD

BE BRAVE AND

GIVE

YOU

NOT

COURAGE

WITH

ME

APPLY. AM
FAITH

OVER

QUITE

PEACE.

FIFTY YEARS YOU
WELL

GLAD

HAPPY.
MIRA

MAY

HAPPY.

LOVE. 2

BAPU
From a photostat: S.N. 21269

158. LETTER TO MIRABEHN 3
May 10, 1933
You and Ba will get such reports daily. I hope you are bearing
up well.
BAPU
MISS S LADE
S ABARMATI P RISON
From the original: C.W. 6274. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9740

1

The telegram was in reply to the addressee’s from Sabarmati Jail received on
this date. It read: “It appears from papers prisoners not to be released. I therefore ask
your permission to apply Government for two months leave that I may come to you.
Very anxious. Wire reply. Mira sends love. She is finding peace courage in prayer.”
2
In the source, the sheet containing the draft of Gandhiji’s telegram bears also
the following remark in Gujarati: “Do not now stoop to cracking coal with the mouth
which you have always used for chewing pan. Have trust in God. Overcome your
delusion that we are the body. Repeat Ramanama. Bapu.”
3
In Bapu’s Letters to Mira, Mirabehn explains that this was “written by Bapu
himself on the letters reporting the progress of his fast”. This was added to a letter of
even date from Mathuradas Trikumji from “‘Parnakuti’, Poona”, which read: “Bapuji
enters today the third day of his fast. on the first day after his release towards night,
he dictated his statement on the situation which meant a considerable expenditure of
energy but it was inevitable. Yesterday he worked less and today I hope he will exert
still less. The relieving feature is that he himself has made up his mind to conserve
energy as much as possible. He sleeps well and remains in bed. Devdas, Brijkishan
and myself and other friends do our best to lighten his ordeal as much as is possible
for us. I am fully confident that he will successfully go through the ordeal.”
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

133

159. LETTER TO N.
May 10, 1933
I see that there is more effort in dictating than in writing. As
days proceed I may not be able to write or dictate. Then you will
know that my thoughts are speaking to you.
But you must write a detailed letter daily giving your bodily and
mental condition, your food and S.’s food.
I hope you have understood the moral necessity of avoiding
abortion.
Have sun-bath daily on the terrace of your sleeping quarters.
And there you can take sewing work for the Ashram. Also do takli
spinning.
I wish you will forget Pythagoras, Bacchus and Mahabharata.
Why should you brood over the past when you have to re-enact the
Mahabharata at the Ashram? Do please fill your mind with the task
before you i.e., to become an ideal member of the Ashram, no matter
what the others are.
Love to you and S.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 82

160. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 10, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

You must have received my letter1 regarding Duncan’s criticism.
His criticism proceeds from complete ignorance, but has no malice in
it. Though it proceeds from utter ignorance, there are some good
points in it. I will send you his report. If he has a copy of it, get it
from him and discuss the matter calmly with him. Devote some of
your time to such discussions.
I shall not be able to write or dictate a letter every day. But you
should go on writing in detail about everybody, particularly about N.,
1

134

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 8-5-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Parashuram, Duncan and Sharma. You have not written anything
about Kusum.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8380. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

161. LETTER TO BHAU PANSE
May 10, 1933
CHI. BHAU,

Put your trust in God and have no worry for anything.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 9686. Courtesy: Bhau Panse

162. TO THE READER1
All should know that, even though I am supposed to be a free
man, the Harijan will continue to be edited just as if I was in prison. It
will still be solely devoted to the Harijan cause and will scrupulously
exclude all politics. It is a matter of regret to me that for three weeks I
shall not be able to write anything for the Harijan. But, if God spares
me, I hope to write for the Harijan with better qualifications. I hope,
further, that in the mean while the Harijan cause will make rapid
progress, that reformers and sanatanists will combine, wherever
possible, to serve Harijans, that reformers will work the rest of the
programme without wounding the susceptibilities of the sanatanists
and that the Harijans themselves will, by vigorously prosecuting
internal reforms to which I have drawn attention so often in these
columns, make it easier for sanatanists and reformers to recognize that
Harijans are truly ‘Harijans’ and that they are capable of responding
to love precisely in the same manner and to the same degree as others.
Harijan, 13-5-1933

1

According to The Bombay Chronicle, 13-5-1933, this was “dictated” by
Gandhiji on May 11, 1933.
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

135

163. TELEGRAM TO DR. M. A. ANSARI
May 11, 1933
DR. ANSARI
DELHI
SAROJINI

MENTIONED

YOUR

PRESS

STATEMENT. 1

DREAD

TROUBLE

YOU BUT IT IS YOUR RIGHT AND DUTY COME WHEN YOU FEEL LIKE
IT.

YOU

KNOW

MY

FAITH

IN

YOU.

LOVE

TO

YOU

ALL.

GANDHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 19085

164. TELEGRAM TO MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA
May 11, 1933
2

YOUR

BLESSINGS

ADVICE

IN

COMFORT

SPIRIT.

FROM

ME.

HAVE

CHILDHOOD

BEEN

CARRYING

RAMANAMA

HAS

OUT

YOUR

BEEN

MY

TALISMAN. AM WELL AND AT PEACE. PRAY DO NOT TROUBLE COME.

GANDHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 19085

165. NOTES3
Untouchability is against reason. It is opposed to truth,
non-violence and dharma and hence is adharma. The underlying
assumption is that we are high while others are low. The Brahmin who
does not have the attribute of the Shudra—that is, service, is no
Brahmin. A true Brahmin is one who possesses the attributes of a
Kshatriya, a Vaishya and a Shudra, and has in addition learning.
Shudras are not of course wholly devoid of learning, but service is
their chief characteristic. In varnashramadharma there is to place for
1

Under the date-line “Poona, May 11, 1933”, The Bombay Chronicle,
12-5-1933, had reported: “ ‘I would love to tie with my head on the lap of Doctor
Ansari’, said Gandhiji, who, though in weak condition, felt extremely happy when he
was told by Mrs. Sarojini Naidu of Dr. Ansari’s willingness to come over to Poona
and asked whether Dr. Ansari should be sent for. When he was informed of the above,
Dr. Ansari replied from Delhi on phone: ‘I will never allow Bapu to die on my lap. I
will never allow him to die at all. I will be with Bapu as soon as possible.’ ”
2
Vide “Letter to Madan Mohan Malaviya”, 2-5-1933.
3
These were published under the title “Swarna-Sutra”, that is, golden sayings.

136

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the distinctions of high and low. In the Vaishnava cult even Bhangis
and Chandalas have attained moksha. How can a religion that sees the
whole universe as a manifestation of Vishnu treat the Harijans as apart
from Vishnu?
*

*

*

If anyone says that his belief in untouchability is prompted by
love I just cannot agree with him. I can see nothing of love in this
attitude. If we have love for the untouchables we will not make them
eat our left-overs. If we have love for them we will worship them as we
worship our mother and father. If we have love for them we will dig
for them better wells, build for them schools and admit them
into our temples. These are the signs of love. Love is made
ofinnumerable suns. When one small sun cannot remain hidden, how
can love? Does a mother ever have to go about saying that she loves
her child? A child who cannot yet speak looks into the eyes of his
mother. When their eyes meet we can tell from their looks that they
are in communion with something divine.
[From Hindi]
Harijan Sevak, 12-5-1933

166. LETTER TO MIRABEHN 1
[May 12, 1933] 2
CHI. MIRA,

You will be brave to the end. No joke to be my daughter. Being
there you have to pass through a more searching ordeal than [I.]3 But
then my children to be worthy have to do better than I. Have they
not? God be with you.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: C.W. 9691. Courtesy: Mirabehn

1

The letter was in reply to the addressee’s (S.N. 21231) dated May 8, 1933.
As supplied by the addressee
3
Mirabehn explains: “In the letter reporting the progress of the fast which
accompanied this, the following is written by Mathuradas: ‘The lines at the back
Bapu penned at about 2 p.m. on Friday. He wrote them without using specs, and hence
that incomplete sentence.’ ”
2

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

137

167. NOT BY BIRTH BUT BY MERIT
The reader may not know that among the many devotees of the
Harijan cause are two lepers. One is a Kshatriya who has caught the
infection through service among the poor with whom some years ago
he cast in his lot, taking with him almost all his wealth. His leprosy has
not deterred him from the self-chosen service. Another is a Brahmin
pundit well versed in Sanskrit. He often sends me selections from the
Shastras in support of the reformer’s position on untouchability.
Below is the translation of his latest collection:
l. “one who has purified himself by pure deeds and who
has restrained his senses deserves to be treated as a Brah-min
even though he may be a Shudra”, said God Brahma himself.
2. Even though a Shudra, one who is noble of nature and
deed should be regarded as the best among the twice-born.
3. Neither birth nor lineage, neither culture nor knowledge
of the Vedas, can render one a twice-born. Good conduct is the
only deciding cause.
4. It is good conduct alone which makes one a Brahmin. A
person of good conduct, even though a Shudra, acquires
Brahminhood.
5. He who lives for the performance of dharma (duty),
whose dharma is consecrated to God and whose day and night
are devoted to good deeds—he is declared by Gods to be a
Brahmin.
6. He who is content with whatever food and clothes and
bed are offered to him is declared by Gods to be a Brahmin.
—Mahabharata: “Shanti-Parva”
Commenting on this, the compiler truly exclaims: “Surely
the Harijans of India today fulfil this test.”
7. For a Brahmin truth is Brahman; austerity is Brahman;
control of the senses is Brahman; compassion for the whole
creation is Brahman. . . .
—Parashara Smriti
8. A Brahmin is one possessed of self-restraint, austerity,
self-control, charity, truth, purity, compassion, knowledge of the
Vedas, learning, wisdom, faith. . . .
—Vasishtha
138

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

9. Only those Brahmins are capable of saving (mankind)
who are completely self-controlled, whose ears are full of the
music of Vedic chants, who have conquered their senses, who
have abjured injury to all sentient beings and who shrink from
possession.
(Source unknown)
Harijan, 13-5-1933

168. LETTER TO MIRABEHN 1
May 14, 1933
So you have no Ba to look after or to keep company. 2 God is
trying you through and through. He will give you strength.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6275. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9741

169. WHAT TO DO?
A Harijan sevak writes: 3
Obviously even to serve water to Harijans in their lotas was
considered a sin on the part of the Harijan sevaks though the poor
sevaks had cleaned the lotas after they had been used. When we buy
1

This was added to a letter of even date from Mathuradas Trikumji to Mirabehn,
which read: “Bapuji gets your letter regularly. He completes today six days of his fast
during which time his condition on the whole has been satisfactory. Yesterday was
held a consultation of doctors who have issued their bulletin which must have
appeared in today’s Press. They are not pessimistic. A very useful suggestion came
from Dr. Deshmukh; he recommended the Vichy water in lieu of ordinary water. Bapuji
after ascertaining facts about it readily agreed to take it and it has wonderfully suited
him. It is expected to keep acidity under check. From yesterday the full text of the
Gita is being recited to him. In the evening he has music. He remains cheerful.”
2
Kasturba Gandhi was released from Sabarmati Jail on May 13, 1933.
3
The letter is not translated here. The correspondent had reported that three
Harijan sevaks of his village had invited Harijans to dinner on the Ramanavami Day
and served them drinking water in their own lotas. As a result of this the orthodox
sections of the village had ostracized them and the barber and the washerman had
refused to serve them. He hat sought Gandhiji’s advice about taking the matter to the
court.
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

139

lotas in the market we do not stop to ask as to who might have used
them. What peculiar quality does a lota come to possess as soon as it
falls into our hands so that it becomes useless to us if a Harijan
happens to use it? The villagers in question have given their answer.
They have declared it a sin to lend the lotas to Harijans for drinking
water and they are meting out rough treatment to the three young
Harijan sevaks for having committed this sin. What should they do?
What the villagers have condemned as a sin I consider a meritorious
deed. They must therefore suffer in patience even if corporal
punishment were to be meted out to them, to say nothing of denying
them the services of the washerman and the barber. They may wash
their own clothes and cut their own hair. If they cannot do the latter
they may let their hair grow. But they must never give up.
One must not however under any condition be angry with the
villagers. What after all can they do? They have been taught adharma
in the name of dharma They are, if anything, to be pitied. That the
removal of untouchability is a religious act has been realized by no
more than three young men there. The rest of the villagers continue to
languish in the well of ignorance. Under the circumstances, it becomes
the duty of the three young men by their firmness, purity, tapasya,
sacrifice, patience and generosity to change the hearts of these
villagers lost in darkness and at the same time to teach the Harijans the
habits of cleanliness. They can under no circumstance take the matter
to a court of law.
[From Hindi]
Harijan Sevak, 19-5-1933

170. TELEGRAM TO MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA
May 19, 1933
P ANDIT MALAVIYAJI
JUST

FINISHED

PORTIONS

GUJARATI

PRESCRIBED

BY

TRANSLATION
YOU. 1

MISSING

OF
YOUR

“BHAGAVATA”
VOICE

AND

1

Malaviyaji in his telegram (S.N. 21302) of May 15 to Devdas Gandhi had
suggested that “‘Dhruva Katha’ (Bhagavata: fourth skandha-eighth, ninth adhyayas)
also ‘Gajendra Stuti’ (Bhagavata: eighth skandha-second, third, fourth adhyayas)”
should be read out to Gandhiji.

140

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

RUNNING
AT

COMMENTARY.

YOU

ARE

EVER

WITH

ME.

AM

QUITE

PEACE.

GANDHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 19085

171. TELEGRAM TO KHAN SAHEB AND
ABDUL GHAFFAR KHAN
May 19, 1933
KHAN S AHEB [AND ] ABDUL GHAFFAR KHAN
HAZARIBAG C ENTRAL JAIL
DEEPLY

TOUCHED

BY

YOUR

WIRE. 1

GOD

IS

GREAT

AND

MERCIFUL.

GANDHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 19085

172. TELEGRAM TO BAPAT
[May 20, 1933] 2
JUST

HEARD

WITH

YOU

TO

WILL

WITH

ME.

YOU

WILL

ABOUT

LISTEN

YOUR

FAST.

DISCONTINUE
IT
TO

WILL
ME.

BE

DEEPLY

THE
A

PLEASE

FAST.
GREAT

TOUCHED
LET

GOD

COMFORT

BUT

PLEAD

HAVE
TO

ME

HIS
IF

REPLY.3

The Hindu, 21-5-1933 (Special Supplement)

1
Dated May 19, it read: “We both brothers congratulate you Mahatmaji on
your noble fast for a noble cause. Our daily prayers for your long life to ever serve the
depressed of India.”
2
From The Bombay Chronicle, 22-5-1933
3
Bapat who was on a sympathetic fast from May 8 in Ratnagiri Jail had
replied: “Deeply grateful. I am in God’s hands as you are. Please don’t worry. Death or
life, let God decide.”

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

141

173. LETTER TO MIRABEHN 1
P OONA ,

[May 21, 1933]
CHI. MIRA,

You are showing wonderful bravery. There is no true bravery to
be had apart from complete reliance on God.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6276. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9742

174. TALK WITH DEVDAS GANDHI
P OONA ,

May 27, 1933
If God desires to take me away on the twenty-first day of the
fast, even after keeping me alive for all these twenty days, this will be
my last sacrifice. But if God gives me a further lease of life and
desires me to work more, a new epoch will begin in my life.
My future plan lies in God’s hands. I have driven away all thoughts from my
mind except of Ramanama. What God wills will be just and reasonable. When Mr.
Devdas thanked God for His mercy in sparing his father, the Mahatma remarked:

1

Gandhiji had added this to the letter dated May 21, 1933, from Mathuradas
Trikumji to Mirabehn which read: “. . . It is not yet 7 a.m. Bapu is fast asleep in the
porch facing the Yeravda Central Prison. And I am writing these lines from a corner
from where I constantly have a look at him. He lies in his cot like a sweet child;
beaming with brightness. None who looks merely at his face can believe that he has
not touched food all these 13 days. All is going on smoothly. He is now taking
Sinhagad water—a place famous in the history of Maharashtra. He himself stayed for
a few days in that fortress in 1920. He likes it very much and the historic associations
of the place have drawn him towards it and its water. Dr. Dinshaw Mehta who nurses
him has a branch of his clinic there and it is he who is responsible for securing water
from there. He with his fiancee is rendering splendid service to Bapu. Bapu enjoys
peace of mind and is attaining more and more the spirit of detachment. Mahadevbhai
has gone yesterday to the Ashram. Bapu has added himself these lines without specs
and hence duplication of letters. The letter was about to be posted when he asked for
it. N.B. I am writing you daily without fail, and Mahadev wrote to you yesterday. Your
last letter is dated May 19, 1933.”

142

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Yes, that is so. It is due to God’s mercy that I am living,
but I don’t think that God’s mission is so circumscribed as to only
save me. Even His taking me away must be regarded as an act of
mercy.
The Hindu, 29-5-1933

175. NOTE TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
May 28, 1933
Ishavasya will not do tomorrow. Instead, shuddhoyam
buddhothava should be recited, and Amiya or Mahadev should sing
something from Tagore. The former is a verse in the Bhajanavali.
Mahadev knows it. I need not tell what song from Tagore should be
sung.1
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 127

176. MESSAGE BEFORE BREAKING 21-DAY FAST 2
May 29, 1933
Within a minute or two I am going to break the fast. In His
name and with faith in Him was it taken, in His name it terminates. My
faith is not less today, but more.
You will not expect me to make a speech on this occasion. It is
an occasion for taking the name and singing the glory of God. But I
may not forget the doctors and other friends who have poured their
affection on me during these days of privilege and grace. I cannot
help referring to their service because it is part of God’s mercy. I have
nothing but thanks to give them. God alone can give them a fitting
reward.
I am glad that Harijans are here with us today. I do not know
exactly what work God expects from me now. But whatever it may be,
I know that He will give me the strength for it.
Harijan, 3-6-1933
1

For Mahadev Desai’s account describing the breaking of the 21-day fast, vide
Appendix “Breaking the Fast”, 3-6-1933.
2
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Sparks from the Sacred Fire-IV”. Gandhiji
had dictated the message to Mahadev Desai, who read it out.
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

143

177. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 29, 1933
CHI. MIRA, 1

I have just broken the fast. The next task commences. He will
find the ways and means.2
From a photostat: C.W. 9692. Courtesy: Mirabehn

178. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
[Before June 1933] 3
CHI. KAKA,

I got your two letters at the same time. You have gained good
weight. Milk is bound to increase it. The idea of making you fast for
some days in between is good. There is a difference between the
method described in the book which you have given me and the
treatment that is being given to you there. This indicates that
Dinshawji4 has taken some suggestion from other books or introduced
changes on his own. For you, however, he is the final authority.
I am aware that massage of the back is highly recommended. I
shall see what can be done.
Can Bal5 and others stay with you all the time? I got Bal’s letter.
I will write to him later. If I get time, I may write even today.
I don’t feel happy that those who come to see me stay at
Trivedi’s. In doing so, they do not consider his circumstances. Such
persons must stop staying with Trivedi, nor should they visit you. And,
besides, see how much they spend in coming. Last week there was a
whole army of visitors. I think that was absolutely unnecessary. . . .6
Don’t think of coming down at present at all. It is desirable that you
should derive the utmost benefit from the treatment there. It will be
wise to do so. We shall certainly meet when you come down, that is, in
1

In the source, the superscription is in Devanagari.
This was supplemented by an account by Mahadev Desai of the breaking of
the fast; vide Appendix “Breaking the Fast”, 3-6-1933.
3
From the reference to the milk treatment (vide “Letter to Mirabehn”,
21-6-1933) and the proposal to meet the addressee in June
4
Dinshaw Mehta, a well-known naturopath of Poona
5
Bal Kalelkar, addressee’s son
6
In the source some portion is scored out.
2

144

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

June. Don’t be in haste to come down. If your health improves
completely and you learn something about these methods of
treatment, that will be a great advantage.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9474. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

179. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
P ARNAKUTI, P OONA 6,

June 3, 1933
CHI. MIRA,

Mahadev must give you all the news and I shall just add a line or
two at the end.
I ought to have written to you, but could not for heavy pressure of other
work. Bapu is steadily progressing and gradually adding to his nourishment.
He took milk for the first time yesterday, having taken 14 oz. during the day.
In all he takes about six feeds during the day composed of fruit juices and
honey and now milk. Yesterday over and above the milk, he took eight
spoons of honey, four oranges, one grape fruit and a pound of mango juice.
This is quite good and if he continues to add to this nourishment the doctors
expect that he will regain his normal weight and strength in about two weeks’
time. But their instructions are very strict and Bapu has promised to observe
them. This means that until the fourteenth of this month he should not do any
writing, should not be worried about problems, should take part in no
discussion, etc. Bapu’s weight taken on the morning of the 1st was 84 lb.
The future is in the lap of gods. He was just asking me this morning
about the date of your release. I confessed I did not know it, but that I was told
at the Ashram that you had still two and a half months to do. Please let me
know if I am correct, and now do let Bapu have one of your usual full, long,
detailed letters so that he may know everything about you. He was practically
under a vow of silence but if his thoughts were with any of us, they were most
with you.
Rajaji1 left last evening and expects to be back by the 11th or 12th.
Jamnalalji was here, but saw Bapu only for a second and refused to engage him
in a conversation until he was quite well. No one from the Ashram came
1

For his talks with Gandhiji on June I and 2, vide Appendix “Talks with C.
Rajagopalachari”, 1-6-1933.
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

145

excepting little Babla1 who wanted to have the most out of me, lest I should go
back to my haunts very soon!
Mathuradas has occupied my gadi during these days and is likely to
continue for some time. Devdas has been ill due to strain of work and
exhaustion but is now convalescing. Among the ‘nurses’, good Brijkrishna2 is
still there, also Bal, and Harihar Sharma 3 who will now be going. Ramdas
might take his place. He is here. Ba is quite happy and giving all her time to
Bapu nursing him and massaging him and preparing his feeds with all her
devoted and loving care. I have left space enough for Bapu to write a line.
CHI. MIRA,

You must try to wean yourself from this longing for physical
meeting. I hope the fever is off.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6277. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9743

180. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
June 4, 1933
MY DEAR AMALA,

You should be patient and take part in all the Ashram activities.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegl Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

181. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 4, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

From today I have started writing a little. The burden on you
seems to have proved unbearably heavy, but I hope that it will become
somewhat lighter now. I myself shall not be able to write much, but I
1
2
3

146

Narayan Desai, Mahadev Desai’s son
Brijkrishna Chandiwala, a Congress worker of Delhi
Secretary, Dakshina Bharat Hindi Prachar Sabha, Madras
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

will dictate. You may, therefore, write to me now about important
matters.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8381. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

182. LETTER TO JAMNABEHN GANDHI
June 4, 1933
Are you undergoing the same treatment yet? Write to me
regularly now. How is Purushottam?
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 881. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

183. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
June 4, 1933
DAUGHTER AMTUSSALAAM,

I have written some letters today, hence one for you. Now give
me all the news. How are you keeping?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: G.N. 285

184. CABLE TO C. F. ANDREWS 1
June 5, 1933
PRECIPITATE

ACTION

WILL

BE

SCRUPULOUSLY

A

VOIDED.

GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 21442

1
The cable was in reply to the addressee’s received on June 4, 1933, which
read: “My dearest love Ansari. Take absolute rest. Doing utmost obtain release
prisoners. Hope issue remains unprecipitated. Time essential this end.”

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

147

185. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 5, 1933
CHI. MIRA,

This recurrence of fever disturbs me. You ought to learn real
self-control. It does not come by reading. It comes only by definite
realization that God is with us and looks after us as if He had no other
care besides. How this happens, I do not know. That it does happen I
do know. Those who have faith have all their cares lifted from off
their shoulders. You cannot have faith and tension at the same time.
Do relax your mind.
Love.
BAPU1
From the original: C.W. 6278. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9744

186. LETTER TO DUNCAN GREENLEES
June 6, 1933
MY DEAR DUNCAN,

It was only yesterday that I was able to see your letters to
Mahadev. Of course, when your time comes, you will certainly take
part in the sacrificial and purificatory fast. Whether it should be 21
days or less or even more, need not be determined now. You seem to
have fixed up your mind on 21 days. But you should dismiss that
from your mind. I would urge you also not to be in a hurry. The first
thing that is needful in your case is to see whether, as a whole, the
Ashram has a message for you and in considering this, you will please
not separate the Ashram from its ideal. It is the easiest possible thing
in the world to set forth on a piece of paper the highest ideal. But if
there is no living representative of that ideal it is worthless. Therefore,
1

In the source, this was followed by Mahadev Desai’s note, which read: “Bapu
is getting on very well indeed. The weight accurate to an ounce taken today was 88 Ib.
26 tolas. That is very good. He looks very bright and quite ready to take up
‘problems’ and thrash them out. But the doctors will not allow him to do anything of
the kind and have ordered him to take complete rest until the 14th. He can just sit up
and stand up for a second on the weighing machine (of course, if supported).
Otherwise everything is all right. He is worried that you have brought on the fever by
constantly think[ing] of and worrying about him and sleeplessness and irregularity.
Do get well soon for Bapu’s sake.”

148

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I have always insisted that those who know me and my interpretation
of life should do so through the Ashram, and if the latter makes no
appeal to the examiner he should unhesitatingly reject me. I do not
know whether I have made myself clear to you. So far as I am
concerned, I want you to the extent of your ability to share the life I
am living and the sacrifice I am endeavouring to perform.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19089

187. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
P ARNAKUTI, P OONA 6,

June 6, 1933
MY DEAR AMALA,

I have your letter. You are with me when you are at the Ashram
doing the Ashram work. I am sure you understand this very simple
truth. There were many prisoners occupying the same yard, sharing
the same verandah. Do you suppose that they were living with me?
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Also S.N.
19090

188. LETTER TO N.
June 6, 1933
MY DEAR N.,

I was able only yesterday to read your letters which were with
Mahadev. Surely there must be some misunderstanding about white
flour. There is no white flour used in the Ashram. All the flour that is
used in the Ashram is specially ground and it is always wholemeal.
Sometimes it is sifted after it is ground and sometimes it is not. You
should, therefore, enquire and then let me know. What I told you
about food applies merely not to you, but certainly to all. That all
may not follow that dietary, is a different question. But in the
common kitchen in the Ashram, generally that method is followed
with more or less the same exactness. It is not possible to do away with
rice and dal altogether. But every encouragement has been given to
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

149

those who avoid rice and pulses. I do hope you are finding more and
more peace at the Ashram and that both you and S. are keeping well.
From a microfilm: S.N. 19091

189. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
June 6, 1933
CHI. RAMA,

You may write to me now. How is the condition of the arm? Is
the pain still as bad as it has been? How is your study going on? What
is the condition of your mind?
How are the children? How is Dhiru’s health?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5351

190. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 6, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I see that not only will it be some time before I am able to move
about, but also before I can work with my hands. I heard from
Mahadev yesterday the report of developments there. I have also read
the letters which he gave to me. There seems to have been some
misunderstanding. What I meant was that the ultimate stage, whether in
the quest of truth or in the path of ahimsa, must be a fast by every
seeker, and that the changes about food, etc., which were introduced in
the Ashram in connection with my fast should be understood as a
preparation for this. It is necessary to understand this. Those who do
not see the truth of this need not adopt those changes. I did not intend
that everybody should join in the chain of fasts or leave the Ashram. I
welcome your intention to come here as soon as I pick up a little
strength. You can come on any day during the next week. I will not
talk much, but I shall be strong enough to explain my ideas
and answer your doubts. Nobody need feel troubled. My dharma is
limited to explaining truth as I understand it. All of you may
accept what you can from my suggestions. I don’t wish to create a
new world. You may ask me any questions you like from there. When
150

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you decide to come, you may also bring with you any others whom
you wish to.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8382. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

191. LETTER TO AMINA QURESHI
P OONA ,

June 6, 1933
CHI. AMINA,

You may now write to me. I thought that my hand had become
strong enough to write, but I see from experience that it has not and
so I content myself with dictating. How is your health? How are the
children? Are you making any progress in studies? What is the news
about Qureshi? Has he regained his former weight? Or is it within
limits?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 10779. Courtesy: Gulam Rasul Qurehsi

192. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
P OONA

June 6, 1933
CHI. NIMU,

When Ramdas is out of jail you would not be expecting letters
from me, would you? I am writing this for a specific purpose. I have
seen what Ramdas wrote to you. I have also had a long discussion with
Jamnalalji. You should boldly let me know what you yourself would
like to do. Personally, I like the idea of your going to Wardha. May
you both live there in good health and devote yourselves to God, that
is , to service.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Nirmala Gandhi Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

151

193. TELEGRAM TO SITLA SAHAI
June 7, 1933
S ITLA S AHAI
16 L ATOUCHE R OAD , L UCKNOW
YOU

MAY

COME

PADMA1

WITH

THAKURSAHEB

FROM COMING

GUEST-ROOM

ACCOMMODATION

BE

PREPARED

STAY

JUST FOR
BUT

AFTER

15TH

DARSHAN.
IF

HE

BUT

BESIDES
MUST

HE

DISSUADE
NO

MORE

SHOULD

HOTEL.

BAPU
From a microfilm: S.N. 21456

194. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
P ARNAKUTI, P OONA 6,

June 7, 1933
CHI. MIRA,

I must not write. The last letter that I wrote to you caused much
strain upon the hand. I am, therefore, dictating this letter, in reply to
yours of the 5th instant.
You say that the brief sentence2 I wrote at the end of the letter
written by Mahadev, gave you pangs. It is wonderful how we create
misery for ourselves where there is not even the slightest cause. My
sentence had reference to your fever, which you yourself had said was
due to over-anxiety on your part. You had explicitly mentioned that
you were ill able to bear the separation. It was in answer to this that I
wrote that sentence. It had reference only to enforced separation.
There was no thought whatsoever that you should live out of sight
even when it was possible for you to be with me, that is, if we
were both not imprisoned. Of course, in that case, you would
be most naturally with me, But to be out of prison is not my natural
life. My natural life is that of a prisoner and therefore I suggest that
you should learn to do without my physical presence. Is not this as
clear as daylight?
I do not like this loss of weight by you. There is something
radically wrong in your carrying this load of anxiety on your
1
2

152

Addressee’s daughter
Vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 3-6-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

shoulders. It is incompatible with a living faith in a living God. As
days pass I feel this living presence in every fibre of my vein. Without
that feeling I should be demented. There are so many things that are
calculated to disturb my peace of mind. So many events happened
that would, without the realization of that presence, shake me to the
very foundation. But they pass me by leaving me practically
untouched. I want you to share that reality with me. Then you would
not be disturbed because you cannot be physically near me.
Remember that no heroic effort is necessary in order to be able to
bear such enforced separation, as you and I have to put up with.
Millions of human beings do so without any effort. Do not make the
mistake of thinking that they bear such separation because their
nature is not sensitive to such things. If we would examine them we
would find that they are just as sensitive as you and I are likely to be.
Only they have a natural faith in God of which they have not even the
knowledge. Ours is, beside theirs, a laboured faith. Hence we have to
put forth a Herculean effort to bear separation. Anyway that is my
analysis of your mentality. If it is not true you will make your own
analysis and somehow or other cure yourself of the terrible anxiety.
Carefully ponder over Krishna’s discourses in the second chapter of
the Gita. Then go to the twelfth chapter, and see whether you cannot
find real peace and calmness of mind. Do not try to give me a detailed
reply to this argument of mine. I do not want you to go through that
strain. I have advanced the argument simply to soothe you, if at all I
can. I know that argument is vain when one’s whole being is in
rebellion against itself. Perhaps the painful process through which you
are passing is preliminary to the coming realization of the living
presence of God. May it be so. Anyway do not again allow the
thought to cross your mind that there is any question whatsoever of
your having to live in separation from me when we both find
ourselves out of prison.
Now about myself. I am flourishing. Rebuilding the body at the
age of 64 must be a slow process, and I see that it will be slower than I
had expected. Yet recovery is steady. I am taking easily 24 oz. of
milk. I am trying to go to 2 lb. and may, under Dr. Dinshaw Mehta’s
care, do even better. I am entirely satisfied with the way I am
progressing. Besides milk I take oranges and juice of three to four
pomegranate[s]. I am taking also a fair quantity of honey, perhaps 4
oz. Up to yesterday, I was taking vegetable soup. Dr. Mehta has
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

153

stopped it from today in order to increase the quantity of milk. So
you see that there is nothing to grumble about my food, and the way I
am progressing.
You complain of sultry weather there. Here we have delicious
cool weather. Of course, Poona is ideal in the rainy season.
Devdas will be married to Lakshmi on the 16th; that is the date
when the religious ceremony will be gone through. But as this will be
a marriage in breach of the present Hindu usage, there will be also a
civil registration on the 21st. Jamnalalji is trying to fix up a match for
Prabhudas also. If it comes off, he too would be married about the
same date. Ramdas is here; not at all keeping well. His body largely
depends upon his mental state and he has not yet found his peace of
mind. Jamnalalji is going to mother him. Probably that will pull him
through. He will be living in Wardha with his wife.
N. seems to be shaping well. Margarete Spiegel, who is named
Amala, is as mad as a mad-hatter. But what was one to do? She simply
came and one had to take her. She is a good woman. But it remains to
be seen how she shapes. Both N. and Amala are to do Harijan work.
I think I have now given you enough for the week.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6279. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9745

195. LETTER TO VERRIER ELWIN
June 7, 1933
MY DEAR VERRIER,

Of course I have been having news about you and now I have
your letter before me of the 31st ultimo.
Yes, God has been good to me. He has been a friend
in need. He never forsook me during all those very wonderful 21
days. But I must not dictate a long letter, after having dictated one
long letter to Mira who stood in need of one. I do not want you to
come here merely for the purpose of meeting me. The temptation to
say ‘come’ is there but I know that I must resist it. You have your
work cut out for you and you must not be disturbed.
I am glad you all seem to be keeping well. I hope Mary is quite
154

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

at peace with herself. Do send my love to Mother, Eldyth and the
Italian sisters when you write to them. I am flourishing.
Yours sincerely,1
From a microfilm: S.N. 19092; also The Tribal World of Verrier Elwin, pp.
83-4

196. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
June 7, 1933
CHI. MANUDI,

I was happy to learn that you had gone to the Ashram. Do you
feel happy there? Your tonsils must have been removed now. I
suppose you do know that after the operation one must not speak for
a few days. Even the food should be liquid for some days. It is only if
these post-operation rules are carefully observed that one can derive
the utmost benefit from the removal of tonsils. Write to me a detailed
letter.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1522. Courtesy: Manubehn
Mashruwa1a

197. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 7, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I had wanted to post this letter today before the clearance, but
after writing a long letter2 to Mirabehn I had no energy left to write
another immediately. Thus the improvement is rather slow, but it is
satisfactory.
Let me know how you find N. and Amala. You must have read
N.’s complaint concerning white flour. Personally I think that there
has been some misunderstanding about the matter.
I will call Parachure Shastri’s son here when I get Parachure
Shastri’s letter. I will not let that burden remain on you.
I have not been satisfied about Kusum. Does she want now to
1
2

The printed source has “Love. Bapu”.
Vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 7-6-1933.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

155

find a vaid or another doctor? Please explain to me how the matter
stands.
It is also necessary to do something about Ramabehn’s
shoulder. Either show it to Manekrao 1, or let her come here so that
something may be done here. Please think what would be the best
course. As regards the other matters, Mahadev must have written to
you and so I don’t write anything.
How is Amtussalaam? She seems to be exercising strict selfcontrol about writing to me.
Let me know what your experience of Dr. Sharma was. Does he
write to you? Did you ask him to leave or did he leave of his own
accord?
I assume that Prema will come and see me.
How is Kanu’s health now? What is the news about
Purushottam?
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8383. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

198. TELEGRAM TO GIRIJA SHANKER ROY CHOWDHURY
[On or after June 8, 1933] 2
GIRIJA S HANKER R OY C HOWDHURY
253 BALLYGUNGE AVENUE , C ALCUTTA
THANKS.
[WI]SE

D[EATH]
REGARD

ANNIVERSARY
HAPPY

NO

BAR

TO

MARRIAGE.

CONTRARY-

COINCIDENCE.

GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 21458

1

Professor Manekrao, well-known bone-setter and founder of a gymnasium at

Baroda
2
The telegram was in reply to the addressee’s received on June 8, 1933, which
read: “I beg to bring to your notice that your son’s marriage comes on sixteenth June
which is Deshbandhu’s death anniversary day.”

156

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

199. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
June 9, 1933
MY DEAR AMALA,

I have your letters. Do become steady. It is not good to be
constantly thinking of being with me. On the contrary you will be
constantly thinking of the duty in front of you. Do become a wise
woman of 35 instead of being a child of 5 years.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Also from a
microfilm: S.N. 19094

200. LETTER TO N.
June 9, 1933
MY DEAR N.,

You must not expect from me just now any reply to your letters.
Strength is not coming to me as rapidly as I had expected. But my
expectation had no justification. The regaining of strength is really as
rapid as is possible for an old man of 64. When I built my castle of
expectation I had forgotten that I was 64 and not 46.
What you say about the monthly business is quite true. But it is
not likely to be true of you. To reach the state you have described,
you need to attain perfect purity not merely in act but in thought also.
Then undoubtedly the sex symptom goes, mere form remains. I do
fervently hope that you will soon reach that state, but you have not yet
done so. That you can do so, I have not a shadow of doubt. You have
in you the making of such a woman. I know your aspirations and I
know that you want to be true through and through. You are, so far as
I can read your letters, making a Herculean effort. May you succeed
soon. Meanwhile, I am not just now building any high hope upon the
scarcity of the monthly symptom. I have not, therefore, lost all fear of
conception. [If] it is there, I want you not to mind it but to regard it as
a blessing of God. Whereas if there is no conception we would regard
that too as equally a blessing and a narrow escape. Either way let it
serve as a warning, final and unforgettable.
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

157

I am glad you like Abbas and Govindji as tutors. I know that
they are all very fine workers. They have their hearts in their work. Of
course, Lakshmidas you will look up to both as your first teacher and
in the place of a parent. He is one of the staunchest of men in the
Ashram. I want you to pick out all that you may find to be good in
the Ashram and cling to it.
As to the name, you will see that I have adopted your
suggestion. You may ask everybody in the Ashram to cut out Devi in
any case. And let them address you as N. or N. behn just as they wish.
But having done this forget all about the name, and its meaning and
significance. After all nothing hangs by it. Everything is based upon
what we think and what we do.
From a microfilm: S.N. 19095

201. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
June 9, 1933
CHI. RAMA,

I took no time in coming to a decision after hearing Mahadev’s
report of his conversation with Dr. Patel1. You should now get
yourself operated upon as quickly as possible. From what has been
told me, I clearly understand that the operation is neither very painful
nor risky in any way. It would be wise, therefore, to get the operation
performed without delay. You need not have any fear. I have
expressed this view after the most careful thought. Write to me.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5352

202. LETTER TO JAMNABEHN GANDHI
June 9, 1933
CHI. JAMNA,

I got your letter. I did not read your previous letters. It is only
since a few days that I have been having letters fully read out to me.
One day I actually read them myself, but the doctors advised me
against doing so and, therefore, they are now read out to me by
somebody else.
1

158

Dr. Motibhai D. Patel, an eminent surgeon of Ahmedabad
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

If you send me the substance of your previous letters, I will
dictate a reply.
Have faith that your health will definitely improve if you
patiently cling to nature-cure treatment. I was over-hopeful when I
wrote in my previous letter that I would soon be able to write letters
without any difficulty, but I find that, leave alone writing, I am not
even able to dictate as much as I should like to do. It will take some
time before I can dictate or write without difficulty.
I am following the same regimen as Purushottam did, that is,
complete rest and nothing but milk in food. If this agrees with me, I
shall soon get stronger.
You need feel no hesitation at all in writing to me.
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 882. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

203. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
June 9, 1933
CHI. MANUDI,

I have heard that the operation for the removal of tonsils
was very painful. But I am sure that by the time you get this letter you
will be completely all right. You must have got my previous letter1.
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati C.W. 1523. Courtesy: Manubehn Mashruwala

204. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
P OONA ,

June 9, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

In his letter of yesterday, Mahadev did suggest an operation
for Ramabehn. 1 learnt about the discussion with Dr. Patel only
yesterday. Now get the operation done as soon as possible. I have
already written to you about the question of your coming here.
1

Vide “Letter to Manu Gandhi”, 7-6-1933

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

159

Devdas’s marriage1 is fixed for the 16th. It would perhaps be
better if you come on a date later than that. The general rule that
nobody need come from there to attend a wedding may as well be
observed on this occasion. And so we may deliberately not let the
saying ‘accomplish two objects in one journey’ apply in this case.
This does seem a little unnatural, but perhaps it is more desirable.
For myself, I have been dissuading everyone from coming.
Supposing Prabhudas’s marriage takes place about the same time and
in my presence, I would, if I could, stop even Chhaganlal and Kashi
from coming to attend it. If we really believe that the marriage
ceremony is a religious rite we cannot avoid having performed, there
should be no need for anyone to come here. On such occasions, we
should be quite content with the company of those in whose midst we
happen to be at the time, and the presence of some others who can
attend. It is from this point of view that it has been considered
desirable to be content with [the services of] Lakshman Shastri [as
priest] who is quite near Poona and without those of Panditji.
Combined with all these considerations, there is of course the desire to
save expense. Though enjoying royal facilities myself,2 I just cannot
forget our poverty. Maybe these royal facilities are not unpleasing to
me, but they are certainly not pleasing either. My conscience bears
witness to the fact that seen from the point of view of truth, they are
more unpleasing than pleasing.
Before fixing the date of your coming here, I have indulged in
all this philosophizing. About my health and my experiment regarding milk, either Mathuradas or Mahadev must have written to you.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33500

1

With Lakshmi, daughter of C. Rajagopalachari
Gandhiji was at this time staying at Lady Premlila Thakersey’s residence
‘Parnakuti’.
2

160

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

205. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI P. PANDYA
June 10, 1933
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

I had put your letter under my mattress. I could reach it only
today. If you can come away and if Narandas permits to do so, do
come, so that we can talk and understand each other’s point of view.
If you cannot come, you may ask me whatever questions you may
wish. But assuming that you will come, I don’t write anything in this
letter.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 358. Courtesy: Bhagwanji P. Pandya

206. CABLE TO A. FENNER BROCKWAY AND OTHERS 1
June 12, 1933
THANKS.

MAKING

STEADY

PROGRESS.

GANDHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 21464

207. LETTER TO BHULABHAI J. DESAI
‘PARNAKUTI’, POONA 6,

June 12, 1933
BHAISHRI BHULABHAI,

Only today I heard that you were quite ill. Get well soon. Do
write to me or get someone to write for you.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bhulabhai Desai Papers, File No. 1. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
1

The cable was in reply to the addressees’ received on June 10, 1933, which
read: “Rejoice you have been spared to continue work for Indian untouchables and
social and national freedom. Fenner Brockway, James Maxton, John McGovern,
Members Parliament, Girdharilal Puri, Gurditsingh Dara, Secretary, 33 Staldates
oxford.”
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

161

208. TELEGRAM TO MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA 1
June 14, 1933
GLAD

COLIC

DEVDAS
CAN

SHORT

LAKSHMI

LIVED.

WEDDING

CONSCIENTIOUSLY

DELIGHTED
FRIDAY.

GIVE .

YOU

WANT

WILL

YOUR

COME

BLESSINGS

IF

22ND.
YOU

2

GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 21470

209. TELEGRAM TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA3
June 14, 1933
RELIGIOUS

CEREMONY

NECESSARY

FOR

DEVDAS

UNFORESEEN

MARRIAGE

FRIDAY.

REGISTRATION

CIRCUMSTANCES.

GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 21473

210. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
‘PARNAKUTI’, POONA 6,

June 14, 1933
CHI. MIRA,

Your letter has just arrived. I shall have to be very brief this
week, because from 8 o’clock what is called the milk diet commences
and lasts till half past three or four. During this period perfect bodily
and mental rest is required. Yet if I must write this letter in time I must
do so during this milk feed. What this feed is will be described later on
1
The telegram was in reply to the addressee’s dated June 13, 1933, which read:
“Thanks attack short lived. Am quite well. Only weak. Hope to meet you
twenty-second. Praying you may soon regain full strength.”
2
Malaviya had sent a telegraphic reply which read: “Though I do not approve
the sambandh, I wish Devdas and his spouse all happiness.”
3
The telegram was in reply to the addressee’s to Devdas which read: “Papers
say your marriage to be registered civil marriage. Can it be correct? Wire.”

162

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

by Mahadev.1 Under it, though I cannot be said to be yet putting on
weight, my energy is distinctly on the increase. There is therefore no
cause whatsoever for worrying on my account. As far as I can see I
may be said to be making steady progress.
I understand what you say about your own health, and about the
mistake you made in reading my letter. I do hope that your weakness
has left you and that there is no fever now left. I am assuming that
you will not stint yourself for fruit. Whatever the body needs you
should procure and get well and strong.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6280. Courtesy Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9746

211. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
‘PARNAKUTI’, POONA 6,

June 15, 1933
MY DEAR CHARLIE,

As soon as I was able I wanted to deal with two of your
important letters. Your telegram and your letters2 have helped me
greatly, but I must not deal with the past for I have still to be miserly
in the expenditure of my energy. I am glad you are there able to look
after your brother to a certain extent.
You were quite right 3 in thinking that, if I thought that your
presence was necessary here, I would at once write or cable as the
occasion required. But I am more than convinced that your place is
essentially there. I am not so sanguine as you are, as to your
influence. The meaning I put upon the India Office listening to you is
that they are much more courteous than they used to be. I want you
1

Mahadev Desai’s postscript to this letter read “There is just a minute to add a
postscript. The milk treatment consists of feeds of 6 to 8 ounces every three quarters
of an hour. The milk is unboiled. Goats are milked early morning after the udders are
properly washed with permanganate of potash and the milkman’s hands washed with
hot water. The milk is then kept in a nice refrigerator and keeps wonderfully cool and
tastes very nice. From today Bapu has been allowed to add two dates to each feet. 6 Ib.
each day.”
2
Vide “Letter to C. F. Andrews”, 8-5-1933 and “Letter to C. F. Andrews”, 5-61933.
3
The source has “write”.
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

163

there for a higher purpose and a higher influence.You being there are
able to hold together all those who are friendly to the cause and what
is more you must be silently and imperceptibly permeating the best
English mind with the truth that is in you. All this will tell in the end.
Whilst God is great and omnipotent and works in mysterious ways and
therefore all things are possible for Him, humanly speaking I see not
the slightest immediate cause for hope of improvement in the present
position which so far as I can see is as bad as it can possibly be. This
Ordinance rule has struck the people dumb. The ignorant mass have
become terror-struck. They do not know what is in store for them on
the morrow. The well-to-do are trembling in their shoes simply through a vague fear of their being overtaken by some Governmental Act.
They feel that their only safety lies in an abject surrender to the will of
what to them is a power which seems even to override Providence
itself—a power that will compel subjection to its will at any cost. And
so there is a kind of dead calm which even in my bed, isolated though
I am from contact with people through the orders of doctors, I can’t
help sensing. It is the peace of the cemetery as Lord Irwin once or
twice said in 1930 when he refused to make further use of the terrible
powers which it was possible for the Government of India to use
whenever they liked. Though therefore I see no hope in the near
future, whilst you and I do not ignore it, we have in view the distances
in working for and at truth. Time does not count, or if it does, it
counts in our favour. For here there is all hope, no cause for despair,
for there is a certainty of the final triumph of truth, so long as there is
some living representative of it. Thanks be to God, so far as I can see
there are certainly several, if not many, representatives of truth today
in India who will count no cost too great for the vindication of truth.
Having got this immovable faith in me in the rightness of the
cause, there is no danger on this side of any precipitate action. Every
step that is necessary will be taken with the greatest deliberation. I
shall personally leave no stone unturned to secure an honourable
peace. So far as I can judge I shall fail, but that does not worry me.
The harder General Smuts became the harder and the oftener I
knocked at his door till it was banged in my face, but patience was
rewarded and so it will be in this case. Abdul Ghaffar Khan cannot be
sacrificed. Khorshed Naoroji over 30 years in age, a woman free of
hysterics, full of faith and spirituality, went to the Frontier, lived with
Abdul Ghaffar Khan, came in intimate touch with people. Devdas next
went and both these told me that they were convinced that there was
164

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

no guile about Abdul Ghaffar Khan, that he always said what he
meant and meant what he said. They admit that he is hot-tempered,
hasty in action, but has no belief in violence, is in secret league with
neither Amanullah nor anybody else. His sole ambition is to see his
people happy and free from terrorism. My own personal experience is
that he is amenable to control and discipline. I do not remember his
having ever refused to carry out his promises. He has come to me
whenever I have wanted him. My own firm opinion is that he is much
misrepresented in the official circles and that what they do not want is
his influence among his people. This he undoubtedly has, because he
is self-sacrificing, simple and brave. It is once more a repetition of the
old policy of cutting off tall poppies. If what is insinuated about
Abdul Ghaffar Khan is true, that must be proved by an impartial
tribunal and neither the Congress nor I personally would have
anything to say if the charges against him are true. But the tribunal
must be an acceptable tribunal. I do not want a second edition of the
Meerut Case1. As you know full well I have no sympathy with
Communism, most of the Meerut prisoners were daggers at me. They
missed no occasion to vilify or insult me. But that is of no consequence. They have been punished for holding particular opinions, not
for any act that they have done! And what a punishment! But that is
merely symptomatic of the deep-seated disease. There is no intention
whatsoever on the part of the Indian Civil Service to give up power
and all it means, nor for that matter is there any intention on the part
of Mr. Baldwin or Sir Samuel Hoare to do otherwise.
Now for your important argument about untouchability. But
there is this initial flaw about it. My life is one indivisible whole. It is
not built after the compartmental system—satyagraha, civil resistance,
untouchability, Hindu-Muslim unity and several other things I could
name are not different things to be taken and handled. They are
indivisible parts of a whole which is truth. I can’t devote myself
entirely to untouchability and say: ‘Neglect Hindu-Muslim unity or
1

Meerut Conspiracy Case, in which Justice Yorke found the Communist
lnternational in Russia responsible for armed risings with a view to overthrowing
existing Governments for establishing Soviet Republics by means of inciting
antagonism between capital and labour, conducting strikes, etc. The judgment
pronounced the accused guilty of taking part in this conspiracy, which aimed at
depriving the King of the Sovereignty of British India and convicted 27 out of the 30
accused to sentences ranging from transportation for life to rigorous imprisonment
for three years.
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

165

swaraj.’ All these things run into one another and are inter-dependent.
You will find at one time in my life an emphasis on one thing, at
another time on other. But that is just like a pianist, now emphasizing
one note and now other. But they are all related to one another.
Therefore you see how it is utterly impossible for me to say: ‘I have
now nothing to do with civil disobedience or swaraj!’ Not only so, if I
attempted any such thing, I could not do it. Full and final removal of
untouchability I can show you to your satisfaction, is utterly impossible without swaraj. This letter will be too long and unnecessarily so,
if I gave you chapter and verse to prove my statement.
Love.
MOHAN
From a photostat: G.N. 1300; also S.N. 19097

212. TELEGRAM TO SHEWAKRAM KARAMCHAND
June 16, 1933
S HEWAKRAM KARAMCHAND
S ERVANTS UNTOUCHABLES S OCIETY , O LD S UKKUR
PLEASE TELL
BELLA

NEVANDRAM

MY

BEHALF NOT

FAST

REGARDING

SADHU

TEMPLE.

GANDHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 21478

213. TELEGRAM TO RAMAKRISHNADAS CHANDIWALA
June 16, 1933
R AMAKRISHNADAS C HANDIWALA
KATRA KHUSHAL , D ELHI
READ

YOUR

WIRE

BRIJKISHAN.

FEVER SINCE YESTERDAY.
HABITUAL
COME.

I

CONSTIPATION.
SHALL

KEEP

I

HE

WANT
NEITHER

YOU

IS

MAKING

HIM

TAKE

YOU

DAILY
FULL

NOR

PROGRESS.

TREATMENT
MOTHER

NO
FOR

SHOULD

INFORMED.

BAPU
From a microfilm; S. N. 21478 a

166

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

214. SPEECH AT DEVDAS-LAKSHMI WEDDING1
P OONA ,

June 16, 1933
You have just heard our familiar hymn of “The True
Vaishnava”. I hope you both will ponder over it, and try to live as the
true Vaishnava described by the poet-saint Narasinh Mehta.
Devdas, you know my expectations about you. May you fulfil
them, and I assure you that if you do so all the objections raised
against the match will melt away. Since I reached the age of discretion,
I have tried to understand the meaning of dharma and live up to it as
best as I could. I do not think that in celebrating this marriage
anything has been done against the dictates of dharma. Had it been so,
you should not have had my blessings and presence at the ceremony.
You are taking upon yourself a grave responsibility, which is
proportionate to the great good fortune that has fallen to your lot.
Who knew that your wedding would take place under the roof of the
pure-souled Lady Thackersey? Who knew that a man of great
learning and spotless character like Lakshman Shastri would be found
to act as priest? Perhaps, at some future and convenient date, the
ceremony would have taken place at the Ashram. But the fast has
brought this about. Let the fruit of what was an essentially religious
act be also religious. Let the memory of it inspire you to take every
step with a full sense of dharma. You know dharma is Truth, and if
you keep it as your pole star, it is sure to protect you. What a piece of
good fortune for you that you should have so many friends and
elders to bless you on the occasion! May you prove worthy of all
these blessings! You have today robbed Rajagopalachari of a
cherished gem. May you be worthy of it! May you treasure it! She is
real Lakshmi. Guard her, protect her as you would Lakshmi, the
goddess of the good and beautiful. May you both live long and tread
the path of dharma ! May you live for dharma and have the courage
to lay down your lives, when the occasion comes, for dharma! Let
your life from today be a further dedication to service of the country,
and may you never give yourselves to idle pleasure. This is my
blessing and my cherished hope and desire.
1

This appeared as reported by Mahadev Desai, who had stated: “Gandhiji
addressed a few words to the bride and bridegroom. He took over five minutes to
gather sufficient strength to speak. The part addressed to Mr. Devdas was in Gujarati,
and that addressed to the bride was in Hindi. I summarize the substance below.”
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

167

Devdas, you have always looked upon Rajagopalachari as a
respected elder. From today, he is as good as your father. Tender to
him the same loyalty and obedient devotion that you have been
tendering to me.
To you, Lakshmi, I need not say much. I believe that Devdas
will prove himself a worthy husband to you. Ever since I have seen
and known you, I have felt that you have justified your name. Let
your marriage strengthen, if possible, the bond of affection that has
ever been growing between Rajagopalachari and me. I need not
emphasize the unique auspices under which the wedding is being
celebrated. It is essentially a religious thing, and may it prove to you
both a means for the better performance of your duty! I should have
had nothing to do with the marriage, had I not known it to be in
consonance with religion, and the fruit of the pure tapasya undergone
by both of you in order to gain our sanction and blessings, which you
have now amply deserved.1
It has been a great effort on my part to say these few words. But
I thought it was essential for me to bless you, and warn you of the
great responsibility you are taking upon yourselves. May God protect
you! Only He protects, for He is the father, mother, and friend,
everything rolled into one. Let your life be a dedication to the service
of the motherland, and of humanity. May you both ever be humble,
and may you both walk in fear of God always!
The Hindu, 17-6-1933; also The Hindustan Times, 17-6-1933

215. CABLE TO AGATHA HARRISON 2
June 17, 1933
AGATHA HARRISON
119 GOWER S TREET, L ONDON
WHEN

HEALTH

WILL

BE

NO

PERMITS

COURTING

INTERVIEW

FOR

MY

PART

THERE

CONDITION.

GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 1466
1

This sentence is reproduced from The Hindustan Times, 17-6-1933
The cable was in reply to the addressee’s (S.N. 19096), received on June 15,
1933, which read: “If two men meet without conditions might not a way of peace be
found?”
2

168

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

216. MESSAGE TO SOUTH INDIANS
June 17, 1933
One should feel pleased to hear Pandit Harihar Sharma’s1 report
about the Hindi work in the Provinces of the South. But I shall get real
pleasure only when Hindi is spread in every village. I would wish all
those who can to contribute their maximum to help this sacred work.
M. K. GANDHI

The Hindu, 24-6-1933

217. MESSAGE TO ASHRAM INMATES
[Before June 18, 1933] 2
Mr. Narandas Gandhi, manager of the Satyagraha Ashram, who had gone to
Poona to see Gandhiji, returned this morning. With the Mahatma he had discussion
on the significance of his fast which, according to the Mahatma, was the last resort in
pursuit of truth and non-violence.
Gandhiji is understood to have told Mr. Narandas that his last fast
had convinced him that thousands of similar ordeals would be necessary, and the
inmates of the Ashram should as on previous occasions, take the lead in observing
fasts. They should, therefore, prepare themselves for the purpose by leading purer
lives than heretofore.

The Bombay Chronicle, 19-6-1933

218. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
While observing silence
‘PARNAKUTI’ P OONA ,

4 a.m., Sunday [June 18, 1933] 3
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

Soon after I wrote that letter to you, I had to stop writing letters
with my own hand. I saw that I had not regained enough strength for
that. I feel like trying whether I have it now, and I think I can’t do
better than try to write a letter to you to find that out.
1
2
3

One of Gandhiji, a four ‘nurses, during the fast
The message was reported under the date-line: “Ahmedabad, June 18, 1933.”
Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 19-6-1933.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

169

Please do not get frightened by the doctors’ reports or by the
delay in the recovery of strength. “God’s will prevails”, as the poet
says. I had thought that I would be on my feet in three weeks’ time.
But my expectation has been belied. However, there is no cause at all
for worry. Except for the delay in regaining strength, there is nothing
else. Really speaking, what else could I have expected at the age of
sixty-four? Please rest assured that I am perfectly all right. I am
bathing in Premlilabehn’s love. I have turned her home into a
dharmashala. She herself made arrangements for the marriage of
Devdas and Lakshmi, and with what love she did that! God’s kindness
is boundless. Do we deserve it? May He make us worthy of it.
What has been done regarding your nose?
Tell Joshi that I have given instructions that the operation on
Ramabehn should be performed. But Dr. Patel himself has asked her
to wait till the rains come and the weather is cooler. It is he who has
been insisting on the operation and he is positive that it involves no
risk at all. He thinks the operation is absolutely necessary. Chhaganlal
should not worry. The matter has not been out of my mind even for a
moment.
Writing this much has not tired me. All the same, I don’t wish to
uproot a tree which bears sweet fruit and will not, therefore, write any
other letter today.
Prabhavati has arrived here today. I suppose somebody must
have written to you about that.
Blessings from

BAPU
S ARDAR VALLABHBHAI P ATEL
YERAVDA JAIL , P OONA

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 17-9

219. TELEGRAM TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 19, 1933
S ATYAGRAHAASHRAM
AHMEDABAD
RAMNARAYAN

170

CHAUDHRY

SAYS

JNANADEVI

GIVES

FULL

CONSENT

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

MARRIAGE
ME

PRABHUDAS.

FULLY

STATING

CONFIRM

HER

THIS

AND

LET

JNANADEVI

WRITE

POSITION.

BAPU
From a microfilm: M.M.U./I; also S.N. 21485

220. TELEGRAM TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
June 19, 1933
S HREE
BOMBAY
RAMNARAYAN
FATHER

CHAUDHRY

GIVES

STATEMENT

AND

FULL

WIRES

CONSENT.

ASKED

AND

JNANADEVI
HAVE

AFTER

ASKED

JNANADEVI’S

TALK

NARANDAS

WITH

HER

CONFIRM

LETTER.

BAPU
From a microfilm: S.N. 21486

221. LETTER TO DUNCAN GREENLEES1
‘PARNAKUTI’, POONA ,

June 19, 1933
All these days I have kept your letter of 8th instant under my
mattress in the hope of either writing myself or at least dictating. But I
found myself too weak to do it before today. There are yet 55
minutes for the silence to break. I am utilizing what I can of these
minutes to reply to your letter. I like it very much. I understand all
you say and it satisfies me also. No one can banish you from the
Ashram but yourself. So long as it gives you satisfaction and you
think that you can grow there, you will stay. If the purificatory fast is
resumed2 as it will be some time or other, your place will undoubtedly
be in it without the taint of publication and tomtoming that
unfortunately and inevitably accompanied mine. Everyone will judge
for himself or herself whether he or she has the qualifications. In
theory no one is truly qualified for every one of us has more or less
sin in us. Hence I have called it primarily for self-purification. It is
1
2

Addressee’s name has been inferred from the following item.
Gandhiji was contemplating a relay of self-purificatory fasts by Harijan

sevaks.
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

171

enough if one has the inner urge for service, greater dedication and
greater purification and confidence in one’s ability to go through the
ordeal. The ability comes from the intensity of the urge and (which is
the same thing) the deep and ever deepening conviction of the
necessity of the penance. A seeker after Truth has no strength he can
call his own. The necessary strength (and no more) is given or rather
sent to him for the moment and for the mission to which he is called.
If the chain is begun whilst I am alive, your turn as everybody
else’s will be determined by me or in case of death someone whom I
may have named. If I have failed to do so the participants will elect
the leader from among themselves.
This is as far as I have thought the thing out.
This letter has turned out to be rather important. I am therefore
having it multiplied on the typewriter without your name.
I hope you are keeping well both in mind and body.
Love.
From a photostat: S.N. 19100; also S.N. 21488

222. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 19, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I made another attempt yesterday to write letters. I wrote one to
Vallabhbhai, and today I started with Duncan. After that I am writing
this to you. Duncan’s original letter also is enclosed. As I find that I
have expressed my ideas rather clearly in the letter to Duncan, I got
copies of it made. I have removed his name from them. If there is
time, I will enclose one copy along with the original. If there is no
time, a copy will be dispatched tomorrow. As regards changes in my
diet, anybody who writes to you from here will mention them, and so I
don’t write anything about them in this letter.
I now expect from you detailed news concerning Deolali. How
has Jamna’s and Kusum’s condition been? Have you had any news
about Maitri? If you have decided to consult a vaid for Kusum, let me
know his name.
172

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

What has been done about Ramabehn? When will Dr. Patel think
it is cool enough? How is Amina? She has not replied to my letter.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8384. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

223. LETTER TO P. N. RAJBHOJ
June 19, 1933
BHAI RAJBHOJ,

I have three letters from you, one of May 10, another of June 8,
and yet another of May 16. Till now I was not told of all the letters
that arrived; even now only a few are shown to me. As full energy has
not been regained, my letter-writing is even more uncertain than
reading the letters or having them read out. I have been able to write
very few letters till today. I often thought of writing to you but it is
only today that I have succeeded in doing so. What you have written
about Shri Daphtari is correct. Only a Harijan has the right to ask the
Harijans to take such a vow, other Hindus can only make a suggestion.
The problem of drinking and leading an unclean life is common for
the world at large, it does not concern the Harijans alone. I shall write
to Bhai Daphtari and also in Harijan on this subject when I gain some
strength. You can certainly leave the Ashram at the end of three
months if you feel confident of having gained what you came for. I
would advise you to consult Narandas regarding this, it is all right if
he too feels the same. There is no cause at present for you or other
Harijans to fast. The penance has to be done by other Hindus, not the
Harijans. The occasion for them for atonement and fasting will
certainly arise but it will take some time. I believe this answers the
main part of your queries.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 792

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

173

224. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
June 19, 1933
CHI. BRAJKISAN,

Your letter. Do send for Keshu. Your mother must not be
troubled. I have despatched a wire today. Anyway we shall see later
on. Yes, the treatment must not be given up now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2400

225. LETTER TO ARUN DAS GUPTA
‘PARNAKUTI’, POONA ,

June 20, 1933
MY DEAR ARUN,

I was delighted to have your note after such a long time. Hardly
any letter was read to me during my fast. I was glad that Father and
Mother restrained themselves from running down to Poona during the
fast and are still exercising restraint and sticking to their respective
posts. If I were to travel as I used to before, I would love to take you
with me during one of the travels, if you were physically fit to
undertake the fatigue of the journey. You have said nothing about
your health and your activities. You must tell me something about
both in your reply to this letter.
Have you seen Abdul Halim lately?
From a microfilm: S.N. 19101

226. LETTER TO N.
June 20, 1933
MY DEAR N.

I have kept under my mattress three of your letters among
others. But it is only now that I am able to dictate my reply. I take the
latest, just handed to me, first. Your letter to the Governor of Madras is
being posted today. It might have been worded slightly differently but
174

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the change is not important enough to warrant the delay in sending
the letter. You need neither worry nor be disgusted with yourself for
being late at prayers three or four times in two days. There is such a
thing as being disgusted with oneself and yet continuing the wrong. I
have seen so many such cases. Therefore, what I suggest to you is to
calmly analyse the reason for being late and to avoid it. You have
given the reason in these cases yourself for not leaving your work in
time for prayer. Therefore you should now be careful and leave the
work in time to reach the prayer ground in peace. Constant watch over
one’s minutes guards one from all such difficulties.
Your long letter of 13th instant is too imaginative and too poetic
for me. You have plenty of poetry in you. Your imagination knows
no bounds. I want you to transmute these into an inexhaustible power
for real service. We have all to aspire after being childlike. We cannot
become children because that is impossible. But we can all become
like children. In spite of the knowledge gained, we can become
simple, guileless, candid and natural like them. Here the word
‘natural’ has a definite meaning. All the virtues that we may prize
should not be an artificial growth, possible only in a hothouse, but
they must be as natural to us as perhaps mischief is natural to
children. We love their mischief because it is so natural to them. The
mischief of grown-up ones lies in their being naturally good,
restrained, humble and proof against temptation.
I want to warn you against putting the construction you have put
upon the scarcity of the monthly flow. My fear is that the decrease is
not, in you, a healthy sign. You are not yet free from the sex emotion,
and unless you are entirely from it in thought, word and deed,
irregularity on scarcity in your monthly condition must be regarded
as a sign of some internal derangement. I am afraid that ordinarily
speaking, you will take a long time to reach that condition, unless you
and I and the Ashram are so blessed that you suddenly reach the
requisite condition of natural purity that would stop the monthly flow
and be a sign of perfect health. When you reach that state you will
have no boils, etc., and no other bodily or mental ailment. You will be
the happy possessor of the qualities that we pray for every evening at
the prayer time. I refer you to the last verses of the second chapter of
the Gita.
Pray, do not disturb yourself over the milk treatment though I
know that 10 lb. of milk is an unnatural diet. As a medicinal treatment
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

175

it might have great potentialities. These are certainly claimed for it by
many people. Dr. Mehta, who is treating me, swears by it. Anyway, for
the time being it is suspended, and it may have to be given up
altogether. You must trust me to act cautiously and with sufficient
restraint. Though slow, my progress is steady. I am just now taking
my ordinary quantity of three to four lb. milk a day and a liberal
supply of fruit, consisting of oranges, pomegranate juice and grapes.
This is meant for both you and Amala who also is disturbed over my
diet.
I see that you swear by Kashmir, but let me tell you that it is not
the climate that suits every constitution and in any case I cannot go to
Kashmir in search of health. I must find my health where my work
lies. That is what I did before also and that, too, was after a fast. I
happened to be in the Ashram and in spite of importunities of friends
I would not stir out of the Ashram. The same God who saw me
through 21 days will see me through this convalescence, if such is His
will, and the best thing that you, Amala and others can do to quicken
the progress is by discharging your respective duties as fully as is
possible for you to do.
In your last letter you had said nothing about your boils and
nothing about my suggestion as to the ways and means of restoring S.
to his normal weight. After all he is not only to reach his normal
weight but he is to show an increase in his weight and height, in
general development both physical and mental.
I think this answers all your questions.
From a microfilm: S.N. 19102

227. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
June. 20, 1933
MY DEAR AMALA,

I have your letter.
I see that you will worry about me. As I had to write fairly fully
to N. on several matters arising out of her letter I have asked her to
share my letter 1 with you, at least so far as my food question is
1

176

Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

concerned. I am glad you too are getting on well. I shall certainly
forget your madness, if I find that you are consistently simple and
reasonable.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Who has your passport? Please send me a copy of the main part.
Then I shall tell you what to do.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Also S.N.
19103

228. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
June 20, 1933
MY DEAR SATISBABU,

I have been pining to write to you but have not been able to do
so. You should now write to me fully about your activities, about the
Bengali Harijan and all that you know you should tell me about, and
how you are keeping your health. I am still obliged to be in bed. I
have been permitted to walk a few steps daily in the big room which
had been placed at my disposal by Lady Thackersey. I am taking
nearly four Ib. of milk and plenty of oranges, pomegranate juice
and grapes. That is my staple food. Progress is slow but certainly
steady.
I sent you a telegraphic reply 1 to your question about the civil
registration of Devdas-Lakshmi marriage. So far as we are concerned
the religious bond and the religious ceremony was all-sufficing. So
far as the outside world is concerned and the social and civil
consequences are concerned, the religious tie in what are known as
pratiloma marriages2, as this one, is of no consequences and is held to
be invalid. In order to avoid these consequences the Civil Marriage
Act was passed, I believe, at the instance of Sir Hari Singh Gour,
whereby a Hindu is not obliged to declare that he is not a Hindu, but
on the contrary he can, as he does, declare himself a Hindu and still
1
2

Vide “Telegram to Satis Chandra Das Gupta”, 14-6-1933.
In which the bride belongs to a higher varna

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

177

claim registration of such marriage. Then it is recognized in law. I
had, personally, not thought of this registration, but Rajaji considered
it to be the duty of parents in such marriages to clothe their children
with as much protection as was possible in the circumstance so as to
avoid untoward consequences. I at once agreed with him. If you still
discover any flaw in this you will please not hesitate to bring it to my
notice.
From a photostat: S.N. 21492

229. LETTER TO JAIKRISHNA P. BHANSALI
June 20, 1933
CHI. BHANSALI,

I was delighted to see a letter from you after so many days, I
mean so many months, but I was also pained to read it. I hold that the
remedies you are adopting for attaining self-realization are not right.
If anybody stitches up his lips in order to observe silence, his silence
would not be the real thing. One can observe silence even by cutting
off one’s tongue, but that also will not be real silence. He is truly
silent, who, having the capacity to speak, utters no idle word. The type
of tapas which you are practising is described by the author of the
Gita as tamasi tapas, and I think that is correct. You eat uncooked
flour, but that is against medical science. Shastras never enjoin
anybody to do so. If you have decided to eat nothing but uncooked
things, you can eat only fruits, etc. You may add milk or curds, that
would be complete food. I think it would be better if you gave up this
unnatural effort completely. Reflect over the bhajan given below:
Oh good man! Natural communion is best. Ever since by the Grace of
God it was achieved, it has been growing. Wherever I wander it is a circuit
round the Deity, whatever I do is an act of service, every lying down of mine is
an act of prostration before God. Every utterance of mine is God’s name—1
worship no other God—and all hearing is a remembrance of God. Eating and
drinking are acts of worship and living in a house or in the wilderness are the
same to me. I shut not my eyes, neither do I stuff my ears; to no torture do I
subject myself. I open my eyes to find nothing but the beautiful manifestation
of God everywhere to greet and delight me. My mind ever intent on Him, all
corrupt thought has left me; so very much I am engrossed in contemplation of
Him that there is no room in me for aught else. Kabir says—This is a state to

178

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

be silently enjoyed but I have dared to sing about it. It is a state beyond misery
and bliss, I am merged in it.1

You should live in peace in the Ashram or anywhere else that
you like and go on doing some work of service. You may then, in the
course of time, attain self-realization if you are fortunate enough.
Probably you know that I completed a 21-day fast three weeks ago. I
had a special reason for undertaking the fast. I am still confined to
bed, but am gaining strength day by day.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 21491; also Harijanbandhu, 25-6-1933

230. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
June 20, 1933
CHI. HEMPRABHA,

I got your letter. Only since yesterday have I made some
attempts of writing a few letters. Ten copies of the Ramayana have
reached. I shall go through it after gaining more strength. I am
somewhat worried on account of your health but what can I say to
you? You have left everything to God. He alone will protect you.
Khadi work at present is becoming somewhat difficult day by day.
But I have found from experience that even a difficult task becomes
easy if one works within one’s limits, and the devout never go
beyond it.
The attempt to convert Sodepur into an Ashram can be made
only by keeping the original aim of Khadi Pratishthan in mind. The
following shloka is to be considered in this context:
“Better ones own duty, bereft of merit, than another’s well performed.”2
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1701

1
This translation of the song ‘Sadho Sahaja Samadh Bhali’ is reproduced from
Harijan, 24-6-1933.
2
Bhagavad Gita,III. 35; vide also “Discourses on the Gita”, 27-11-1926.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

179

231. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
‘PARNAKUTI’, POONA ,

June 21, 1933
CHI. MIRA,

Your letter of 18th came into my hands this morning. I have
given up the milk treatment as it is called. But I am taking, after my
own fashion, four lb. of milk at intervals of three hours commencing
from six o’clock and juicy fruits (oranges, grapes, and pomegranate
juice). This is likely to suit me better for the time being. My weight
has gone up to 93_ lb. It is a good increase, and I am allowed to walk
a few steps daily, three or four times. I had, for the first time after six
weeks, a tub-bath. It was very refreshing. So you see that there is
nothing to worry about so far as my health is concerned. In the milk
treatment, so called, and in accordance with my height I should be
able to take 12 lb. of milk per day without discomfort. It is a special
method and in many eases it is very efficacious. In my case too,
ultimately it was expected to succeed, but I did not want to engage
myself in arguing over it, and therefore, for the moment I have
dropped it. You will be surprised to know that Kakasaheb is
undergoing that treatment and is now taking 10 lb. per day and has to
come up to 12 lb. His weight has gone up to 120 Ib. Brijkrishna, who
has been suffering, as you know, for years from habitual constipation,
is also undergoing that treatment. He is taking 12 lb. per day without
any difficulty in quantities of 1 lb. per hour. It is a well-tried method.
The central point of this method is that whilst you are taking the milk
treatment you have got to lie in bed and take perfect rest. You can
take plenty of exercise in the morning before commencing the
milk feed.
Nothing is certain as to where Devdas is to stay in future or what
he is to do. It is enough that both he and Lakshmi are very happy and
so is Rajaji, who is both father and mother to his children. He loves
them, and he would be satisfied to lose himself in them if he had no
other call upon his time. Prabhudas’s turn comes next. It is likely that
he will be married to a girl who is just now living in the Ashram. She
belongs to United Provinces. But nothing is yet certain. Ramdas has
gone to Sabarmati and with his wife he will be presently going to
Wardha. Verrier continues to suffer from one thing or another. He is
180

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

now ready for an operation for hernia from which he has been
suffering for a long time. As a matter of fact the operation seems to
me to be overdue. Radha is still lingering at Deolali where Rukhi has
given birth to another son. She is having her treatment at Deolali.
Keshu is staying there still uncertain as to what he is to do. Chhotalal
is now free from his eczema. Balkrishna is just as weak as before. He
too is in Wardha. Santibehn is here with Om 1 for reasons of health.
She is not keeping well. Jamnalalji has just left for Wardha in
connection with an old business case. His ear trouble is just now under
control, but only under control. It has made him very weak. He
becomes easily fatigued both in body and mind. N. seems to be
shaping well. Duncan, of course, is quite happy and evidently
retaining his health. It is not so with N. She has rash and boils. I think
I have given you a fairly full budget of family news. I dare say I have
forgotten many names, and the little ailments from which the large
family is suffering, but the sample I have given you tells its own tale.
The news about your own health is cheerful. I wish and hope
that you will now continue to improve steadily without interruption.
You will not over-tax yourself by insisting upon going through the
daily programme. Take it easily and go through whatever you can
without difficulty or strain. Then you will be quite all right.2
What you say about boys and girls learning astronomy and the
like is of course very true.
Did I tell you that Prabhavati is with me and is standing by my
bedside whilst I am writing this?
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6281. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9747

1
2

Uma Agrawal; Jamnalal Bajaj’s daughter
In the source, what follows is in Gandhiji’s hand.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

181

232. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
‘PARNAKUTI’, POONA ,

June 22, 1933
MY DEAR AMALA,

I have your two stupid and silly letters.
I never knew that you were so unbalanced, suspicious and
hypersensitive. What led you to think that I regarded you as a
stranger? Or that you were less than a daughter to me? You, nowadays,
sign yourself as a disciple. But do you not know that I claim nobody
as my disciple? I have one disciple, too many, and that is myself. You
suppose I would take additional burden and make my life a misery? I
delight in owning sons and daughters, sisters and brothers. Therefore,
you are either a daughter or nothing; certainly not a disciple, and what
a disciple suspecting her own master at every step! Are you now
surprised that I called you mad! And why do you worry about my
food? Can you not have trust enough in me and feel that I would not
take any risk with myself? In any case, now that I am taking milk and
fruit, after my own style, perhaps you will cease to worry. Anyway I
am flourishing, gaining weight and strength. Are you flourishing as
well as I am?
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Also S.N.
19105

233. TELEGRAM TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
P OONA ,

June 22, 1933
P RABHUDAS GANDHI
ALMORA
PROCEED WARDHA. SETTLED ABOUT YOUR MARRIAGE. WIRE JAMNALALJI
THERE.

BAPU
From the original: S.N. 32991

182

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

234. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 25, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letters. Keshu and Radha came yesterday. Radha
stayed with me, and Keshu with Brijkrishna. I had talked things over
with Keshu last evening. Radha has gone away to Brijkrishna today,
who is taking treatment in Dinshawji’s nursing home. Radha is
thinking whether she also should try that treatment. It is certain
that neither Keshu nor Radha will return to the Ashram. Jamnalalji
met them in Deolali and then went to Wardha.
Jnana must have left for Wardha. Prabhudas should see her, then
hear your, Kashi’s and Ramdas’s views and then decide.
Write to me in detail what your experience of Rajbhoj was. I
suppose you read all the letters addressed to N. How is Ramji?
What do you think may have been the cause of Kusum’s fever?
I hope Jamna is better now. I have received a postcard from
Purushottam. I will send him a wire after I have a talk with Dinshaw.
Most probably there will be no difficulty.
Has there been any rain there?
BAPU

[PS.]
I seem to be gaining strength every day. The weight, too, has
gone up to 95. That is certainly good.
All of you know about Bhansali’s and Chaitanya’s letters. You
will read my reply1 in Harijanbandhu.
Letters enclosed for: N., Amala, Anandi, Rama, Amina, Kusum,
Jamna, Amtussalaam, Champa and Ramdas (the last is sealed in a
separate envelope.).
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8386. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

235. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
June 26, 1933
CHI. AMALA,

There are two ways of doing reparation to your injured mother.
1

To J. P. Bhansali; vide “Letter to Jaikrishna P. Bhansali”, 20-6-1933.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

183

The most natural (i.e., return to her) you reject. The other is to lose
yourself in the service you have chosen. Then every grown-up woman
is mother to you. You should regularly write to her and give an
account of your work. That will console her.
Wear that costume which pleases you best and is easily washable.
That means a . . .1 like mine, a petticoat three inches above the ankles
and a free blouse reaching the knees. Mira has chosen a labouring
woman’s costume plus the . . .2.
You need not copy her outward form. Do copy, if you can, her
inner beauty of soul. But why think even of her. You have the Ashram
ideal before you. Try to realize it to the utmost of your capacity and it
will be well with you. And do not try to go beyond your depth.
Please do not worry about my health. God will take care of it, so
long as He needs my service in this tabernacle.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

236. LETTER TO DR. SYED MAHMUD
‘PARNAKUTI’, POONA ,

June 26, 1933
DEAR DR. MAHMUD,

Domestic sorrow dogs your footsteps, no matter wherever you
go. I see now that Begum Mahmud is probably suffering from
typhoid and that you have taken her to Delhi. A big risk, but I
suppose it was worth taking in order to put her under Dr. Ansari’s
care. I hope that she is making steady progress.
Devdas showed me the presents that you had brought. Whilst I
appreciated your and Jalbhai’s3 affection underlying those presents, I
felt that silk things ought not to be accepted because consistently with
the past profession and practice, Lakshmi could not, if she can help it,
wear silken things. Having given that opinion, I left the decision to
Lakshmi, Rajaji and Devdas. They all felt like me, as to the use of
silken things, but they had some delicacy about returning such gifts to
1
2
3

184

Illegible
ibid.
Grandson of Dadabhoy Naoroji
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

friends who had presented them out of affection. I undertook to
perform the task if they agreed that such gifts should be returned.
When Mrs. Naidu heard all this discussion, she said that if perchance
your gift was not accepted she should take charge of it. I, therefore,
took the liberty of returning your sari to her. Jalbhai’s sari is being
returned to him. Mathuradas is presently going to Bombay for a day
or so when he will take it. But the bag and the other contents have
been retained and I hope that you will be satisfied that they would be
a constant reminder to Devdas and Lakshmi of your affection. The
third friend, who sent silken saris, was Ghanshyamdas Birla. I spoke to
him about them. He appreciated our difficulty and gladly took them
back. The moral of this, I would like to point out. Next time you
happen to make presents to friends you should make yourself
acquainted with their capacity for taking and using them. Romain
Rolland thought that he should give each of us a memento of our visit
to his hermitage, and he seems to have passed an anxious night
discussing with his sister what he should give me. He could not think
of books, or any other useful articles. Therefore, he parted with a
trifling but a most artistic box, meant possibly to be a snuff box. Even
that is too valuable a treasure for me. It will, therefore, go to the
Vidyapith Museum. Of course, I had no compunction about accepting
that little box. I have mentioned this very beautiful incident as it is so
relevant and as I know it would please you and at the same time
emphasize what I want to say.
I do not know as to what your movement will be. If you are not
able to come this way and that pretty soon, I would like you to give
me your views on the political situation. What will you have me to do
and what should be done by Congressmen in general? Where is
Sherwani? If this reaches you in Delhi, I would like you to, at least,
share this part of the letter with Dr. Ansari and if he is not likely to see
me early next month, I would like him to give me his opinion.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
DR. S YED MAHMUD
C/ O DR. M. A. A NSARI
1 DARYAGANJ , D ELHI
From a photostat: G.N. 5089; also S.N. 19106

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

185

237. LETTER TO MOTILAL ROY
June 26, 1933
DEAR MOTIBABU,

You will pardon me for not replying to your letter earlier. The
fact is that I am still confined to bed and have only limited energy for
dictating letters. Much of my time is passed in attending to the bodily
needs.
As you will see from the current issue of the Harijan1 a portion
of your letter dealing with the opening of temples had already been
reproduced 2. Extraordinary care has been taken to publish only
verifiable statements and yet errors will creep in. Thank God, there are
watchmen like you who do not fail to draw attention to any error that
might creep into the columns of the Harijan. It is difficult, in human
affairs, to ensure cent per cent accuracy and it is equally difficult to
keep out reports of relevant events for fear of inaccuracy creeping in.
All, therefore, that we fallible human beings can do, is to be
over-cautious about all our speech, action and thought and ever be
ready to retrace our steps and confess our errors whenever we meet
them.
As soon as I am in a fit state, I propose to write in the Harijan
on the fast. 3 I, therefore, say nothing about it here. I am glad the
affairs with you are shaping well. The doctor about whom I wrote to
you, just now happens to be here. As soon as I have had sufficient
experience of him I will write to you. You ought to attend to your eye
trouble without delay.
Yours,

BAPU
S JT. M OTILAL R OY
P RAVARTAK S ANGH , C HANDRANAGORE
From a photostat: G.N. 11045

1
2
3

186

Of June 24, 1933
Under the title “Save Us from Our Friends”
Vide “All about the Fast”, 8-7-1933.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

238. LETTER TO M. ASAF ALI 1
June 26, 1933
MY DEAR ASAF ALI,

I have your long letter for which I thank you. I do not at all
mind your having sent it to the Press. You had a perfect right to send
me that letter and I appreciate the frankness with which you have
expressed your views.
I am, as yet, unable to say anything on the present situation
because I am still bed-ridden and have not been able to make an
analytical study of it. I want you, however, to understand my
fundamental difficulty which constitutes also my limitation. Nonviolence for me is not a mere experiment. It is part of my life and the
whole of the creed of satyagraha, non-co-operation, civil disobedience, and the like are necessary deductions from the fundamental
proposition that non-violence is the law of life for human beings. For
me it is both a means and an end and I am more than ever convinced
that in the complex situation that faces India, there is no other way of
gaining real freedom. In applying my mind to the present situation I
must, therefore, test everything in terms of non-violence.
Yours sincerely

M. A SAF ALI , E SQ., B AR-AT-LAW
KUCHA C HELAN , D ELHI
From a photostat: S.N. 19108

239. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
June 26, 1933
CHI. JAMNALAL,

If Keshu works under your control, he will certainly have my
blessings in that. The arrangement will also lessen my worry on his
account. He is here at present, as also Radha. Mathuradas will write to
you about this. It is not necessary for you to come here for the sake
of Kamala. You need not think of joining the chain of fasts.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2916
1
This appeared in The Hindu, 4-7-1933, as Gandhiji’s “reply to the open letter
of Mr. Asaf Ali demanding suspension of civil disobedience and fundamental changes
in the Congress policy”.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

187

240. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
June 26, 1933
CHI. RAMA,

Have you vowed not to write to me? If anybody who is strong
and healthy in body and mind takes such a vow, I would not mind.
But is that true about you?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5353

241. LETTER TO AMINA G. QURESHI
June 26, 1933
CHI. AMINA,

How is it that you did not even reply to my letter? I often think
about you.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6667. Also C.W. 4312. Courtesy:
Hamid G. Qureshi

242. LETTER TO JAMNABEHN GANDHI
June 26, 1933
CHI. JAMNA,

How is it that you fell ill again?
I will discuss with Dinshawji about Purushottam after the period
of silence ends, and then send a wire1 to you. I remember about him.
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 883. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

243. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
June 26, 1933
DAUGHTER AMTUSSALAAM,

How is it that the girl who had been writing regularly does not
1

Gandhiji, however, sent a telegram to Khushalchand Gandhi, addressee’s
father-in-law; vide “Telegram to Khushalchand Gandhi”, 29-6-1933.

188

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

write at all now? Did you get the letter I wrote to you or not? Tell me
about your health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: G.N. 286

244. LETTER TO RANI VIDYAVATI
P ARNAKUTI, P OONA ,

June 27, 1933
CHI. VIDYA,

I have your letter after a long time. I have the impression that I
had also received a letter from Lakshmi long ago. I can understand
what you say. It is a matter neither for sorrow nor shame. There is no
doubt that in your present condition it is difficult strictly to follow the
rules. But with effort this can be managed. Therefore rather than feel
unhappy you should try to make such effort as you can. I am
regaining my strength day by day. I expect in two or three weeks, I
shall be quite fit again.
How is your health these days? Tell Lakshmi to write to me.
Tara should never give up her studies. You are perhaps aware that
after her release Prabhavati has come here and will be staying on.
Jayaprakash is also in the nearby prison.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Rani Vidyavati Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi National
Museum and Library

245. TELEGRAM TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 28, 1933
NARANDAS GANDHI
S ABARMATI ASHRAM
CONSULT

KANUGA

REGARDING

S.

AND

REPORT.

BAPU
From a microfilm: S.N. 21500

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

189

246. TELEGRAM TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
June 28, 1933
JAMNALAL BAJAJ
WARDHA
JNANADEVI
MARRIAGE

HAS

WRITTEN

PRABHUDAS.

YOU

FIRM
WILL

LETTER

ASKING

DEFEND

HER

PROTECTION
INDEPENDENCE

FROM
ALL

COST. POSTING HER LETTER.1

BAPU
From a microfilm: S.N. 21501

247. LETTER TO BALIBEHN M. ADALAJA
June 28, 1933
CHI. BALI,

I got your letter on Manudi. Who can answer either your tongue
or your pen? You know very well how to exaggerate. Probably you
don’t know that I had dissuaded everybody from coming. I dissuaded
Nimu 2 too. Those who cannot restrain themselves despite my
persuasion come. I had dissuaded Aunt 3 also. Rami ought not to
come. Where can she spare the money from? Kunvarji is barely able
to meet his expenses. You, of course, have an inexhaustible mine and
know to waste it over the children. If, however, you would listen to my
advice, you should overcome your desire to come to me and persuade
Rami to do the same. I know your love. If you use it for doing my
work, that will be more than coming to see me. What you write is
perfectly correct. You two sisters are as near to me as Ramdas and
Devdas are. You certainly have a right to come running to me at any
time you like without waiting for my permission. It is because you
have that right, I can ask you to exercise self-control. If you cannot
do so, you may come. I have written the same thing to Ramdas.
Kamu’s 4 letter is lying before me. I will not write separately to her. I
have not regained full strength yet. I hope Kamu is well.
Harilal’s letter is enclosed. There is no hope about him at
1

Vide also “Telegram to Jamnalal Bajaj”, 19-6-1933 and “Letter to Mirabehn”,
21-6-1933.
2
Nirmala, wife of Ramdas Gandhi
3
Sarojini Naidu
4
Kamala Patel

190

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

present. Manu ought not to be betrothed as yet. She is a mere child.
She has no capacity at all for running a home.
I don’t think Harilal is in this place just now. He may be
somewhere on that side.
Write to me from time to time.
Manu’s weight is increasing. Let her stay here as long as she
wishes. 1 also won’t be here for long now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 5054. Courtesy: Surendra Mashruwala

248. TELEGRAM TO KHUSHALCHAND GANDHI
June 29, 1933
KHUSHALCHAND GANDHI
R AJKOT
ARRANGED

FOR

PURUSHOTTAM.

SENDED

HIM.

AM

KEEPING

WELL.

MOHANDAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 2l503

249. CABLE TO FRANCIS J. MCCONNELL
June 29, 1933
BISHOP MCC ONNELL
HOTEL MORRISON, C HICAGO
THANKS.

REGRET

INABILITY

ATTEND.1

GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 21504

1
Addressee communication inviting Gandhiji to the Parliament of Religions
to be held at Chicago in September 1933 is not available; but a letter (S.N. 21502)
dated June 28, 1933 from C. F. Weller provides the relevant detail.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

191

250. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 29, 1933
CHI. MIRA,

It is now 5.30 a.m. Thursday. Your letter is before me.
It makes me glad to think that you are well again and daily
gaining strength. We have to acquire the faculty for keeping well
under all weathers—a difficult task I know. But it is not beyond
human reach. The mind plays a great part in it. If we can completely
detach ourselves from the externals in terms of the 6th chapter, we can
attain that state. That it appears to be beyond our reach for the present
need not baffle us. The author of the Gita invites us to the effort and
says from his abundant experience that it never fails. It may take long
but success is a certainty.
Yes, I did not take salt during the fast. It was a virtue of
necessity. I simply could not take it. I never attempted it because there
was repugnance towards it and there was no necessity for it as there
was about soda which therefore I took willynilly.
My weight yesterday was 97_ and I walked altogether 44
minutes in three periods without feeling fatigued. It was therefore a
good record. Nor is there difficulty about some conversation.
Radha and Keshu are with me just now. Radha is somewhat
better. She goes back to Deolali today. Keshu will be with me for a
few days to finish his conversations.
Poor Prabhudas ! The contemplated tie is off. Therefore there
has to be a further search.1
Devdas and Lakshmi and Rajaji with his widowed daughter2 and
his son are still here and are likely to be for some time.
As for the Mahabharata reading, you should take down the
names of all the persons with their short history and their connection
with one another and have an alphabetical index to enable you at once
to find the history of any name in your note book. The preparation of
such a book will clear your mind and be of great use to others too, if
it is accurately prepared.
You are quite right when you say that a Hindi translation reads
1
2

192

Vide “Telegram to Jamnalal Bajaj”, 28-6-1933.
Namagiri Varadachari
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

better than English however well made. This is natural because Hindi
is akin to Sanskrit.
Prabhavati is by me and sends you her love. Radha has today
left for Deolali.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6282. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9748

251. TELEGRAM TO PRAFULLA GHOSH
June 30, 1933
P RAFULLA GHOSH
39 C REEK R OW , C ALCUTTA
WELCOME

ANY

DAY .
BAPU

From a microfilm: S.N. 21505

252. TELEGRAM TO NEVANDRAM
June 30, 1933
NEVANDRAM
S IROO ’S C HOWK, S UKKUR
STRONGLY

DISSUADE

YOU

FROM

FASTING. 1

GANDHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 21506

253. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
‘PARNAKUTI’, POONA ,

June 30, 1933
CHI. AMALA,

In spite of your grandmotherly advice I must persist in the
course I have adopted about my diet. Most grandmothers, when they
give advice, at least make themselves sure of their facts before they
begin their unsolicited work but you are a curious grandmother. You
begin your sermons not caring whether you base them on facts or
1

For securing temple-entry for Harijans; vide “Letter to Shewakram
Karamchand”, 16-3-1933.
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

193

affection, and I like your authoritative “we in Europe”. Unfortunately for you what is good for Europe may not always be good for
India, and do you not see that “we of Europe” means only a few
cranks like yourself? The real “we of Europe” believe in live oysters,
lobsters, high game, crawling cheese, fiery champagne, and stout beer.
You have begun with carrot juice. I hope you will not end with Port
Wine. Both are no doubt juices, but there is a little difference between
the two. God forbid that you should ever become a nature cure Miss.
It is quite enough and it will be excellent when you can become a
proper full-fledged Harijan servant and if you will be that, nature cure
will take care of itself.
Do you know that you do not yet know your Hindi letters
properly? I hope you did not teach your pupils in the manner you
seem to be teaching yourself. You must not satisfy yourself with
faulty letters. Do you know that your ‘k’s are like ‘f ‘s, your ‘r’ is
like the numeral number ‘2’, and your ‘t’ is like ‘dh’? There is
hardly a letter which I should say is perfectly drawn. In the beginning
stages I was not inclined to be critical but really there is no change for
the better from the time when you first began to write a few words in
Hindi. You should condescend to have your letters corrected before
you trace the few words you do in every letter. You will admit that this
task is not as heavy as that of washing your needlessly heavy
garments. The heaviness of your garments is your own creation, but
somewhat pardonable. The faulty lettering, you should regard as
utterly unpardonable.
I observe that your passport, according to the copy you say,
expires on the 15th March 1935. If that is so, need anything be done
now and if it requires to be extended now I take it that it is the
German Consul who has to do it. If you do not know this I must
enquire.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Also S.N.
19109

194

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

254. LETTER TO N.
June 30, 1933
N.,

I have your letters by me. I deal with the last first.
You are going through a terrible but wonderful trial and I hope
that God will give you the strength to stand it. If you will but realize
that we are an utterly poor family, that we are far away from the ideal
of poverty, you will find the burden easy to bear and the illness of S.
an ordinary occurrence in the lives of poor people. You will have a
doctor, not so the bona-fide poor. They do not even know what a
doctor can be. They have the utterly incompetent village physician
and they have to be satisfied with what services his often selfish nature
would permit him to render. You will, therefore, be quite content with
whatever relief can be afforded to S. in the Ashram itself. You will not
compare yourself to some of the pampered Ashramites whom your
keen faculty for observation could not have missed. But when you
have a feeling of irritation over this knowledge and resentment that
neither you nor S. can be pampered, recall the fact that one whom
you have adopted as your father is the first among the pampered
Ashramites and if you are prepared to suffer my being pampered,
then you will find it easy to tolerate the pampering of others and then,
perhaps, you will find why they are pampered, if they are pampered,
and then you will make the further discovery that compared to yet
others you yourself might also be ranked amongst the pampered for
there are degrees in pampering. Anyway, I want you to be happy,
calm, and contented in the face of S.’s illness and your own boils.
You and I sail in the same boat in the distrust of doctors, but that
distrust has to have its recognized limitations and must be based upon
enlightenment. You are wholly unjust to the doctors who are attending
upon me. They have been most careful, conscientious and helpful.
They have not stopped oranges as you imagine. What they have said is
according to the latest natural healing methods. They know that I am
not likely to accept any of their nostrums and therefore they are
making an honest effort to suit my peculiarities. I can describe to you
what they have prescribed, what exactly I am doing and perhaps you
will feel that they have said or done nothing that should offend
against the laws of natural healing. The use that I want to make of
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

195

doctor’s presence at the Ashram for S., is to know exactly what is
wrong with S. and why he has lost weight. The doctor there would not
easily prescribe any medicine but he will give general guidance for
which you and I and the Ashram as a whole must be thankful. Then
we may or may not accept his advice. But nonetheless it is necessary
to have a proper diagnosis of the boy’s illness.
As for your boils, you are quite right in giving up even milk for
the time being. Take plenty of juicy fruit, hot water and lemon and
salt or hot water, lemon and goor1 or honey. If it is goor, the water
should be strained. The best thing is to dissolve it in cold water and
then put the strained goor-water on the stove.
It is as well that you have recalled some of the instances of your
violent nature. I had detected it and therefore your letter has caused
me no surprise, but you are not to get rid of that violence by making a
brave effort. Nor must you wreak it on S. and don’t insist upon S.
eating this thing or that thing. After all he has got to like the things he
eats, and remember that we are all largely a mixture of our parents.
You may not, therefore, resent S. being a second edition of yourself in
many respects.
Tell me whether S. has made friends with anybody else in the
Ashram, whether amongst grown-up people or children.
Now for the dogs. You are quite right we ought to be able to
find a solution. The European countries have found it by killing the
dogs beyond their wants. India would not tolerate that solution and
yet has not found an ideal solution in terms of ahimsa. The society for
the care of animals takes charge of stray dogs, etc. Unfortunately,
these societies are not well-organized. However, the Ashram is in
touch with one such society and very often there is a clearance. Ask
Narandas how it is that dogs have not been cleared by the society. N.
From a microfilm: S.N. 19110

1

196

Jaggery
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

255. LETTER TO B. S. RAO
June 30, 1933
MY DEAR GOPALA RAO,

I was glad to receive your letter, but I was pained over your
persistence in the advice that you have repeated in spite of the very
bitter experience of your experiment1 at the Ashram amongst 40
people under the best of auspices. Have you forgotten the complete
failure of your experiment? Have you forgotten that Mirabai was at
death’s door because of her valiant continuance of your experiment
in spite of her being deathpale, and in spite of my having almost
fallen prostrate with weakness? I had warned you against your failure
and ignorant persistence in your prescribing uncooked starch. I also
drew your attention to the fact that you had no scientific mind and
that you were utterly indifferent to the well-being of those who had
the misfortune to be under your care. Your vegetable substitute for
milk is poison for babies, and I would plead with you to desist from a
practice which you must know to have failed. That in some cases you
might have achieved temporary success only shows how kind and
forbearing Nature is. She suffers her children to break her laws for a
long time and you are taking an undue advantage of Nature’s
kindness. You will be, perhaps, sorry to learn that I am flourishing on
goat’s milk and fruit and there is no prospect of my taking the
substitute that you would have me to take. I would only plead with
you to desist from further endangering the health of simple people
who may, trusting you, come to you to have themselves cured. I have
written strongly because I know the danger with which your
ill-conceived dietary is fraught, and I shall be happy if you could tell
me that you would no longer persist in your experiment which has
proved to be wrong.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. B OLLAPRAGUDU S UNDARAGOPALA R AO
From a photostat: S.N. 19111

1

Of eating uncooked food in the summer months of 1929.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

197

256. LETTER TO M. S. WAJID HUSAIN
June 30, 1933
DEAR SIR,

I thank you for the shoes and the chappals you have sent and I
am glad that although your descent is high you have taken up the
useful calling of a shoe-maker.
Yours sincerely,

M. S. W AJID HUSAIN
S HOES C URIO C HAMBER, V ICTORIA S TREET, L UCKNOW
From a microfilm: S.N. 19112

257. LETTER TO HILDA WOOD
June 30, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

I have your letter.
I am transferring it to Sjt. Amritlal Thakkar, the General
Secretary of the Central Board of the Servants of Untouchables’
Society. I do not think that there will be any difficulty about granting
the scholarships for the pupils you have referred to. It will be
necessary, however, to forward to Sjt. Thakkar the details of the boys
or girls for whom the scholarships may be required.
Yours sincerely,

MRS. H ILDA WOOD
WOOD BUNGALOW, A OYAR , M ADRAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 19113

258. LETTER TO JAMNABEHN GANDHI
June 30, 1933
CHI. JAMNA,

I hope you got my letter. Since I wanted to call Purushottam
here, what I wrote to him was different from what I did to you. I have
now sent a wire 1 and am waiting for him.
To whom else did I say I would write? I have forgotten.
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 884. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
1

198

Vide “Telegram to Khushalchand Gandhi”, 29-6-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

259. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
June 30, 1933
CHI. PREMA,

Why is there no letter from you? How is your health? And the
condition of your mind? How is your throat?
What is the news about Sushila?
Dhurandhar had come again to see me.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 6785. Courtesy: Premabehn Kantak

260. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 30, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I hear that Mahalakshmi was released and came there three
weeks ago. It was only by chance that I came to know this yesterday
evening. It is possible that you mentioned the fact in one of your
letters, but that the letter was not shown to me. I am now sending a
wire today asking you to send her here. It seems that she is worried
about her children.
I have already sent a wire1 regarding S. You are right in thinking
that it was a mistake to force him to eat. I had written against that
being done. 2 The fact that he is losing weight requires serious
thinking. He has been accustomed to butter and may, therefore,
improve if he is given it. Have you been able to do anything
regarding the suggestion I made in a letter and also orally concerning
wheat flour? I don’t know what happened regarding Jnana. You must
have read her last letter. Her father seems to have exercised pressure
on her. Find out the cause of the opposition of Kashi, Jamna and
others to the proposal of marriage with her. Jnana’s own opposition
may be one thing, but the opposition of Kashi and others is another
matter. I think it absolutely necessary to know the cause behind all
this.
I am very eager to see Bhagwanji. I think it will be best to let
him come. Mahalakshmi also may come with him.
BAPU
1
2

Vide “Telegram to Narandas Gandhi”, 28-6-1933.
Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 29-4-1933.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

199

[PS.]
Letters enclosed: Bhagwanji, Ramdas, Jamna, Mathew, Prema,
Jnana.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8387. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

261. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 30, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

Dr. Aggrawal is an eye-specialist. He has specialized in teaching
people how to improve eye-sight and do without glasses. He is coming
there to see the Ashram. If he wants to examine the children’s eyes, let
him do so. Bhagwanji may accompany him when he visits the Harijan
children. Request the doctor to explain to the people who wear glasses
how they can dispense with them. If he wants a letter of recommendation to anybody outside the Ashram, please do not give any. I don’t
know anything about his abilities. He seems to be a good mans but he
did not succeed in his experiment on me. He will stay there for three
or four days.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8388. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

262. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
July 1, 1933
CHI. PREMA,

Our letters crossed each other. I wrote yesterday and so did you.
The years of all of us are flying quickly one after another.
Would it not be truer to say that we grow younger? Our destined
life-span is shortened by each year that passes. Do we not grow
correspondingly younger? The lesson which I want you to draw from
this is that we should become more vigilant in our lives. The capital
given to us is being slowly eaten away. We should learn to make the
fullest use of what remains. I pray that you may do so.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10347. Also C.W. 6786. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

200

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

263. A CIRCULAR LETTER 1
July 2, 1933
DEAR BROTHER,

As you know Sjt. Aney has invited a few Congressmen for 12th
instant 2. If your health permits, I would like you to come for those two
or three days. They will be most eventful for me and possibly for the
nation. And I would like you to be present.
Yours ever,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19114

264. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
July 2, 1933
MY DEAR AMALA,

You have done well in reminding me of my two promises. The
letter to your mother I had in mind but I could not reach it when I
had it in mind. Then it slipped my memory. I knew that I had to send
you something. Herewith you will find that letter.
As to the yarn necklace I thought that Mahadev had given
it to you. You will find it herewith. It is made out of my own
yarn.
If you are wearing what Mira wears, surely it is a petticoat. Is it
not the petticoat the Ashram women wear? You should remember that
Mira’s sari is a mere scarf thrown round her body. It is perhaps not
even three yards in length. It simply covers her naked back and head
and abdomen.
If your Ashram ideal is not there, you are doomed to
disappointment some day. Better watch yourself. Your letters betray
lack of ballast and responsibility. Take care and be humble.
I have already written3 to you about your passport.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

1

According to S.N. Register, this was sent to various persons.
Vide “Speech at Leaders’ Conference, Poona-I” 12-7-1933 and “Speech at
Leaders’ Conference, Poona-II” 14-7-1933.
3
Vide “Letter to Margarete Spiegel”, 30-6-1933.
2

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

201

265. LETTER TO ABHAYDEV SHARMA
July 2, 1933
BHAI ABHAY,

I read your letter addressed to Rajendra Babu. It seemed to me
good and appropriate. The sentiment is beautiful. The occasion does
not appear to have arisen so far for a fast unto death which may yet
have to be undertaken one day.
There is no doubt that only harm has resulted from underground activity. Let us see what is possible. It all rests with Rama.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: C.W. 9662

266. DISCUSSION WITH HARIJAN WORKERS, POONA1
[July 2, 1933] 2
I am not against propaganda of the right kind on the right lines.
Temperance propaganda among Harijans would certainly be welfare
work, but it should be done with the minimum of expense. If Harijans
of spotless character could be found to go to Harijan areas to carry on
this propaganda, all the money would go into Harijans’ pockets, and
propaganda, too, would be most effectively done. A question is asked
whether I would prefer an inefficient Harijan teacher to an efficient
savarna Hindu teacher of character. Here, as on all questions of the
character, I would say I would endeavour to secure a Harijan teacher
of character and then try to bring him up to the mark, so far as
educational qualifications are concerned. I would no doubt think of
1

Extracted from “Sparks from the Sacred Fire-IX” by Mahadev Desai who had
reported “For the first time after the fast, Gandhiji met a fairly large gathering of
workers and talked to them. The Servants of Untouchables Society had its General
Board meeting in the Servants of India Society, but the members came in a body to
‘Parnakuti’ to ascertain Gandhiji’s views on certain questions. Was it to be
propaganda v . welfare work, or propaganda cum welfare work, or no propaganda and
only welfare work? Gandhiji had insisted on strictly limiting ‘overhead charges’ and
administration expenditure. But many points werer aised Interpreting this rule. For
instance, would expenses on village propaganda, say, against the drink evil among
Harijans, be considered to be money well spent? I shall try to summarize Gandhiji’s
views on this question.”
2
Vide the postscript to the following item.

202

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the children’s own good rather than of accommodating a particular
Harijan candidate, but all questions would have to be decided on
merits. All that I would say is: ‘Don’t make a fetish of efficiency.’
But we can make one general rule as regards propaganda:
Let propaganda charges be voted each time. The more I think
the more convinced I feel that, if our work is to abide, we shall
have to cut down mere propaganda expenses to a minimum. Where
there is the possibility of recurring expenditure on propaganda, let
our expenses be divided into three parts: 20 per cent administration
charges; 20 per cent propaganda; 60 per cent welfare work.
You ask whether a Harijan Day should be observed as we have
been doing. I would say: observe it, but if it is properly observed, no
expense need be incurred. The Harijan Day should not mean carving
a slice out of the little balance you may have. In the same way, I
should not spend Rs. 75 to get a donation of Rs. 100, i.e., a net
donation of Rs. 25. I do not say that propaganda is bad; propaganda
wisely directed is necessary. But I would say that propaganda could be
made selfsupporting. Do not touch your funds for, say, a reception or
a procession; recover the charges from sympathetic local friends and
don’t burden your accounts with them.
Let us always remember that severe critics are watching us If we
do everything in a religious spirit, without any reward, our work is
bound to tell.
Harijan, 8-7-1933

267. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
July 2, 1933
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I hope you got my wire1 regarding Jnana. Chhaganlal’s letter is
enclosed. I infer from it that Jnana has not arrived there. If you have
been able to know how Jnana had agreed, please let me know.
I don’t see any necessity at all for you to put yourself to trouble
for attending the meeting on the 12th. 2 You may communicate your
views, if you wish to. If I think it necessary, I will read it out. The
better course would be to send it to Aneyji.
1
2

Vide “Telegram to Jamnalal Bajaj”, 28-6-1933.
Vide “A Circular Letter”, p. 235.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

203

You need not come for Kamala either. Everything possible will
be done. I have been making inquiries. Kamalnayan pays frequent
visits. I saw Janakidevi also. Kamala, too, came and saw me. She is still
a child. She has grown up in an atmosphere of loving indulgence and,
therefore, has not developed a proper sense of responsibility. That is
not her fault. Our children naturally take after us. We may change as
we grow older, but our children cannot adopt all the changes which
take place in us. Harilal is a convincing example of this. He has
crossed all limits, and that, too, openly. I craved inwardly for pleasures
of the senses but gradually acquired outward self-control. If I had not
succeeded in the end in controlling my mind, too, I would have been
rightly counted a hypocrite. But how can we expect that the changes
which took place in me would have any effect on Harilal? I am afraid
I have strayed from the subject and inflicted a sermon on you.
Take care of your health in everything you do. If Prabhudas has
come there, let me know what his condition of mind is. What does he
intend to do now?
How is the health of Vinoba, Balkrishna and Chhotelal?
Radhika was here for some time. She is in Deolali now. Keshu is
still here. He is calm. He has not been able to come to a decision yet. I
think he will by and by. I have given him plenty of time for the
purpose.
What have you decided to do about the sum of Rs. 5,000 which
Sushila, Lakshminivas’s wife, has donated for Harijan work?
Devdas and Lakshmi live in Ranchhoddas’s bungalow. Rajaji
lives with Ghanashyamdas. My health is steadily improving. I walk
three times a day and for 45 minutes in all. The weight has reached 97
pounds. It will increase still further. There is no cause now for
worrying about me.
Most probably, Narandas’s Purushottam will come here and
receive training under Dinshawji in nature-cure methods.
When do you expect your work there to be finished? Giridhari
will be re-arrested today. He was released yesterday. He was ordered
to go to Hyderabad, but he has not obeyed the order.
I hope you are being careful about food, etc. Write to me in
detail.
Blessings from

BAPU

204

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[PS.]
I discussed today problems with Harijan workers from
10 to 11.30.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2917

268. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
July 3, 1933
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,

Both of you have been regular in writing to me. I did read all
your letters, but I could not reply. Now that I have gained some
strength, I try to write a few letters every day. My weight also is
increasing. I eat fairly well. I am on milk and fruit just now. There is
no cause for worrying about me. Only God knows where I shall be
when you get this letter. Perhaps with Vallabhbhai. We must accept
whatever is ordained for us. Can we alter anything even if we wish?
It will be enough if you go on doing your duty devotedly. I like
that Sushila helps you. If both of you lead a life of self-control,
Sushila will be able to do a lot. The arrangement you have made for
Sita1 seems good. I see that Shanti cannot be trusted. He is extremely
unsteady.
Jalbhai had come and seen me. I understand what you say
regarding his daughter.
What you have done regarding Sorabji 2 seems all right. If we
adhere to principles, sometimes friends desert us. We need not worry
about that. It is, of course, necessary to be sure in all cases that what
we believe to be moral is not in fact immoral and that there is no
consideration of self-interest in our motives. More immorality is
practised in the world in the name of morality than is done openly.
Immorality can flourish only under the cloak of morality. This is the
reason why so often moral dilemmas arise. In order to learn to
distinguish rightly between morality and immorality, the observance
of yamaniyamas3 is essential.
Devdas and Lakshmi are here. They are quite happy. I am sure
someone must have given you an account of the wedding. Both seem
1
2
3

Addressees’ daughter
Son of Parsi Rustomji, a co-worker of Gandhiji in South Africa
Rules of moral discipline and religious observances

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

205

to be fortunate. They have been receiving blessings from unexpected
quarters. Ramdas is unfortunate. He cannot be either happy or at
peace, and his health is deteriorating. Nimu also keeps poor health.
And the same is the case with the children. She now seems to have
developed some complaint of the vaginal tract and even an operation
may be necessary. But Ramdas is a bhakta and of a trustful nature. He
is always anxious to know what his duty is and tries his best to do it. I
believe, therefore, that ultimately he will be happy. However, it is a fact
that God does test his bhaktas severely. Ramdas knows that, and so,
even if he remains unhappy all his life, he will not cease to be a
bhakta. Both of you should write to him from time to time. Ramdas
and Nimu have placed their lives in the hands of Jamnalalji. But they
have not been able to go to Wardha as yet, for meanwhile Nimu’s
ailments were detected. It will, therefore, be some time before they can
go to Wardha. I hope you write to Jamnalalji occasionally. Janakidevi
and the children are here. Only Madalasa 1 is at Wardha with Vinoba.
Ba is here, of course. Mahadev and Mathuradas also are here. Manu
has come and will stay for some time. Harilal remains drowned in
casks of liquor, or say rather that his belly is always full of them.
Thanks to their weight, how can he shoulder any other burden? I am
not complaining against him. I believe that his conduct must be the
bitter fruit of my own sins and endure it in silence.
I understand what you say regarding West. Finally, do what
seems best to you. If you form an unfavourable impression about
him, I cannot remove it. I read West’s letters to Devibehn when I was
in England. It seemed to me after reading them that he had not
changed. Tulsidas has taught us that we should see the good in men
and remember that only. We also may have our weaknesses. If people
boycott us because of them we pull a long face. We forget that people
keep good relations with us despite our weaknesses. I hope this will be
enough by way of advice.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4810. Also C.W. 1222. Courtesy:
Sushila Gandhi

1

206

Daughter of Jamnalal Bajaj
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

269. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
July 3, 1933
CHI. LILAVATI,

I got your letter. Your resolution is good. Cling to it now with
complete faith. Do not attempt anything beyond your capacity. One
should not obstinately persist in doing a thing which is beyond the
capacity of one’s body. If you remain humble, everything will be all
right. Write to me regularly. God will give you peace of mind.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9326; also C.W. 6601

270. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
July 3, I933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I assume that Jnana has not left for Wardha. I have sent a wire to
Purushottam, but have received no reply from him so far. I have not
written any letter to him, but assume that he must have received the
wire. If you have not heard from him anything, please write to him
immediately after you get this letter. That will save time. Ask him to
come here as soon as possible. I can’t say how long I shall remain
free.
Keshu is still here. He has been talking things over with me. He
seems to be calm. I asked him what remains to be decided regarding
carding, but he didn’t seem to know. I also don’t understand.
I have sent a wire asking you to send Mahalakshmi here. If you
have not done so, please send her immediately. About Bhagwanjij too,
I have suggested that he may come. 1 If he does, I shall be able to
pacify him.
Brijkrishna is receiving treatment in Dr. Mehta’s nursing home.
He is improving. He consumes ten to twelve pounds of milk daily.
Krishnan Nair also is here at present. I will suggest to him that he
should pay a visit to the Ashram.
We should not mind some of the women having started separate
kitchens. I think that is for the good of us all. Rice is not the only
1

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 30-6-1933.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

207

reason for their decision, though it is certainly one of them. They
cannot do without rice, and will want other things also from time to
time. Let not the other inmates grudge them their freedom. We should
not criticize what others do. We can cling to our chosen path only if
we feel that we follow it for our own good. Nobody should do
anything simply because others do it. Acting in that manner does one
no good at all. I think that, except for milk and ghee, the food served
in the Ashram should resemble as far as possible the food served in
jails. Our test is still to come. I don’t know when it will come, but I
have no doubt at all that it is coming and must come. Those who have
trained their bodies and minds for it will come out of it victorious, and
those who have not done so will fall on the way. This is what has
always happened. Nobody should criticize, or has a right to criticize,
the women who have started separate kitchens. There is no ground at
all for such criticism. Who can do more than what he or she is capable
of? Moreover, nothing is more reprehensible than criticizing other
people’s food-habits. Nobody can exercise enough self-control in
one’s own habits, but no person has the right to pass judgment on the
measure of such self-control exercised by others. He has no means for
passing such judgment, either. I don’t set great store by my ability to
refrain from chillies and spices. If, however, Harilal could give up
drink, I would admire his self-control. For some, giving up spices
might be as difficult as giving up liquor would be for Harilal.
Revashankerbhai1 found it a hard task to give up smoking. It is mostly
such matters that call for the exercise of non-violence. Explain all this
to everybody when you find it convenient.
My dissatisfaction regarding Kusum persists. Will a vaidya never
get a chance of treating her? However, as long as she herself is
satisfied I need not worry about her.
I suppose Dhiru and Balbhadra2 have had their lungs examined.
Personally, I have no faith in such methods at all. Even after an x-ray
is taken, only an expert can read it correctly. You or I can judge
nothing. I look upon these things as the luxuries of the rich. They are
certainly not within the means of the poor. However, as long as people
give us money and we have faith in these methods, we may avail
ourselves of them.
1
Revashanker Jagjivan Zaveri, brother of Dr. Pranjivandas Mehta and
father-in-law of Shri Rajachandra
2
Raojibhai Nathabhai Patel’s younger brother, a student of the Ashram

208

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I think I have now replied to all your questions.
You will be able to judge about the state of my health from this
letter itself.
Purushottam has arrived. I have had a letter from Jamnalal and it
seems from it that Jnana had reached there before he wrote it. I am
enclosing that letter for you to read.
[PS.]
NARANDAS,

After I had finished the letter above, I received a letter from
Kanhaiyalal and one from Maganlal, both of which are enclosed. I
don’t know anything about the matter in question. Do you? Have you
received any letters from Jivaram1? How is his health? I have replied to
Kanhaiyalal and Maganlal that I can advise only after I hear from
Jivaram. It is probable that both have left Bhadrak by now. I got the
letters only today. They are dated June 20, and the gentlemen had
hoped to get my reply before the end of the month.
I have written to Wai regarding Parachure Shastri’s son. I will let
you know when I get a reply.
I had a letter from Harakhaji. Perhaps you have read it. He
wants to fix up somewhere else. Can you suggest anything?
Letters for: Amala, her mother, Gajra’s mother, Valji, Ramji,
Kusum, Harakhaji, Lilavati, and the letters of Kanhaiyalal and
Maganlal.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: Si.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8389. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

271. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
‘PARNAKUTI’, POONA ,

July 4, 1933
CHI. AMALA,

I have your letter. There is no occasion to stop writing to me.
But I would like you always, whether I am busy or otherwise, to write
sense and not nonsense, as you almost invariably do. But when you
1

Jivaram Kothari from Kutch who, after giving away one lakh of rupees—all
his wealth—to Gandhiji, went to Orissa to work for the poor
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

209

write sensibly and have to say much, I do not mind how long your
letters are. But a senseless letter is too long even when it contains only
one sentence or one word. Do you know how much senseless stuff
you have written in your letter under reply? That is why I called you a
baby, 35 years old.1
Your question about your future is too curious. You have hardly
yet commenced your training, in my opinion. After all it is the
trainers who have to give the certificate that you have been sufficiently
trained. You would not give it yourself. When you are sufficiently
trained you will find your work cut out for you, and of course you are
being trained for Harijan service. What shape that service will take, it is
difficult to say now, but before you can do that you have got to be
well-versed in Hindi, well-versed in all the processes through which
cotton goes before being turned into cloth. I have mentioned only two
things, but there are many other things which you should know in
order to be able to render Harijan service efficiently.
I hope you received my letter 2 of yesterday together with the
chain and my letter to your mother.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Also S.N.
19115

272. LETTER TO N.
July 4, 1933
I hope S. has not typhoid. There is no reason for him to have
that. But it does seem to me that the food you gave him should not
have been given, and I am not quite sure that Lakshmidas wanted him
to have all the food you have described. It is always best to treat every
fever as incipient typhoid. In other words the main treatment for all
fevers is the same, namely, nothing but fruit juices and boiled water,
and, after the fever is gone, diluted milk, that is, milk to which water is
added before it is boiled. If you are quite composed and clear in your
mind, I do not want any change for S. He will come through all right
1

Vide “Letter to Margarete Spiegel”, 9-6-1933.
Vide “Letter to Margarete Spiegel”, 2-7-1933.. It was sent on July 3, with
“Letter to Narandas Gandhi”; vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 3-7-1933.
2

210

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in the Ashram if he gets proper nursing and a typhoid patient needs
nothing more than most careful nursing and fruit juices, principally
orange juice and, under certain circumstances, diluted milk. Do not be
obstinate about medical assistance. The doctors who come to the
Ashram are very fine men. They know the Ashram dislike for too
much medicine. If you can possibly do, it would be much better for
you to detach yourself from personal affection and treat S. as an
Ashram child whom you have been set to nurse. But I know that this is
a condition which cannot be forced and if it does not come to you,
you will not hesitate to say so plainly. Not everyone in the Ashram has
that detachment. Perhaps no one has, but much is expected of you.
What is more, you have set before yourself nothing short of the
highest ideal, and I want you to realize it. Maybe the illness of S. is
one of the many ordeals you have to pass through. May God be your
guide, strength and shield.
From a microfilm: S.N. 19116

273. DISCUSSION WITH A FRIEND1
July 4, 1933
If there is truth in the epigram that in the midst of life we are in death, is not
the converse true also that in the midst of death we are in life? That at any rate was my
feeling during a friend’s interview with Gandhiji the other day.
He had waited some days to tell me that he wanted a few minutes with Gandhiji
before he returned to his place. But when the time was given to him, his courage failed
him. For a couple of minutes he was speechless.

[ GANDHIJI:] Come along, out with it. Mahadev has told me that
you wanted to tell me something about the vow or vows you had taken
some years ago. I now forget that you took any vow, but come along,
speak out.
This was just enough to help him utter a broken sentence: “Five years ago, I
wrote down a few words, and—
G.

And you have failed to keep your word.

“No, on the contrary”, I put in.
G.

(Coaxingly) Then, it is tears of joy?

But he was silent and the tears rolled down his cheeks. Gandhiji said:

But perhaps what Mahadev says is not quite right. Then do what
1

Extracted from “Sparks from the Sacred Fire-IX” by Mahadev Desai

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

211

I did. I could not open my lips before my father when I made my first
confession to him. So I wrote it down. You can write what you want to
say.
But the friend was still speechless and signed to me to allow him to go. After a
few more tears he pulled himself together.
[FRIEND:] Bapu, a little over five years ago, I wrote down what I solemnly
wanted to promise to do, and you corrected one word.

[ G.] Yes, but I have forgotten it altogether.
After reminding Gandhiji about the matter, the young man said:
Well, Bapu, it has been a terrible struggle, but by the grace of God I have
fulfilled the letter of the vow and to a very great extent the spirit of it too.

[ G.] That is good. I understand the tears. One is overwhelmed
with thankfulness when God helps one to fulfil a vow.
[F.] But now is the question.

[ G.] Why? The mother, I suppose, is impatient, as every mother
is.
[F.] Oh yes. That vow signed and sealed by you is in her safe custody, and she
often has reminded [me] of the termination of the period. But the father and the
mother don’t worry me. It is myself. Once I make up my mind, there will be no
difficulty. But, Bapu, is the struggle worth while?

[ G.] Ah sure enough. Is not struggle the law in the natural
world? If it is, much more so is it the law in the spiritual world. There
is a spiritual law in the natural world and a natural law in the spiritual
world. Life is a perpetual striving. There is always a tempest raging in
us, and struggle against temptation is a perpetual duty. The Gita says
this at not less than three places. I dare say there are many more
places, but I remember only three. One needs must have the will and
then, you know the English proverb, there’s the way. And there are
those Biblical sayings, “Ask and it shall be given”, “Seek and you
shall find”, “Knock and it shall be open”.
[F.] Bapu, bless me.

[ G.] Well, you write down what you want and if it is all right, I
shall sign it.
He took out his diary and wrote down on the leaf bearing date 4th of July:
“Remember the spirit of all that you have said. My blessings are that you might
triumph through the struggle.” And this he handed me for getting the priceless
imprimatur ‘Bapu’.
And Bapu read the words once, twice and then said:

Shall I just add a word?
212

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

He added in his own hand the word ‘inevitable’ before ‘struggle’ and signed
‘Bapu,’ his hand shaking. He added:

How I wish the hand was a little more firm. But that’s all right.
The word ‘inevitable’ is quite necessary there. Read the end of the 6th
chapter of the Bhagavad Gita in this connection.
He bowed in gratitude and slipped quietly away. His tears were infectious. I
mingled mine with his, as I realized the truth of what Gandhiji had said only two
days ago:

Somehow my faith is ascending every day, in spite of the
darkness that surrounds me.
Harijan, 8-7-1933

274. LETTER TO N.
July 5, 1933
N.,

I have your long letter. It does not appeal to me. You are again
dominated by emotion. The golden lid hides the truth. If you will
dispossess yourself of S., you must possess all the children of the
world. Your world just now is the Ashram. If all the children had
come from the hills, as poor people’s do very often, they flourish in
the best manner they can on the plains. It is altogether wrong to think
that by suitable changes even little children cannot accommodate
themselves to the varying climatic conditions. I do not deny the
possibility of S. responding to the hills. But your tapasya lies in
remaining where you are and risking his life. That is the price that
faith has to pay. It is no faith that demands complete insurance against
risk. S. will be all right if you will cease to worry about him and will
simply do the nursing.
If my argument or opinion does not appeal to you, you will not
hesitate to tell me so. I do not want you to feel helpless or under any
sort of compulsion. I want you to feel freer than you ever were. The
only thing that binds you to me and the Ashram is love and
acceptance of the common ideal. I guide you so long as you have
confidence in my judgment. I have played sufficiently with the lives
of the dearest ones on more occasions than one. But if you are to do
likewise, you should do so [only] if you feel the truth of it. You must
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

213

act out of strength, never out of helplessness. Therefore, you will not
hesitate to tell me truly what you feel. I am hoping however that S. has
no fever and that he is out of all immediate danger. For his rash he
needs a wet-sheet pack.
Love.
BAPU
From a microfilm: S.N. 19117

275. TELEGRAM TO BHULABHAI J. DESAI
July 6, 1933
BHULABHAI DESAI
C IVIL HOSPITAL, N ASIK
JUST

UNDERSTOOD

PLEASE

WIRE

TRUE

YOU

WERE

CONDITION,

RELEASED
HOPE

BEING

SPEEDY

SERIOUSLY

ILL.

RECOVERY.

GANDHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 21509

276. TELEGRAM TO N.
July 6, 1933
N.
S ATYAGRAHAASHRAM, S ABARMATI
YOUR

LETTER.

HOPE

SHOULD

NOT

ALMORA.

GO

S.

BETTER.

AM

CONVINCED

YOU

LOVE.

BAPU
From a microfilm: S.N. 21508

277. TELEGRAM TO URMILA DEVI
July 6, 1933
URMILA DEVI
24 R AMESH MITTER R OAD , B HOWANIPUR, C ALCUTTA
YOUR
LETTER.
AM
WELL.
YOU
PERSONALLY I
REGARD
COMING
SEND VIEWS REGISTERED POST.

MAY
WASTE

COME
IF
YOU
MUST.
MONEY
TIME
ENERGY.

BAPU
From a microfilm: S.N. 21510

214

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

278. TELEGRAM TO BHULABHAI J. DESAI
July 6, 1933
BHULABHAI DESAI
BOMBAY
WIRED

NASIK

ENOUGH.

WIRE

EARLY

MORNING.

DO

COME

IF

YOU

ARE

WELL

CONDITION.

GANDHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 21511

279. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
July 6, 1933
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter.
My progress is steady. I am now over 98 lb., food continuing as
before. I am able to walk three times daily taking altogether one hour
20 minutes—not bad! This gives me no fatigue. I hope you will beat
me in competing for good health. No doubt the heat there is against
you. But you must have the rains now. And in any case, if you will
take the wet-sheet pack when the heat is oppressive, you will at once
be cool. You know how the pack is taken. Take your bed-sheet. Dip it
in cold water. Wring it well so that no water is left. Spread it on a
blanket. Lie naked on the sheet, wrap yourself in the pack. The
blanket will cover you from neck to foot. Remain in it for five
minutes or longer if you feel comfortable. There should be no chill
felt. If there is, you should get out of it at once. This is most
refreshing and cooling. You can take this pack frequently if
necessary. Try and test it for yourself.
As for the notes suggested by me, 1 it is not so difficult as yet
seem to imagine. When it becomes a habit, it becomes quite
simple and deeply interesting. Do not forget to take down references as you proceed so that through your index and notes you can
find out in a moment where a particular name occurs, These notes
may prove of great general use, if they are brief and yet to the point.
Your description of the monkeys is entertaining. Have they not
yet snatched your food from you? Of course you know that when
1

Vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 29-6-1933.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

215

they are enraged, they can inflict great injury on you.
Purushottam is here and is learning nature-cure methods
und[er] Mehta who has been nursing me with exquisite devotion.
Mahadev is down with fever. He will be all right in a day or two.
Gangabehn Jhaveri and Nanibehn Jhaveri are here for the sake
of the former’s health. Gangabehn elder is at the Ashram. She
reached there only two days ago.
Lakshmi seems to be supremely happy with Devdas. Keshu is
still here and will be for some time. He will then go to Wardha and
work in Jamnalalji’s gin. Prabhavati insists on sending special love.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: G. W. 6283. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9749

280. LETTER TO VINOBA BHAVE
July 7, 1933
CHI. VINOBA,

I have put a heavy responsibility on you, but you have the
strength to shoulder the burden of any responsibility which may be
thrust on you, or, in the words of the Gita, can pass on such
responsibility to God. It hope all the persons whom I have sent to the
Ashram have settled down there properly. Just now, however, I wish to
write to you about four European men and women. All the four are to
be trained for Harijan work and as long as they maintain connection
with us, should keep away from politics completely. Cultivate close
relations with all of them and appoint somebody who knows English
to look after their needs. Marybehn and Duncan are straightforward
persons and are not likely to create any difficulties for you. But that
cannot be saidabout N. and Amalabehn (i.e., Dr. Spiegel). If N.
maintains good health, she is likely to be very useful. I am not sure
about Amalabehn. She is rather obstinate and her capacity is limited.
Her intentions are very good but she is very slow in acting on them.
She goes on making all kinds of plans. All four will require milk in
their diet. I think oil will not agree with them. Ask them and ascertain
their requirements. Tell them and others, too, that just now I cannot
write to them. Whether or not I shall be able to write after some time,
216

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

God alone knows. Write or dictate a thoughtful letter to . . .1. I hope
you keep good health. I also hope that Manu is not ill. Balkrishna’s
and Chhotelal’s health does not seem to be satisfactory. I hope
Ramdas has settled down there, and that the climate there agrees with
Nimu and the children. Vidya Hingorani, who has come there, has
delicate health and is rather of a sensitive nature, but she is a woman
of very pure character. She has cultivated bhakti of a very high order.
I am sure Lakshmibehn is looking after her properly, and so I don’t
write more about her. I hope Vatsala has got over her fear, and that
Madalasa is progressing. I also hope your contacts with the Harijans
are becoming closer day by day. I have not forgotten the idea of
chain-fasts. It is still in my mind. I constantly feel that our atonement
will not be complete without such a step. I don’t mean to say that it
will be complete even with it, but I do believe that, if the right type of
men and women join in the fasts, the movement for the removal of
untouchability will make rapid progress.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 3085

281. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
July 7, 1933
CHI. HEMPRABHA,

Your letter. I hope you are all right by now. God is testing you
from all sides. That your mind is at peace is a great thing. What solace
can I offer you? Keep writing to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 1702

282. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
July 7, 1933
DEAR DAUGHTER AMTUSSALAAM,

I have received your letter after a long interval; it gave me
1

The name is not legible in the source.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

217

immense pleasure. If the word ‘dear’ has been missed in some letters,
it does not mean that you are no longer dear to me.
I was very happy to learn that all is well with you. No other letter
from you has reached me. You are, of course, getting all the news
about me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: G.N. 287

283. ALL ABOUT THE FAST1
It is, perhaps, meet that the very first writing for the Press I
should attempt after the fast should be for the Harijan, and that in
connection with the fast. God willing, I hope now to contribute my
weekly quota to the Harijan as before the fast. Let no one, however,
run away with the idea that I have regained my pre-fast capacity for
work. I have still to be very careful how I work. Correspondents will,
therefore, have mercy on me. They should know that for a while yet I
shall be unable to cope with all their letters. Whatever they may have
for my special attention will have still to wait for some time, probably
yet another month. Who knows what will happen a month hence? We
are short-lived and do not know even what will happen the next
moment. Then what can one say about the ambitions of a Harijan
worker like myself? To those who buy and read Harijanbandhu in a
spirit of service, my advice is that they should not wait for my writings
and opinions. The way for rendering service to Harijans is quite clear.
The field is vast. Harijanbandhu endeavours to give an idea of the
week’s activities. It also attempts to indicate what needs to be done,
what can be done and how it is to be done. From that all could find
one or the other way of service. Then where is the need of my writing
or opinion? If I am tempted to write about it, it is only for my own
satisfaction. I have to write only when I have something to say or
explain to the readers. I hope readers won’t be disheartened and will
maintain their relations with Harijanbandhu irrespective of whether I
have something to write or not and whether I have the strength and the
leisure.
1

This item has been collated with the Gujarati version published in
Harijanbandhu, 9-7-1933.

218

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Now for the fast.
The first question that has puzzled many is about the Voice of
God. What was it? What did I hear? Was there any person I saw? Ifnot,
how was the Voice conveyed to me? These are pertinent questions.
For me the voice of God, of Conscience, of Truth or the Inner
Voice or ‘the still small Voice’ mean one and the same thing. I saw
no form. I have never tried, for I have always believed God to be
without form. One who realizes God is freed from sin for ever. He has
no desire to be fulfilled. Not even in his thoughts will he suffer from
faults, imperfections or impurities. Whatever he does will be perfect
because he does nothing himself but the God within him does
everything. He is completely merged in Him. Such realization comes
to one among tens of millions. That it can come I have no doubt at
all. I yearn to have such realization but I have not got it yet and I
know that I am yet very far from it. The inspiration I had was quite a
different thing. Moreover, many get such inspiration quite often or at
some time. There is certainly need for a particular type of sadhana 1 to
obtain such inspiration. If some efforts and some sadhana are
necessary even to acquire the ability to have the commonest thing,
what wonder if efforts and sadhana are needed to get divine
inspiration? The inspiration I got was this: The night I got the
inspiration, I had a terrible inner struggle. My mind was restless. I
could see no way. The burden of my responsibility was crushing me.
But what I did hear was like a Voice from afar and yet quite near. It
was as unmistakable as some human voice definitely speaking to me,
and irresistible. I was not dreaming at the time I heard the Voice. The
hearing of the Voice was preceded by a terrific struggle within me.
Suddenly the Voice came upon me. I listened, made certain that it was
the Voice, and the struggle ceased. I was calm. The determination was
made accordingly, the date and the hour of the fast were fixed. Joy
came over me. This was between 11 and 12 midnight. I felt refreshed
and began to write the note2 about it which the reader must have seen.
Could I give any further evidence that it was truly the Voice that
I heard and that it was not an echo of my own heated imagination? I
have no further evidence to convince the sceptic. He is free to say that
it was all self-delusion or hallucination. It may well have been so. I
can offer no proof to the contrary. But I can say this—that not the
1
2

Spiritual effort
Vide “Statement on Fast”, 30-4-1933.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

219

unanimous verdict of the whole world against me could shake me
from the belief that what I heard was the true voice of God.
But some think that God Himself is a creation of our own
imagination. If that view holds good, then nothing is real, everything
is of our own imagination. Even so, whilst my imagination dominates
me, I can only act under its spell. Realest things are only relatively so.
For me the Voice was more real than my own existence. It has never
failed me, and for that matter, anyone else.
And everyone who wills can hear the Voice. It is within
everyone. But like everything else, it requires previous and definite
preparation.
The second question that has puzzled many is whether a fast in
which an army of doctors watch and guide the fasting person, as they
undoubtedly and with extraordinary care and attention watched and
guided me, when he is coddled in various other ways as I was, could
be described as a fast in answer to the call of the Inner Voice. Put thus,
the objection seems valid. It would undoubtedly have been more in
keeping with the high claim made for the fast, if it had been
unattended with all the extraordinary, external aids that it was my
good fortune or misfortune to receive.
But I do not repent of having gratefully accepted the generous
help that kind friends extended to me. I was battling against death. I
accepted all the help that came to me as godsend, when it did not in
any way affect my vow.
As I think over the past, I am not sorry for having taken the fast.
Though I suffered bodily pain and discomfort, there was
indescribable peace within. I have enjoyed peace during all my fasts
but never so much as in this. Perhaps, the reason was that there was
nothing to look forward to. In the previous fasts there was some
tangible expectation. In this there was nothing tangible to expect.
There was undoubtedly faith that it must lead to purification of self
and others and that workers would know that true Harijan service was
impossible without inward purity. This, however, is a result that could
not be measured or known in a tangible manner. I had, therefore,
withdrawn within myself.
The nature of the fast deserves some more consideration. Was it
mere mortification of the flesh? I firmly believe that a fast taken for
mortification of the flesh does some good from the medical point of
view; apart from that it produces no particular effect. I know my fast
220

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

was not at all meant for the mortification of the flesh. Nor was I ready
for it. The time of the fast was beyond my imagination. From the
letters then written to friends it is clear that I did not foresee any
immediate fast. For me, this fast was a supplication or prayer to God
coming from the depth of my heart. The fast was an uninterrupted
twenty-one days, prayer whose effect I can feel even now. I know now
more fully than ever that there is no prayer without fasting, be the
latter ever so little. And this fasting relates not merely to the palate, but
all the senses and organs. Complete absorption in prayer must mean
complete exclusion of physical activities till prayer possesses the
whole of our being and we rise superior to, and are completely
detached from, all physical functions. That state can only be reached
after continual and voluntary crucifixion of the flesh. Thus all fasting,
if it is a spiritual act, is an intense prayer or a preparation for it. It is a
yearning of the soul to merge in the divine essence. My last fast was
intended to be such a preparation. How far I have succeeded, how far
I am in tune with the Infinite, I do not know. But I do know that the
fast has made the passion for such a state intenser than ever.
Looking back upon the fast, I fed it to have been as necessary as
I felt it was when I entered upon it. It has resulted in some revelations
of impurities among workers of which I had no knowledge
whatsoever, and but for the fast I would never have gained that
knowledge. All the letters that have come under my notice go to show
that it has led to greater purification among the workers. The fast was
meant not for the purification of known workers only who had been
found wanting, but for all the workers, known and unknown, in the
Harijan cause. Nothing probably could have brought home to the
workers so well as this fast the fact that the movement is purely
religious in the highest sense of the term, to be handled in a religious
spirit by workers of character above reproach.
The work of removal of untouchability is not merely a social or
economic reform whose extent can be measured by so much social
amenities or economic relief provided in so much time. Its goal is to
touch the hearts of the millions of Hindus who honestly believe in the
present-day untouchability as a God-made institution, as old as the
human race itself. This, it will be admitted, is a task infinitely higher
than mere social and economic reform. Its accomplishment undoubtedly includes all these and much more. For it means nothing short of
a complete revolution in the Hindu thought and the disappearance of
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

221

the horrible and terrible doctrine of inborn inequality and highand-lowness, which has poisoned Hinduism and is slowly undermining
its very existence. Such a change can only be brought about by an
appeal to the highest in man. And I am more than ever convinced that
that appeal can be made effective only by self-purification, i.e., by
fasting conceived as the deepest prayer coming from a lacerated heart.
I believe that the invisible effect of such fasting is far greater
and far more extensive than the visible effect. The conviction has,
therefore, gone deeper in me that my fast is but the beginning of a
chain of true voluntary fasts by men and women who have qualified
themselves by previous preparation for them and who believe in
prayer as the most effective method of reaching the heart of things.
How that chain can be established I do not know as yet. But I am
striving after it. If it can be established, I know that it will touch, as
nothing else will, the hearts of Hindus, both the opponents of reform
and the Harijans. For the Harijans have also to play their part in the
movement no less than the reformers and the opponents. And I am
glad to be able to inform the reader that the Harijans have not been
untouched by the fast. A number of letters received from abroad
suggest that even there many hearts have awakened. If an imperfect
fast by a man like me could create such awakening, who could then
estimate how great and far-reaching the result would be if innocent
men and women unassumingly, without any hope of medical or other
aid and without one or the other concession, sacrifice their lives in an
unbroken chain of fasts?
Harijan, 8-7-1933

284. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
July 8, 1933
DEAR “GRAND MOTHER”,

Your old age does not permit you to master the simple Hindi
alphabet.
For your sake I have looked up the word ‘petticoat’ in the
Oxford Dictionary and it was properly used by me. 1 The Indian
woman’s skirt is part of her sari which hangs from the waist and
covers the petticoat.
1

222

Vide “Letter to Margarete Spiegel”, 2-7-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The word ballast was properly used. Look up the dictionary. I
have not the time just now to give you instances of what I mean. It
would be better if you will discover them yourself.
The necklace sent to you is strong enough to last for months.
Another can be easily made. Do you want me to send you a spare
one?
Love.
BAPU
AMALABEHN 1
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

285. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
July 8, 1933
DEAR SATISBABU,

*

*

*2

If the Bengali Harijan does not pay itself you will not
hesitate to withdraw it. It should be issued only if it is wanted
by the public. You may reduce the cost of production to the lowest
limit possible but if even then you cannot get enough subscribers
it is clear that there is no demand for it. Harijan service does
not depend upon such propaganda. This work has to be deeper and
intenser rather than extensive. The intensity will insure the extent.
Mail time is up. Therefore no more.
Love.
BAPU
From a microfilm: S.N. 19119

1
2

In Devanagari in Gandhiji’s hand
As in the source

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

223

286. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
July 8, 1933
CHI. PREMA,

Let me know what is your experience of . . .1. Many persons say
that she is not worthy of. . 2.. That is Narandas’s view also. Give me
your opinion.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10348. Also C.W. 6787. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

287. LETTER TO ALASTAIR MACRAE
‘PARNAKUTI’, POONA 6,

July 9, 1933
DEAR MR. MACRAE,

I thank you for sending me the first page of your father’s letter
containing his reference to my fast.
My position in regard to the principal religions of the world has
been explained fairly often in the pages of Young India and
elsewhere. I believe in the truth of them all and I have studied them to
the best of my ability, not as a critic but as a seeker after Truth and
therefore have received much assistance from their study. So far as I
know it, a change in the fundamental position that I hold today is not
likely. Whilst I regard Jesus to be one of the greatest religious
teachers, I do not believe in His exclusive divinity. You will be
surprised to know that my belief in fasting, as a form of intense
prayer, began before I knew anything of the teachings of Jesus. But
when I came to read the Bible, the Koran and the other scriptures, my
position was further fortified by the knowledge that they advocated
fasting as a help to heartfelt prayer and communion with God.
I return the page from your father’s letter.
Yours sincerely,

Enclosure
From a photostat: S. N. 19121
1
2

224

The names have been omitted.
ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

288. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
July 9, 1933
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

I suggested that Prabhudas and Gyan should meet only after I
came to know that you approved of their union. I fear that some
injustice has been done to Gyan. We may not get for Prabhudas an
ideal girl, but if we find a girl who is of good character and healthy,
we should accept her. We should examine Gyan from this point of
view. If she were to ask us to find a husband for her, what would we
tell her? I do not know Gyan personally at all but I think it is my duty
now to have an acquaintance with her if possible. I have fully talked
the matter over with Prabhudas. He will explain things further.
Impatience will be of no avail. We should do what is right, with due
regard for dharma.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33064

289. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
July 10, 1933
CHI. AMALA,

Do not be in a hurry to know all your limitations. I want your
letters giving me your natural state. When I get the time I shall analyse
some of them. Meanwhile know that all my criticism is charged with
love. And I am hoping that you have sense of humour.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

290. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
July 10, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter. Purushottam has resumed work, but his mind is
still not at peace.
Keshu is still here. He is calm. I feel that our duty towards Jnana
requires us to do something more for her.
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

225

Tell Panditji1 that I understand what he says regarding Gajanan
and Dhiru. Ramdas and Nimu are here. Kano2 has taken ill and sothey
have had to stay on. Mahadev is completely free. Babla has an attack
of fever, but today it is very slight. There is no cause for worry at all.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8390. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

291. SPEECH AT LEADERS’ CONFERENCE, POONA-1
July 12, 1933
Gandhiji, speaking next, 3 is reported to have narrated to the conference as to
why he undertook the fast. After the fast he had received several suggestions
regarding the position of the movement in the country. Severa1 Congressmen had
urged him to call off the movement and in order to ascertain their views, this
Workers’ Conference had been called. He said that it had been suggested that Messrs
Shastri and Birla should also be invited to the conference but he was of opinion, that
if Messrs Shastri and Birla were invited, others of similar views should not be left
uninvited. The Conference being of the Congressmen, Gandhiji advised that no
invitation should be sent to non-Congressmen.4
That he was very keen about establishing peace in the country, and that he
would certainly try his but to secure it, Mr. Gandhi is reported to have remarked in the
course of his speech.
Mr. Gandhi stated that the necessity for calling the conference had arisen not
because circumstances had altered or that the Government had offered terms, but
because of the peculiar circumstances created by his fast and his consequent release.
He felt ashamed that one man should have been responsible for this, but he could not
help it.
Asking the delegates to express their views freely and frankly, Mr. Gandhi
stated that he would like to have their views whether they wanted suspension of the
civil disobedience movement indefinitely or for a definite period with conditions, as
he had gathered that some were of opinion that it should be an unconditional calling
off, while others thought it should be a kind of truce and some conditions should be
laid down for acceptance by the Government. After hearing their views, Mr. Gandhi
1
2
3
4

226

Narayan Moreshwar Khare
Son of Ramdas Gandhi
M. S. Aney, President of the Conference, spoke first.
What follows is reproduced from The Hindu, 13-7-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

said he would give his own considered opinion the next day and advise the Congress
as to what action it should take.1
The Bombay Chronicle, 13-7-1933; also The Hindu, 13-7-l933

292. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
July 13, 1933
CHI. MIRA,

Your letter has come. You can imagine the pressure I am
working under. I have taken silence to write this and one or two other
important letters and to write for the Harijan. I have but a few minutes
left to keep an appointment for 7 a.m. God is good to me and Hegives
me just enough strength to pull through the work before me.
The weight fluctuates. Under the pressure of work it has
dropped from over 101 to under 99. So it would continue to fluctuate
for some time. I am keeping quite fit.
I want you to beat me in competition for health of mind and
body without being anxious about it. What is the use of your adopting
me as father and mother and not adding to the heritage you may have
received from a double parent? I really believe that such should be the
case where there is reciprocity. And where it is a case of adoption, you
do not adopt a parent for his vices or limitations but the virtues you
impute to him. Therefore you not only try to imbibe the imaginary or
real virtues but add to them. I would like you to prove the law. And I
have faith that you will.
Do you know the notable instance of Gorakhnath having
outdone his Guru Machhendranath?
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Prabhavati is standing by me whilst I am writing this and of
course sends you her love.
From a photostat: C.W. 9680. Courtesy: Mirabehn

1

The report had added: “Except one or two, the rest of the speakers were
unanimous in their view that civil disobedience should be called off, and that it should
be done without regard to what the Government may or may not do regarding the
question of the release of politicals. . .”
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

227

293. TELEGRAM TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO VICEROY1
July 14, 1933 2
P RIVATE S ECRETARY TO VICEROY
VICEROY’S C AMP
WILL

HIS

EXCELLENCY

GRANT

INTERVIEW

EXPLORING POSSIBILITIES OF PEACE. KINDLY WIRE.

WITH

A

VIEW

TO

3

GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40) ( 14), p. 42; also S.N. 21526

294. SPEECH AT LEADERS’ CONFERENCE, POONA-II
July 14, 1933
Gandhiji began his speech after referring to the events since September last.
He is stated to have said:

I am accused of having committed three sins. They are (1) my
fast with regard to the change in the communal award, (2) my
1

The draft in Gandhiji’s hand read: “Will His Excellency grant me interview
exploring possibilities of peace. Kindly wire.”
2
From the S.N. source
3
The addressee’s telegram dated July 17, in reply to this read: “In reply to your
telegram asking for an interview His Excellency has directed me to say that if the
circumstances were different he would gladly have seen you. But it would seem that
you are opposed to withdrawing civil disobedience except on conditions and that the
interview you seek with His Excellency is for the purpose of initiating negotiations
with Government regarding these conditions. It also appears to have been decided
that unless Congress reaches a settlement with Government as a result of such
discussions civil disobedience will be resumed on first August. It is hardly necessary
to remind you that the position of Government is that the civil disobedience
movement is wholly unconstitutional that there can be no compromise with it and
that Government cannot enter into any negotiations for its withdrawal. On April
twenty-ninth nineteen hundred and thirty two the Secretary of State stated in the
House of Commons that there would be no question of making a bargain with
Congress as a condition of its co-operation. The same position has been consistently
maintained by Government in numerous subsequent statements. If the Congress
desires to resume its position as a consitutional party and to put an end to a
movement which has brought grave injury and suffering to the country the way is
open to it as it always has been. It is within the power of the Congress to restore
peace by withdrawing on its own initiative the civil disobedience movement. As
however the Congress is not willing to take that action an interview with His
Excellency would be to no purpose.”

228

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

acceptance of conditional freedom to carry on propaganda regarding
untouchability, and (3) suspension of civil disobedience movement.
As regards change in the communal award I had stated at the
Round Table Conference that I would perish in fighting against
separate electorates for untouchables.
Consistent with that statement he had to get the communal award changed, and
hence had to carry on correspondence with Government. Fast and further propaganda
from inside the jail were the natural consequences.
Answering the third charge, Gandhiji is reported to have stated that as soon as
jail gates were banged behind him he thought he would not be able to sustain during
the fast ale hearing of reports of arrests, lathi charges, etc., and hence requested Mr.
Aney to suspend the movement.
Speaking about civil disobedience movement Gandhiji is stated to have
spoken in the following strain:

I have carefully heard the speeches of everyone, the more so of
those speaking for withdrawal; I have heard their arguments, but I am
still unconvinced. I would use the very same arguments in favour of
continuation of the movement. I was sorry to hear several speakers say
that workers were tired and wanted rest. I would have appreciated if
they had said they themselves were tired. The workers were not tired.
The country was not tired. The country was prepared to continue.
I am sorry at the lack of confidence of certain leaders. I am
definite that withdrawal of the movement without an honourable
settlement would be a false and fatal [step], attended by deadly
consequences. We should be betraying the confidence of the nation
reposed in us. The Government wants complete surrender. I would
rather be reduced to dust than surrender. How can we call off
the movement when Government had not granted the national
demand? It is a mistake to say that the movement began in 1930. The
real movement began in 1920, and the fight is being continued,
though there was a lull of a few years.
It cannot be withdrawn now. A true satyagrahi will go on
fighting till the end, till he got what he had aimed at. I have heard
several speakers referring to lack of numbers. Those who say this do
not know the A.B.C. of satyagraha. I do not mind numbers. I can
quote historical facts where a handful have fought against heavy odds,
and won.
The speaker felt sorry at the attitude taken by people who stood for
withdrawal. He said the country was not tired but a few leaders were. He gave an
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

229

example of Kathiawar bullocks. When one of the two bullocks sat down the other also
was forced to sit down, but if the one that was standing was strong enough, the other
that was sitting would be made to stand up. Gandhiji is stated to have said that due to
repression it was not possible to carry on mass civil disobedience, and hence he
had prepared a scheme for individual satyagraha, where every worker was his own
leader.
Referring to the constructive programme suggested by several speakers,
Gandhiji is said to have stated that it was a delusion. It was impossible to carry on
any constructive programme in the country if the movement was withdrawn.
Referring to another speaker’s suggestion that one crore of Congress members
should be enrolled, Gandhiji said that it was an impossible programme. Not even six
members could be enrolled in Bardoli if the movement were to be withdrawn.
Concluding, Gandhiji said that he was hankering for peace and he would
explore all avenues to arrive at an honourable settlement, before resuming civil
disobedience. Certain friends had objected to his writing to the Viceroy. He said a true
satyagrahi should not be ashamed to make overtures. He must try his best to arrive at
an honourable settlement. Overture was not being made due to weakness, but with a
feeling of full strength. He appealed to the Conference that if they thought necessary,
he should be authorized to seek unconditional interview from the Viceroy and try to
arrive at an honourable settlement.
Gandhiji who opposed unconditional withdrawal of the movement said that the
demand of Government for unconditional withdrawal before negotiations was a trap
into which he asked members not to fall. After his speech he called upon different
members to express their views on his statement. He wanted speakers to be frank, and
not support him due to personal loyalty to himself.1

The Bombay Chronicle, 15-7-1933

295. THE WRONG WAY
The following extracts from the letter of a professor who claims
to be a sanatanist will be read with interest:
I am an orthodox sanatanist Brahmin. I have rendered my humble
services to the cause of sanatana dharma in various capacities. I have even
written books and published articles concerning sanatana dharma. Various
1

After Gandhiji’s speech the conference was adjourned for one hour to allow
members to discuss and express their opinions. When the conference reassembled,
Gandhiji answered several questions put by the delegates; vide Appendix “Answers to
Questions”, 14-7-1933. The Conference authorized Gandhiji to seek unconditional
interview with the Viceroy; vide the preceding item.

230

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

orthodox sanatanist organizations and leaders will bear me out in my
statement. So I have proved my bona fides to speak for sanatana dharma. Up
till now, I was also an opponent of temple-entry by Harijans but my inner
voice today, all of a sudden, spoke to me that, unless the so-called
untouchables are given the right of having darshan of patitapavana Bhagavan
in temples, Hinduism is doomed. Bitter experiences of past months have
compelled me to revolutionize my views now. 1 know my statement will
surprise many. Most of them may even call me a renegade now, but to me
safety of Hindus and of Hinduism is a sacred religious duty for which I will not
mind vilification. . . . The plight of Hindus in these days is very pathetic.
They have now become a constant prey to untold sufferings and agonies.
Whenever I see a Hindu in distress, tears flood my eyes and I try my best to
relieve him or her of it. . . . I rather prefer death to seeing Hindus in such a
melancholy condition. . . . But, in order to persuade orthodox sanatanists to
agree with me, I request you with all the emphasis at my command to accept a
condition that only those Harijans may be freely allowed to enter a temple
who have taken a solemn vow to bathe daily, to wear clean clothes, and to
discard beef and carrion. Poor sanatanists are also not to be blamed. It is these
unclean habits that are really responsible for the practice of untouchability
itself. Harijans are themselves to be blamed to a great extent for the
disabilities under which they are groaning. To ask sanatanists to allow
Harijans to enter temples without, at the same time, rebuking them for their
evil habits is, I fear, tantamount to putting a premium on them (habits).
So I entreat you to accept my suggestion, and I assure you that I shall
leave no stone unturned to see that it is consented to by my orthodox
sanatanist friends too. I will also carry on intense propaganda in its favour,
and I am confident by grace of Providence I will attain succes.

Let not the reader think that the reference to the Inner Voice has
any connection with my claim regarding the fast. It is an independent
thought. For the letter is dated 25th April last. The Editor has
unearthed old undisposed of correspondence which was to receive
attention. I do not know whether the learned professor retains the
views expressed in his letter or whether he has modified the position
taken up by him as to the conditional temple-entry by Harijans. But
the position taken up by him is typical. It is, therefore, necessary to
show the fallacy underlying it. Whilst I appreciate the conversion of
the writer on the temple-entry question, I cannot help saying that the
condition he seeks to impose upon the Harijans will frustrate the very
end he has in view. He forgets that caste Hindus are responsible for
the present condition of the Harijans. We have, therefore, to receive
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

231

them as they are and have faith that our contact and love will, if we are
true, make them shed all those habits that may be repugnant to decent
society. To blame the Harijans for their present condition is like a
slave-holder blaming his slave for the misery and squalor the latter
may be living in. We would ridicule the slave-holder, perhaps even
accuse him of insincerity, if he made the removal of squalor by the
slave as a condition precedent to the grant of freedom. It should also
be borne in mind that the Harijans will enter temples subject to the
same condition that is applicable to the rest of Hindus. Nature has not
made of Harijans a separate species distinguished from caste Hindus
by definite unmistakable signs. Hundreds, if not thousands, of
Harijans enter temples without being detected. The studies of census
reports published in these columns 1 must make it clear to anybody
that those who were not classified as untouchables must have entered
temples without let or hindrance. The mere fact of a new enumeration,
for the first time including certain classes and excluding certain other
classes from the Harijan list, surely cannot be used as any test of
untouchability or touchability. Only Hindus can claim no merit for
the undetected entry of the so-called State-made untouchables into
temples. What is now claimed is that caste Hindus should seek merit, in
other words, purify themselves, by deliberately banishing untouchability from their midst as a sin. I cannot repeat too often that by
untouchability I mean the thing as it is practised today. Let the
professor and those who think like him remember that [what] the
reform, the anti-untouchability campaign, stands for is no mere
make-shift for placating Harijans. I tstands for a fundamental change
in Hindu practice, it stands for the total abolition of the practice of
high-and-lowness that has crept into Hinduism in spite of its lofty and
unequivocal declaration that all life is one and that differentiation is
maya, is false. Practice of equal treatment of all human beings should
be the least direct outcome of that belief not reserved for sannyasis
but for the ordinary man in his ordinary dealings with fellowmen.
Harijan, 15-7-1933

1
Vide “Human Manufacture [-I]”, 29-4-1933 and “Human Manufacture [-II]”,
29-4-1933.

232

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

296. CABLE TO C. F. ANDREWS1
July 15, 1933
ANDREWS
ISUHOST
LONDON
INFORMAL

CONFERENCE2

CONSENSUS

OPINION

FINISHED

WIRED 3

LAST

VICEROY

NIGHT.

SEEKING

IN

ACCORDANCE

INTERVIEW

EXPLORE

POSSIBILITY PEACE.

GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 21527

297. LETTER TO KRISHNASWAMI
‘PARNAKUTI’, POONA ,

July 16, 1933
BHAI KRISHNASWAMI,

I have your letter. I have also learnt from Rajaji of your
acquaintance with him. My blessings on your marriage.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS GANDHI
S JT. K RISHNASWAMI
DAKSHINA BHARAT HINDI P RACHAR
TRIPLICANE
MADRAS4
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 6580; also C.W. 4405

1

The cable Was in reply to the addressee’s dated July 14, 1933, from London,
which read: “Please cable immediately your own language exact present situation”,
(S.N. 21527).
2
Of leading Congressmen held at Poona from July 12 to 14; vide “Speech at
Leaders’ Conference, Poona-I”, 12-7-1933 and “Speech at Leaders’ Conference,
Poona-II”, 12-7-1933.
3
Vide “Telegram to Private Secretary to Viceroy”, 14-7-1933.
4
The address is reproduced from the C. W. source.
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

233

298. TESTIMONIAL TO PARASHURAM MEHROTRA
July 16, 1933
Shri Parashuram Mehrotra has been known to me for several
years. I have found him to be an enthusiastic, industrious and reliable
young man. His bent is towards editorial work. I hope he will soon
secure such work and achieve success in it.
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 5848. Also C. W. 3071. Courtesy:
Parashuram Mehrotra

299. TELEGRAM TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO VICEROY
[July 17, 1933] 1
P RIVATE S ECRETARY TO VICEROY
S IMLA
YOUR

WIRE

PRISE.

I

EVEN

HAD

OFFICIAL

NOTICE

PROCEEDINGS
OF
I

REJECT
COULD

DATE

NOT
OF

OF

SHOW

CALCULATED
UNDOUBTEDLY

INFORMAL
FOR

THAT

TO

COME

UPON

THAT

UNAUTHORIZED

AN

REQUEST

HAS

EXPECTED

BRING

CONFERENCE

PROCEEDINGS

FAVOURABLE

AN

TO

AS

A

PUBLICATION

INTERVIEW.

ABOUT

ME

GOVERNMENT

IF

AND

TAKEN

AS

PEACE

IF

IT

SURTAKE

OF

CONFIDENTIAL

ON

BASIS

INTERVIEW

HONOURABLE

PAINFUL
WOULD

WERE

A

WHOLE

PEACE.
CAN

THERE-

GRANTED
WERE

CONFERENCE

BE

ATTAINED

WITHOUT HUMILIATION. IF HOWEVER GOVERNMENT HOLD THAT THEY CANNOT
HAVE

ANY

WITH

REPRESENTATIVE

CONVERSATION

ACTIVITIES

IN

MAY

UNTIL

BE

ACTIVITIES

BREACH

WHICH

OF
OF

THAT
IT

EVEN
AN

STATE

LAWS

ASSOCIATION

BELIEVES

TO

FOR

PROMOTING

ASSOCIATION

BE

HOWEVER
FIRST
IN

PEACE

ENGAGED
REPRESSIVE

DISCONTINUES

PURSUANCE

OF

IN
THEY
SUCH

INHERENT

RIGHT BELONGING TO HUMAN FAMILY I CAN HAVE NOTHING TO SAY.
NEVERTHELESS I WOULD LIKE TO ADD A PERSONAL NOTE. MY LIFE IS REGULATED
BY PEACEFUL MOTIVES. I HANKER FOR REAL PEACE BUT I MUST CONFESS THAT I
CANNOT BE SATISFIE WITH MAKESHIFT. IF I RESORT TO NON-CO-OPERATION OR
CIVIL

DISOBEDIENCE

IT

IS FOR ESTABLISHING

TRUE

AND

VOLUNTARY

1

From the reference to the addressee’s telegram, vide “Telegram to Private
Secretary to Viceroy”, 14-7-1933..

234

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

CO-OPERATION AND OBEDIENCE TO LAWS IN PLACE OF FORCED CO-OPERATION
AND FORCED OBEDIENCE. I THEREFORE HOPE THAT MY REQUEST FOR INTERVIEW
WILL BE GRANTED. 1

GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 21526; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40)(14), p. 42

300. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
July 17, 1933
CHI. AMALA,

I shall try to send another chain.2 Do not worry about anything,
not even for me. After all God keeps us all and He is an all-sufficing
Protector.
Your Hindi letter was quite nice for you. The alphabet is not yet
correctly traced. You should compare it with the original.
You are not going to be unnerved on hearing that I am taken to
Yeravda or some such prison.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

301. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
July 17, 1933
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I don’t get a single moment free, and, therefore, cannot write to
you even though I wish to do so. A copy of my letter to the Ashram is
enclosed. My ideas are thus changing fast. I don’t know where they
will stop. If I am fixed up [in jail] in a day or two I shall not be able to
discuss such ideas with you. But you yourself should start thinking.
1
The addressee’s telegram of even date in reply to this read: “His Excellency
had hoped that position of Government was plain. It is that civil disobedience is a
movement intended to coerce the Government by means of unlawful activities and
that there can be no question of Government holding conversation with a
representative of an Association which has not abandoned that movement” (S.N.
21526).
2
Vide “Letter to Margarete Spiegel”, 8-7-1933.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

235

Give to Narandas whatever advice you think fit. Vinoba also will read
my letter. I have had no time to write to him, and cannot get any even
today.
Kamala’s1 fast has been going on. Perhaps she may end it
today. Mehta is taking proper care of her. He gives me a report every
day. She started the fast with great courage.
I hope you keep good health.
You will certainly have to join. But don’t be in a hurry. Improve
your health a little before joining.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 2918

302. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI P. PANDYA
July 17, 1933
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

I got your letter. There has been no letter from Satara. I quite
forgot to write to Narandas about you. I remembered today and wrote
immediately. He will now discuss the matter with you. The rest you
will know from my letter to him.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 360. Courtesy: Bhagwanji P. Pandya

303. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
July 17, 1933
CHI. PREMA,

You must have received my letter. You know my expectations.
My letter to Narandas need not make you impatient. At present what
is necessary is to be ready for such a step. Nobody knows when the
time to take it will come.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10349. Also C.W. 6788. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
1

236

Addressee’s daughter
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

304. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
July 17, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

A negative reply1 has come from the Viceroy. So consider me
out [of jail only] for a short while. I am getting ready [for jail again].
It is my keen desire that the whole Ashram is surrendered in this final
sacrifice. I wish that Ambalalbhai or some such friend looks after the
movable property of the Ashram as a trustee. I am thinking of
handing over the immovable property to the Government.2 Those who
wish to leave may do so after that. Those who remain may
accommodate themselves where they wish to. I don’t want to force
you if you do not approve of this. The responsibility of protecting the
Ashram and its ideals rests with A those who stay behind. Let them do
as much as they can. I can only guide them. If this happens we have
to think where we can put N. and Amala. If Amala wishes to do some
Harijan service, she may do so. If Jamnalalji agrees to take
responsibility for N., she may go to Wardha. I cannot think of the
other problems that may be there just now. I don’t say anything about
Duncan because he is after all a man. Moreover he belongs to this
place. He can easily be accommodated for Harijan service.3
BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, pp. 371-2

305. TELEGRAM TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
KIRKEE ,

July 18, 1933
JAMNALAL BAJAJ
WARDHA
REACHING
ASHRAM
TOMORROW.
REVA
GANGADHARRAO WILL BE BOMBAY TWO DAYS.

LEAVING

TOMORROW.

BAPU
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 111
1

Vide “Telegram to Private Secretary to Viceroy”, 14-7-1933..
Vide “Letter to Home Secretary, Government of Bombay”, 26-7-1933 and
“Letter to Home Secretary, Government of Bombay”, 30-7-1933.
3
Vide “Appeal to People of Gujatrat”, 30-7-1933.
2

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

237

306. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
P OONA ,

July 18, 1933
Asked about his immediate programme, he stated that he was going to the
Sabarmati Ashram simply for the sake of visiting the people at the Ashram.

It would be a matter of regret for me if I did not go to the
Ashram before being imprisoned. Imprisonment is a certainty whether
it comes today or in a few days.
What do you think of the Viceroy’s reply1 ?

In my opinion, the Viceregal reply has created a regret- table
situation fraught with grave danger. The doctrine laid down in that
reply, in my opinion, is altogether new. I do not know that civilized
States have refused to carry on conversations with their rebellious
subjects for the sake of peace. Whilst hitherto they have parleyed with
rebels, who have been armed from top to toe, in the present instance
the civil resisters are admittedly non-violent.2 It is also a matter of
deep regret that His Excellency should have taken any notice
whatsoever of unauthorized Press reports of confidential proceedings
in answering a simple request for an interview for the promotion of
peace. This again, in my opinion, is a dangerous doctrine. I am not
aware of heads of States having taken notice of Press reports in
situations such as this. The duty, therefore, before self-respecting
Indians is perfectly plain. I cannot imagine greater degradation or
humiliation than for one to deny his faith.
Questioned regarding the exact purpose of the conference Gandhiji said it was
an informal conference.

Without fear of any contradiction I can say that it was convened
solely for the purpose of ascertaining whether Congressmen desired
peace or not. I would not have been a party to convening this
informal conference had I not been in utter ignorance of the situation
in the country. It was, therefore, convened for the sake of guiding me.
Having found myself outside the jail, naturally, co-workers expected
me to advise them regarding the course of action to be adopted. I
could give no decisive advice without knowing the state of affairs in
the country. The conference therefore was the only method whereby I
could do so and I am glad to be able to say today that, whilst the
1
2

238

Vide 3rd footnote “Telegram to Private Secreary to Viceroy”, 14-7-1933.
This sentence is reproduced from The Hindu, 19-7-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

conference as a whole was not prepared to give up or call off civil
disobedience, undoubtedly there was every desire to withdraw the
movement on honourable terms. But the Viceregal telegrams are clear
proof of the fact that, what the Government desires is not an
honourable settlement, but a complete and humiliating surrender on
the part of the Congress.
I prophesy that what has been impossible today will be possible
tomorrow. When that tomorrow will come, I do not know. That it is
coming and sooner than men expect, is to me, as much a certainty as
the fact of my giving this interview.
Asked whether the majority of the conference favoured withdrawal, and the
present decision was forced on the conference, Gandhiji said:

It is not right, and if it had been right, I would not be guilty of
forcing my opinion. But I freely admit that there was at the
conference a fair body of opinion that favoured complete withdrawal
but not in the sense that the Government would have it.
Asked about the future of Congress policy, Gandhiji stated:

Mr. Aney will be issuing a statement, and I betray no secret
when I say that his statement will be found to advise the country to
suspend mass movement for the time being. There are causes for this
step into which I need not go presently. He will also be advising the
cessation of all Congress organizations and secret methods which
alone made their functioning possible.
The movement remains under suspension up to the end of this
month as announced by Mr. Aney for my sake; and, though the
Viceregal refusal has considerably altered the situation, in view of my
having regained sufficient, strength to do a moderate amount of work,
and in order to avoid all possibilities of any misunderstanding, it has
been decided to continue the suspension.
Asked if he would be the All-India Dictator, he said:

I am just now in the role of a humble adviser. I do not regard
myself as really fully out of Yeravda. My discharge was due to
unforeseen circumstances. I have no desire whatsoever to take undue
advantage of that circumstance. I am not going to do any act of civil
disobedience till after the suspension period, without telling the
Government previously about it.
Asked about what would happen to the Harijan movement, he said:

Many people had expected that I would devote the whole of my
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

239

time to the Harijan movement. These do not understand me and
without any disparagement to any of them I would say that they do
not understand all the implications of what they thought. In the first
instance, my life is not divided into watertight compartments but is
one indivisible whole and therefore I could not possibly give up the
activities of a lifetime which are as dear to me as the Harijan
movement itself. My activities react upon one another. Therefore if I
excluded other activities my Harijan service would itself suffer. Then
again I could not all the twenty-four hours of the day be doing
Harijan work. That is an impossible thing; and if it was suggested that
I could give up prison life which the civil disobedience movement
implied, for the sake of Harijan work, it means that I should give up a
life principle. Therefore I can only render this service to the best of
my ability and consistently with the principles that govern my life.
Lastly, as I have already stated, Harijan work requires
tremendous individual efforts for self-purification. In that respect,
perhaps, it may be distinguished from other movements—social,
political or semi-political. The recent fast perhaps best illustrates my
point. Therefore I am certain that my attention to other activities does
not in any way affect my capacity for serving the Harijan cause.
The Bombay Chronicle, 19-7-1933; also The Hindu, 19-7-1933

307. INTERVIEW TO “THE HINDU”1
BOMBAY

July 18, 1933
Since the Viceroy has turned down my very simple request, not
accompanied by any conditions, there is no present prospect of peace.
I made every effort that was humanly possible, but when the door was
banged in my face, I became helpless.
The informal conference was favourable to peace. It is difficult
to say what would have been the basis of an honourable peace, but it
would certainly have been reinstatement, at the very least, of the
Gandhi-Irwin Pact, in so far as it was possible, for I could show that
there was a breach of that Pact not by the Congress, but by the
Government.
1

The Bombay Chronicle, 21-7-1933, published this as Gandhiji’s “reply to
certain questions asked by the London Daily Harald”.

240

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The White Paper has satisfied no party. It will never satisfy the
Congress, but I would not have even discussed the White Paper at the
interview. I had a wholly different scheme in view, which could have
been acceptable both to the Government and the Congress.
Civil disobedience will certainly be renewed, after the suspension
period, unless it is anticipated by the Government taking any
precipitate action. But the acting President of the Congress is stopping
mass civil disobedience including the no tax campaign. He is also
tabooing secret methods, and since Congress organizations can only
function through secret methods, he is scrapping all Congress
organizations for the time being. Civil disobedience will, therefore, be
confined to individual effort. Individuals will offer disobedience on
their own responsibility, without the expectation of financial or other
help.
You ask what I should do if the movement became violent. I can
only say that it had remained non-violent under the gravest
provocation. It is not likely now to become violent, but if it does, I
know that I have a prompt remedy for it.
The Hindu, 19-7-1933

308. TELEGRAM TO HOME SECRETARY, GOVERNMENT
OF BOMBAY
S ABARMATI ,

July 19, 1933
S ECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT
HOME DEPARTMENT, P OONA
WOULD

LIKE

SABARMATI

WHILST
INSTEAD

HERE
WEEKLY

SEE

MIRABAI

LETTER

SHE

SLADE
IS

PRISONER
PERMITTED

WRITE AND RECEIVE REPLY. KINDLY WIRE REPLY.

GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(11), Pt. II, p. 29

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

241

309. LETTER TO S. AMBUJAMMAL
WARDHA ,

July 19, 1933
CHI. AMBUJAM1 ,

Your letters cannot tire me, for I am interested in your true
happiness.
You may send the little bigger-size cooker through someone
coming. There is no immediate hurry.
I am glad you have a good daugher-in-law.
I shall be relieved when I hear that Kichi’s2 finger is completely
healed.
I hope Father is keeping good health.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: Ambujammal Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library

310. DISCUSSION WITH HARIJANS, AHMEDABAD3
[July 19, 1933] 4
It is for you to suggest improvements in the present methods of
your work. It should be done in the cleanest and most hygienic way. I
know it. I have done it in South African jails. Baskets are
no good for the disposal of the night-soil. You should have
1

Daughter of S. Srinivasa Iyengar. The superscription is in the Devanagari

script.
2

Krishnaswamy, addressee’s son
This is extracted from “Ahmedabad Letter” by Mahadev Desai, who had
reported: “About a hundred of them, many of them in spotless white khadi, gathered
round Gandhiji in Sheth Ranchhodbhai’s courtyard. The questions that they asked
were eloquent proof of the awakening that had come over them and of the intelligence
and fearlessness with which they could discuss their problems. Gandhiji addressed
himself to the Bhangis’ questions first, as the poor Bhangi is the most unfortunate
among the unfortunates.”
4
From a report in The Bombay Chronicle, 20-7-1933, published under the
date-line “Ahmedabad, July 19” which read: “Earlier in the day Gandhiji received a
deputation of the local Depressed-Class People.”
3

242

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

strong buckets to be carried by a couple of men. You are so
conservative in your ways that you may not like the innovation but I
suggest to you that buckets are far more convenient, clean and
effective. If you like my suggestion, I am prepared to broach the
matter to the local Municipal Councillors. You want public baths. I am
glad you do, but I may warn you that some of your people have not
been ready to avail themselves of the facilities provided in other
places. You must bestir yourselves and strengthen the hands of those
who are working for your welfare.
Addressing next all the Harijans, he said:

The apathy of the high-caste Hindus seems to worry you. I am
dealing with them as best I can, but this is not the occasion to give
them a message. How can I convey them a message through you? I
would ask you not to think of them, but to think of yourselves. This is
a movement for the purification of Hinduism. Think what
contribution you can make to it. If you bestir yourselves, if you shed
your unclean habits, if you reform your way of living, irrespective of
what the high-caste Hindus do, I assure you their superiority of birth
will automatically disappear. Superiority consists in clean and pure
living and I assure you that in spite of your unclean occupations you
can live cleaner and purer lives than the rest of us. Yours is a service
without which the community cannot do. I want you to be conscious
of the dignity of your profession, to learn to practise it in a clean
manner and I am sure you will be able to dictate your terms. Depend
on yourselves, stand on your own legs and work your own salvation.
But, you complain that your own people are not being made
members of the Servants of Untouchability Boards, and you suggest
that they should be given a larger share in the administration. If the
caste Hindus were over-lords or a bureaucracy ruling over you, I
could understand the suggestion. I would then ask them to surrender
all power. But they are no overlords, they are servants pledged to
atone for the wrongs their forefathers have committed for ages. How
can you share in the atonement? They are doing what they are by way
of penance. You have no penance to perform. Rest assured that the
moment you claim a share in the administration the burden will be
shifted on to you and the caste Hindus will declare themselves free of
all responsibility. There is no power or pride of possession in the
responsibility to collect funds and administer relief. I have made
drastic suggestions for cutting down the administrative expenses and
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

243

they are being carried out. In stead of asking to be appointed on the
Executive of the Anti-untouchability Board, you can form your own
advisory boards to help the Anti-untouchability Board with
suggestions every now and then. That is how you can make yourselves
most useful.
You have asked me why instead of staying with you I have
accepted the hospitality of Sheth Ranchhodlal. Will you believe me
when I say that I am staying with him in your own interest? You do
not want me to make a demonstration of my affection for you? If
staying in your midst was the only test, I should not hesitate to do so,
but I want you to believe me when I say that I can do your work better
by living here than amongst you. If Sheth Ranchhodlal was
harbouring untouchability it would have been a different matter. I
should then have not thought of staying with him. But you can see
that he has turned his house into a Harijans’ home for me.
A VOICE : We do not mind your staying with Sheth Ranchhodbhai. It is the
sanatanists who are twitting us, saying, ‘Look even your Gandhi avoids you and stays
with mill-owners.’

Well, if you listen to the sanatanists in these matters, you are
done for!
Harijan, 29-7-1933

311. DISCUSSION WITH ANTI-UNTOUCHABILITY
WORKERS, AHMEDABAD1
[July 19, 1933] 2
Gandhiji also took an opportunity of meeting the anti-untouchability workers
in Gujarat and helping them with suggestions. They narrated the difficulties of work
in villages. He said he was aware of them, and suggested that work in villages will for
some time to come have to be predominantly welfare work. Thus they would have to
have schools for Harijan children, wells and temples for Harijans, and so on, the
thing to be borne in mind being that they should try to enlist the sympathy of the
caste Hindus who may be in favour of reform by asking them to send their children to
these schools, and to use the Harijan wells and visit the Harijan temples in preference
to those exclusively used by the caste Hindus. Necessarily therefore the schools and
wells and temples would have to be better in every way than the corresponding
exclusive ones.
1
2

244

Extracted from “Ahmedabad Letter” by Mahadev Desai
From The Bombay Chronicle, 20-7-1933; vide also the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The task in the towns and cities was comparatively easier. In Ahmedabad they
were getting anti-untouchability pledges signed by caste Hindus. The workers must
now ask those who sign these pledges to give concrete form to their sympathy for
Harijans. To this end they should pay house-to-house visits and collect
subscriptions, no matter however small, from each house which may not definitely be
opposed to the reform. The coppers thus collected from thousands of homes would be
much more valuable than the rupees collected from a handful of wealthy people.
There was a Harijan girls’ hostel opened by the local branch of the Servants of
Untouchables Society, but the workers were hard put to it in inducing Bhangi girls to
enter the hostel. There was also the fear that the girls belonging to other sections of
Harijans would go away if Bhangi girls came. Gandhiji’s advice was emphatic on this
matter. Even at the risk of scaring away other Harijan girls, Bhangi girls should be
induced to come.
Gandhiji himself carried out his suggestion for house-to-house collection by
appealing to people coming to the evening prayers for giving their coppers for
Harijan work. The response was spontaneous.

Harijan, 29-7-1933

312. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA
July 19, 1933
I have seen a report of Sir Samuel Hoare’s speech in the House
of Commons on the India estimates debate. It is another surprise
equally painful like the Viceregal telegram.
I may say that since the fast I have not been able to read
newspapers regularly, and, during the fast, for ten or twelve days I
have not even looked at the newspapers for the simple reason that I
have had no time. I, therefore, cannot say whether reports in
newspapers are truly reflective of the proceedings of the informal
conference. My point, however, was not that the reports are necessarily
untrue, but it was that no notice should have been taken of
unauthorized reports of confidential proceedings. Surely, it ought not
to have mattered to the Viceroy what I or anybody had said at the
informal conference. The Viceroy could have judged for himself what
I might have said at the interview, had it been granted. The
proceedings were kept confidential purposely, in order not to
prejudice my request for an interview,
I have been asked even now to deny the accuracy of the reports.
How am I to do so without going through the files of newspapers, and
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

245

how many newspapers am I to read? I venture to suggest that it is not
a business proposition. It ought to be sufficient that my request was
not fettered by any conditions. It was a mere request for an interview
to explore possibilities of peace, and I think that it should have been
considered on its merits. But perhaps the proper question to put to me
at this stage is whether I personally repent having advised the country
to take up civil disobedience and whether I would still advise
withdrawal. That question I have already answered1 before now.
The interviewer then asked if the door for negotiation had been finally closed.
Gandhiji readily replied:

Not for me. So far as I am concerned, the door will never be
closed, and whenever I see the slightest opportunity, I would not
hesitate to knock at the Viceregal door. But I suppose that so far as
authorities are concerned, they have finally closed the door, unless the
Congress will call off civil disobedience altogether which, I hope, the
Congress will never do.
Asked if he was likely to do anything to promote civil disobedience before
31st July, Gandhiji said:

I shall do nothing overt before the end of the month during
which civil disobedience stands suspended.
The Bombay Chronicle, 20-7-1933

313. INTERVIEW TO REPRESENTATIVE OF
“THE TIMES OF INDIA”
July 20, 1933
In mass civil disobedience a large number of people act like
sheep, therefore fact under leadership and sink or swim together. In
individual civil disobedience everyone is his own leader and the
weakening of one cannot affect any other person. One million
individuals may offer individual civil disobedience but that
would mean that each one of them has acted independently of
others and on his own responsibility. This again does not mean that
the people do not have one mind and that they pull in opposite
directions and, on the contrary, if individuals act with one aim and
under one banner although they may act independently of one
another, they will pull in same direction. The beauty of individual
1

246

Vide “Interview to the Press”, 18-7-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

satyagraha lies in the fact that in it there is no such thing as defeat and
it can never be circumvented by an earthly power, no matter how great
it is.
Individual civil disobedience includes anything and everything
that an individual conceives as proper and is permitted by Congress
under the creed of non-violence and truth.
Q.

Prison bar helpful country [sic]?

A. If I did not think so I would cease to offer civil disobedience.
The truth lying behind civil disobedience is that under an unjust
system a freedom-loving man considers himself to be freer in a prison
than outside.
Q. As a result of Poona Conference don’t you feel [that there will be a] split
into two or more parties?

A. I do not anticipate any such result at all. Whilst there were
sharp differences of opinion among Congressmen, I have never
known more cordiality and less acrimony and prompter obedience to
the chair as at Poona Conference. Indeed I believe that there will be
no split in Congress ranks and it will be found that the revised scheme
when it is published by the acting President, accomm[odates] almost it
every shade of opinion in Congress.
Q.

Call off civil disobedience by instalments [sic]?

A. would never consider admissions of a setback in a movement
either as humi[liation] or as weakness and It is for that reason that I
have advised cessation of mass civil disobedience which is clearly an
admission of setback, and if I had felt that there was no other form of
civil disobedience, I would have advised complete withdrawal, had I
been the sole representative of that opinion; but in satyagraha
individual civil disobedience is the final factor, it is indefensible [sic]
and it’s for that reason that I have contended that it is an invincible
force. So far as interview with Viceroy was concerned, it was because I
was anxious as was the conference that even individual civil
disobedience should be stopped if any honourable settlement could
be secured had I got the interview. You will therefore see that there
was, behind request for interview, no obstinate refusal to call off even
individual civil disobedience under any circumstances whatsoever.
I am here during the pleasure of Government, but otherwise at
least up to the end of suspension period [that is] 31st July.
In my opinion, friends in England can do very little at present. I
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

247

am clear—Viceroy’s position [is] wholly untenable. There seems to
be no way out but greater, purer suffering by people.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

314. TELEGRAM TO HOME SECRETARYARY,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
AHMEDABAD

July 21, 1933
S ECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT
HOME DEPARTMENT, P OONA
GRATEFUL

PROMPT

PERMISSION

SEE

MIRABAI.

Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(11), Pt. II, p. 37

315. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
‘AMRIT BHUVAN’, E LLIS BRIDGE ,

July 21, 1933
CHI. JAMNALALJI,

I have had no letter from you recently. I had hoped for one.
You must have received the letter1 which I wrote to you from Poona. I
am discussing with co-workers a proposal for sacrificing the Ashram
in this yajna. It is almost certain now. We shall decide finally today.
The example of the Ashram’s sacrifice need not be copied. Anybody
who wishes to regard it as an ideal and act accordingly may certainly
do so. It is not necessary just now even in regard to the Ashram at
Wardha to copy the example of Sabarmati. If I get time, I will write
more.
Abdul Ghaffar Khan’s son, who was in England and had gone
to the U.S.A. from there, came and saw me in Poona. He is in Bombay
at present. He has had training in a sugar factory in the U.S.A. I don’t
know, though, how much he has learnt. Khurshedbehn and others
advise that he should work for some time in a sugar factory. Try him
in your factory. He has not impressed me as being a very intelligent
person, but has impressed me as being a good man. Just now at any
rate he says that he will do as I advise. You need not pay him
1

248

Vide “Letter to Jamnalal Bajaj”, 17-7-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

immediately. You may fix the pay after one month if he shows
proficiency in his work. For the present, you will have only to provide
for his boarding and lodging.
My health is fairly good. I am staying with Ranchhodbhai.
I go to the Ashram daily. I hope to see Mirabehn today. I had
wired to the Government seeking permission to do so, and I have
got it
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 2919

316. AN AMERICAN CRITICISM1
The vast majority of letters received from the West on the recent
fast have been full of goodwill and appreciation of it and the motive
lying behind it. The following letter balances the opinion reflected in
the friendly letters and probably represents the majority opinion:
Now that your twenty-one day fast is ended, as announced in small
notices in the daily Press, what did it avail? The world was told that it was for
the benefit of the untouchables so called. Just what did it do for them?
(The Mahatma Gandhi is no longer front page news; we must search the
inside pages to find him in the daily Press.)
India, whose culture and civilization goes back far beyond record, which
was given the new tongue of Christ Jesus by Thomas, the disciple, in the first
century, and in the centuries just past has been given many opportunities to
face the light, still remains in pagan darkness, its caste system of society the
greatest sore spot on the modern world.
What is the answer? Certainly not a fast, of whatever duration, by a lone
man, of whatever sincerity, a man who late in life took off his clothes, and
walked barefoot through the streets of London. That smacks too much of some
of the grosser forms of American publicity methods to be effective.
No one thing can raise the lower classes of India out of their poverty and
degradation; if it is ever accomplished, it must be the workingof many
influences, each contributing to the one end. And the start must be from within
themseles.
It must be a mental urge for something better.
1

A summary of the article had appeared in The Bombay Chronicle, 22-7-1933
under the date-line, “Poona, July 21, 1933”.
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

249

No race whose women are subservient—or “without a soul” as you have
it—has ever risen high in the scale of human progress.
Cleanliness is next to Godliness; and the nauseating filth in which the
millions of your people live would preclude a start upward, until they begin to
emerge from this mire.
A clean mind and a clean body will begin to turn their thought to a new
life, which can have in it none of the ‘persecution of the body’ for the ‘sake of
the spirit’. For instance, your ‘Holy Men’, Sitting for years in some deformed
position, publicly torturing the body to liberate the soul, are no longer taken
seriously by any enlightened person; I doubt if by themselves. Do they sit and
think; or do they just sit?
The pagan religious rites, of sticking the body full of nails, spears
through the tongue, and other revolting tortures, now widely known in
America and throughout the world, bring nothing but disgust, and the feeling
that they are, indeed, ‘untouchable’.
I have not read Mother India by Katherine Mayo, but am told on good
authority (India’s resentment to the contrary notwithstanding, that it is a
compilation of facts—so horrible that I have known cases of extreme illness
from reading it.
If you really want to do something for the unfortunates of India, whose
cause you have so nobly championed, why not cease your attempts at cheap
publicity, found an educational system, work out a method by which large and
increasing numbers may be enabled to take advantage of it; then see the
support the enlightened nations of the world, especially America, would give
you. It is a big job, with sixty millions to reach, and it is increasing so
rapidly because of unwholesome social conditions which education would
correct, and tradition of many hundreds of years to overcome. It will take
generations but it will work, and this would be a substantial foundation upon
which to build your future greatness.
And a united nation of sixty million people, united in knowledge, in
progress, in ambition, in spiritu1 desire for self-government, cannot be held
in bondage, either by a minority of their own countrymen, or by another
powerful nation.

After all people who are hostile to certain steps taken by a
public man do not trouble themselves to express their disapprobation
to him. They ventilate it in the local Press. And since in the great
Harijan movement I would love to retain the friendliness of the world,
it is well to reply to the letter.
250

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

But it is a difficult letter to notice. For it starts with a bias and
ends with it. The caste system does not become “the greatest sore spot
on the modern world”. He does not even seem to know what that
system is. I have myself raised my voice against the evil that has crept
into the system, but the evil of it is foreign to the original, and can be
removed as it is being removed, Untouchability is the greatest
excrescence, and the world knows what Herculean efforts are being
made to combat the evil. The fast which the writer belittles was
intended to help the movement. I must be unmoved by the writer’s
mixing up the fast and my mode of dress with “the grosser forms of
American publicity methods”. The proof of the pudding will be in
the eating.
But one can heartily endorse the opinion that “no one thing can
raise the lower classes of India out of their poverty and degradation”
and that “the start must be from within themselves”.
Almost the very next sentence repeats the exploded libel about
the women of India being “without a soul”. It is, perhaps, useless to
tell the correspondent that many foreign writers of note have
marvelled at the comparative freedom enjoyed by the women of
India. This is not to say that there is not much to be done for the
amelioration of their condition. But this can be said without fear of
contradiction that whilst the betterment of the condition of women of
the West is of recent growth, the women of India have from ancient
times enjoyed in essential matters a freedom which has not escaped
foreign observers.
The correspondent has evidently read literature containing
ignorant and interested distortions about Indian habits and customs.
No one, perhaps, has written more severely than I have done about our
insanitation. But to describe it as “nauseating filth” is a gross libel. It
betrays violent intolerance of habits other than one’s own.
The correspondent would not have been betrayed into the wild
generalization he has indulged in about the tortures which so-called
yogis undergo, if instead of relying upon ignorant and sensational
literature he had seen things with his own eyes. Just as one swallow
does not make a summer, so cannot one yogi so-called resorting to
self-tortures warrant the libel that self-torture is the general practice of
those who seek liberation of the soul through crucifixion of the flesh,
a practice general to mankind and indispensable for the subjugation
of the body to the soul.
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

251

I must pass by Miss Catherine Mayo and “the unknown cases of
extreme illness” from the reading of her libellous production Mother
India. One can but pity the readers, if there were any such, who made
themselves sick by reading a book which opened the drains of India
and made the readers believe that they were India.
In the concluding sentences, the correspondent advises the
course to be adopted for the amelioration of the lot of the
“untouchables”. The pages of Harijan can tell him what constructive
work is being attempted all over India by the Servants of
Untouchables Society. It is up to American friends who are giving
moral support to the movement to put before the American public a
digest of the work reported in these pages from week to week.
Harijan, 22-7-1933

317. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
July 22, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I have often wished to write to you but I have been helpless.
Every ounce of the energy newly acquired has been spent in attending
to the pressing work before me.
I had a nice time with Mother and Kamala. I was not able to see
much of Sarup and Ranjit.
Mother is anxious about Krishna. She had long talks with me
about her future. If you have any suggestions for me in the matter
please let me have them. Of course my movements are uncertain. But
that does not matter.
Devdas and Lakshmi, I left in Poona. They are due to come here
now. Devdas will most probably settle down in Delhi for the time
being. Mahadev, Ba and Prabhavati are with me. They are all soon to
disperse, I expect.
I have been slow in regaining pre-fast strength. But I am slowly
improving.
Love.
BAPU
A Bunch of Old Letters, P. lll

252

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

318. LETTER TO PREMLILA THACKERSEY
July 22, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

I simply cannot forget your wonderful love. I had never thought
I would be the cause of so much trouble to you, but I was helpless. I
know that expressing one’s feelings in words reduces their value, but I
cannot help doing so. Hence this brief note. My health is good. My
blessings to all, the grown-ups and the young, and to the servants too.
Their service left nothing to be desired. A poor human, what return
can I make?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 79. Also G. W. 4831. Courtesy:
Premlila Thackersey

319. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
July 22, 1933
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I got your letter. All your questions are all right. I will reply to
them as well as I can. The reason for handing over control of the
Ashram is that it is better to hand over ourselves what the Government
is sure to take by force in due course. Instead of carrying away our
belongings one after another against land revenue, let them take the
entire land. Moreover, when thousands of people have been ruined
forcibly, it seems desirable, and even necessary from the point of view
of dharma, that an ashram which bears the name of Satyagraha
Ashram should voluntarily sacrifice itself. But this does not mean that
the Ashram there should follow suit immediately. On the contrary, I
feel that we should be satisfied with as many inmates as can leaving it
and courting arrest. Vinoba, however, must not do so. He should
remain outside for Harijan work. I wish to make the fullest use of the
Mahila Ashram. Can children also be sent there? Some of the women
at any rate will go. I have to solve the problem of N. and Amalabehn.
I see no alternative to sending them there. Both of them should be
given Harijan work. For the present, they are to be trained for the
work. N. should have as few contacts with men as possible. If the
Government does not take possession of movable property, we will
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

253

keep it somewhere here publicly. The problem of cows is a rather
difficult one. I have been thinking what to do about it.
You need not be in a hurry to come out and join. You may do
so when the time comes. I hope these details will satisfy you for the
present. I am writing under great pressure for time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 2920

320. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
July 22, 1933
CHI. DEVDAS,

I got your postcard. The decision to sacrifice the Ashram has
been made. I think we did have a discussion whether or not you
should come here. You may now do what you think best. If you think
it necessary to go to Delhi immediately, you may certainly do so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 2019

321. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
Saturday [On or after July 22,] 1933 1
CHI. PREMA,

If nothing unforeseen prevents me, I shall arrive there at three
o’clock today.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10350. Also C.W. 6789. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

1

In Bapuna Patro-5: Ku. Premabehn Kantakne, the addressee explains that it
was “probably in July 1933”, during Gandhiji’s stay at Ranchhodlal’s bungalow, that
she invited him to visit the Ashram library. In 1933 Gandhiji was in Ahmedabad from
July 20 to 31.

254

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

322. TELEGRAM TO MRS. SENGUPTA
July 23, 1933
MRS. S ENGUPTA
C ARE “ADVANCE ”, C ALCUTTA
JUST

HEARD

NATION’S.

SENGUPTA’S

PRAY

COUNT

SUDDEN
ME

AS

DEATH. 1
ONE

YOUR
OF

LOSS

IS

COUNTLESS

ALSO

SHARERS

YOUR GRIEF.

GANDHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 21530

323. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
July 23, 1933
CHI. RAMA,

I get news about your improvement every day. You will soon be
completely all right now. I hope to meet you once more before I am
arrested.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5354

324. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
Copy

July 24, 1933

DEAR SATISBABU,

I have your short, sweet and significant letter. I wish I could
send you a long love-letter in reply. But that I cannot do; no time.
Yes, I shall go, and many Ashram inmates. The Ashram is being
disbanded and handed over to the Government or left for the dumb
creation to occupy. The movables will be entrusted to friends, unless
the Government want them. In due course, you will have the papers.
This was the only course open to me. It is surprising, however,
children at the Ashram appreciated the propriety of the step suggested
1

Jatindra Mohan Sengupta, a prisoner at Ranchi, died suddenly of apoplectic
stroke on the night of July 22, 1933.
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

255

by me. This step does not affect you, the Pratishthan or any other
institution managed after the Sabarmati pattern. Their time is not yet;
it may never come. You personally are wholly dedicated to the
Harijan cause and Hemprabha to khadi. No matter what criticism is
levelled at you, there is to be for the time being at any rate no
departure from this. You may use this letter if you need to do so. I
have not the time, nor is it necessary, to argue why I do not apply the
rule that is being applied to Sabarmati, to you and others also.
I hope you will unhesitatingly stop Bengali Harijan if its sale
does not pay the expenses. Your unique work in bastis really leaves
you no time for anything else. You should make use of the English
edition and of the vernacular Press in Bengal.
I have no doubt that I shall do the Harijan work even when I am
locked. But God knows better.
Love.
From a photostat: G. N. 9071

325. LETTER TO A. V. THAKKAR
July 24, 1933
BHAI THAKKAR BAPA,

Harijan Shastri has broken down. He is laid down with fever.
The food at Poona did not agree with me. I am carrying on somehow.
If you can send Malkani, I will get some help. But don’t worry if you
cannot send him. I don’t wish the work there to suffer.
What has been decided about Malkani’s salary? I am certain that
he is being paid from the Ashram funds. But the Ashram is being
disbanded now. You will read about this in the papers. You should,
therefore, arrange to pay him from there. Even from jail I will
continue Harijan work. Good-bye.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 1123

326. LETTER TO NANABHAI I. MASHRUWALA
July 24, 1933
BHAI NANABHAI,

I got your letter. I also hear from Phoenix from time to time.
Sushila and Manilal have become very much devoted to each other
256

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and are happy.
I have decided to disband the Ashram. You will read more
details about this in the papers. I do not have time to write more.
Take care of your health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 6688. Also C. W. 4333. Courtesy:
Kanubhai Mashruwala

327. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
July 24, 1933
CHI. HEMPRABHA,

I got your letter. I have no time to answer letters. I have
regained considerable strength but not enough to permit me to do
unlimited work. Whatever be my lot, yours is the khadi work. I have
explained everything in the letter 1 to Satisbabu and so I am not
repeating that here. I trust Arun is well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 1703

328. INTERVIEW ON M. S. ANEY’S STATEMENT

2

AHMEDABAD ,

July 24, 1933
I can say that in some places there is misrepresentation and
some material portions have altogether been omitted. I have a copy of
Mr. Aney’s statement in my possession. It was drafted in Poona, and I
am quite sure that Mr. Aney has not altered the statement, as the
mutilated version would lead one to suppose.
Asked how Mr. Aney’s statement had affected the position regarding
Council-entry, Gandhiji said that the position regarding Council-entry remained just
1

Vide “Letter to Satis Chandra Das Gupta”, 24-7-1933.
Vide Appendix “M. S. Aney’s Statement Discontinuing Mass
Disobedience”, 22-7-1933.

Civil

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

257

2

the same as it was before Mr. Aney’s statement. If Congressmen wanted
Council-cntry no single individual could prevent it.

The Bombay Chronicle, 25-7-1933

329. LETTER TO A. I. S. A.
AHMEDABAD ,

July 25, 1933
THE HONORARY S ECRETARY
ALL-INDIA S PINNERS’ ASSOCIATION
MIRZAPUR, A HMEDABAD
DEAR SIR,

With reference to your letter of 20th instant I have to state that,
in my opinion, ‘handling’ means portable and capable of being
housed in a tiny hut, and easily movable by one person from place to
place.
With reference to the 5th condition, the price includes the
carding attachment of the machine, if special slivers are necessary. But
I must state that the meaning I give to the conditions cannot be
allowed to weigh with the judges. They must be left wholly
uninfluenced by any opinion that I may have on the conditions. This
is, therefore, purely for your guidance, in the choice of machines and
in directing the inventors as to what they should do.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19122

330. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA
July 25, 1933
Mahatma Gandhi announced to the representative of the Associated Press
today that he had decided to disband his Sabarmati Ashram which had been in
existence for nearly 18 years. Asked his reasons for taking such a serious step,
Mahatma Gandhi said:

The reason is quite obvious for me. Hundreds or thousands who
took part in the struggle have lost their all. Having heard the story of
the brave suffering of the villagers, I felt that some drastic action was
necessary on my part. What was it that I could sacrifice? I have
258

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

nothing on this earth which I can call my own; but I have some things
which are more precious than what might be considered to be mine,
and among these precious things, the Ashram is perhaps the most
precious and I felt that on the eve of my embarking upon what is to
me a fresh and sacred mission in life, I should invite fellow workers of
the Ashram to join me and give up for the time being the activities in
which they have been engaged all these precious years, and I am glad
to be able to say that not one of them had the slightest hesitation in
believing that the time had come for the Ashram to make the sacrifice.
Asked what would happen to the many activities of the Ashram, Gandhiji said:

This is a question somewhat difficult to answer; but I can say
generally that if the activities were true and fulfilled some of the real
wants of India, they will live in spite of the disbandment of the
Ashram. For example, the whole of the khadi activity will certainly
survive the disbandment. Indeed, the only thing that the Ashram was
doing was to make experiments in khadi manufacture by devising new
types of spinning-wheels and perfecting those that are in existence,
supporting many Harijan families and teaching candidates all the
hand processes that cotton goes through before it comes out as khadi.
This is undoubtedly an essential work and very important, but I have
faith that the work will be continued even after the Ashram ceases to
exist as an institution and this may be said more or less of all other
activities of the Ashram.
Asked what he was going to do now, Gandhiji said:

I am afraid I must not at the present moment go beyond what I
have stated. I hope to make a further statement 1 in the course of the
next few days.2
The Bombay Chronicle, 26-7-1933; also The Hindu, 25-7-1933

331. STATEMENT ON M. S. ANEY’S STATEMENT
[July 26, 1933] 3
The statement issued by Sjt. Aney closely follows the advice
tendered by me at the informal conference. It does not give any
1
2
3

Vide the following item.
This sentence is reproduced from The Hindu, 25-7-1933.
From contemporary Press reports and The Indian Annual Register, Vol. II, P.

333
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

259

reasons for the decision taken. It was left to me to give them. This
does not mean that they are necessarily the reasons that guided Sjt.
Aney and all those friends who accepted my advice. They must be
taken, therefore to be solely mine.
In my opinion, it would have been disastrous if, in the existing
circumstance, civil disobedience had been altogether withdrawn. The
technique of satyagraha, as I have known it, requires continuance even
by one person so long as such continuance does not defeat the ends
of truth and ahimsa. It may not be given up either because of the
weakness of the people taking part in it or (which is the same thing)
the seeming victory of the opponent. The greater the repression the
greater the strength of a true civil resister. The continuance of civil
resistance, even by one person, insures its revival by those who might
have given it up through despair or weakness.
But radical changes in the programme were absolutely
necessary.
Sjt. Aney’s instructions taboo secret methods. There is nothing
inherently wrong in them. I fully admit the purity of purpose and the
great cleverness of the workers in conducting the campaign by secret
methods, devised to meet the situation created by repressive measures
of the Government. But secrecy is repugnant to satyagraha and
hampers its progress. It has undoubtedly contributed in a great
measure to the present demoralization of the people. I know that a
ban on secrecy will stop some of the activities which appeared to keep
the Congress before the public eye. But this doubtful benefit will be
outweighed by the certain elimination of a method which is foreign to
the spirit of satyagraha and which interferes with its efficacy.
Another change made is the stoppage of the mass movement.
The masses have acted bravely and suffered much wherever they have
responded to the national call. But ample evidence is forthcoming to
show that they are not able any longer to suffer the prolonged torture
of the Ordinance Rule now crystallized into statute by the so-called
legislatures. The Congress as an organization finds it increasingly
difficult day by day to render them effective aid. The stoppage of
secrecy would prevent even the little relief that it was possible to give
them. The masses have not yet learnt to act as one man and without
direction. They need more training and experience through the
example of individuals.
260

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Civil disobedience is, therefore, to be confined to individuals on
their own responsibility although they would be acting on behalf of
and in the name of the Congress. Those who will so act may expect no
financial or other assistance from the Congress. They should be
prepared for indefinite incarceration whether ill or well. They may not
come out of jails except by termination of their sentences in due
course or through the strength of the people. on termination of their
sentences they should seek re-imprisonment on the first opportunity.
They should be prepared to brave all the risks attendant upon their
action including uttermost penury and the loss of all their possessions,
movable or immovable, or physical torture such as lathi blows.
Naturally such action can only be expected from a small
number, especially in the beginning. The very enumeration of the
hardships is likely to frighten many people. But experience of patriots
and reformers all the world over shows that Nature provides us with
the capacity for suffering when it is taken up in the true spirit.
It follows that such response, if it comes at all, must come in the
first instance from the intelligentsia. Their example will prove
infectious in the long run and pervade the whole nation resulting in a
mass awakening that cannot possibly be crushed by any repression, be
it ever so ferocious. Moreover, individuals from among the masses can
certainly act even now. Only they must understand the implications of
individual civil disobedience.
I am convinced that these men and women will represent the
national spirit and the nation’s determination to win independence in
every sense of the term. It may be objected that the heroic suffering
of a few individuals, however praiseworthy in itself, is of no practical
value and cannot affect British policy. I differ from such a view. In
my opinion, the seemingly long or almost interminable process
adumbrated by me will in practice be found to be the shortest. For I
hold that true independence, i.e., independence in terms of and on
behalf of the masses, can be proved in India’s case to be unattainable
by any other method. The method of non-violence which is an
integral part of the Congress constitution demands the course
suggested by me.
It must be clear to the dullest intellect that British policy cannot
change through a constitution which registers the British will and
ignores the wish or the welfare of the nation. Any constitution
imposed upon India by the British will, unaffected by anything done
in and by India, must in the nature of things harden and perpetuate
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

261

the British policy. It can and will be changed by adequate action taken
by India in the face of British repression. In other words, Britain
cannot work out our salvation. We must work it out ourselves. Our
independence should mean the registration not of Britain’s will but of
our will. I have suggested the only way that will forge the necessary
sanction for the registration of our will, that is, the will of the dumb
millions. For individual action must, in the long run, affect the masses.
Let us not forget the uniqueness of India’s case. I know of no
parallel in history. In India British will is enforced through India’s
own men and, shall I say, even women. India supplies the civilian and
the soldier, India supplies money and other resources for the
subjugation and exploitation of the masses. If this terribly immoral
state of things is not altered in a day or even in a century, it need
cause no surprise.
But our success is ensured the moment we take the right route to
our goal. I claim that we took it in 1920. And though it cannot be
visibly demonstrated, we have since then taken long strides toward
purna swaraj. We could not have gone nearer the goal by any other
way. Who can deny that during the past thirteen years we have seen an
awakening among the masses, never witnessed during the hundred
years preceding September 1920.
My advice does not proceed from a sense of despair, or defeat; I
have neither. I am filled with joy that the national response has been
so great as it has been. The greatest cause for joy is that the
individuals as well as the masses have observed non-violellce in action,
in spite of themselves and in the face of almost inconceivable
provocation. We are too near the time to judge the merit of the
non-violence observed by the Frontier Pathans. They might have used
violent language. But they have refrained from violent action in a way
they have never done before within living memory. Such is the
testimony of several sober independent witnesses. If non-violence
becomes rooted in the Pathan heart, it will solve several difficult
problems for us. What is true of the Frontier Pathan is largely true of
the civil resisters throughout India.
I must not he misunderstood. My claim is humble. Danger of a
sudden outburst of Violence is always present so long as the violence
of the heart is not eradicated. I am sorry to say that there is ample
violence in our breasts. We have acted non-violently out of policy, out
of helplessness. We would inflict violence if we could do so with
262

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

effect. I would have India to abjure violence even if it had the power
to wield it. I would have it appreciate the fact that if the masses are to
work out their own independence, they are so numerous us that if they
achieved anything through violent means, it would not be independence but a fiendish thing that would devour them and perhaps bring
ruination to the whole world. The one lesson that the Western nations
teach the world in flaming letters, is that violence is not the way to
peace and happiness. The cult of violence has not made them or those
who have contact with them any the happier or better. If ever we, as a
nation, reach that living faith in non-violence and banish violence
from our hearts we would not even need resort to civil disobedience.
The latter is required whilst we are trying non-violence as a mere
policy or expedient. Even as a policy it is any day far more effective
than violence. Under the Dictator’s instructions secret organizations
naturally disappear. Every civil resister will be his or her own leader.
He or she will carry the burden of the Congress on his or her own
shoulders. Such civil resisters will be trustees of national honour.
Whilst Congressmen may be counted by the crore, civil
resistance, under the new scheme, will be represented only by a few
thousand or even less. If these few are true men and women, I am
certain that they will multiply into millions. Meanwhile the remaining
Congressmen will engage in various other constructive activities of the
Congress such as Harijan service, communal unity, khadi production
and distribution, total prohibition, boycott of foreign cloth and other
goods that compete with indigenous manufactures or are otherwise
detrimental to the interests of the nation, the manufacture of new
goods, the improvement of the methods of indigenous manufacture,
and in this connection development or resuscitation of village
industries, improvement of agriculture and cattle-breeding,
organization of labour unions, not for political exploitation but for
the betterment of the condition of workers and improvement in the
relations between capital and labour. In fact, no branch of national
activity may be left untouched by the Congress. This will be possible
if we will get rid of the very wrong idea that there is no other Congress
activity save that of civil resistance or that the latter blocks all other
activities. This will be true, perhaps when there is mass civil
disobedience and the campaign has to be swift and sharp. But till that
time is reached, due importance must be given to every one of
nation-building activities and none should be neglected. Civil resisters
represent the non-violent army of the nation. And just as every citizen
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

263

cannot be a soldier on the active list, every citizen cannot be a civil
resister on the active list. And if a soldier may not consider himself a
superior being because he fights at the risk of his life for his nation
much less may a civil resister will undergoes sufferings for the sake of
his nation. Those outside the rank of fighters are equally important
limbs of their nation if they regard themselves as national servants
dedicating their talents for the nation’s welfare, and not engaging in
any activity, private or public, that may be in conflict with the national
interest.
Moreover, whilst the Congress as an organization cannot openly
help civil resisters, and must under my plan avoid all secret methods, it
will be the duty of Congressmen and even others who sympathize with
the Congress methods and aim, wherever possible to give relief to the
indigent families of civil resisters especially to the utterly destitute
peasantry who joined the no-tax campaign. For they must be assured
that every inch of the land confiscated during the campaign (I think
lawlessly and wrongly) will be returned to them or their progeny when
the nation comes to her own as it must some day. I have learnt that at
great personal risk to the workers engaged in the task the Congress
has successfully administered secret relief to the peasants who have
chosen for the sake of national freedom to risk their all. Such relief
will be impossible of administration in the future, not merely because
of the contemplated stoppage of secret methods but also because the
Congress has no ceaseless source of income. The burden of reaching
relief openly to such families must on pure humanitarian grounds, if
no other, fall on the shoulders of those who are not engaged in civil
resistance. The Government cannot have it both ways. If they will slop
even private and open relief, they must imprison the dependants of
civil resisters or otherwise maintain them. The world would be
staggered to know the number of those who once in fair
circumstances have courted ruination and are living on doles of three
or four rupees per head, per month. I understand that even their
houses are in danger of being attached.
I have left the Council programme untouched. To think now of
working the reforms to come is, in my opinion, altogether premature.
We do not know what they are to be, when they are to come, if at all. It
would behove those who are inclined to participate, to wait for the
reforms before they commit themselves to a policy. Then there
remain the existing Legislatures. I can give no decisive opinion on this
264

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

question as I can on civil disobedience. My head reels at the very
thought of entering Councils for the sake of winning independence.
They may give some relief in specific cases but that is the miasma to
keep the nation from its goal. They have no temptation for me in spite
of my having sought through Sjt. Rajagopalachari and others the
co-operation of the Legislatures and the Government in the matter of
the untouchability Bills. The primary responsibility for seeking it lies
not on his shoulders but mine. I offer no apology for having sought
it. It is wholly consistent with the doctrine of non-co-operation.
There is one thing on which Sjt. Aney has differed from me and
some other friends. I have felt strongly that the office of All-India
Dictator and Provincial Dictators should also be abolished. But he felt
equally strongly that the office should be retained if only as a symbol.
But I see grave difficulties in our way. Dictators under the new scheme
must, like others, offer civil resistance as soon as they are appointed.
All the best men and women must quickly find their way to prison.
Therefore a time must soon come when men and women who can
really dictate will not be available. Then there could only
be dummy Dictators as they have been before. These may easily
produce embarrassing situations. Lastly, when every civil resister
is expected to be his own leader, there seems to be no warrant for
having Dictators. Indeed their mere existence may well stop the
flow of individual civil resisters. For they may wait for Dictators’
instructions whereas the new scheme provides for no further
instructions. The Congress as an organization should live in its
ideal in the final instructions issued by Sjt. Aney. I, there- fore, still
feel that Dictators should abolish themselves, if my argument appeals
to them.
The Viceroy’s refusal to see me even for the sake of exploring
possibilities of peace, renders it unnecessary to examine the conditions
under which even without purna swaraj but in furtherance of it, civil
disobedience may be discontinued. But I may repeat what I have said
so often that all non-co-operation is undertaken to ensure real
co-operation in the place of forced one and all civil disobedience of
laws is resorted to for the sake of rendering voluntary obedience
instead of forced obedience. Therefore, I have no doubt that the
Congress would be ever ready for honourable peace.
From a microfilm: S.N. 20025

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

265

332. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY, GOVERNMENT
OF BOMBAY
AHMEDABAD ,

July 26, 1933
TO

THE S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
(HOME DEPARTMENT)
P OONA
DEAR SIR,

My first constructive act on return to India in 1915 was to found
the Satyagraha Ashram for the purpose of serving Truth. The inmates
are under the vows of truth, ahimsa, celibacy, control of palate,
poverty, fearlessness, removal of untouchability, swadeshi with khadi
as the centre, equal respect for all religions and bread-labour. The
present site for the Ashram was bought in 1916. It conducts today
certain activities mostly through the labour of inmates. But it does
need to supplement that labour with ordinary paid labour. Its
principal activities are: khadi production as a village industry without
the aid of power-driven machinery, dairy, agriculture, scientific
scavenging and literary education. The Ashram has 107 inmates at
present (men 42, women 31, boys 12 and girls 22). This number
excludes those who are in prison and those who are otherwise engaged
outside. Up to now it has trained nearly 1,000 persons in the
manufacture of khadi. Most of these, so far as my knowledge goes,
are doing useful constructive work and earning an honest livelihood.
The Ashram is a registered trust. The funds at its disposal are
ear-marked. Whilst the aim has been to make every department selfsupporting, it has hitherto been obliged to receive donations from
friends to meet all the obligations. Experience has shown that so long
as it remains a predominantly educational service (using the term in
the widest sense) and not only charges no fees but actually feeds and
clothes the learners, it cannot be wholly self-supporting.
The Ashram owns immovable property estimated at about Rs.
3,60,000 and movables including cash estimated at over Rs. 3,00,0001.
1

“Over Rs. 3,00,000” was later on corrected as “nearly Rs. 2,00,000”; vide
the following item.

266

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

The Ashram takes no part in politics so-called. But it does believe in
non-co-operation and civil disobedience as indispensable, under
certain circumstances, for the observance of truth and non-violence.
Hence, the civil disobedience campaign of 1930 was started by the
march to Dandi of nearly eighty inmates of the Ashram.
Time has now arrived for the Ashram to make a greater sacrifice
in the face of the existing situation—on the one hand the growing
terrorism by the Government and on the other the equally growing
demoralization among the people.
The statements that have come under my observation since the
breaking of my fast show that
1. methods of torture have been adopted by the police in
various parts of India in order to cow down individual civil resisters,
2. women have been insulted,
3. free movement of people has become almost impossible,
4. in many parts of India, village work by Congressmen has
become all but impossible,
5. civil resistance prisoners have been subjected to humiliations
and bodily injury in many lock-ups and prisons,
6. unconscionably heavy fines have been imposed and gross
irregularities committed for their recovery,
7. peasants withholding revenue or rent have been punished in a
manner out of all proportion to their offence, obviously with a view to
terrifying them and their neighbours into subjection1,
8. the public Press has been gagged,
9. in short, freedom with self-respect has become impossible
throughout the length and breadth of the land.
I have no doubt that these statements will be denied or
explainedaway in official circles. It may be that they are not free from
exaggerations. But in common with many Congressmen I believe in
them and therefore they are able to arouse us to action.
Hence, mere incarceration can bring little satisfaction. Moreover,
I quite clearly see that the vast constructive programme of the Ashram
cannot be carried on with safety, unless the Ashram ceases entirely to
have anything to do with the campaign. To accept such a position will
1

The two words “into subjection” are reproduced from Bombay Secret
Abstracts.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

267

be to deny the creed. Up to now I had hoped that the existence of the
Ashram side by side with the civil resistance of its individual members
was possible and that there was bound to be an honourable peace
between Government and the Congress in the near future even though
the Congress goal might not be immediately realized. The unfortunate
rejection by His Excellency the Viceroy of the honest advance of the
Congress through me, in the interest of peace, shows clearly that the
Government do not seek or desire peace, they want an abject
surrender by the largest and the admittedly most, if not the only,
popular political organization in the country. This is impossible so
long as the Congress continues to repose confidence in its present
advisers. The struggle therefore is bound to be prolonged and calls
for much greater sacrifice than the people have hitherto undergone. It
follows that the greatest measure of sacrifice is to be expected of me
as the author of the movement. I can therefore only offer that which is
nearest and dearest to me and for the building of which I and many
other members of the Ashram have laboured with infinite patience
and care all these eighteen years. Every head of cattle and every tree
has its history and sacred associations. They are all members of a big
family. What was once a barren plot of land has been turned by
human endeavour into a fair-sized model garden colony. It will not be
without a tear that we shall break up the family and its activities. I have
had many and prayerful conversations with the inmates and they have,
men and women, unanimously approved of the proposal to give up
the present activities. Those who are at all able have decided to offer
individual civil disobedience after the suspension period is over.
It may not be superfluous to mention that the Ashram has for
the past two years refused to pay revenue dues and consequently
goods of considerable value have been seized and sold in respect of
them. I make no complaint of the procedure. But it cannot be a matter
of pleasure or profit to carry on a great institution in such precarious
circumstances. I fully realize that whether a State is just or unjust and
whether it is under popular or Foreign control, the citizen’s
possessions may at any time be forcibly taken away from him by the
State, if he comes in conflict with it. In the circumstances, it seems to
me to be simple prudence to anticipate the inevitable in a conflict
which promises to be indefinitely prolonged.
But whilst it has been decided to break up the Ashram we want
everything to be used for public purpose. Therefore, unless the
268

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

Government for any reason desire to take charge of any or all of the
movables including cash, l propose to hand them over to those friends
who will take them and use them for public benefit and in accordance
with the earmarking. Thus the khadi stock and contents of the
workshop and the weaving sheds will be handed over to the All-India
Spinners’ Association on whose behalf that activity has been carried
on. The cows and other cattle will be handed to a representative of the
Goseva Sangh on whose behalf the dairy has been conducted. The
library will be handed probably to an institution that will take care of
it. The moneys and articles belonging to the various parties will be
returned [to] them or kept for them by friends who will care to take
charge of them.
Then there remain the land, the buildings and the crops. I
suggest that the Government take possession of these and do what
they like with them. I would gladly have handed these also to friends
but I cannot be party to their paying the revenue dues. And naturally
I may not hand them to fellow resisters. All, therefore, I wish is that
beneficial use be made of the land, buildings and the valuable trees
and crops instead of being allowed to run to waste as I see has been
done in many cases.
There is a plot of land with buildings occupied by Harijan
families. They have hitherto paid no rent. I have no desire to invite
them to take part in civil resistance. They will now pay the nominal
rent of one rupee per year to the trustees of the Ashram and be
responsible for the revenue due on that portion.
If for any reason, the Government decline to take of the
property mentioned, the Ashram will still be vacated by the inmates as
soon as may be after the expiry of the suspension period, viz., 31st
instant unless the date is anticipated by the Government. I request a
telegraphic reply to this letter, at least, I so far as the Government’s
wishes regarding the movables are concerned so as to enable me to
remove them in due time if I am to remove them at all.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
From a microfilm: S.N. 21535; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40), Pt. II, pp. 171-81

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

269

333. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY, GOVERNMENT
OF
BOMBAY
July 26, 1933
THE S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
(HOME DEPARTMENT)
P OONA
DEAR SIR,

I have to correct a statement in my letter addressed to you
today. On page 2, line 3, instead of “at over Rs. 3,00,000” please
read “at nearly, Rs. 2,00,000”.
Yours faithfully,
From a photostat: S.N. 19123; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40), Pt. II, p. 183

334. LETTER TO SYED MAHMUD
July 26, 1933
DEAR DR. MAHMUD,

I have your two letters.
I must not make the declaration that you suggest. No
declarations unaccompanied by immediate action are of any value at
the present moment. Even action taken under a sense of duty and with
the purest of motives is wholly misinterpreted. But I can repeat my
conviction to you that I would not care to go to heaven without taking
the Mussalman friends with me. The fact is, the more I examine
myself the more I fed that deep down in me there is no distinction
between Hindus, Mussalmans, Christians and others. I would disdain to
thrive at their expense.
As to your other suggestion about the Benares Hindu
University, whilst Malaviyaji is capable of immense sacrifice, he will
not sacrifice the University. He is philosophic enough to let it go, if he
could not retain it, consistently with his notion of self-respect. But, if I
know him rightly, he would consider it a great mistake deliberately to
sacrifice the University. What is more, those who are its co-trustees
would never allow him to take that step and what is still more is that
270

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

the students have no desire whatsoever to suspend their training.
Whatever, therefore, you and I may desire, the step suggested by you
seems to me to be incapable of being taken.
With reference to your second letter, what you say may be half
true, namely that I want some individuals to go to prison in order to
keep up the attitude of defiance. But I want them to go to prison in
order that out of the imprisonment of a few pure civil resisters may
rise a manifestation which would be unmistakable and irresistible.
I am glad Begum Mahmud is better and I hope she will be
thoroughly restored. For your own health, how I wish you could take
nature cure at Dr. Mehta’s sanatorium. I have no doubt that you can
be thoroughly restored.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

[PS.]
Salaams from Mahadev.
DR. S YED MAHMUD
F ARIDI MANZIL
DARGAHASHARIF
AJMER
From a photostat: G.N. 5090; also S.N. 19124

335. LETTER TO PREMLILA THACKERSEY
July 26, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

I hope you got the postcard which I wrote to you. You
must have read the news about the Ashram I being disbanded. I shall
have to put some of the girls somewhere. You know Anandi and
Mani. I wish to put them and three other girls in your school. One of
the latter is Mahadev’s sister, another is Sharda, daughter of the
Assistant Secretary of the Ashram, and the third is Narahari’s
daughter Vanamala. You have seen the last one too. If you think you
can take them in without any trouble and if Lilabehn also is willing,
please let me know. If I receive your permission, I shall have to send
them immediately. I cannot say what will-happen to me on the 1st. If
possible, please reply by wire. If you send the wire to the Ashram
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

271

address, it is likely to reach me earlier. A letter will reach me earlier in
Amrit Bhuvan, as I go to the Ashram at 1 p.m.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4832. Courtesy: Premlila Thackersey

336. LETTER TO AMRITLAL NANAVATI
July 26, 1933
CHI. AMRITLAL,

I read your letter to Kakasaheb and laughed. You lack sense of
humour. If I were in your place, I would have simply laughed at the
reply. You should have good-humouredly told Mathuradas that, if he
recognized you, he would say that you had as much right as he
himself. Mathuradas did not recognize you as a snataka1 and, taking
you to be a gentleman from North India, started talking to you in
Hindi. You could have ignored him and come to me. I also did not
recognize you, but you should not have punished me for that mistake.
It is I who should complain. Your complaining is like a thief
punishing a constable.
What is the good of harbouring resentment now?2
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9652. Courtesy: Amritlal Nanavati

337. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
July 26, 1933
CHI. KAKA,

I have your letter.
Many others may have had to suffer what Amritlal had to. It was
certainly a painful affair, but nobody can be blamed, or if at all it was
Bal3 who should be blamed. And next to him, or even more than he,
Amritlal himself should be blamed. Mathuradas gave the reply that he
1
2
3

272

A graduate
Vide also the following item.
Addressee’s son
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

did only to protect me from unnecessary trouble. I didn’t know
anything about the incident at all. I saw that Mathuradas was asking
somebody to go away. But how was I to recognize Amritlal? If he
gave your name, I don’t know that at all. However, had he taken the
incident in good humour, everybody would have laughed at the error.
I myself treated Kanu in a similar way here. I did not recognize him
and pushed him away when he was trying to touch my feet. Amritlal
was not treated as he was knowingly. If you ask why nobody
recognized him, I don’t see how a person can be blamed for that.
Amritlal should have laughed at the error and replied in Gujarati
instead of in Hindi.
Bal may not have been able to tell Mathuradas anything, but he
should have told me. I am not sending the letter to Mathuradas.
Sending it to him will only keep alive the incident.
I had no choice but to put you in charge of Harijan. Now
Anand 1 has been sent. When he is ready you may leave it off. A
person like you who has the gift of writing can easily get his English
corrected. You do not have a good style in English, but it is not as if
your thoughts do not flow in it at all.
I will certainly like it if you can come here. I have asked Bal to
write a long letter to you, but seeing the place for yourself will be a
different experience altogether.
The pessimism expressed by Mahadev in his letter is unjustified.
But I understand your attitude and what you say about staying with
me. It is a complete error to believe that you were a burden on me.
However, why do you believe that we can do anything that we may
wish to? I am indifferent as to who will come and stay with me. I do
believe that the Government will send Mahadev. They know [that I
need him].
If you can come, do come please.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 9477. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

1

Anand Hingorani

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

273

338. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA1
July 26, 1933
I thought that my words were quite clear and explicit. I had
simply said that had the interview been granted, I would have been
able to put forth something that would have been acceptable both to
the Government and the people. If you ask me what I would have put
before the Viceroy, I cannot tell you, not because it is a secret but
because I do not know. When I made that statement, I relied upon my
resourcefulness, which has up to now not failed me in putting forth
acceptable proposals for a compromise.
I did not go to Lord Irwin with any preconceived proposals but
in the course of the conversation, I put them before him, as they came
to me, and as both the parties had a will for peace, a way was found
and so would it have been with Lord Willingdon, if he had shown the
will. Thus there is no mystery about any scheme which I had up my
sleeve. If I had it, I should have no hesitation in sharing it with the
public.
The Bombay Chronicle, 27-7-1933

339. INTERVIEW TO “THE HINDU”
July 26, 1933
The disbandment of the Ashram would mean that every inmate
would constitute a walking ashram, carrying with him or her the
responsibility for realizing the Ashram ideal, no matter where situated,
whether in prison or outside.
Mr. Gandhi added that the impending disbandment would not mean loss or
diminution of incentive, but it would be a greater incentive to greater effort, greater
dedication and greater sacrifice. He would disband the Ashram as early as possible
after the end of the month. He declared:

Every step regarding the Ashram will be taken with the full
knowledge of the authorities.
Asked if he was closing the Ashram for want of funds, Mr. Gandhi
said:
1
The source had reported that Gandhiji was asked as to “what
scheme he had in view to unfold to the Viceroy if the latter had granted him an
interview”.

274

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

It is malicious and baseless to say so. The Ashram has plenty of
friends who have never kept it in want.
Asked if he was closing the Ashram because of disappointment, Mr. Gandhi
said that it was also equally baseless to say so. He declared:

I am not only not seriously disappointed, but I am convinced
that the majority of the inmates have made all endeavours, humanly
possible to come up to the ideal. This much, however, is true that
though the inmates, including myself, have made an honest endeavour
to come up to the principles, we have all failed. But that is no cause
for disappointment. It is a cause for greater effort.
Asked if the suspension of all Congress organizations would mean the
prevailing of anarchy in India, Mr. Gandhi replied:

No. Anarchy means want of rule and discipline. The Congress
would be under rigid discipline. Individuals’ activities will be within
the limits prescribed by the Congress resolution.
Regarding the suggestion to hold a meeting of the All-India Congress
Committee, Mr. Gandhi said:

I would not mind, but personally I think it is impossible unless
the step is taken to give up civil disobedience altogether. Such an
intention should be made known to the Government. Whether it would
he advisable or not, is a question the answer to which will depend
upon the temperament of each member.
The Hindu, 27-7-1933

340. LETTER TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE
AHMEDABAD ,

July 27, 1933
DEAR GURUDEV,

I have read your Press message 1 regarding the Yeravda Pact, in
so far as it applies to Bengal. It caused me deep grief to find that you
were misled by very deep affection for me and by your confidence in
my judgment into approving of a Pact which was discovered to have
1

Vide Appendix “Cable from Rabindranath Tagore to Sir Nripendranath
Sircar”, after 22-7-1933. Rabindranath Tagore had forwarded a copy of this message
along with his letter dated July 28, 1933 to Gandhiji; vide 1st footnote to “Letter to
Rabindranath Tagore”, 7-8-1933.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

275

done a grave injustice to Bengal. It is now no use my saying that
affection for me should not have affected your judgment, or that
confidence in my judgment ought not to have made you accept a Pact
about which you had ample means for coming to an independent
judgment. Knowing as I do your very generous nature, you could not
have acted otherwise than you did and in spite of the discovery made
by you that you have committed a grave error you would continue to
repeat such errors if the occasions too were repeated.
But I am not at all convinced that there was any error made. As
soon as the agitation for an amendment of the Pact arose, I applied
my mind to it, discussed it with friends who ought to know and I was
satisfied that there was no injustice done to Bengal. I corresponded
with those who complained of injustice. But they, too, including
Ramanandbabu, could not convince me of any injustice. Of course,
our points of view were different. In my opinion, the approach to the
question was also wrong.
A Pact arrived at by mutual arrangement cannot possibly be
altered by the British Government except through the consent of the
parties to the Pact. But no serious attempt seems to have been made to
secure any such agreement. Your appearance, therefore, on the same
platform as the complainants, I, for one, welcome, in the hope that it
would lead to a mutual discussion, instead of a futile appeal to the
British Government. If, therefore, you have, for your own part, studied
the subject and have arrived at the opinion that you have now
pronounced, I would like you to convene a meeting of the principal
parties and convince them that a grave injustice has been done to
Bengal. If it can be proved, I have no doubt that the Pact will be
re-considered and amended so as to undo the wrong said to have been
done to Bengal. If I felt convinced that there was an error of
judgment, so far as Bengal was concerned, I would strain every nerve
to see that the error was rectified. You may know that up to now I
have studiously refrained from saying anything in public in defence
of the Pact, save by way of reiterating my opinion accompanied by
the statement that if injustice could be proved, redress would be given.
I am, therefore, entirely at your service.
Just now, I am absorbed in disbanding the Ashram and devising
means of saving as much as can be for public use. My service will,
therefore, be available after I am imprisoned, which event may take
276

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

place any day after the end of this month. I hope you are keeping
good health.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
DR. R ABINDRANATH TAGORE
From a photostat: G.N. 4639

341. LETTER TO R. V. SASTRI
July 27, 1933
MY DEAR SASTRI,

I wanted to dictate something for you as soon as I heard of your
fever, but it was no use. I have just now a few moments, and I am
taking advantage of them to dictate these few lines.
Of course you are bound to go to Madras for recuperation. I
hope that, like Mrs. Sastri and her mother, mere change to Madras will
produce a miraculous effect upon you and this will find you free of
fever. But you ought to make use of the time now yielded to you to
learn from Mrs. Sastri the art of simple cookery and return to Poona
with a proper quality of rice as part of your luggage. You cannot give
up the struggle to live in Poona and to live in perfect health. What
hundreds of Tamilians have been able to do you must be able also to
do. You should write to me regularly. Mahadev must have written to
you already that Anand Hingorani has been sent to fill in the gap. But
you have to return as soon as you have regained your strength and yet
there should be no premature return. You should not only regain
your strength but learn the art of retaining it. Of course, you will take
without reservation from the Harijan coffers whatever you need, and
if you want me to write to Patwardhan1 about it I would gladly do so,
or to save time you can make use of this letter or the relevant part of
it.
Give my love to Mrs. Sastri and the children.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. R. V. S ASTRI
From a photostat: S.N. 19125
1

Anant Vinayak Patwardhan, printer and publisher of Harijan

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

277

342. LETTER TO S. SADANAND
July 27, 1933
MY DEAR SADANAND,

I have had rough notes for the last two days from Maganbhai
whom I had asked to read the file left by you. He says that the
headlines often give an impression wholly different from the contents
which they describe. Often events appear which have no basis in fact.
Just now I have been reading the Free Press during the few moments
that I have allowed myself for newspaper reading and I want to tell
you that I am not happy over my reading. Your reporters seem to
thrive more on gossip than on actualities. Therefore, many things
reported do not inspire belief. What I would like you to do is to give
the public only such news that have a good foundation and when the
news consist of a forecast of events to come, the reporters should have
substantial grounds for giving their forecast. I have one forecast in my
mind. If it comes to pass I shall certainly congratulate you and your
reporters. In any case, you know that the ban no longer exists.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S. S ADANAND
EDITOR , “F REE P RESS JOURNAL ”
DALAL S TREET, F ORT, B OMBAY
From a photostat: S.N. 19126

343. A TESTIMONIAL
July 27, 1933
Abbas’s work in the Ashram was appreciated by everybody. He
taught me many useful things about carding. He has done service in
other ways too. It is my hope and my blessing that, wherever he lives,
he will observe the Ashram rules and devote himself to service.
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6308

278

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

344. LETTER TO BALIBEHN M. ADALAJA
July 27, 1933
CHI. BALI 1 ,

I have your letter.
I tried hard to persuade Manu 2, but she is very eager to go to
Poona and does not wish to return to you. She now wants to study,
and wishes to go to Poona because there are better facilities for study
in that place. I should, therefore, like you to give your willing
permission to her. I don’t have the courage to send her to Poona
unless you give your consent. Come and see me, if you wish.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1524. Courtesy: Manubehn
S. Mashruwala

345. INTERVIEW TO “THE DAILY HERALD”3
July 27, 1933
My merely going to jail is not sufficient sacrifice in the face of
the sacrifices and sufferings of thousands of men and women of
which I have had knowledge since the breaking of the fast. The
Ashram has three lakhs worth of immovable property, that is, land and
buildings, and movable property worth nearly two lakhs, including a
rich library containing 11,000 volumes. We estimate the value of the
books at least at Rs. 40,000. The members of the Ashram and I came
to the conclusion that we should no longer enjoy these things when
others have been deprived of what was just as precious as the, things of
the Ashram to the Ashram people. Moreover, many members of the
Ashram having decided to offer individual civil disobedience, it would
be wrong to expect the Government to treat the Ashram differently
from other properties similarly affected. Of course, there is a fundamental difference. The Ashram is a public trust, with well-defined
objects; and if the members of such a public institution adopt an
1
2
3

Harilal Gandhi’s sister-in-law
Harilal Gandhi’s daughter
This was reported as “from a special correspondent”.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

279

attitude which brings upon them the heavy hand of the law, good or
bad, the property which is the subject-matter of the trust might not be
easily affected. It is for this reason that we have decided that we
should voluntarily give up possession of the properties to the
Government. Hence this step to be taken of disbanding the Ashram.
Replying to supplementary questions, the Mahatma said:

The immovable property will revert to the Government. The
movable property, subject to what the Government have to say, will be
given to public institutions.
Gandhiji said that he had not finally decided on his method of individual civil
disobedience. He added:

I shall resort to no overt act of disobedience without first
informing the Government. I shall be ready with my plan on the 1st
August.
Asked about the reports current that he is contemplating another march,
Gandhiji said:

That is all bazaar gossip. I have not decided on anything yet. It
might be another march or might not be. I cannot say yet.
The Hindu, 28-7-1933

346. INTERVIEW TO “THE TIMES OF INDIA”
July 27, 1933
In an exclusive interview today, Mr. Gandhi told me that N., Dr. Spiegel and
another Englishman, Duncan Greenlees, who was also in the Ashram, were bound not
to take part in politics in general and civil disobedience in particular. Mr. Gandhi
said:

They are all qualifying themselves for Harijan service. I am,
therefore, arranging, if possible, to send them to Wardha, where they
will continue their work.
The other inmates, who may not take part in the civil resistance
movement, will go to their homes and some old workers and their
children will be sent wherever it is most convenient for them to reside
or train as the case may be. The disposal of the land, building and
movable property of the Ashram will depend largely upon the
intentions of Government.
Asked how he would first break the law after the period of the suspension of
civil disobedience had expired, MY. Gandhi continued:

280

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

No steps will be taken without first intimating Government. What
definite steps will be taken, I have not yet been able to decide upon.
Of course, Government may frustrate all my plans by anticipating
them but that has been my life since the discovery of satyagraha in
1906.
The Times of India, 28-7-1933

347. MESSAGE ON CENTENARY OF ABOLITION
OF SLAVERY 1
[Before July 28, 1933] 2
INDIA
OF

HAS MUCH TO

SLAVERY

RELIGIOUS

FOR

SANCTION

LEARN

WE

FROM THE

HAVE

AND

MORE

SLAVERY

HEROES OF
BASED

POISONOUS

THE

ABOLITION

UPON

SUPPOSED.

THAN

ITS

WESTERN

FELLOW.

GANDHI

Amrita Bazar Patrika, 29-7-1933

348. A STATEMENT
[July 28, 1933]
Mr. Duncan Greenlees, who is now staying in the Ashram, tells
me that in bracketing him, a Britisher, with two foreigners, N. and Dr.
Spiegel, I did not accurately represent his position. While in
accordance with my request under Ashram discipline he does not
propose to take part in the present civil disobedience movement, he
naturally cannot bind himself in advance to a particular future course
of conduct. A time may come, he says, for him to take his due share
as a citizen in politics.
M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 21544

1

Reported under the date-line, “Calcutta, July 28, 1933”, this and a message
from Rabindranath Tagore appeared in the source as “released by Kalidas Nag, Editor,
India and the World”. he. report added that July 29 had been fixed for international
celebration in Hull, England, Wilberforce’s native town, “in commemoration of the
event which synchronized with the death anniversary of Wilberforce”.
2
ibid.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

281

349. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
July 28, 1933
CHI. HEMPRABHA,

I have your letter. What more can you gain by meeting me? If
we adopt poverty in earnest we must not possess even a farthing. What
should we do under such circumstances? Our dharma lies only in
following our duty to the utmost. Your work lies in khadi service and
to turn Sodepur into an ashram is a part of that. Your achievement will
be complete if you can bring about all this and can find God in this
alone.
Can you not keep Arun at some place other than Sodepur? Or
are you and Arun content with remaining at Sodepur and taking
whatever treatment is available there?
I trust you have understood all the changes I am making. 1 do
not find time to write at length on this matter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1704

350. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA
AHMEDABAD ,

July 28, 1933
Asked by a representative of the Associated Press as to how he would vacate
the Ashram and who would take charge of it, Mr. Gandhi said that it was a question
which could be better answered by the Government than by him, for the simple reason
that when the members of the Ashram vacated the property, it naturally would become
Government’s care, but the question was somewhat premature. They would all know in
a few days, what would happen to the Ashram property.
Asked if this referred to the movable property also, Mr. Gandhi said he hoped
not. That question too would be decided inside two or three days.
It is understood that Mr. Gandhi has written a letter 1 to the Government of
Bombay in this connection, a reply to which is awaited by him.
Asked what he thought of the rumours published in the Press that the
Government would not give him this time, if he went to jail, the facility for Harijan
work that was given to him before, Mr. Gandhi stated that he did not believe the
1

282

Vide “Letter to Home Secretary, Government of India”, 26-7-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

rumour at all. He had not a shadow of doubt that the Government would not go back
upon the policy deliberately adopted by them—a policy which was implied in
Yeravda Pact—and for which he had never given, so far as he was aware, the slightest
reason.

The Hindu, 28-7-1933

351. NOTES
A NOTEWORTHY DONATION

A Brahmin, who has lost his sister and sister’s daughter, sends
me a cheque for Rs. 1,750 to be invested and the interest to be used
for the benefit of Harijans, in any manner that may commend itself to
me. In the course of his letter he says:
I had set apart Rs. 2,000 for charity in connection with the death of my
dear sister and daughter. I have used Rs. 250 out of the sum so far for the local
charities and I am sending you the balance for Harijan uplift. My own
suggestion is that this money should be invested to form the nucleus of a
permanent fund whose interest only should be used for the benefit of Harijans.
But you are at liberty, if you think it more advisable, to use the capital in any
manner you like in connection with the Harijan service. I would like you not
to disclose my name.

I respect both the wishes of the donor and I am handing the
cheque to the Gujarat Branch of the Servants of Untouchables Society
with instructions to invest it and to use the interest for the benefit of
Harijans, with my approval, wherever such approval can be easily
procured. I hope that this example will be followed by others.
AN OVERSEER’S C ONFESSION

Letters continue still to come as evidence of the indirect
influence that the fast had on several workers. One such worker from
Gujarat writes a pathetic letter in Gujarati which I condense below:
When you were in Poona, I often took up the pen to write
to you, but my courage failed me. But today, early in the
morning, I said to myself that whilst you were so near me I
should disburden myself of my sin and tell you how I had
robbed poor people. It happened this way: In 1900, you may
remember, there was a big famine. I was in charge oflabourers
who were employed at some famine work. I was then a mere lad,
and I saw nothing wrong in helping myself out of the wages that
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

283

were paid to the labourers under my charge. It is likely that I
must have taken nothing less than Rs. 100 in this fashion. I was
engaged for nearly eight months. The saddest part of the story
is that the labourers were all Harijans, whom I was instrumental
in engaging. I was otherwise kind to them and they always
seemed to be pleased with me. But I helped myself with one pice
per head, out of eight to be paid to the full-day labourer. I was
so mean that I could not help taking away one pice from the
wages of a boy of about 6 years old. The fact that this boy
helped me considerably at the time of distribution of wages
enhances my guilt. I drowned my conscience and flattered
myself with the belief that I could safely steal the money I did
from these poor people, because I was instrumental in finding
them employment. I had under me non-Harijan labourers also.
They did not always relish my taking one pice per head from
their wages and I had to threaten them with dismissal if they did
not let me steal the pice from them. But the poor Harijans never
said a word in protest when I helped myself regularly every day
in the manner I have described.
Nor does the recital of misdeeds stop here. I could not even
keep my relations with women labourers quite pure.
Though I may not say anything in self-defence I must
inform you that the whole atmosphere around me was
soul-killing. There was only one Parsi Engineer who, I believe,
was incorruptible.
As some penance for my misdeeds I enclose herewith notes
for Rs. 250 of which Rs. 50 are marked for the use of Harijans
to be distributed as follows:
Rs. 28 towards education.
Rs. 20 towards supply of water to them and Rs. 10 for
propaganda.
The other Rs. 200 you can use as you like.
What this young man did in 1900 was undoubtedly the common
practice amongst overseers and I fear very much that it still continues.
Poor Harijans, unable to find work, otherwise make a virtue of
necessity and even feel thankful to those who rob them.
They feel that if they resisted the robbery they were in danger of
losing the only means of earning a miserable pittance. But such
regular robbery of a portion of their hard-earned daily wage cannot
284

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

but leave an unpleasant memory behind. I congratulate the writer of
the letter on his frankness and his penance. Let this letter be a warning
to all Harijan workers and let it serve the purpose of making them
clean.
Harijan, 29-7-1933

352. SOME DANGEROUS BELIEFS
A professor of English writes as follows:1
My reading of the situation in Cochin and Travancore is that there will be a
most unhappy split if temple-entry for Harijans is your next step, unless people are
convinced that the tapasya you have performed has endowed you with the power to
understand our temples. Even non-caste Hindus are not convinced that you are
completing the work of Shri Narayana Guru, because he built them separate temples. I
humbly beg you to visit personally a temple or two in Kerala with Malaviyaji, if
possible.
My own orthodoxy borders on superstition. Your fast perplexed me, I fasted
and prayed for guidance, and then I felt I must go to Chottanikary temple to pray for
your life. There I met the Brahmin devotee about whom I have written once, and after
days of discussion we found we could not agree. On the seventh day I had a feeling that
you would successfully terminate the fast.
At the temple I witnessed two cures of what new psychology would call
hysteria or multiple personality. The cure of mental and nervous disease is common
in many temples. . . .
The orthodox people fear that any departure from usage may lessen the
sanctity of temples. The Catholic Church at Ettumanur was once noted for such cures.
The slackening of caste rules among Catholics is believed to be the cause of the
partial disappearance of the power. It is almost impossible to convince people that
such explanations are absurd. They live in a narrow static universe....

I am not so much concerned over the feared unhappy split on
the temple-entry question as over the dangerous beliefs to which
the professor refers. Suffice it to say that I shall leave no stone
unturned to avoid a split. But my goal is quite clear. It is not to have
Harijans regarded as a separate body in Hinduism or outside it. I
shall be satisfied with nothing less than complete removal of
untouchability as it is known to us today. The beliefs, however, to
which the professor refers seem to me to be most dangerous. No
1

Only excerpts are reproduced here.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

285

doubt imagination goes a long way in making us do certain things
and to refrain from doing certain other things. People have been
known to die of fright because they have mistaken a rope for a snake.
But it would be highly improper to cultivate the habit of entertaining
such imaginary beliefs.
Therefore, in spite of the professor’s testimony about the cures,
I am unable to endorse the deduction the professor draws from these
cures that the extraordinary beliefs, entertained by people in Malabar
about the curative powers of certain idols in certain temples in
Malabar, are justified. I feel that it is necessary to educate the people
out of such beliefs. They cannot promote healthy thinking. And in
any case I do not see how the entry of ‘untouchables’ can pollute
temples or deities installed therein. And it is clear from the very nature
of things that the powers, curative or any other, come not from deities
but from the imaginary imputing of those powers to the temples or
their deities. Surely many ‘untouchables’ must have entered these
temples without being detected and without the efficacy of the deities
being in any way affected. In my humble opinion, therefore, it is up
to every educated man and woman in Malabar to make a serious
effort to rid Hinduism of the beliefs described by the correspondent.
Surely it is no matter for joy or congratulation that even the Catholic
Church has been affected by the virus of untouchability.
Harijan, 29-7-1933

353. AN EXAMPLE TO COPY
A European correspondent writes:1
. . . My object in writing this letter is not to deal with points in Harijan
but to draw your attention to (or rather to remind you of—you have surely
heard of it) the work being done at Hampton Institute, Hampton, Virginia, and
at Tuskegee Institute, Alabama, U.S. for the American Negroes. To some
extent the problem of the masses of the Harijans of today is the problem of the
American slaves on their emancipation in 1865 (I think that was the date). In
the Story of Hampton . . . is unfolded the story of how noble white American
men and women tackled this problem. Again in Up from Slavery, My Larger
Education and Tuskegee and Its People by Booker T. Washington . . . is
revealed the story of what noble black Americans (many of them graduates of
1

286

Only excerpts are reproduced here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

Hampton Institute) have done and are doing for their people and not only for
their own people but for others. The scientific experiments in farming carried
on at Tuskegee, for example, have benefited the country all round. Might I
also suggest that it might not be amiss if some of those in charge of Harijan
education paid a visit to these American institutions. The advance of American
Negro reads like a wonder-tale. Of course, in no case must manual training be
emphasized at the expense of higher literary and artistic training. The two
should go hand in hand. My ideal is that every shoemaker should have a
University degree and that every University graduate should be skilled in some
form of manual work. Thus and thus only would varnashrama become without
offence to any, but thus also would the whole point of varnashrama fall away.
I note that you suggest that wealthy people might build new temples,
but does it require wealthy people to do that? Should not the great feature of
such new temples be their simplicity? Are not the reformers, the puritans of
Hinduism? Cannot Harijans and reformers, with their own hands, build these
temples?

Neither the Hampton Institute nor the Tuskegee are unfamiliar
to me, but they cannot be familiar to the Indian readers of the
Harijan. There is no doubt that the work of Armstrong at the
Hampton Institute and of Booker T. Washington at the Tuskegee is
worth studying by all Harijan workers and Harijans. The analogy,
however, does not hold good in all respects. The work of the white
men at Hampton Institute corresponds to some of the work being
done by the so-called high-caste Hindus among Harijans. But I feel
sure that the duty owing by the former to Harijans, is far more
imperative than that of white men towards American Negroes. For we
have made of the artificial and assumed superiority of so-called
high-castes over Harijans a matter of religion and therefore the work
of the Hindu reformer in India is more urgent than that of the white
reformer in America, as it also becomes far more difficult. And yet I
have no doubt that we have nothing corresponding to Hampton
Institute in India. That Institute is a very great enterprise and a noble
monument of the industrious and exceedingly well-informed zeal of a
handful of white reformers. The Tuskegee Institute is a model for
Harijans. Booker Washington has shown to the world what a man of a
despised race can do in the teeth of enormous odds. He was able to
build that noble edifice at Tuskegee because of his limitless faith and
equally limitless application. Indeed, both the Institutes, apart from
their special usefulness for Harijans and Harijan sevaks, have a very
high value from the general educationist’s point of view. I hope some
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

287

day, therefore, to give in these pages a gist of the work done by and in
both the Institutes. Meanwhile, let it be noted that in both, great stress
is laid upon the dignity of manual labour and the endeavour in both is
to draw out the best in the students that flock to them.
As to my correspondent’s reference to varnashrama, evidently
the whole point of it has been missed, for, as I have interpreted
varnadharma, there is no bar in any shape or form to the highest
mental development. The bar altogether moral is against change of
hereditary occupation for the sake of bettering one’s material
condition, and thus setting up a system of unhealthy and ruinous
competition which is today robbing life of all its joy and beauty.
As to the temples, I refer to my description of the model temple!
I am trying to think that my model temple more than fulfill the
requirements of my correspondent. But my reason for reproducing
from the letter the reference to new temples is to emphasize the fact
that Western thinkers are watching this movement for the removal of
untouchability and that they would have us not merely to be satisfied
with the mere destruction of the outward form, but they would have us
to carry out a thorough-going reform so as to revolutionize many
old-rooted ideas and so to purify Hindu society as to affect the whole
of mankind.
Harijan, 29-7-1933

354. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA
AHMEDABAD ,

July 29, 1933
Asked by a representative of the Associated Press what he had to say regarding
the fears entertained in some quarters that the suspension of the Congress
Committees would plunge the country into chaos, Mr. Gandhi stated that behind the
question there lay a grave misconception of the situation. The question presupposed
that there were lawfully working Congress organizations all over the country, which
the acting Congress President had dissolved. The fact was that all such organizations
had been declared illegal. What was therefore working were secret organizations, and
shadow cabinets, and this was calculated to lead to chaos. That condition had been
anticipated, and stopped by the action of the acting President. If there was any chaos
now, it would be confined to individuals.

288

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

The more he read the criticism levelled at Mr. M. S. Alley’s action, Mr. Gandhi
said, the more convinced he felt that, as time passed, people would understand the
necessity for his action, as also its beauty. It was the only action possible in order to
save the Congress and the national honour and the national spirit that had been
awakened among the masses.
Asked if it was true as hinted in the Press report that he had offered to
Government to take possession of his Ashram in anticipation of confiscation,
Mahatma Gandhi said: “No.” He asked the people patiently to await events, instead of
anticipating them. 1
Asked whether he had decided his plan of civil disobedience, Mr. Gandhi said
there were undoubtedly many schemes floating in his brain, which it would be
purposeless to recount, but as soon as anything took a definite shape, he would
gladly share it with the public. But he would share it first with the Government. He
said the Harijans were more than friends to him and he might not invite them to joint
him.
Asked whether he would launch his civil disobedience on the 1st August and
call upon anybody to join him, Mr. Gandhi said that, whether it would be 1st August
or when, he was unable to say.
The Hindustan Times, 30-7-1933; also The Hindu, 31-7-1933

355. STATEMENT ON SENGUPTA DAY
AHMEDABAD ,

July 30, 1933
I have received a message from Mr. Santosh Basu, Mayor of
Calcutta, and others asking me to announce 6th August as the
All-India Sengupta Day. I also have seen Mr. Aney’s appeal in the
same connection. I associate myself heartily with the appeal made by
the acting President of the Congress and I hope that at public
meetings that may be convened, striking features of the departed
patriot’s life will be recalled and endeavour will be made by all to
reproduce them in their own lives.
The Hindustan Times, 1-8-1933

1

This paragraph and the last sentence of the succeeding one are reproduced
from The Hindustan Times, 30-7-1933.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

289

356. STATEMENT TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA1
July 30, 1933
On the eve of what is to me an act of greater dedication than
perhaps ever before, I would like to urge all Congressmen not to
fritter away their energy in debating over the decision of the acting
President regarding individual civil disobedience. As an expert I
reiterate my opinion that the decision was the only right course to
take. In my opinion it is also constitutional. I would urge every
Congressman to study my statement 2 carefully and it will be found
that if the programme is zealously worked out the Congress will
become a much more powerful organization than it has ever been.
Without civil disobedience there is no safety and no freedom. Civil
disobedience can become impregnable only in the manner pointed
out by me.
To non-Congressmen I would say: Help the largest organization
in the country in every way you can. It is not a sectional body. It is
national in every sense of the term.
To the Englishmen, whether belonging to the services or others,
I would say: If you want peace in the land and real friendship with
India, Ordinance Rule is not the way, that of the Congress is the only
way. I say this as a friend of the English people. Some of you may
regard me today as your enemy. I make bold to prophesy that a day
will come when the mists will have rolled away and you will admit my
claim.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 21541

1
This was published in The Hindu, 31-7-1933, and The Hindustan Times,
1-8-1933.
2
Vide “Statement on M. S. Aney’s Statement”, 26-7-1933.

290

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

357. TELEGRAM TO HOME SECRETARY,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
July 30, 1933
S ECRETARY
HOME DEPARTMENT
P OONA
HOPE

VACATE

WITH

ASHRAM

COMPANIONS

TUESDAY

IN

BEING RAS WITH VIEW

MORNING

EASY
TENDER

STAGES

AND

SYMPATHY

VILLAGERS

DESIRE INVITE VILLAGERS MASS CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE
WILL

BE INVITED

OFFER CIVIL

IF

FREE

IMMEDIATE

DISOBEDIENCE

MARCH

DESTINATION
MOST HIT.

BUT

NO

INDIVIDUALS

TERMS CONGRESS RESO-

LUTION. WILL GIVE TALKS VILLAGERS ON TEETOTALISM LIQUOR DEALERS

LEAVE

CLUSIVELY

LIQUOR
KHADDAR

CONSTRUCTIVE
ABILITY.
ON

AND

FOREIGN

ALL

COMPANIONS

FEEDING

THIRTYTWO

IN

US. IN
NUMBER

CLOTH

OTHERWISE

PROGRAMME. HINDUS

SELF AND

VILLAGERS

NIONS

TRADE

WILL

WILL
EVENT

GO

DEALERS

DEAL

THROUGH

BE ASKED

SHED

CONGRESS
UNTOUCH-

MARCH PICELESS AND
MY

INCLUDING

EARLIER
SIXTEEN

EX-

DEPEND

ARREST

COMPA-

WOMEN

WILL

TAKE UP MARCH.

GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 21542

358. APPEAL TO PEOPLE OF GUJARAT 1
July 30, 1933
It was no easy thing to decide to sacrifice the Ashram, but it was
very clear to every inmate of the Ashram that the sacrifice was
inevitable. This sacrifice is nothing before the suffering and sacrifice
that has been gone through by the peasants of Karnatak, Midnapore
and Kaira, the U. P. and of the Frontier. They have been so far given
secret relief which has now been stopped or will be stopped, and
should be stopped. But that does not mean that those who are starving
should be deprived of public relief simply because they were
satyagrahis. I hope that all the peasants who are in distress will receive
1

The first and the third paragraphs of this were omitted in the Press reports.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

291

the needed relief from the public and, should Government prohibit
the distribution of such relief, those who give the relief will have the
ability to resist it and take the consequences. But whether they have
the ability or not, the way is clear for me. I have sacrificed my all.
On Tuesday morning I propose, God willing, to march from the
Ashram with 33 companions. Some of these will be even physically
weaker than I, for there are nearly as many women with me this time
as men. But I could not resist their desire to sacrifice themselves. It
was to them a call they could not resist. We hope and pray that God
will help us to carry out our pledge. Our immediate destination is Ras.
In case we are allowed to reach there, we shall proceed further. But it
is quite likely that we may all be arrested as we proceed on the march.
If we are not so arrested, it is our plan to carry the message of
fearlessness to every village home.
We will not invite them to offer mass civil disobedience, but we
will certainly ask such as may be ready to offer individual civil
disobedience, we will ask those who drink to refrain from it, the
liquor-dealer to give up his trade, the foreign cloth dealer to deal
exclusively in khaddar and we shall carry the message of handspinning to every home. We shall ask the so-called high-class Hindus
to wash themselves clean of untouchability and to befriend the
Harijans. We shall ask the Harijans to observe the rules of hygiene and
abjure carrion, and we shall call upon all the communities to achieve
communal unity, thus fulfilling the whole of the constructive
programme of the Congress.1
Let me set out in brief what we shall expect of the villages we
visit. We will not have a copper on us, we shall cheerfully and
thankfully accept what humble fare the villagers may offer us. The
coarsest fare lovingly served will mean to us the choicest treat. As this
is the rainy season, we shall be thankful to be put up in a cottage
having a roof and we shall march by easy stages, as many amongst us
are not physically strong, and our programme will not be rigid. We
shall halt whenever our legs cannot carry us further but we don’t
propose to spend more than a single night at one place.
It is possible that the Government may take me before Tuesday.
Even then the march will continue so long as there is any marcher left
free. I am confident that if the sacrifice that we are offering is pure, it
1

292

What follows is taken from the photostat source.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

will generate a power of non-violence that will put us in reach of the
swaraj that millions of us are pining for.
From a microfilm: S.N. 21549; also photostat: S.N. 21416

359. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
July 30, 1933
MY DEAR ANAND,

Just a line to acknowledge your letter. I have come very near
Vidya1. She knows her course of action but has not enough courage
to take it cheerfully. But she is struggling most bravely and I think
successfully. She sits by me all the time I am at the Ashram. But she is
not likely to see me tomorrow. And she will probably leave for
Wardha tomorrow night. You need not worry about her.
I do not know what can be sent you next week. If it is at all
possible, I shall certainly send something.
Love.
BAPU
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

360. LETTER TO G. V. MAVALANKAR
July 30, 1933
BHAI MAVALANKAR,

I think about you every day, but get no time at all to write to
you. Today I decided to write this anyhow. I get reports about you
from time to time and hear that you are all right. I approve of your
self-exile. Without it, you would not have got the rest which you are
now getting. As for the world, it will go on without caring for us.
Make good use of this opportunity which you have got and improve
your health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1237
1

Vidya Hingorani, addressee’s wife

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

293

361. LETTER TO MAITRI GIRI
July 30, 1933
CHI. MAITRI,

I was pleased to get your letter. Work well now and bring great
credit to the Ashram. Bachubhai1 is a selfless worker. There is very
much indeed which you can learn from him. Learn as much as you
can.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6241

362. LETTER TO KRISHNAMAIYADEVI GIRI
July 30, 1933
CHI. KRISHNAMAIYADEVI,

I have your letter. I was glad. Your having taken up work there
will certainly benefit you. We are now disbanding the Ashram, and so
it has now become the responsibility of you all to keep up its good
name. Observe its rules now and do so.
I am sending Durga and Satyavati there. Take care of
them.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6214

363. LETTER TO KHUSHALCHAND GANDHI
July 30, 1933
RESPECTED BROTHER,

I request my sister-in-law and you and others to rejoice, instead
of being unhappy, that Narandas is joining the movement. In my eyes,
this is highly sacred work. I have no doubt at all in my mind that it is
your great good fortune that all your sons are taking part in this
sacrifice. Have faith that wherever Narandas may go he will come to
no harm. Moreover he is not alone; there are many. Women, of whom
1

294

Bachubhai Ramdas, nephew of Gangabehn Vaidya
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

some are even physically weak, have joined this pilgrimage. Please
believe with me that by all of us taking up this work we shall wipe the
tears of many and bring some happiness to thousands of homes, and
let both of you give your blessings to Narandas and the whole party.
Humble greetings to both.
Regards to both of you
from

MOHANDAS
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

364. LETTER TO MAHAVIR GIRI
July 30, 1933
CHI. MAHAVIR,

You seem to be working well. Go on improving your efficiency
in the same manner and produce a fine impression on everybody with
your sincere work. Bring credit to the Ashram.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6240

365. LETTER TO TOTARAM SANADHYA
July 30, 1933
BHAI TOTARAMJI,

I have received the letter from you and Chi. Hariprasad. I am
fully confident that you will live in accordance with the Ashram rules
wherever you might be.
Continue looking after the Ashram lands until the Government
takes possession, and utilize the fruit and other produce. Also share
them with the weaver brethren.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2536

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

295

366. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
S ABARMATI ,

July 30, 1933
BHAISHRI SHANKERLAL,

Since the Ashram has been disbanded 1 it has been decided by
the inmates to hand over the dairy and the cattle at the Ashram to the
Goseva Sangh. Hence, on behalf of the Ashram and the Goseva
Sangh, since I am its president, I am entrusting the dairy and the cattle
to you. You should manage these as a public undertaking. It should
largely be self-sufficient. But if the need arises for funds to be raised
for it, you may do so. There is some money kept at the Ashram for
this work. Arrangement has been made for this to be paid to you as
early as possible. The amount is. . . 2. Bhai Titus3 will be working as
manager of the dairy and as secretary. He should be paid a monthly
allowance of Rs. 75. If possible, keep the cowherds who are already
employed. I am giving you all the powers in connection with this
dairy.4
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 32726

367. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
July 30, 1933
Interviewed by Pressmen, Gandhiji said that there was no truth in the Press
report that he had drafted a letter to the Viceroy. He said he knew only one fetish in
life and that was Truth, and he was not sorry for having made of it a fetish.
In his opinion, prestige came unasked and unsought from right conduct, right
speech and right thought. His endeavour ever since he entered public life was to
regulate it by those three golden rules.
Replying to a question whether his request to the Viceroy for an interview was
accompanied by a threat of revival of civil disobedience, Gandhiji declared that in no
1
In July 1933, Gandhiji had offered to hand over the Sabarmati Ashram to the
Government; vide also “Interview to Associated Press of India”, 25-7-1933 and 3014. However, the Ashram was finally given over to the Harijan Sevak Sangh; vide also
“Letter to Vallabhbhai Patel”, 24-9-1933.
2
The figure has been struck off in the source.
3
T. Titus
4
Vide also “Letter to Vallabhbhai Patel”, 24-9-1933.

296

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

sense was the request for an interview accompanied by threat of any kind whatsoever,
whether direct or indirect, open or veiled.
It was for the sake of avoiding the slightest suspicion of threat that the
proceedings of the informal conference were made confidential. It was a public
misfortune that the present code of conduct of newspapers not only permitted, but
seemed even to applaud the gaining of confidential information by hook or crook,
and gave it publicity.
That at an informal conference many things were said in connection with the
possibilities that might arise if the interview was not granted or if granted, proved
infructuous, could not in any way be interpreted as threat. The relevant fact was that
his request for interview carried with it no condition.

The Bombay Chronicle, 31-7-1933

368. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
July 30, 1933
CHI. MIRA,

I am writing this at the Ashram. It is now 8.45 p.m. I hope you
were not over-excited after the interview.1 You have to put on more
weight if you can do so without being ill.
Now that the Ashram is disbanded, you will fall back upon
Ranchhodbhai for your needs. I have spoken to him.
I must not 2 write more as I have little time at my disposal and
my fingers won’t give me much more work for the night.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6284. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9750

369. TELEGRAM TO SILAM
[Before July 31, I933]3
MR. S ILAM
S ECRETARY, L OKAMANYA MEMORIAL C OMMITTEE
DEEPEST REGRET UNABLE UNVEIL STATUE MYSELF. NO HOMAGE TOO
GREAT AT THIS JUNCTURE FOR ONE WHO GAVE US SWARAJYA
MANTRA.

GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 21417
1
2
3

Gandhiji had met Mirabehn at Sabarmati Jail earlier.
The source has “now”.
The telegram appeared in Gujarat Samachar, 31-7-1933.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

297

370. LETTER TO COLLECTOR OF AHMEDABAD1
July 14, 1933
You had already given me permission to take away such books
as I wanted. Would it be in order for me to take away all the books
from the Vidyapith building including the bookshelves in which they
are kept? As you know, it has been decided to hand over the books in
the Sabarmati Ashram for public use. It is the intention of the trustees
of the Vidyapith to hand over the Vidyapith library also in a like
manner. Hence my question.2
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, Vol. Il, p. 161

371. LETTER TO N. R. MALKANI
July 31, 1933
MY DEAR MALKANI,

I can say neither yes nor no off-hand. You will have to judge
for yourself when you cannot help plunging into the fire. You should
therefore always prepare a safe substitute for yourself. Am I clear?
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 899

372. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
July 31, 1933
DEAR BH-R-R-R3 ,

What nonsense! You had a perfect right to explode as you did.
The prolonged discussions were enough to try anybody’s nerves. But
I never doubted your capacity and willingness for suffering when the
occasion arose. Do take full rest and plunge when the time comes.
This time it is going to be a long-drawn-out affair. That does not
1

In the source, Narahari Parikh explains that this letter was drafted for D. B.
Kalelkar who had sent it “after arriving in Ahmedabad on July 31”.
2
According to Narahari Parikh, the Collector had said in his reply “that there
was no objection to the books and such shelves as are not fixtures in the building
being removed”.
3
This was a form of greeting between Gandhiji and the addressee.

298

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

matter. But it gives one breathing time. Once in, however, there should
be no rest after. That is the ideal.
Love to you all.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI

[PS.]
Good-bye. I expect to find myself H.M.’s guest before
tomorrow dawns on me.
From a photostat: S.N. 9585

373. LETTER TO PREMI JAIRAMDAS
July 31, 1933
CHI. PREMA,

I do not get letters from you these days. Tell your father1 that if
Shri Aney goes to jail and he becomes the president and if he accepts
my views about dictators, he should abolish the post of Dictator and
those of Provincial Dictators.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: C. W. 11041. Courtesy: Arjun Jairamdas

374. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[July 31, 1933] 2
CHI. NARANDAS,

Your responsibilities are heavy indeed. But I see that God gives
you the strength to meet them.
Bhai Apte’s letter is enclosed. I knew that some correspondence
was going on with Sharja. She has asked for freedom. Have a talk with
her and see if you can take the responsibility. If she observes
discipline, I don’t see any harm in accepting responsibility for her.
Mahadev is likely to be arrested at the same time as I am. Even
if that happens, the programme should remain unchanged. Anybody
1

Jairamdas Doulatram
According to Bapuna Patro-9: Shri Narandas Gandhine, Pt. II, the letter was
written before Gandhiji’s arrest at midnight on this date.
2

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

299

who is free tomorrow should discuss all the matters with Jamnalalji. He
is not to court arrest just now. He should take possession of the
Ashram funds. Any secret funds which he finds should be kept
openly. I have looked into the accounts and find that there are no
sums which the Government can confiscate. All such sums which we
had have already been spent. They represented the contributions for
satyagrahis. All the same, the Government is welcome to confiscate
whatever there is. All sums are earmarked for specific purposes.
If Bali comes there, have a talk with her and come to a clear
understanding. If Anasuyabehn shows the slightest reluctance, Manu
should go to Wardha. If she is very eager to go to Rajkot, let her do
so.
So far as I know, Keshu will definitely go to Wardha. Santok
also wants to go there. She wants to take Radha with her and hopes to
do to the best of her ability any work which Jamnalalji might give her.
Discuss this with her fully.
Send away Balbhadra to Da[kshina] Mu[rti]. Since Rama Joshi
has forbidden Dhiru Joshi, make what arrangements you think proper
for him. Probably Ramnarayan will keep him till you decide finally.
Rama Joshi will have to be given fare to Poona and back. Ask her. See
that she is not displeased. Totaramji should look after the Ashram for
some time. After that, even if the Government does not take
possession of it he should abandon it.
Prabhavati should be given what she requires for going to
Banaras or Bihar.
I don’t remember anything more just now. If you wish to ask
about anything, you may.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8391. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

300

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

375. STATEMENT BEFORE DISTRICT MAGISTRATE 1 ,
AHMEDABAD
August 1, 1933
There has never been the slightest desire on my part to disturb
the public peace, as I think. In my opinion, I have never done a single
thing consciously to disturb the public peace. On the contrary, I make
bold to say that I have made the best endeavour possible to promote
public peace and I can show several instances in which I have attained
very considerable success in preserving and promoting public peace.
Being a lover of peace all my life, nothing can be remoter from my
thought than to disturb public peace.
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(11), Pt. II, pp. 263-5

376. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
C ENTRAL P RISON,
S ABARMATI ,

August 1, 1933
CHI. AMALA,

You must shed your strange and embarrassing manners.
Effusiveness is no mark of true devotion. True devotion works
stealthily. You will not be fit for Harijan work if you do not
concentrate and learn to use your hands well. Your spinning is most
clumsy. I hope you do not mind my speaking or writing as I feel.
Pure love has to feel harsh at times.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

1

J. B. Irwin; the statement was made under section 3(2) of the Bombay Act
XVI of 1932.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

301

377. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
August 1, 1933
1

I hope you have settled down to work. You will not wait for
approach from but you yourself will approach the members of the
family and make yourself at home with everybody. I would like you
to express your wants to Nalinibehn. You will not on any account
endanger your health.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Please share this with Duncan.
From a photostat: G.N. 6004. Also C.W. 3330. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

378. LETTER TO ADVANI2
August 1, 1933
DEAR MAJOR ADVANI,

You might know that before my discharge, owing to my fast,
from the Yeravda Central Prison in May last, I was permitted to do
Harijan work and thereanent to see freely visitors and equally freely to
receive and send letters, to have a typist and to receive newspapers,
magazines and other literature. I hope that I would be given the same
facilities now. I may state that a weekly newspaper called Harijan is
issued at Poona and it is necessary for me to send matter for the paper
and otherwise instruct the Editor. I have detained in Ahmedabad the
typist I brought from Poona. I have understood from you that you
have received no instructions from the Government as yet in this
matter. Will you please obtain the necessary instructions by wire?3
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3893; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800 (40) (14), Pt. V, p. 85
1

After the disbandment of the Sabarmati Ashram the addressee had gone to the
Ashram at Wardha.
2
Superintendent of Ahmedabad Central Prison
3
This and the correspondence which followed up to August 16, 1933 were
published in The Hindu, 19-8-1933.

302

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

379. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
August 1, 1933
CHI. RAMA,

I still feel sorry that I could not meet you a second time. Since
there are no women in the Ashram, I have asked Vinabehn 1 to make
careful arrangements for looking after you. I hope, therefore, that
everything is all right. Your reply to me may be dictated. I am afraid
that the message which I sent regarding Dhiru was rather harsh, but I
had no option. About your travelling expenses, ask Chimanlal. I don’t
expect any difficulty.
Dhiru and Balbhadra have gone to Bhavnagar. I certainly hope
that they will behave well there.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I have also sent messages to Anandi, Bachu, Sharda and
Vanamala and asked them to go and inquire after you.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5355

380. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

August 3, 1933
S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
HOME DEPARTMENT
DEAR SIR,

What purports to be an authentic report in The Times of India
dated the 2nd instant, says that I am to be released after being served
with an order 2 which will restrict my movements to Poona and
preclude any activities connected with the civil disobedience
movement. It then goes on: “Should he ignore this order he will be
re-arrested.” If the report be true, I would like to say, in order to save
1

A German lady who was working as a nurse in V. S. Hospital,
Ahmedabad
2
Vide Appendix “Order Restraining Gandhiji’s Movements”, before
18-8-1933; also the following item.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

303

Government possible, unnecessary embarrassment, and to conserve
my energy, which I am still regaining since the breaking of the fast,
that in accordance with my belief in civil disobedience, I shall be
unable to conform to the order reported to be under contemplation. If
the object be to secure my conviction I have no doubt that the
sweeping powers possessed by Government enable them to do so
without going through the vexatious procedure described in the
above-mentioned report.
I gratefully observe that Government have kept Sjt. Mahadev
Desai with me. He therefore desires me to say that civil disobedience is
as much a life-principle with him as with me, and that he can no more
refrain than I can from preaching or practising it.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3894; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800 (40) (14), Pt. V, p. 37

381. STATEMENT BEFORE DISTRICT MAGISTRATE POONA1
August 3, 1933
I have already this morning handed to Col. Martin,
Superintendent, Yeravda Central Prison, a letter 2 addressed to the
Secretary, Home Department, on this subject. This gives my view on
the subject and I have nothing further to add.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 9724; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40)(14), Pt. V, p. 75

1

After hearing the directions proposed to be issued under Section 4 of Act XVI
of 1932 which was read out to him by D. Maclachlan, District Magistrate,
Poona
2
Vide the preceding item.

304

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

382. STATEMENT1 DISOBEYING RESTRAINT
ORDER
August 4, 1933
I have received copy of this order2. I regret to have to say that I
shall be unable to conform to it.
M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(14), Pt. V, p. 67

383. TRIAL AT POONA3
August 4, 1933
After the Magistrate had explained the circumstances under which the trial was
taking place, Gandhiji suggested that as he intended to plead guilty to the charge,
witnesses might not be examined. But the Magistrate informed Gandhiji that the
procedure required him to record some evidence.
GANDHIJI: I think in 1922, when I pleaded guilty all evidence was
dispensed with.
MAGISTRATE:

It is very kind of you. I understand what you say. It will of course

simplify matters, but it is my duty to record some evidence. But I shall reduce it as
much as possible. . . .4
Asked by the Court if he wished to cross examine the witness, Gandhiji
1

Given before R. V. Martin, the Superintendent, Yeravda Central Prison
Vide Appendix “Order Restraining Gandhiji’s Movements”, before
18-8-1933. Gandhiji broke the order forthwith and was re-arrested and taken back to
Yeravda Jail for trial; vide the following item.
3
Gandhiji, on his release at 9 a.m., was served with an order to remain within
Poona city limits. He was, within an hour, re-arrested for disobeying the order and
taken to Yeravda Jail for trial, which began at 3.15 p.m. before Hyam S. Israel,
Additional District Magistrate, Poona.
4
Then, F.W.O’gorman, District Superintendent of Police, the first prosecution witness, narrated the events which led to Gandhiji’s arrest.
2

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

305

replied in the negative. . . .1
Gandhiji declined to cross-examine this witness also saying:

No, thanks.2
To a question put by the Court, Gandhiji stated that his age was 64, and that he
was a Hindu by caste.
M.

What is your occupation?

G.

(Hesitatingly) I am by occupation a spinner, a weaver and a

farmer.
M.

Your residence?

G.

Yeravda Jail now. (Laughter)

M.

Now, of course, but otherwise?

G.

Otherwise, Sabarmati in Ahmedabad district.

M.

Have you anything to say regarding the prosecution evidence recorded?

G. I think that the statements that several prosecution witnesses
have made are quite correct.
Gandhiji, proceeding, stated that he desired to make a brief statement as to
why he had committed a breach of the order. The court consenting, he dictated
off-hand a brief statement in slow and measured tones. He stated:

I would like to make a brief statement as to why I have
committed what must be described as a wilful and deliberate breach of
orders of the Government of Bombay. It cannot be a matter of
pleasure to me to commit a breach of orders of a constituted
authority. I am a lover of peace, and I regard myself a good citizen
voluntarily tendering obedience to the laws of the State to which I
may belong. But there are occasions in the lifetime of a citizen when it
becomes his painful duty to disobey laws and orders of his State. As is
well known, such a painful duty came upon me in 1919 and I have
not only regarded it as my duty to offer civil disobedience but also to
preach it to others.
1

Lt.-Col. Martin, Superintendent, Yeravda Jail, the second witness to be
examined, stated that it was he who served the order on Gandhiji. Then, Assistant
Superintendent of Police, the third witness, deposed that Gandhiji and Mahadev Desai
were found at 9.40 a.m. still within Yeravda limits having gone out of the jail in a
private taxi. On being told to quit the place at once, they refused to do so. After ten
minutes, they were reminded of the order, and on their refusal to comply with it, they
were both re-arrested by the witness and brought back to Yeravda Jail.
2
The taxi driver in whose taxi Gandhiji drove to Golf Iinks was the last
witness. He corroborated the other witnesses.

306

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

This law or Act under which I have been tried, is a glaring
instance in proof of my contention that the system under which India
is being governed today is not merely unjust, but is dragging her
down economically and morally.
I have had recently a spell of freedom and was in the midst of
people and had an opportunity of coming into contact with a very
large number of men and women. I made what was to me a most
painful discovery, that men high and low, educated and uneducated,
rich and poor, were demoralized, and were living in a perpetual fear of
loss of liberty and their possessions.
It was a trial for me to live in the midst of that atmosphere.
Being by nature from my childhood a confirmed believer in the
methods of non-violence, I sought shelter in self-suffering such as
might fall to my lot. That was the only way in which I could relieve
myself of some of the agony that was burning in me.
It is for reasons such as this that I am offering all resistance to
this system of Government—a resistance that is within my capacity
and resistance that a peaceful man like me could offer.
One word more. I think, you, Sir, or Government would, after
sentencing me, classify me. I must state that I intensely dislike the
procedure of classification of prisoners into A, B and C classes. I have
no desire whatsoever to enjoy the special comforts to which other
fellow-prisoners might not be entitled. I would like to be classified
amongst those whom the Government may consider to be the lowest. I
would like, in conclusion, to state that the authorities with whom I had
come in contact during these few days have treated me with courtesy
and consideration for which I am thankful to them.
After making the above statement, Gandhiji read through it as recorded by the
Magistrate and stated that it was all right.
The Magistrate then framed a charge under Section 14 of the Bombay Special
Powers Act 1932, for intentionally disobeying an order of the Government under
Section 4 of the same Act requiring him among other things to remove himself before
9.30 a.m. outside Yeravda village limits. Asked if he pleaded guilty, Gandhiji replied
in the affirmative.
Gandhiji also stated that he did not want to call defence witnesses. At this
stage the police prosecutor said that considering Gandhiji’s age he did not press for a
deterrent sentence.
The Magistrate delivered judgment and observed that it had been proved that
Gandhiji disobeyed an order of the Government. As such he convicted him under
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

307

Section 14 of the Bombay Special Powers Act of 1932 and sentenced him to one
year’s simple imprisonment....
M. I am passing a light sentence considering your age and the present state of
your health and also because the prosecution has not pressed for a deterrent sentence.

This concluded the trial and Gandhiji rose after bowing to the Magistrate and
was taken by the jailor to his cell. Gandhiji has been placed in ‘A’
class. 1

The Bombay Chronicle, 5-8-1933

384. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY, GOVERNMENT
OF BOMBAY
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

August 4, 1933
S ECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT
HOME DEPARTMENT
DEAR SIR,

On the day of my admission to the Ahmedabad Central Prison, I
applied through its Superintendent for permission to resume
anti-untouchability work as before my late fast. There is no reply to it
as yet. Government know that I have been controlling the policy of
the weekly newspaper Harijan and its Gujarati edition, and partly also
the Hindi edition. This is only part of the anti-untouchability work I
am doing in fulfilment of my promise to myself and the Harijans as
an integral part of the Yeravda Pact. This work may not be interrupted
except at the peril of my life. I would therefore esteem a reply by
Monday next, so as to enable me to attend to next week’s Harijan and
to deal with certain important matters that were left pending at the
time of my arrest.2
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3895

1
Mahadev Desai was then brought before the Magistrate. He was sentenced to
one year’s simple imprisonment and was placed in ‘B’ class.
2
Vide also “Letter to Home Secretary, Government of Bombay”, 6-8-1933.

308

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

385. ETHICS OF FASTING
A learned correspondent from the West thus writes about my
late fast:
I have read your reply1 to a correspondent querying the ethics of your
fast. I don’t quite see your point. You seem to think that the fact of your
suffering removes all offence from such a deed; but every man who does wrong
suffers—according to your reasoning, then, there is no such thing as
wrongdoing. If, instead of identifying yourself with your body, you, for a
moment, regard your body objectively, is it not then clear to you that violence
to or unnatural treatment of that body is as much an infringement of the law of
ahimsa as such unnatural or violent treatment of any other extraneous object?
The fact that good men in other ages have contemplated and even perpetrated
such fasts is no argument.

This argument has been advanced before, but not so seriously as
has been done by my correspondent. As I hold that fasting as a
powerful means of purification ought to occupy an important part in
the life of the human family, it is best to examine the argument.
The fact of a fast even by the offender does not remove the
offence from his deed, much less can it do so when it is vicarious.
What the fast does is to prevent repetition of evil. Most, if not all, evil
comes from attachment to the flesh. If, therefore, the flesh is
mortified, attachment to it is likely to decrease. No doubt this is
dependent on the motive with which a fast is undertaken. There is a
great deal of truth in the saying that man becomes what he eats. The
grosser the food, the grosser the body. Plain living is said to go hand
in hand with high thinking. But plain living is only a few steps
removed from fasting. Plain living may itself be said to be a mode of
fasting. Complete fasting is a forcible reminder of the fact that ‘man
does not live by bread alone’.
‘But assume that there is some force in the argument you
advance for the offender’s fast, what about vicarious fasting?’ might
say the correspondent. The answer is that just as there is identity of
spirit, so is there identity of matter and in essence the two are
inseparable. Spirit is matter rarefied to the utmost limit. Hence,
whatever happens to the body must affect the whole of matter and the
whole of spirit. It is within the experience of us all that often
wrongdoers are touched by the loving acts of their friends and
1

Vide “An American Criticism”, 22-7-1933.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

309

relatives especially when they consider the latter to be better than they.
Fasting for the sake of loved ones is a forcible and unmistakable
expression of love and therefore affects those for whose sake it is
undertaken. Those whose love encircles the whole of life cannot but
affect the whole creation by a supreme act of love.
If the necessity of fasting is admitted, the argument that it is
unnatural or an act of violence to one’s own body falls to pieces. Just
as a fast for regaining lost health is neither unnatural nor criminal
self-torture, so is not a fast for purification of self or others.
But all my argument is useless if it cannot be sustained by
practice. And if there is any soundness in it, the unbroken practice of
all the sages and others from time immemorial clinches the argument.
Sceptics, however, need not rely either upon argument or past
testimony. Let them acquaint themselves with the rules and the science
of fasting for purification and then test its efficacy themselves. That
fasting does not appeal to people brought up in the midst of the
dazzling materialism is an additional reason for people like my
correspondent not to reject summarily one of the most potent
methods of purification and penance.
Harijan, 5-8-1933

386. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
August 5, 1933
DEAR COL. MARTIN,

You were good enough this morning to tell me that according to
rules I had to pay for any rations I needed outside the scale ordinarily
provided for prisoners and that therefore I should tell you what I
considered to be my minimum wants. I may say in the first instance
that I do not desire to pay for any extra food that I may need. I was
admitted as a convict in 1922 and I was not called upon to pay for
anything in the shape of food or otherwise, but I recognize that
Government may adopt a different policy this time, and if they do,
that would be no cause for complaint by me. I should be satisfied with
whatever food was provided so long as it did not interfere with the
restrictions that I have observed now for many years. The food that I
need and has been provided hitherto by the prison authorities is
goat’s milk, fresh and dried fruit, fresh vegetables, and, whenever I
have needed it, bread.
310

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

You have asked me also to tell you what facilities I should like
in the shape of newspapers, etc. I do not know that I have any choice
in the matter. I must therefore leave it to the Government to decide
what they would allow. As to correspondence and visits however, I
have to write some business letters in connection with the disbandment
of the Ashram, the affairs of the estate of the late Dr. P. J. Mehta and
other social and religious obligations and to have visits thereanent. I
would like the Government to extend to me the same facilities that
they have given me hitherto.
There are however two things which are vital needs, just as much
as food for the body. One of these is the conduct of the
anti-untouchability movement on which I have already addressed the
Government. The second is humanitarian contact with companions
who are fellow prisoners. This last was recognized even during myfirst
incarceration as a convict and has continued ever since. I hope that the
practice will be so continued during the present incarceration.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3896; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40)(14, 1, Pt. V, pp. 87-9

387. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
August 6, 1933
S ECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT
HOME DEPARTMENT
P OONA
DEAR SIR,

Government’s reply that my request for permission to resume
anti-untouchability work is under consideration but that decision
cannot be given by Monday next has been just conveyed to me (10
a.m.).
In thanking Government for the reply, I would like to state that
there are three matters which do not admit of delay if my work is not
to suffer seriously.
The Editor-in-Chief, Sjt. Sastri, of Harijan is bed-ridden and on
sick leave in Madras. The paper is in charge of two men untrained for
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

311

the work. For last week’s issue, I had made arrangements beforehand
and sent some manuscripts from Sabarmati last Monday. Whilst
therefore Government are considering my request, I should be
permitted to see Sjt. Anand Hingorani or Kaka Kalelkar two persons
in charge, and to send manuscripts for next week’s issue.
The second is a letter1 from Dr. Tagore which was given to me
on Friday last. I enclose it herewith. It demands an immediate reply.
The third is this: I have four Europeans under training for
Harijan service. They were at the Sabarmati Ashram. They are Miss
Mary Barr, N. Devi, Dr. Margarete Spiegel and Mr. Duncan
Greenlees. They have been sent to Wardha where they would be in
unfamiliar surroundings. N. Devi and Dr. Spiegel are comparative
strangers to India and otherwise require delicate attention. I should
like to be able to write to them and to Sjt. Vinoba who is in charge of
Wardha Ashram and who is to look after them.
There are other matters no less important, but which can await a
few days’ delay. I venture to hope therefore that pending their
decision, Government will grant me by tomorrow the facilities
requested about the three matters I have mentioned.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3897; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(0)(14), Pt. V, pp. 89-91

1

Dated July 28, 1933; vide 1st footnote to “Letter to Rabindranath Tagore”,
7-8-1933.

312

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

388. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

August 7, 1933
DEAR COL. MARTIN,

Will you kindly let me have a copy of the Government’s reply
read to me last night or let me make a copy?
In accordance with the reply to the first-request, I am now ready
with the manuscript for the Harijan. Will you kindly therefore ring up
Sjt. Kodandarao, Servants of India Society, and ask him to send
Kakasaheb Kalelkar, and if he is not available, Sjt. Anand Hingorani,
at 3 o’clock today, so as to enable me to hand over the manuscript
and give instructions?
Yours sincerely,
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No. 20-XIII, 1933

389. LETTER TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE
August 7, 1933
DEAR GURUDEV,

Your letter1 of the 28th July enclosing copy of your cable to Sir
Nripen Sarkar on the Yeravda Pact was handed to me here on the 4th
instant. Evidently your letter crossed mine which I wrote2 whilst I was
in Ahmedabad. For the time being I am unable however to send you
anything but this bare acknowledgement.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 4640
1

Rabindranath Tagore had written: “This is the copy of the message which,
with very great pain and reluctance, I cabled to Sir Ripen and from which you will
know how I feel about this Poona Pact. I am fully convinced that if it is accepted
without modification it will be a source of perpetual communal jealousy leading to
constant disturbance of peace and a fatal break in the spirit of mutual co-operation in
our province” (Home Department, Printed Political File No. 3/17/33, 1933, pp. 16-7.
Courtesy: National Archives of India). For the cable sent by Rabindranath Tagore to
Sir Nripendranath Sircar, vide Appendix “Cable from Rabindranath Tagore to Sir
Nripendranath Sircar”, after 22-7-1933.
2
Vide “Letter to Rabundranath Tagore”, 27-7-1933.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

313

390. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
August 8, 1933
S ECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT
HOME DEPARTMENT, P OONA
DEAR SIR,

I have to thank you for the very prompt reply to my letter of the
6th containing three requests. I have thankfully taken advantage,
pending orders on my general request about Harijan work, of the
permission granted on the first request, and of the very limited
permission granted on the second and the third requests. I may
however state that in making my requests I have not been influenced
by the fact of my being classified as an ‘A’ class prisoner. Having
lodged my protest at my trial against classification, I did not and do
not want to make unnecessary fuss about it, and I know that it is open
to me not to avail myself of any of the privileges allowed to ‘A’-class
prisoners. Moreover, I am quite aware that I allow myself to enjoy
physical facilities not granted by Government to other prisoners of
even ‘A’ class. I do so not because I have been classified ‘A’, but
because those facilities are of physical or medical necessity for me.
But I need other facilities which are higher than these and without
which life itself becomes an intolerable burden. They arise from the
cravings of the soul. But I am anxious as a prisoner to avoid all
controversy with Government. I would ask them therefore to be as
considerate in regard to my supra-physical needs, as they have been in
regard to my physical needs.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3898; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40)(14), Pt. V, p. 93

314

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

391. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
August 10, 1933
S ECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT
HOME DEPARTMENT1
P OONA ,
DEAR SIR,

I regret to have to remind you of my letters regarding Harijan
work. Kakasaheb Kalelkar whom I met on Monday last told me that
there were urgent letters in the matter awaiting me in the post. There
are pressing Harijan problems demanding my immediate attention. I
do hope therefore that I shall be favoured with the final decision
before or on Monday next at the latest.
I attach hereto a copy 1 of the Government of India’s orders in
the matter. In my humble opinion they are unequivocal.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3899; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40)(14), Pt. V, p. 95

392. TRUE INWARDNESS
An Arya Samajist writes a long letter in Hindi. Here is the gist:
1. Should Harijans in order to rise in the social scale
remain Hindus or will it serve the same purpose if they became
Christians or Mussalmans?
2. Is not untouchability determined merely by the name of
the caste to which one may belong?
3. If untouchability is to be removed from Hinduism, why
not invite untouchables to join the Arya Samaj?
4. What is the speciality of Hinduism for which a Hindu
need cling to it?
In my opinion these questions betray the ignorance of the
questioner about the true scope of the reform that is being attempted.
1

Received by Gandhiji on November 3, 1932.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

315

The pages of the Harijan make it clear from week to week that it is the
so-called higher classes that have to reform themselves by getting rid
of untouchability, of high-and-lowness. It is they who have to repent
and purify themselves. They have to come in contact with Harijans not
for the sake of the latter, not as their patrons but for the sake of
themselves and as the servants of Harijans. Therefore the object is not
served by Harijans forsaking Hinduism.
And in my opinion religion is a much deeper thing than the
questioner would allow. It is not a matter of convenience or of
bettering one’s social or material condition. People have been known
to cling to their religion although they have had to face social
ostracism, material ruin and much worse. One’s religion keeps one
true in the face of the greatest adversity. It is the sheet-anchor of
one’s hope in this world and even after. It binds one to one’s God, to
Truth as to nothing else. Therefore, whilst Harijans must know best
what is good for them, I, in their place, could not be satisfied by
change of religion. From the practical point of view, they seem to me
to be so inextricably mixed up with the so-called higher classes that
the vast majority simply cannot help remaining Hindus. It is this
helplessness which lays a double burden upon ‘the higher classes’ of
doing the much belated reparation by regarding them as respected
members of the Hindu family in spite of some of their habits. Indeed,
whatever is evil in their habits is due to the criminal neglect of ‘the
higher classes’. The quickest way to remove the evil is to remove
untouchability and receive them as they are as full-fledged Hindus.
The answer to the second question is in the affirmative. That just
shows how precarious untouchability is. If the Harijans would conceal
their caste name and simply declare themselves as Hindus they will, as
in many cases they do, pass muster except in their immediate
neighbourhood. But from the standpoint that I have suggested, such
subterfuge can only protract the agony. It cannot cure ‘the high
classes’ of the taint of superiority and touch-me-notism .
As to the third question, what I have said above makes it clear
that the admission of Harijans to the Arya Samaj does not solve the
difficulty. The hearts of millions of non-Arya Samajists will not be
touched by the Harijans’ acceptance of the Arya Samaj. It is the
‘superior’ Hindu heart that has to melt. It is the whole of Hinduism
that has to be purified and purged. What I am aiming at, what I hope
the Servants of Untouchables Society is aiming at, is the greatest
316

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

reform of the age. That it may take time to achieve it, does not much
matter. The reform is assured, if there are reformers enough who will
not be baffled by any difficulty and will not lower the flag on any
account whatsoever. They will not, if the conviction has gone home
that for Hinduism to live, untouchability has got to go.
The fourth is an invidious question. Perhaps it is also profitless.
But I must answer it, if only to show what I mean by religion. The
closest, though very incomplete, analogy for religion I can find is
marriage. It is or used to be an indissoluble tie. Much more so is the
tie of religion. And just as a husband does not remain faithful to his
wife, or wife to her husband, because either is conscious of some
exclusive superiority of the other over the rest of his or her sex but
because of some indefinable but irresistible attraction, so does one
remain irresistibly faithful to one’s own religion and find full
satisfaction in such adhesion. And just as a faithful husband does not
need, in order to sustain his faithfulness, to consider other women as
inferior to his wife, so does not a person belonging to one religion
need to consider others to be inferior to his own. To pursue the
analogy still further, even as faithfulness to one’s wife does not
presuppose blindness to her shortcomings, so does not faithfulness to
one’s religion presuppose blindness to the shortcomings of that
religion. Indeed faithfulness, not blind adherence, demands a keener
perception of shortcomings and therefore a livelier sense of the
proper remedy for their removal. Taking the view I do of religion, it is
unnecessary for me to examine the beauties of Hinduism. The reader
may rest assured that I am not likely to remain Hindu, if I was not
conscious of its many beauties. Only for my purpose they need not be
exclusive. My approach to other religions, therefore, is never as a
fault-finding critic but as a devotee hoping to find the like beauties in
the other religions and wishing to incorporate in my own the good I
may find in them and miss in mine.
Harijan, 12-8-1933

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

317

393. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
August 14, 1933
S ECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT
HOME DEPARTMENT
P OONA
DEAR SIR,

It is now noon of Monday, and I am yet without any answer to
my request for resumption of Harijan work on the same terms as
before my fast. This request was first conveyed on the 1st instant
from the Central Prison at Ahmedabad and has since been thrice
repeated.1
The strain of deprivation of this work is becoming unbearable.
If therefore I cannot have the permission by noon next Wednesday, I
must deny myself all nourishment from that time, save water and salts.
That is the only way I can fulfil my vow and also relieve myself
somewhat of the strain mentioned above. I do not want the proposed
suspension of nourishment in any way to act as a pressure on the
Government. Life ceases to interest me if I may not do Harijan service
without let or hindrance. As I have made it clear in my previous
correspondence, and as the Government of India have admitted
permission to render that service is implied in the Yeravda Pact to
which the British Government is a consenting party, in so far as its
consent was necessary. Therefore I do indeed want the permission, but
only if the Government believe that justice demands it and not
because I propose to deprive myself of food if it is not granted. That
deprivation is intended purely for my consolation.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3901; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40)(14), Pt. V, p. 97

1

318

On August 4, 6, 8 and 10.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

394. LETTER TO R.. V. MARTIN
August 14, 1933
DEAR COL. MARTIN,

Will you please read the enclosed1 and forward it as early as you
can to the proper quarters? That is of course if no reply has been
received to my request regarding Harijan work.
Yours sincerely,
Home Department, Government of Bombay, I.G.P. File No. 20-XIII, 1933

395. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
August 15, 1933
DEAR COL. MARTIN,

With reference to the two communications received by you from
Government, I beg to state as follows:
1. As to the reply to my letter 2 of the 10th instant addressed to
the Government, whilst I am thankful for the permission to hand over
the Harijan manuscript to the acting Editor and give instructions, this
permission does not meet immediate requirements. It is difficult
without being in touch with correspondence from day to day to write
usefully for the Harijan. Again, to be in touch with the correspondents on untouchability is just as urgent as editing the Harijan. For
instance a difficult experiment under my supervision is being carried
on in connection with a Harijan school. I have to be in contact withthe
teacher if the school is to be a success. I have put some Ashram girls
and boys in a Harijan boarding house, an experiment probably the
first of its kind. It cannot go on without my constant attention. This
was started on the eve of my arrest. These are but two out of the many
instances I can cite, of matters demanding my personal attention.
The least therefore that I require at once is:
(a) the delivery of all the correspondence in your possession
with permission to reply to so much of it as may have any connection
with untouchability;
1
2

Vide the preceding item.
Vide “Letter to Home Secretary, Government of Bombay”, 10-8-1933.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

319

(b) access to, and disposal of, all correspondence received at the
Harijan office;
(c) access to newspapers received by you or the Harijan office
so as to enable me to deal with points on untouchability that may have
been discussed in those papers.
If the permission is given on these three matters, pending final
orders on my request, I shall not need to fast from tomorrow noon, as
stated in my letter1 to Government yesterday. If it can be obtained in
the course of the day, I would like to see Kakasaheb Kalelkar or Sjt.
Anand Hingorani today. I should be able then to hand over some
manuscript to go on with.
2. What I have said above perhaps answers the Government’s
letter regarding the disposal of my correspondence in your
possession. I have no desire to receive a fortnightly letter under the
classification rules. The bulk of my correspondence is likely to have a
bearing on untouchability and would demand my personal attention
or instructions. If the correspondence is handed to me I would gladly
return that which may not pertain to untouchability. There are likely
to be letters concerning business affairs. I should take the Government
instructions regarding such letters. The fact of the matter is that I have
many public activities besides the political, and as I told you
personally this morning, in my opinion the just way to deal with me is,
after insuring my strict abstention from participation directly or
indirectly in civil disobedience, to give me the facilities mentioned in
my letter2 to you of the 5th instant.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G. N. 3902 also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40)(14), Pt. V, pp. 99-101

1
2

320

Vide “Letter to Home Secretary, Government of Bombay”, 14-8-1933.
Vide “Letter to R. V. Martin”, 5-8-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

396. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
August 16, 1933
DEAR COL. MARTIN,

Since there is no reply to the request contained in my letter1 of
yesterday, my fast begins from noon today as already intimated in my
letter. Will you therefore kindly give the necessary orders for not
sending the goats to be milked, and not sending to the market for
sweet and sour limes?
Though the fast begins, if there is no objection kindly telephone
to Kakasaheb Kalelkar to come to the prison today as early as he can,
so as to enable me to hand him the manuscript for Harijan, which is
already prepared and to give him instructions.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3903; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40)(14), Pt. V, p. 101

397. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
August 16, 1933
DEAR COL. MARTIN,

I see that I have hastily and stupidly told you to restore the goats
to me. It shows how disinclined I am to starve. But on reading the
notes of the orders2 you have left with me, they are so far short of the
original orders of the Government of India and of my requirements
that I must not be precipitate in breaking the fast. If the Government
wish to go back upon those orders I shall be sorry, but It may not
1

Vide the preceding item.
“On August 16, Gandhiji was informed that it had been decided that he would
be granted the following special facilities for purposes of work strictly confined to
anti-untouchability: (1) to receive newspapers and periodicals, but not to be allowed
interviews for publication in the Press, whether with Press correspondents or others;
(2) to see not more than two visitors a day; (3) to send instructions or contributions
to the Editor of Harijan three times a week, and a limited number of letters to other
correspondents and (4) to have at his disposal a convict-typist, books and
newspapers, needed for Harijan work” (The Hindu; 19-8-1933). Vide also the
following item.
2

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

321

work under the new orders which are a manifest departure from the
original and which seem to me to be grudgingly given. I observe that
you cannot even let me have the letters already in your possession and
to hand the manuscript to the acting Editor for this week’s Harijan. It
pains me to have to write this letter, but it will give much greater pain
if I break the fast now and have to enter upon a prolonged
controversy with the Government on many matters that need
elucidation. I miss Government response to the meticulous care with
which I am endeavouring to observe jail discipline and as a prisoner
tender co-operation which as a citizen outside prison walls I consider
it a religious duty to withhold. I have read your notes three times and
each reading has increased my grief to discover that Gover-nment
cannot appreciate the desperate need there is for me to do Har-ijan
work without let or hindrance. Much therefore as I am disinclined to
continue the fast, I feel that I must go through the agony if I cannot
serve the Harijan cause without the tremendous handicap which it
seems to me the orders conveyed by you put upon it.
Will you therefore please withdraw the milk and the fruit already
received by me, and accept my apology for having hurriedly told you
that I would break the fast?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3904; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40)(14), Pt. V, p. 103

398. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
August 17, 1933
DEAR COL. MARTIN,

With reference to our conversation of this morning, before I can
break my fast the following points require to be settled:
l. I should see Kakasaheb Kalelkar or Sjt. Anand Hingorani
before 12 o’clock today for handling manuscript and giving.
instructions.
2. All the letters and newspapers in your possession should be
handed to me, subject to the condition mentioned in my letter1 of 15th
instant.
1

322

Vide “Letter to R. V. Martin”, 15-8-1933..
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

3. The notes1 you showed me bind me to the non-publication of
interviews in the Press. This is a physical impossibility as I can have no
control over persons who would see me. It is not contemplated that I
would only see those who would be subject to my discipline. I would
be seeing hot opponents, perhaps more often, than friends.
4. The notes contemplate two visitors a day. I can never conduct
the movement if I am thus restricted. I have to see visitors as they
come if I am to influence them.
5. As a journalist of 29 years’ standing I can say that restriction
as to the sending of instructions to the Editor three times per week is
wholly unworkable, and it is not clear whether the Editor or Editors
are to see me personally or not.
6. The notes contemplate a limited number of letters to other
correspondents. I do not know what the Government have in mind by
the term ‘limited’. I had to send, during the last dispensation, on an
average something like thirty letters a day.
7. There is no mention in the notes about letters. I take it that it
is an unintended omission and that I shall have all the letters and
newspapers, whether received by you or the Harijan office, my work
on them being strictly confined to untouchability.
You will now see what a gulf exists between my requirements
and the concessions the Government are prepared to grant. If the
Government would permit me to handle the tremendous movement of
anti-untouchability affecting millions of human beings, they should
give full effect to the Government of India orders under the last
dispensation. There was in them a frank recognition of my submission
and therefore a full response to it. I miss it altogether in the notes. So
far as I am aware I have given no cause whatever for change of policy.
If permission is given as requested by me, I can give my absolute
assurance that I shall take no undue advantage of it, I shall confine
myself strictly to anti-untouchability work and shall endeavour to the
best of my ability to consult the convenience of the prison staff.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

323

[PS.]
I take it that the convict-typist is also a shorthand typist, and that,
if everything is satisfactorily settled, I shall have the assistance as
before of Sjt. Mahadev Desai and Chhaganlal Joshi.
M. K. G.
From a photostat: G.N. 3905; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40)(14), Pt. V, pp. 105-7

399. QUANTITY v. QUALITY
There is no doubt that workers in a cause are as a rule tempted
more by quantitative than by qualitative results of their labours. And
though the volume of work done throughout India, as a result of
anti-untouchability movement represented by the Servants of
Untouchables Society, is not by any means unsatisfactory as a whole,
it looks insignificant when it is distributed over the respective
provinces and when it is considered relatively to the goal which is
complete removal of untouchability, that is, of the high-and-lowness
mentality that pervades Hinduism. There was, therefore, despondence
markedly reflected at the meetings of anti-untouchability workers that
were called during my convalescence after the recent fast. I did not
share the despondence myself. For, I had only quality in mind
whereas I saw that the co-workers had consciously or unconsciously
quantity in mind.
I would have one good teacher in preference to fifty indifferent
ones, I would be satisfied with the constant attendance of five children
instead of the sporadic attendance of fifty. I would have five workers
concentrating their attention on compact, small, selected areas rather
than having them to cover large areas to which they could never give
concentrated attention.
If this preference for quality is good, as it is for any movement,
it is especially so for an essentially religious movement like that of
anti-untouchability. In religion, indifference to quality may even lead
to disaster. If teachers are a stop-gap, if school children come when
they like and workers go about from place to place without
establishing personal contact with Harijans, it may be found that both
the Harijans and the caste men may have their hearts untouched at the
end, say, of ten years’ labours, and the result may be a reaction
against the movement on the part both of Harijans and caste men.
324

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

In a religious movement faith plays an important part.
Therefore many factors are necessarily unknown and unknowable. No
one can fathom the movement from time to time as we can most
secular movements in which most factors are known and under
control. If I want to manufacture one million yards of khadi, given the
hands and cotton I would be able to say when I can. But if I have to
touch the hearts of five Hindus and wean them from untouchability, I
should not know when, if at all, I could accomplish the task. I have
simply to work in the belief that my cause being just, if I am a pure
enough person to handle it, I must touch the hearts of the five Hindus
amongst whom I have been called upon to work. I may not, therefore,
have any despondence over my mission nor may I change the venue
of my work, nor ambitiously extend its scope beyond my capacity.
On the contrary, I must believe that not only shall I be able by
gentleness and patience to affect the five fellow Hindus, but that when
I have succeeded with them I shall not be long in succeeding with five
millions. This, and no other, is the meaning of the saying, “Faith can
move mountains” or “To those who work assiduously and in My
name I always grant success”.
Therefore, what we need is boundless faith backed by perfect
purity of character. An impure mind and a religious spirit go ill
together. By purity of character is here meant truth, love and chastity
in thought, word and deed. If we have not these we shall neither move
the caste men nor the Harijans. If we have not this triple purity, not
only shall we fail to steal the hearts of either, but by our failure we
shall discredit not merely ourselves but the great cause we represent.
Hence, I have no hesitation in saying that in our campaign
against untouchability, if we will take care of quality, quantity will take
care of itself. It is hardly necessary to point out that what is said here
about quality applies as well to Harijan workers as to caste workers. If
the former are to carry out an internal moral reformation, I was going
to say, revolution among Harijans, they will do so only by producing
workers of unimpeachable purity and integrity, working with
single-mindedness in limited areas where they can establish personal
contacts.
Harijan, 19-8-1933

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

325

400. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
August 19, 1933
THE S ECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT
HOME DEPARTMENT
P OONA
DEAR SIR,

Col. Martin has kindly given me a copy of your reply 1 to my
letter of the 17th instant addressed to him. I regret to observe that
your reply realizes my worst fears. Where I thought there was a
possibility of a more favourable construction on some of the points,
your reply now makes it clear that there was no warrant for any such
construction. It therefore becomes unnecessary for me to take up the
various points in your letter.
But I have now understood through Mr. Andrews that the
difficulty in the way of Government carrying out the orders of the
Government of India to which I have already referred is that instead
of being a State prisoner I am now a convicted prisoner. If that be the
cause for a radical departure from a policy explicitly laid down by the
Government, not by way of concession, but as the Government of
India have admitted, ‘‘because it is necessary that he (I) should have
freedom in regard to visitors and correspondence on matters strictly
limited to removal of untouchability”, ‘‘there being no restrictions
on publicity”, I cannot understand how what was considered to be
necessary for me becomes any the less necessary now, by reason of
my being a convicted prisoner. Just as Government have recognized
my physical wants and satisfied them in spite of my being a convict,
even so, I venture to submit, do my spiritual wants regarding
untouchability demand full recognition from Government.
The last paragraph of your letter grieves me. The reminder
contained in it comes as an added injury to my wounded soul, for I
have stated to Government more than once that civil disobedience
under circumstances like the present is a part of my creed. But I
recognize that what I consider as a perfectly lawful and moral activity,
2

1

For a summary of this in a cable dated August 18 from Viceroy to Secretary of
State, London, vide Appendix “Excerpts from Viceroy’s Cable to Secretary of State”,
18-8-1933.
2
Vide “Letter to R. V. Martin”, 17-8-1933.

326

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

Government consider as unlawful and probably even immoral. I must
therefore be content to be their prisoner not merely for the natural
term of the present confinement, but for such time as India comes to
her own if I live long enough to see that day—if, that is to say, there is
any possibility still left of Government fulfilling their solemn
obligation and my coming safely out of the ordeal through which I
am going.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3906; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40)(l4), Pt. V, pp. 109-11

401. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN.
August 19, 1933
DEAR COL. MARTIN,

For the last three or four days you have been sending me
mutilated copies of The Times of India. I have surmised that the
mutilations are due to references to my fast. If my surmise is correct, I
venture to think the mutilation is not fair to me. If anything has been
said by or on behalf of Government, I should at least know what it is,
so that I could make my submission to the Government if there was
anything that I might consider unfair in the statements appearing in
the Press. In fairness to all concerned, I would suggest that the full text
of the correspondence beginning from my letter of the 29th
September 1932 addressed to Major Bhandari, with reference to my
request for doing Harijan work, should be published, if it has not
already been done.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3907; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40)(14), Pt. V, p. 113

402. A SILENT WORKER IN THE HARIJAN CAUSE
In the year 1919 when I lay ill in Mani Bhuvan, a well-built
gentleman came to see me. I have a faint recollection that he had
brought along some money too. I asked him whose son he was. He
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

327

replied that he was the son of Hariprasad Desai of Bhavnagar. Hearing
this, I was reminded of the days when my father was alive. Even in my
childhood, I had heard of this well-known family of Bhavnagar.
Hence I said to Bhai Yashwant prasad that our friendship was old
enough to entitle me to exploit him, to which he readily agreed saying
that all that he had was available for my work. I had come to know
about his Barsi mill and other enterprises. The contact then established
became increasingly closer and in the end we became like father and
son. His contribution was always there in all my activities. Whether for
the sake of khadi or any other activities, he always allowed himself to
be exploited. I have never had to beg from him. Time and again, of
his own accord he put sums of money into my hands.
He was a sincere worker for the Harijan cause. He made no
difference between himself and Harijans. When khadi work had just
begun, he first thought of Harijans and he had thought of going to
Bhavnagar to revive the craft of weaving with the help of Harijans.
‘He was aware that the Harijans of Kathiawar were looking around for
a living in Bombay, their craft of weaving having almost died. Here I
have spoken of the time when he had just begun serving Harijans.
And the end of his career was worthy of this beginning. He has never
recognized untouchability. He never had the vanity or the moha that
he belonged to one of the highest ranking and well-known Nagar 1
families. He never indulged in long arguments, his motto was to
quietly render whatever service came his way. I have just received the
news of his passing away. His death is certainly a loss to his family,
but I myself have lost a true comrade. And Harijans have lost a sincere
and silent worker. May God bless his soul and may He give his
children and the other members of the family the wisdom to follow in
his footsteps and carry on his beneficent work.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 20-8-1933

403. TO THE HARIJANS OF GUJARAT
During my last visit to Ahmedabad, I had a good opportunity to
meet Harijan brothers and sisters. I was able to speak to them quite
freely. I repeat here what I expect from them.
1

328

A sub-caste of Brahmins
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

1. The so-called caste Hindus have a personal obligation to fulfil
towards you which they must do unconditionally; it is their
atonement. But, whether or not they atone for their deeds you will still
have much work to do independently and unconditionally. One does
not go to heaven without first dying. Whether in this world or the next,
it is for each one to free oneself from bondage by one’s own effort.
Harijans should not look upon themselves as lowly, weak or crippled.
2. The atonement by caste Hindus is not for your salvation but
for their own and it involves service to you. You should be liberal in
accepting their services. In this way, you will readily overlook any
shortcomings in it. If you are not large-hearted, you will only see their
failings. But I am confident you will never be mean.
3. Magnify your own faults so that they appear to be as big as
mountains and then make constant efforts to overcome them. In it lies
the key to obtaining the rights which you want. Never believe that
since others have the same faults we need not mind our own. No
matter what others do, it is your dharma to overcome the failings
which you find in yourselves. I see no need to recount them all here. I
have often shown them to you, but it should not be necessary for me
or anybody to do so. You will not be able, at the behest of others, to
overcome what you yourselves do not look upon as failings. Hence, it
should suffice to say that you should shake off whatever faults you
can find in yourselves.
I do not write all this as a caste Hindu; as I see it, varnadharma
no longer exists and it cannot be revived by keeping you out of its
fold. However, if varnadharma is to be reprieved in my lifetime, know
my varna to be the same in which you would be placed, because I
claim to have voluntarily become a Harijan. It is by virtue of this
relationship that I entertain the above expectation of you. Please do
fulfil it. I share your misery and, believe me, I shall be happy [only]
when you become happy.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 20-8-1933

404. TO KATHIAWARIS
Generally speaking one province should not be burdened with
the work of another, just as in a well-organized society the burden of
one family’s needs is not borne by another. In accordance with this
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

329

principle, the needs of Kathiawar should be met by Kathiawaris,
whether they happen to live in Kathiawar or elsewhere. Hence the
burden of Harijan work in Kathiawar should be borne by Kathiawaris.
When I visited Ahmedabad for a few days, I met workers connected
with the Harijan Schools and ashrams functioning in Kathiawar. Not a
single school or ashram should be obliged to close down solely for
want of funds. It is a different matter altogether if an institution were
to be closed for the sake of better organization, for the conservation
of our energies, or, for the prevention of unnecessary expenditure. I
have often spoken of my experience that no benevolent work, in fact,
stops for lack of funds. Any work which enlists workers willing to
serve by offering their all, will find money readily coming its way. I
hope workers will regard the service of Harijans in this spirit. It is
universal experience that, in the last analysis, every institution and
every work depends upon the devoted efforts of one individual. This
does not imply that such a person can work single-handed. To
entertain such a thought is only a sign of arrogance, but the world is
so ordered that there can be only one organizer. The world is not
governed by many. The Governor or the Lord of the world, whatever
you call Him, is only one. He has countless men and women workers,
but He calls Himself a servant of servants and does the work of one.
Similarly, it can be said that there can be only one president, secretary
or manager for any work. And, if he does not consider himself the
master but rather the humblest of servants, the work which he has
taken up will make progress. And he should have steadfast devotion to
the work. I know there are such devoted workers in Kathiawar and that
there is no dearth of money there. Among the Kathiawaris spread all
over the country, I see men and women who can, if they would,
individually bear the expenditure on service of Harijans in Kathiawar.
So I fail to understand the reason why even a single institution serving
Harijans should have to close down for want of funds.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 20-8-1933

330

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

405. THE BREATH OF MY LIFE
God’s ways are inscrutable! The most unexpected event of my
life has happened.1 I have been used to the most unexpected things in
the course of a very long public life, but this is the most unexpected
of all. What is now in store for me? How I shall use this life out of
prison, I do not know. But I must say this that whether in prison or
outside prison, Harijan service will be always after my heart and will
be the breath of life for me, more precious than the daily bread. I can
live for some days at least without the daily bread, but I cannot live
without Harijan service for one single minute. It is a constant prayer to
the Almighty that this blot of untouchability may be removed in its
entirety foam Hinduism and that the millions of caste Hindus may see
the Sun of Truth which shines upon us, if we would only remove the
scales from our eyes, as I have repeatedly said in these columns. My
life is a dedication to this cause and I shall consider no penance too
great for the vindication of this Truth.
‘Parnakuti’ August 23, 1933, 5.30 p.m.
Harijan, 26-8-1933

406. TELEGRAM TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE
P OONA ,

August 23, 1933
GURUDEV
S HANTINIKETAN
GOD’S

GRACE

AM

WELL.

TOOK

ORANGE.2

GANDHI

Visva-bharti News, September 1933, p. 17

1

On the eight day of his fast, which began on August 16, Gandhiji was
released unconditionally.
2
Addressee’s reply dated August 24 read: ‘‘Greatly relieved. God be praised.
Love to Charlie.”
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

331

407. TELEGRAM TO PADMAJA NAIDU
P OONA ,

August 23, 1933
P ADMAJA NAIDU
GOLDEN THRESHOLD
HYDERABAD
DECCAN
GOD’S

GRACE

AM

WELL.

TOOK

ORANGES.

BAPU
From the original; Padmaja Naidu Papers. Courtesy: Nehru memorial Museum
and Library

408. TELEGRAM TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
P OONA ,

August 24, 1933
JAMNALAL BAJAJ
WARDHA
KEEPING

VERY

WELL.

NO

NURSING

ASSISTANCE

REQUIRED. 1

BAPU
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 113

409. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
August 24, 1933
DEAR COL. MARTIN,

When you sent me to Sassoon Hospital I took with me my
clothes and certain other things, but not my books, spinning-wheels,
etc. Will you kindly hand these to Kakasaheb Kalelkar, as also books
1
Gandhiji had received a wire from the addressee saying that he had sent
Chhotelal Jain, an Ashram inmate, to look after him; vide “Letter to Vallabhbhai
Patel”, 24-8-1933.

332

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

that you might have received whilst I was under your custody and
which were not given to me?
Yours sincerely,

LT. C OL . R. V. M ARTIN , I . M. S.
S UPERINTENDENT, C ENTRAL P RISON, Y ERAVDA
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No. 20-XIII, 1933

410. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
August 24, 1933
MY DEAR BH-R-R-R,

Well, many strange things have happened in my life, but this
discharge is the strangest. However, there it is and I must take it as it
comes; only I do not know what to do with myself. God will clear the
way for me. Till then I wait on Him. I am as strong as I can be
expected in the circumstances and, in a few days’ time, I have no
doubt, I shall regain my strength, lost during the eight days. I am here
for a few days and, then hope to go to Bombay and be there for a few
days. I must not write to Raihana separately. Tell her that I entered
upon my fast with the bhajan that she sent to me.
Love to all.
BH-R-R-R
S JT. A BBAS TYABJI
C AMP, B ARODA
From a photostat: S.N. 9586

411. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
August 24, 1933
CHI. AMALA,

I hope you have not gone mad over my fast and that you have
been giving full satisfaction to everybody there and working in full
speed. As I am dictating this letter I have your letter, written in Hindi,
today. Your handwriting leaves still much to be desired. However, I
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

333

was delighted to have your letter after such a long time. I have not got
any of the letters sent to the jail. I may get them now. I must not give
you a long letter today.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial .Musuem and Library

412. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
August 24, 1933
CHI. MARY,

I was sorry to part with you without having much of a chat and
then not to be able to write to you all these days was a matter of grief
to me. Now that I am able to write again I am dictating as many letters
as I can. I hope you are feeling quite at home there. I want you to tell
me everything about your at Wardha and the people there. Of me, you
will have gleaned from so many sources. So I need not say anything.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 6005. Also C.W. 3331. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

413. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
August 24, 1933
CHI. MANU,

Write to me regularly. I hope you keep good health there and
are quite happy. What arrangement has been made for your study?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a
S. Mashruwala

334

copy

of

the

Gujarati:

C.W.

1525.

Courtesy:

Manubehn

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

414. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
For Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel
by kind favour of Superintendent1

August 24, 1933

BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

My health is not so bad that I cannot write with my own hand,
but I don’t wish to exert myself today. You must have read all the
news and known what has happened. It has all been like a dream. But
I will live as God ordains. I wish to take only one step at a time. Why
should I, therefore, worry? Apart from that, however, this time I don’t
think I shall be able to see my way easily. In Yeravda, I kept thinking
of you all the time. I had not expected to be separated from you in
this manner. We remembered you daily on several occasions. We
missed your dictatorial orders.
I had carefully selected the best bottles2 and sent them to you. I
hope they reached you safely. The rest of your things were packed
separately. If you want any other books or things, let me know.
Mathuradas is here with me. Chandrashankar, Ba, Mirabehn and Nair3
stay with me all the time. Brijkrishna spends the whole day here.
Today is Ganesh Chaturthi and so there is a holiday atmosphere. Kaka
is here. I have just received a wire from Jamnalal saying that he has
sent Chhotelal to look after me. But I am sure I will speedily
regain my strength. I experience no difficulty in sitting up in the bed
without help. I have eaten fruit in plenty today. I have also had some
juice of tandalja4, and that has given me some strength. Dr. Gilder 5
and Dr. Patel 6 came and examined me. They have found nothing
wrong. There is, therefore, no cause for worry regarding my health.
What about your nose? What is its condition? Write to me what you
1

The source has this in English. Gandhiji continued to write this in all his
letters to Vallabhbhai Patel, who was in Nasik Jail.
2
Out of the empty bottles which contained honey, etc., used by Gandhiji and
Vallabhbhai Patel in Yeravda Jail
3
Gandhiji’s typist
4
Amaranth
5
Dr. D. D. Gilder, heart specialist; later, Minister of Health, Bombay
6
Dr. P. T. Patel
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

335

are permitted to. I shall be in ‘Parnakuti’ for a few days. Then I
intend to spend a few days in Bombay. After that, Rama alone knows.
Blessings from

BAPU
S ARDAR VALLABHBHAI P ATEL
NASIK

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro–2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, PP. 20-2

415. LETTER TO VIDYA HINGORANI
August 24, 1933
CHI. VIDYA,

I got news of you from Anand. I hope you are all right in body
and mind. I hope Mahadev is keeping well. How are the others? Write
to me in detail.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

416. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
P OONA

[After August 24, 1933] 1
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I got your wire. You probably believe that I require
careful looking after. But the truth is that except for serving
meals to me I hardly require any other service. This time I have not
lost all my energy. That cannot happen in eight days. Whatever
energy I have lost, I shall soon recover. It was, therefore, not
at all necessary to send Chhotelal. But now that he is coming, he will
feel happy, and that is enough for me. Probably you also know
that Mirabehn is with me. Brijkrishna always runs up from wherever
he may be, and so he, too, is here. There are many others besides
1

From the reference to the receipt of the addressee’s wire about
Chhotelal. The source bears a note that the letter was received on August 26, 1933.

336

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

them. I hope you keep good health. Let me know your experiences of
the newcomers. Is your case over? How is Ramdas succeeding?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Chhotelal arrived just now.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2922

417. LETTER TO MADELEINE ROLLAND1
August 25, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

Just a word to send my have to you and to the Rishi2. Mira will
tell you all about the latest astonishing event3. I hope that you are both
well. Andrews too is here now.
Ever yours,

BAPU
From a copy: C.W. 10582. Courtesy: Madeleine Rolland

418. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
August 25, 1933
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

I could not write to you earlier. I tried yesterday but did not
succeed. You must certainly have been much worried on my account
but why should you be worried now? You must accept by now that
fasting has become a part of my life and you should therefore give up
your attachment for my body.
I learn that Anandi 4 and others are not there. Give me news of
them. I do not write to them thinking they are not there. If they are
with you, tell them to write to me. How is Bablo5 faring? Has Sharda 6
1

The English original is not available. This is a retranslation of a rendering in

French.
2
3
4
5
6

Romain Rolland
The reference is to Gandhiji’s fast and the unexpected release.
Daugher of Lakshmidas Asar
Narayan, son of Mahadev Desai
Daughter of Chimanlal Shah

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

337

gone too? Does she still suffer from attacks of asthma? You are not
pampering her, I hope. If they have left station who is paying their
expenses? Have the Harijan children adjusted themselves [to the new
surroundings?] Do they respect the rules of the Ashram 1? How are
Amina’s children? Do they learn Urdu and read the Koran?
I am regaining my strength. Shankerlal should write to me
regarding the movable property of the Ashram and the dairy.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 32801

419. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS 2
August 25, 1933
Gandhiji commenced by expressing his thanks to Col. Candy,
Civil Surgeon, Poona, his staff and nurses for the very great care with
which they had looked after him and also to Lt. Col. Martin,
Superintendent of Yeravda Prison and his staff for their kind
treatment during the early stages of his fast. Gandhiji said:
I would like the public to be assured about my condition.
Generally a week’s fast is nothing for me, and though this time the
fast, whilst it lasted, caused terrible physical agony because of my
inability to take the necessary quantity of water, I feel on the second
day after the breaking of the fast that I shall be able to regain my lost
strength within a reasonable time. There need be, therefore, no cause
for any anxiety.
This time my discharge having come upon me absolutely
unexpectedly, I confess I have no knowledge whatsoever of how I
would shape my movements, after my convalescence is over. So I
must repeat what I have said so often before, but this time with much
greater force than before, that I shall be constantly praying for light
and guidance.
1

The Harijan Children’s Ashram at Ahmedabad being run by the addressee
The Bombay Chronicle had reported: “Looking remarkably well, Gandhiji
received a group of journalists at 10 a.m. today in the spacious hall of Lady
Thackersey’s bungalow. Gandhiji spoke very clearly and often with emotion.
Towards the end of the interview which lasted nearly an hour, signs of exhaustion
were however perceptible, and at Mrs. Naidu’s suggestion Press representatives
stopped asking more questions.
2

338

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

I shall seek peace much more eagerly than imprisonment and a
possible repetition of fast. I shall therefore again use this unexpected
freedom from imprisonment for the sake of exploring avenues of
peace.
One thing, however, I do want to make clear. This discharge is a
matter of no joy for me; possibly it is a matter of shame that I took
my comrades to prison and came out of it by fasting. The statement
made on behalf of the Government in connection with the fast, I have
not had time to study at all fully. During the fast and a few days
previous to it, I was deprived of all news that was published in the
Press1 in connection with it.
In reply to a question, Gandhiji explained this point further and said that the
Times of India given to him during this period was mutilated, portions bearing on the
fast having been cut out of it.2 Gandhiji proceeded:

Therefore I do not know all that has been stated in the Press
regarding the fast But what little I had the energy to read yesterday
shows that Government have not done me justice.
It should be remembered that when I took my fast in Yeravda in
September last, Government gave me fullest facilities for seeing
people, giving interviews and writing letters in the matter of antiuntouchability work, not because I was a State prisoner, but because
they recognized it was justly due to me to give me those facilities, if
they held me in their custody. If, therefore, a mistake was made by
them, it was made at that very first fast. Had they chosen, they could
have unconditionally discharged me as they did at the time of the 21
days’ fast or this time. The question of jail discipline was just as
pertinent then as now, but they did not do so. They thought it a better
policy for them to keep me in custody and give me the facilities I
have referred to.
Within two days after the Poona Pact was made, facilities for
doing Harijan work were suddenly stopped to my surprise and I
immediately sent in a respectful protest; but that protest having
1

The Times of India, 26-8-1933, had reported that while answering questions
on Gandhiji’s fast in Legislative Assembly at Simla on August 24, it was stated that
“decision to release Gandhiji” was taken as “Mr. Gandhi was apparently determined to
commit suicide. Government were not prepared to allow him to die in jail nor to order
forcible feeding to save his life”
2
Vide also “Letter to R. V. Martin”, 19-8-1933.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

339

evoked no satisfactory response, I had perforce to send a letter1 saying
that unless Government gave me facilities for Harijan work without let
or hindrance, life would not be worth living for me and in reply to
that on November 3 last the following orders2 were conveyed to me:
These orders were passed with the full knowledge of my
requirements and with full knowledge of what they meant in
September.
I say once more that when Government arrested me again after
the 21 days’ fast, they had to face my request for doing Harijan work
without let or hindrance, whether they took me in as a State prisoner
or any other. In my opinion, classification is wholly irrelevant to the
issue. The sole issue was in September, in November and today is this,
namely, my life and the Harijan work in jail or no Harijan work in jail
and my death; and so long as I live that will be the issue that will face
me, face the Government and face the public. If I am wrong in
thinking that, whether outside or inside the prison, I should have the
fullest liberty to carry on the programme of anti-untouchability which
I have undertaken as a solemn obligation, then my fast should be
considered impertinent and should not count either with the
Government or the public; but if I am right, then my fast should be
treated as a sacrificial seal.
One thing more. It has been said on behalf of the Government
that when, owing to the 21 days’ fast I was discharged, I gave more
attention to political than Harijan work. I cannot imagine a grosser
misrepresentation of facts, which are all capable of being proved
today. But I will give a few outstanding instances. The whole of the 21
days and the subsequent days, during which I was unable to do
anything at all, I could only pray and think and not do writing or
talking; and I can say that during this period I thought of nothing else
but God and God’s children, the Harijans. Then when I was at all able
to carry on sustained conversation with a group of men, my first act
was to address 3 a meeting of Harijan workers in this very hall, whilst I
was lying in bed. When I was able to do any public writing, my first
writing4 was for the Harijan.
1
2

Vide “Letter to E. E. Doyle”, 25-10-1932.
Vide footnote to “Telegram to Home Secretary, Govewrnment of India”, 3-11-

1932.
3
4

340

Vide “Discussion with Harijan Workers, Poona”, 2-7-1933.
Vide “All About the Fast”, 8-7-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

True, while I was in Poona I did attend the informal conference1
and held frequent conversations with political co-workers on the
subject of civil disobedience. There was no secret about it and I am
not ashamed of it. Civil disobedience is an integral part of my life. But
the fact is that the bulk of my time was not given to civil disobedience
work. As a matter of fact, in view of the advice I tendered to the
conference, it was not necessary. Then when I went to Ahmedabad,
people may think that the sacrificing of the Ashram must have
occupied a tremendous amount of my time, but I am again able to say
that tremendous amount of my time was taken up with Harijan service.
Thousands gathered at prayer time and every time, if I spoke at
all to these crowds, I spoke on untouchability and I collected funds at
every one of these meetings with more or less generous response,
every pice of which went to the Harijan Fund. If challenged, I would
multiply instances of this character. It, therefore, in my opinion, ill
becomes all body much more a Government official, to recklessly
charge me with having done a thing which I have not done and then
to justify the procedure which, to a simple mind like mine, appears to
be a manifest and gross breach of promise, deliberately made to a
prisoner in their custody.
When Gandhiji’s attention was drawn to the Home Member’s statement in the
Assembly that Gandhiji wished to combine simultaneously two incompatible
policies, deliberate incarceration and complete freedom to carry on social work as an
ordinary man, Gandhiji replied:

I do not consider that there is anything incompatible in it. I
would be asking for incompatible things if I had asked for conducting
civil disobedience campaign from inside the prison walls.
Mahatma Gandhi was then asked if in his opinion his political campaign
during the last few months had done the country any good.2
Gandhiji replied that he was unable to reply to the question as he had no
opportunity to gauge the reaction of his movement on the people. But it was his firm
conviction that the movement which was the cleanest weapon possible in the hands
of self-respecting people to resist injustice could not but have done good.
Asked whether the concessions given by the Government were not adequate
enough, Gandhiji replied in the negative and said there still remained tremendous
work to be done in connection with the anti-untouchability work. The political part
1
Vide “Speech at Leaders’ Conference, Poona-I”, 12-7-1933 and “Speech at
Leaders’ Conference, Poona-II”,.
2
This and the fallowing paragraph are reproduced from The Tribune.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

341

of it formed only very little. The task before the reformers was to bring about a
change of heart on the part of the Hindus.
Gandhiji, continuing, said that he could not describe the grief it caused him
when on a matter of this character where Government orders had been so explicit in
November last, the same officials should have been responsible for goading him on
to a fast and then to say that he wanted to become a dictator. This was the unkindest
cut of all.
Asked if Mr. Rajagopalachari, for example, who had been a party to the Poona
Pact and who was now in jail, could not seek permission for doing Harijan work like
himself, Gandhiji replied in the negative and added:

I will side with the Government in resisting Mr. Rajagopalachari
because Mr. Rajagopalachari was not present at the Round Table
Conference. I was there as the sole representative of Mr. Rajagopalachari and other Congressmen and I made a declaration that I shall
resist with my life separate electorates for the Depressed Classes and
therefore it became a matter of sacred obligation to me to conduct this
campaign even from inside the jail.
Regarding political situation, Gandhiji was asked what form his efforts for
peace would take. Gandhiji replied that he did not know what it would be at the present
moment. It was still in the lap of future. It was all impenetrable darkness for him just
now. But if Government had the will for peace—and he knew that the Congress had
the will—then peace could be had. But on what terms, he could not say at the present
moment, not having all the strings in his hand today.
Asked if he would be approaching the Viceroy again for an interview, he
replied that he could not say definitely, but it was quite on the cards.
Gandhiji concluded by saying that he hoped to be restored to health in the
course of a week or more and he was now on milk diet and free from pain or
discomfort.
The Bombay Chronicle, 26-8-1933; also The Tribune, 27-8-1933

420. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
‘PARNAKUTI’, POONA ,

August 26, 1933
CHI. AMALA,

I have now got all the letters from the jail.
Yes, you may write as often as you like, only handing your
letters to someone who is writing to me so that the postage may be
saved. As a rule, there is a regular post from Wardha for me. The best
342

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

thing for you, therefore, is to hand over your letters to Dwarkanathji1
or Lakshmibehn2.
I wonder what you mean when you say you read the Gita every
day. You read it to understand and act accordingly. You must now
forget the past and look after the present, never mind how you
behaved. I have forgotten all about it and I know that it was all out of
excess of love. There was nothing immoral about it.
Your letter to Mira has not been received. Vinoba is quite right
in asking you to learn cooking, Hindi, and cotton processes well, if
you are to do real work amongst Harijans.
I hope you are keeping quite well and fit.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

421. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
August 26, 1933
CHI. RAMA,

I got your letter, as also Nirmala’s. I am not writing a separate
letter to Nirmala. I was happy to learn that you did not worry.
Vinabehn gave me news about your health. Dhiru wrote to me from
Bhavnagar. He seems to be quite happy. I could not see Chhaganlal
this time at all. This time the conditions were completely different. I
was not permitted to write to anybody. My health is improving
rapidly. Gradually I am recovering strength. Chhaganlal has been
removed to Thana. If you have received any letter from him from
there, please give me news about him. Also give me news about Vimu3,
if you have any.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5356

1
2
3

Dwarkanath Harkare, an Ashram inmate
Laksmibehn N. Khare
Addressee’s daughter

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

343

422. LETTER TO MITHUBEHN PETIT
August 26, 1933
CHI. MITHUBEHN,

I have your letter. Please do not worry about me. I am steadily
regaining strength. I can digest milk.
I trust you are in good health. I need not enquire about your
work; it must be going on as usual.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRIMATI MITHUBEHN P ETIT
C OLABA , B OMBAY
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2705

423. I SHALL DANCE TO HIS TUNE
No one can understand God’s ways. I did not even dream that
after my twenty-one days’ fast, I would have to go on another fast
within three months and, as a result, I would be out of jail. Who knows
what God meant by this play. I, for one, do not know it. But I know
this much that whether in jail or outside, I shall not fail to make any
effort, of which I am capable in thought, speech and act, to wash
Hinduism of the dross of untouchability. When an attempt was made
to thwart the effort, I gave up food. I shall not allow a thing bought so
dearly to slip out of my hands. But God knows how I can make that
effort. I shall dance to His tune. I shall be guided by Him. I have
every hope that all men and women will help me in this attempt.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 27-8-1933

344

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

424. LETTER TO VITHALDAS V. JERAJANI 1
August 27, 1933
MY DEAR VITHALDAS,

You want a message from me on khadi. What message may I
send? When I hear that the love of people for khadi and the
spinning-wheel is diminishing, my love for these things is getting
stronger.
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9784

425. LETTER TO GULAB A. SHAH
August 27, 1933
CHI. GULAB,

I hope you don’t feel a stranger there. Write to me regularly.
Do you keep a diary? Have you made any friends?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1736

426. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
August 27, 1933
CHI. MANUDI,

I hope you are now completely free from fever and are quite
well. Write to me a detailed letter, giving your daily routine.
Ba is quite well. Prabhavatibehn has arrived here today.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 1526. Courtesy: Manubehn S. Mashruwala

1

In The Bombay Chronicle, 16-9-1933, this appeared under the title
“Mahatmaji’s Message” with the following introductory note: “On the special
occasion of the Gandhi Jayanti, Sjt. V. V. Jerajani, Agent, All-India Spinners’
Association, requested Mahatma Gandhi for a message. This he sent in Gujarati which
is translated below.”
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

345

427. LETTER TO HIRALAL SHARMA
August 27, 1933
BHAI SHARMA,

Do come after ten days. I have no idea where I shall be. You will
learn from the newspapers. Make independent arrangements for your
stay. I hope your problems have been resolved.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsh
(1932-48), between pp. 52 and 53

428. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
August 28, 1933
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I am regaining strength fairly rapidly. I am very eager to see
Jnana. I shall be happy if she comes and sees me. Let me know her
address.
Kamala seems to have benefited very well indeed. I have advised
Janakibehn to stay on here for the present without being afraid of the
plague.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2922

429. LETTER TO DR. MANORAMABAI THATTE 1
August 29, 1933
Take With you only that which is good in us and bring with you
only that which is good in the foreign lands you may go to. May God
bless you and make you a fitter instrument of service.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 8680

1

346

The letter was written on the eve of the addresseee’s departure for England.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

430. TELEGRAM TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
P OONA ,

August 30, 1933
JAMNALAL BAJAJ
WARDHAGANJ
AM ANXIOUS
WEEK

VISIT

WARDHA

BUT

NOT

POSSIBLE REACH BEFORE LAST

SEPTEMBER.

BAPU
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 114

431. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
August 30, 1933
DEAR BROTHER,

I treasure your letter1.
I do not mind anything you have said. On the contrary, I
appreciate all you have said. Having said this, I must say that I utterly
dissent from your interpretation of Government orders. If you saw all
the correspondence, perhaps you will revise your judgment. I am not
given to special pleading consciously. You may not have noticed that
the Government have themselves dropped the idea of ‘another set of
conditions’. On the contrary, they said that they made a mistake in
making what you call ‘concession in the first instance’, and the
mistake made was not one on merits but had reference to their own
convenience.
However, I shall not strive with you in connection with your
pronouncement upon my statement, but if you will care to study the
whole question I would gladly send you the whole of the
correspondence. I hope that you yourself do not consider me to be
capable of desiring to blame the Government for the sake of doing so
or that that performance would be dearer to me than Harijan uplift. I
consider myself capable of a just discrimination and therefore of
knowing when the Government is in the right. But this is all beside the
point. I have taken so much space with what is now immaterial, in
order to tell you that I do not plead guilty to the charge you have
1

Dated August 27; vide Appendix “Letter from V. S. Srinivasa Sastri”,
27-8-1933.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

347

made against me.
Now for the central point of your letter. I quite agree with you
that I am wholly unfit for the constitution building at the present
stage. In my opinion that time is not yet. It will come only when the
nation has developed a sanction for itself. I would therefore gladly
retire from the Congress and devote myself to the development of
civil disobedience outside the Congress and to Harijan work. The
difficulty is, how to do it? Can I do it by seceding from the Congress?
That was the question that troubled me at the time of the informal
conference and that is the question that confronts me again. I am
seeking light. As soon as I have regained sufficient strength, I shall
again sound the mind of Congressmen and if I can possibly retire
from the Congress I shall gladly do so. My impression, however, is
that the Congress mentality has not changed. Whilst it is true that a
large number of Congressmen have got tired, very few would care to
subscribe to the White Paper or work for securing certain
improvements in it. They want a radical change. But I am in no hurry
to come to any final decision. I can give you this assurance that
nothing will deter me from taking any steps that might be in the best
interests of the nation. There is no question even of self-effacement.
Performance of duty I have held always to be a thing of beauty and a
joy for ever. The awful fact, however, has often been to know where
duty lies.
You won’t give me up, but continue to guide me and you will
not hesitate to come if you felt like coming. I am not going to hesitate
to ask you to come when I feel that I need your personal contact and
a constant exchange of thoughts.
Love.
M. K. GANDHI
Letters of Srinivasa Sastri, pp. 260-2

432. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
August 30, 1933
CHI. AMALA,

I have your letters. I am glad you have taken to Jamnalalji. You
should accept his guidance and do as he says. Take gratefully all the
nursing that may be offered to you and that may be necessary for the
348

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

healing of your body. I hope you have now got rid of all your boils
and eruptions.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

433. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
August 30, 1933
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I have sent a reply1 to your wire. I should like very much to go
there immediately, but I can’t do that. I think it will be better to pay a
visit to Bombay first and then to Wardha. I wish to acquaint myself
with the atmosphere in Bombay. The Harijan work there also seems to
have become slack and, if possible, I wish to infuse some life into it.
My health is steadily improving. I can eat with appetite. Take
care of your health. Letters for N. and Amala are enclosed. The
former seems to have become a little unsettled.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2923

434. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
August 31, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

So you are out before your time. I hope you got my wire. I had
thought that Mother was going back to Allahabad. I expect full report
from you.
Indu has been with me fairly often. She is to come again this
evening.
If it is at all possible, we must meet soon. But of course you will
be held up there if Mother remains bad. I shall expect a full letter
from you. It would be as well to send it by registered post.
1

Vide “Letter to Jamnalal Bajaj”, 30-8-1933.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

349

I am slowly regaining lost strength. I say nothing about the fast
as I expect you now know all about it. More when we meet.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

435. LETTER TO KASHI GANDHI
August 31, 1933
CHI. KASHI,

I have your letter. We have to forget all talk about Satyavati for
Prabhudas. I am looking for some other girl. It will be as his fate
decides for him. I do not think lack of money comes in Prabhudas’s
way. What comes in his way is his age and the ill reputation he has for
his health. Another reason is that as Prabhudas has always lived by
himself, he has not come into contact with anybody. Whatever the
reason, we have to make the effort and then acquiese in whatever
result God brings about. I am all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: . S.N. 33073

436. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
August 31, 1933
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

I have your letter. You should give up worrying. What is in your
fate will happen. I will certainly give it a thought. I have not given up
Gyan as yet. She writes to say that I have not been just to her. I am
therefore keen on seeing her. I do not want to do anything in a hurry.
Nor do I want do impose Gyan on you. However, I consider it your
duty as an elder person to make acquaintance with Gyan.
Rest assured that you need not worry about your engagement. I
intend to go to Wardha, too. Something will occur to me when I reach
there.
If your health remains good in the plains and if Jamnalalji
allows it, it will no doubt be better if you postpone going to the hills.
Blessings from

BAPU

350

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

[PS.]
I am not writing separately to Chhaganlal. I have received his
previous letter. He is longing to go to Sabarmati. That is all right.
From the Gujarati original: . S.N. 32970

437. LETTER TO TOTARAM SANADHYA
‘PARNAKUTI’, POONA ,

August 31, 1933
BHAI TOTARAM,

I have your letter. It is our duty to endure even when we see the
ruination of the Ashram. God willing, we shall regain its possession
and shall reside in whatever structures then remain. I hope the Ashram
will certainly serve some purpose or other. You and Hariprasad must
be keeping good health. I am regaining strength, there is no cause for
anxiety.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2528

438. FRAGMENT OF LETTER TO H. K. HALES
[After August 31, I933] 1
I assure you that I have no desire to court imprisonment for the
sake of it, but if imprisonment comes in my way even whilst I am
seeking for peace, I will accept it cheerfully.2
The Hindustan Times, 17-9-1933

1

The addressee’s letter under reply was dated August 31, 1933.
Hales, a Conservative member of British Parliament, had written: “It is
imperative that you should, at all costs, preserve your freedom in the evening of your
life. Every hour is of supreme value and for you, of all men, to be incarcerated for
months, at a time when your counsel and advice are so necessary, seems to me almost
a crime.” He had concluded the letter with a request to “resist the inclination this time
for the sake of your friends, if not for yourself .”
2

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

351

439. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
September 1, 1933
MY DEAR AGATHA,

C. F. Andrews has shared with me your letters to him. This is
just to press upon you the necessity of taking fair rest for the sake of
putting in more work. ‘A stitch in time saves nine’ has much truth in
it.
I need say nothing about my body or the situation created by
my unexpected discharge. Deenabandhu has, I know, written to you
fully about it.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Poor Mahadev! He is alone now in Belgaum prison. But this
isolation will do him good.
From a photostat: G.N, 1467

440. LETTER TO EDMOND AND YVONNE PRIVAT
September 1, 1933
DEAR ANAND AND BHAKTI,

This is just to acknowledge your love letter and to tell you that I
am keeping as well as I can. The rest you will have from Mira’s letter.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 8796

441. NOTE
THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE TWO

Deenabandhu Andrews wrote last week on the untouchability of
South Africa and showed how there was the temple-entry question
even there. It is, however, worth noting the distinction between the two
untouchabilities. In South Africa, it is based upon colour prejudice
and has no sanction either in religion or in law. In India,
352

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

unfortunately, it is claimed by a large number of Hindus to have
religious sanction and we know that it has also the sanction of law.
The Indian untouchability is, therefore, much worse than the South
African. Both are, no doubt, equally mischievous, so far as the victims
are concerned. Both deserve equal condemnation. Only, in India it
seems that the fight is likely to be much harder than in South Africa.
Harijan, 2-9-1933

442. THE TEMPLE-ENTRY BILL1
It is sad to think that the anti-untouchability measure has been
hung up for one year by the Legislative Assembly and that the
amendment to hang it up received the support of the Government. But
the reformers may not rest till untouchability is blotted out of the
Statute Book. Meanwhile, the process of having temples opened by
consent of trustees and temple-goers and the general propaganda in
favour of opening temples should continue.
But I observe that a Harijan Conference at Agra has passed the
following resolution:2
This Jatav Conference . . . considers that the methods and system of
work of the movement is not satisfactory. Harijan movement lays stress on
the temple-entry problem more than on economic and educational problems.
The former . . . will produce slave mentality, . . . . Hence . . . great emphasis
must be laid on the educational and economic aspect of the progress.
Inter-caste marriage and inter-dining must be on the programme of the
movement. . . .

The economic and educational uplift is no doubt an essential
part of true repentance by caste Hindus. It is a test of the sincerity of
their professions. But the uplift will not be complete without the
throwing open of temples. The throwing open of temples will be an
admission of the religious equality of Harijans. It will be the surest
sign of their ceasing to be the outcastes of Hinduism, which they are
today.
It is beside the point that tens of thousands of Harijans do not
want to enter temples. If it were properly probed, the fact would be
1
Untouchability Abolition Bill. It was introduced by C. S. Ranga Iyer on
March 24, 1933; vide 6th footnote to “Letter to ranchhoddas Patwari”, 11-1-1933.
2
Only excerpts are reproduced here.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

353

found to be quite otherwise. Thousands of Harijans do want to enter
temples. Only they have been so accustomed to the prohibition that
the very hope of entering temples had dried up in them. They believe
that admission to temples on a par with the other Hindus is an
impossibility.
But whether Harijans desire the consolation of temple-entry or
not, whether, if temples are thrown open to them, they will make use
of them or not, caste Hindus have to perform their simple duty. They
have to open their temples for Harijans to offer worship in, precisely
on, the same terms as for themselves. A debtor is not absolved from
the duty of payment because his creditor does not care for the
payment, or has forgotten the debt altogether.
And when temples are thrown open to Harijans, schools, wells
and many similar facilities will be automatically open to Harijans. It is
surely easy enough to realize that untouchability may subsist side by
side with economic uplift. Many Ezhawas in Travancore and
Namashudras in Bengal possess decent fortunes and are yet treated as
pariahs of society. The bar sinister is all the more galling to them by
reason of their flourishing condition. Dr. Ambedkar suffers from the
curse in spite of his high educational attainments and his superior
economic condition. He is naturally more sensitive to the insult of
untouchability. But the reproach will be automatically removed,
immediately caste Hindus proclaim the banishment of untouchability
by admitting Harijans to their temples on terms of absolute equality
with themselves. It will not then become necessary for any Harijan
individually to go to temples, if he does not desire to do so. The
declaration of the opening of temples will cover him with the rest. It
will be like the abolition of slavery. It will be a vast and glorious step
in the much-needed and overdue purification of Hinduism.
Temple-entry permission, to be of use, has naturally to be a
voluntary act on the part of Hindus. It has to be, therefore, a genuine
change of heart in the caste Hindus. Legislation is nevertheless
necessary because of the fact that in law the entry of Harijans into
caste-Hindu temples is said to be prohibited. Legislation will constitute
the seal of approval of the vast mass of Hindus. I personally should
not want, that legislation in the teeth of universal caste-Hindu
opposition. My own belief is that caste Hindus as a whole do not
oppose temple-entry by Harijans. I should abide by the result of an
honestly conducted referendum. Anyway, let the reformers realize
that, whatever happens in the Legislature at Delhi, the movement for
temple-entry and the necessary legislation must continue.
354

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

There are other things in the resolution quoted above which call
for explanation or criticism. This must be postponed for a future issue
of the Harijan.
Harijan, 2-9-1933

443. LETTER TO DR. MOHAMMAD ALAM
‘PARNAKUTI’ P OONA ,

September 2, 1933
DEAR DR. ALAM,

God is great. He often confounds us. I little knew that I would
have to be discharged in the manner I have been. I am now praying
for light as to the next step I am to take. I am sorry I have not read
your paper, but I must now do it. You must quickly undergo an
examination and ensure good health. I am making steady progress
towards regaining lost strength.
Letter for Begum Alam.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
DR. S. M OHAMMAD ALAM
1 L YTTON R OADS
LAHORE
From a photostat: G.N. 31

444. LETTER TO N. R. MALKANI
September 2, 1933
MY DEAR MALKANI,

I had your letter of 11th instant.
Lakshmi had already told me how you and your wife were
looking after her, and when I heard that she was under your roof I was
perfectly at ease. I now see that she has gone to Wardha; I have not
quite understood why before Devdas was removed from Delhi. Her
first letter had told me that she would be in Delhi so long as Devdas
was there. I have written to Rajaji. I can understand his consolation
because he has to be both father and mother to his children, and
specially to his daughters. But I know also that deep down in him
there is dignified peace.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

355

I hope the work there is flourishing. If you have any
suggestions to make either regarding the Harijan work or regarding
the editing of the Harijan, you must not hesitate to pass them on to
me whilst I am yet in a position to receive them.
Love.
BAPU
S JT. N. R. M ALKANI
S ERVANTS OF UNTOUCHABLES S OCIETY , B IRLA MILLS
DELHI
From a photostat: G.N. 901

445. LETTER TO CHARU PROVA SEN
September 2, 1933
MY DEAR CHARU PROVA,

I was delighted to have your brief note.
I think you are quite right. It is no joke for anybody to be my
co-worker. But I know that God gives all the co-workers and me the
strength they and I may need. Therefore, you will get no pity or
sympathy from me, but you will have to render a true account of your
stewardship.
I hope you are doing well. I am slowly but steadily regaining
strength.
Love.
BAPU
S MT. C HARU P ROVA S EN
R AJBARI, F ARIDPUR DISTRICT
(BENGAL )
From a photostat: G.N. 8702

446. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
September 2, 1933
CHI. AMALA,

I have your letters. You should not expect frequent replies from
me. Whenever I can I will certainly write to you.
356

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

I had said nothing to you about my health because I had
referred to it in some other letters.1 I am getting on as well as possible.
I am regaining strength steadily. Therefore, there is no cause for
anxiety. I am taking milk, fruit and vegetables.
I hope that you are steadily qualifying yourself.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

447. LETTER TO BENARSIDAS CHATURVEDI
September 2, 1933
BHAI BENARSIDAS,

I was happy to get your letter. Proficient and paid teachers
should be employed for propagation of Hindi in Bengal. There is no
doubt that Ramanandbabu has done immense service to Hindi. Please
accept my felicitations on making Vishal Bharat 2 self-supporting. I
have seen the account of the Madras tour, it is good. I hope you are
keeping well.
Blessings from

BAPU
P ANDIT BENARSIDAS C HATURVEDI
EDITOR , “V ISHAL BHARAT ”
120/2 U PPER C IRCULAR R OAD , C ALCUTTA
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2564

448. LETTER TO VIDYA HINGORANI
September 2, 1933
CHI. VIDYA,

I have your letter. I feel that for the time being you should stay
there. Later on we shall see. Anand will stay here for the present. I will
try and go over to Wardha by the end of this month. Keep mind and
body fit.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

1
2

Vide “Letter to Jamanalal Bajaj”, 30-8-1933.
A Hindi monthly published from Calcutta

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

357

449. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA1
September 2, 1933
I am unconscious of any error in giving my previous advice.
However, I admit that this unexpected release has produced a situation
that demands special treatment. At this stage I can only say that I am
giving the matter my earnest and prayerful consideration. I have no
ready-made plan before me. I shall consult all friends, listen to all
advice and come to no hasty decision. I reiterate my earnest desire for
peace. Therefore I shall leave no stone unturned to bring it about in
so far as it lies within my power.
Home Department, Political, File No. 4/11/33, 1933, p. 4. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

450. ADVICE TO FRIENDS 2
[Before September 3, 1933]
It is nothing less than a new life for me. On my part I had given
up all hope. On the 23rd 3 night after the nausea, I felt I would not
survive for long, that I could no longer battle with death. On the
afternoon of the 24th I even gave away whatever I had with me.
Things which are more or less routine for us neither fascinate
nor pain us, however they may be, pleasant or unpleasant. And
whether or not I wish, fasts have become almost a daily occurrence for
me. Why should they pain you? You should understand that fasts have
become a part of my life and for this reason ought to give up the
ignorant attachment to my body. No doubt I had to undergo some
privation, but then who has attained Krishna without great suffering?
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu 3-9-1933
1

The source had this extract from the National Call, 3-9-1933, which had
reported: “Interviewed by the Associated Press, Mahatma Gandhi replied to the
comments of the National Labour Party’s fortnightly organ, the News Letter,
which hoped that he would respond to the Government of India’s conciliatory
action.”
2
This and the following three items are extracted from Chandrashankar
Shukla’s “Weekly Letter”. This appeared under the sub-title, “New Life”.
3
Of August

358

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

451. DISCUSSION WITH A PARSI GENTLEMAN 1
[Before September 3, 1933]
Q.

I am very much pained to see that in many places Harijan work
is carried on with a feeling of obliging the Harijans rather than in a spirit of
service.
A.

That is true. That is why I go on telling the caste Hindus that
whatever they do, they must do for their own sake. That is their
atonement, their purification.
Q. But the work is not being done in the manner you desire. The feeling of
high and low pervades every vein.

A. I admit it. Untouchability cannot be said to have disappeared
so long as this feeling persists. It is not enough to ‘‘touch” Harijans.
Q. Such a feeling of high and low prevails even among us, Parsis. We
have amongst us the first, the second and the third which do not mix with one
another.

A. You are bound to be influenced by us since you have lived
with us for so many years. Once a Parsi gentleman came to me and
told me that the differences of high and low were created by God. I
told him: “You are a Parsi and yet talk like this. But you have been
influenced by us and now you have come to repeat it.”
Q.

This feeling prevails among Muslims too.

A. The same is true of Christians as well. Recently, there was a
conference of Christian untouchables in Madras. Has the world ever
heard of anything like this?
Q.

I think the feeling of untouchability has to be banished from our hearts, is

it not?
A. Everything would be incomplete without it. If untouchability
disappears from Hindu religion, many other problems will be solved. I
also expect the Hindu-Muslim problem to solve itself, because it also
has its root in the feeling of high and low.
Q. As a matter of fact, Zoroaster himself never intended to establish a religion.
The religion came to be established later. Now the feeling of distinction between
themselves and others has gone deep in the minds of Parsis.

A. It has been taken from the Hindu religion. It comes from the
Indian atmosphere. If it disappears from the Hindu religion, it will
1

This appeared under the sub-title, “For the Whole World”.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

359

disappear from elsewhere too. Do you think that I would be
convinced that untouchability was wiped out just because some wells
had been dug for them or some temples had been thrown open to
them? These are only indications. If even this much does not happen,
all our talking would be in vain. But we shall have to go much further.
Q.

For Harijan work, do you have only Hindus in mind or the other people as

well?
A.

The thought of others is of course implied—in the same way
as India’s independence is for the good of the entire world. But I do
not go on harping on that point; I talk only about swaraj for India.
Similarly, I am absolutely confident that there are going to be
widespread consequences of the solution of the Harijan problem.
It would affect the whole world. Unless I had that hope, why should I
get involved in Harijan work? It is already implied in my writings. I
have asserted that I wish to serve the whole world through it.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 3-9-1933

452. ADVICE TO A HARIJAN WORKER 1
[Before September 3, I933]
I do not need any scheme. I want a person who would act. What
purpose would a scheme serve without a person to carry it out? What
can we do with a scheme if we did not have the capacity to implement
it? You are planning to take up leather work. I like leather work very
much. But you have not learnt it. It is not enough that you can make
slippers. We have also to take up the work of tanning. If you have that
ability, your work and mine would become easy. We do not want to
set up big factories. Wee have to see how better tanning of leather
could be done in the villages. What did Madhusudan Das do? He
gathered the tanners of Utkal and studied how they did their tanning.
He was not satisfied with it, and he went to Germany and learnt leather
work there. He brought a German [expert] with him and set up a
factory. It is in Cuttack. It is no longer under him. I do not know its
present condition. Many Harijans learnt the work during the days of
Madhusudan Das. Like Madhusudan Das you too should first master
1

360

This appeared under the sub-title, “Training for Service”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

the craft. It cannot be done in one month’s time. You can do very
well, if you learn it properly. I can make arrangements for your
training.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 3-9-1933

453. DISCUSSION ON FASTING1
[Before September 3, 1933]
What we regard as dharma, they [the orthodox] regard as
adharma. It is ignorance; but you cannot undertake a fast unto death
to counter it. It is not a matter for fasting unto death. Such a fast can
be undertaken on very rare occasions. It is a very strong measure.
This problem is very complex. A conditional fast can be undertaken
only in exceptional circumstances. That is why I thought of an
unconditional fast2, a fast without any conditions, for the purification
of the Hindu religion. It would be good to have a relay fast just as
Ganga-water kavad 3. If the right persons undertook a right fast for the
purification of religion, it is bound to have its impact on the people. It
is not an asuri 4 act, but a purely daivi5 act. No one can call it coercion
if somebody resorted to a 21-day or a 50-day fast for ridding the
Hindu religion of the evil that has entered into it, because that fast
would not to be broken, whatever the people might do.
Q.

How do you see coercion in my proposed fast unto death?

A. You are not concerned with the trustees of the temple. What
appears adharma to you is regarded as dharma by them. How can
you undertake a fast in protest against it? Can you make anyone give
up his dharma by resorting to a fast? Let me explain to you when a
conditional fast can be undertaken. Suppose my brother is a
drunkard. He considers drinking an evil but is not able to give it up. It
would be justifiable if I went on a fast till he gave up drinking. But
when he declares his intention of renouncing his Hindu faith and
1

This appeared under the sub-title, ‘‘Limitations of Fasting”.
From May 8 to 29, 1933
3
Ganga water used to be transported by a relay of runners in a kavad, i.e., a
pole carried on the shoulder with pots at the ends.
4
Demoniacal
5
Godly
2

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

361

embracing Christianity, my fast to prevent him from doing it would be
coercion. So, for the time being, your duty is to meet the trustees,
argue your point with them, convey your stand through their friends,
create public opinion. If public opinion is favourable it must be
demonstrated to the trustees, as was done in Guruvayur referendum1.
If public opinion is found to be favourable, maybe the trustees might
agree. Such a poll cannot be conducted by just asking people to raise
their hands at a public meeting; you should go from door to door to
collect the votes.
Q. In spite of all this, if they are not convinced, what should I do except going
on a fast unto death?

A. Even then it cannot be said that a fast unto death may be
undertaken. This is not going to purify the Hindu religion. There are
many features of the Hindu religion that call for reform, but people
are still not agreeable to it. I have said that the Hindu religion would
be wiped out unless untouchability is removed. And it is literally true.
But what are we going to do if God Himself has willed that the Hindu
religion should perish? We must be prepared to lay down our lives;
but there should be an occasion for it.

[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 3-9-1933

454. NO EXAGGERATION 2
The following is the gist of a letter from a Gujarati
correspondent:
I have read in the Harijanbandhu of the 27th August an
article 3 by you in which you say, “I can live some days atleast
without the daily bread, but I cannot live without Harijan service
for one single minute.” I have observed an exaggeration of
expression in many of your writings. People are often confused
by utterances like this. If every moment of your life is occupied
in Harijan service, how can you find time for other activities?
You cannot serve two masters at one and the same time. I realize
that for you life is an indivisible whole and your various
1

In December 1932.
The original Gujarati appeared in Harijanbandhu, 3-9-1933. This was
published as “condensed from Gujarati”.
3
Vide “The Breath of My Life”, 23-8-1933.
2

362

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

activities are only different phases of it. But the masses cannot
comprehend this thing. They would naturally infer from the
foregoing sentence that you are going to devote the rest of your
life to Harijan service. But that is incorrect, for you will no
doubt take up other activities also as occasion arises. This
exaggeration of expression has, I believe, even in the past
created a confusion in people’s minds. Therefore, if you keep
more sense of proportion in your speech and writing, chances of
misunderstanding could be reduced to a minimum. I have
written this out of regard for you and ask to be forgiven if I am
found guilty of presumption.
It is not clear to me whether the correspondent is himself
confounded by my ‘exaggeration’ or whether he represents the
confusion of others only. I should be pained, if it is true that many are
confounded by my writings. For I believe I have a keen sense of
proportion. As a worshipper of Truth I must eschew all exaggeration.
What I have written about Harijan service is, I believe, literally true.
But Harijan service does not exclude all other service. One can devote
oneself simultaneously to several things which are connected with one
another. What I have said of Harijan service can, for instance, with
equal truth be said of the service of Daridranarayana1 also, for that
service is not inconsistent with the service of the Harijans. Human life
is not mechanical. To every one of us there are things as dear as life
itself, and one can say that life would be impossible without them. The
measure of the truthfulness of such statements would depend on the
intensity of one’s devotion to the causes espoused. While in the case
of some people separation from a cause claimed to be dear as life
itself will not kill them, with others such a separation will be nothing
less than a sentence of death.
But it would be wrong to take such devotion to imply that
outward activity connected with the object of devotion must go on
from moment to moment. It certainly does imply that outward action
must be taken whenever occasion demands it. The seed we sow in the
ground does not sprout immediately, but if it is not dead, it grows
every minute, though we see it as a plant or tree only after many days
or months. The process of growth we see in the physical world we
should expect to see in the mental and spiritual world also.
1

God in the form of the poor

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

363

The truth of my statement about Harijan service can be
measured, if at all, only after my death. The full measure is known
only to the all-knowing God. For He alone knows our intentions. it
can, therefore, try to satisfy the correspondent, and others who think
like him, only by repeating that there is no exaggeration in my claim
that Harijan service is the breath of my life and that, therefore, I
cannot live for one moment without it.
Harijan, 30-9-1933

455. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS 1
September 3, 1933
It is needless for me to redeclare my absolute faith in nonviolence and 2 utter disbelief in violence as a means of 3 gaining
political rights or political freedom. I deeply deplore the assassination
of the Midnapore Magistrate4. But at the same time it is impossible not
to regret that the rulers will not only not redress the wrongs which lead
to such assassinations but5 insist on ruling by counter-terrorism, which
the Ordinances undoubtedly mean.6
The Hindu, 4-9-1933; also G.N. 1469

456. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
September 3, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I have your letter. Evidently your presence has served as a tonic
for Mother. If she remains free from fever, you should be free to
move out for a few days. If so, you should come to me as early as you
can. I am anxious to leave here on Friday or Saturday next for
Bombay and be there for about a week and then go to Wardha.
1

According to G.N. version, a copy of this statement with slight verbal
variations was sent to Agatha Harrison.
2
The G.N. version here adds “my”.
3
The G.N. version has “method for” instead of “means of ”.
4
B. E. G. Burge, who was assassinated by three Bengali youths on September
2. The sentence in the G.N. version reads: “I therefore cannot but deeply deplore the
assassination of the District Magistrate of Midnapore.”
5
The G.N. version here adds “will”.
6
The G.N. version here reads: “which the Ordinance Rule undoubtedly means”.

364

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

I do not know the young man1 you mention. I know the family
well. I must have met him too. But I could not identify him, if
I saw him. The family has liberal traditions. Krishna is therefore likely
to be quite happy with them. I have written to Anasuyabehn about
him. She of course knows all these people intimately. But meanwhile I
see no harm in your sending for him and seeing him and presenting
him to Mother if you find him acceptable. On hearing from
Anasuyabehn, I shall wire to you, if necessary. Of course, I am
otherwise keeping the matter quite secret. I take it that you have not
minded my writing to Anasuyabehn.
Kamala needs freedom from excitement and worry. I am
inclined to think that she is the least unhappy in Bombay with Naoroji
sisters. I therefore feel that you should bring her when you come here
and then leave her here.
In the expectation that we must meet soon, I say nothing of the
political situation or of my fasting exploits. I am ‘steadily regaining
lost strength.
Poor Mahadev is in Belgaum. It is good to go through the fire.
Do please tell Mother that she is continually in my thoughts.
She has to live long enough to see the clouds lifting.
My love to you all.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

457. LETTER TO RUKMINIDEVI BAJAJ
September 3, 1933
2

CHI. RUKMINI ,

I was wondering whether you would even write to me, when I
got your letter. I do get reports about you from time to time. You
have given a rather big name to the child. Before him, poor Madhav3
will seem plebeian. I hope you and Devendra keep good health. I am
fairly well. Mirabehn, Brijkrishna and Prabhavati look after me. Most
1

Gunottam Hutheesing
Daughter of Maganlal Gandhi
3
Gandhiji had suggested Madhavdas and Gopaldas as names for the addressee’s
son, Devendra, which means ‘the Lord of gods’.
2

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

365

probably I will go to Bombay on Friday and from there to Wardha.
Blessings to you both from

BAPU
S HRI BENARSIDAS BAZAJ
THATHERI BAZAAR , B ENARES C ITY
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9154

458. LETTER TO SARALADEVI SARABHAI
September 3, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

I have your letter. I shall be in a position to see you on
Wednesday. Do come with Bharati1 and Suhrid2. Whatever may be my
ideas on education, the brother and sister will definitely have my
blessings. I know that for you, going to England at this time is a
tribulation. I have known for many years that whatever you do is with
a sense of duty.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 11138. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

459. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
[Before September 4, 1933] 3
CHI. JAMNALAL,

N. is off the rails again. I can see signs of her unsettled mind in
her letters. Till now she was all for Hinduism, and now it is
Christianity. That also will be good if she is serious about it. But it
doesn’t seem to me that she is. Her imagination tosses her from one
thing to another. The vow of silence seems to have unsettled her mind
all the more. Read the accompanying letter and then give it to her. If
you can find time, also have a talk with her. Or Vinoba may do so. If
Dwarakanath can do anything let him try to calm her.
1
2
3

366

Addressee’s daughter and son
ibid
According to the source, the letter was received on September 4, 1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

You must have received my wire1. I certainly have many things
to discuss with you, but I don’t wish to drag you here. At first I felt
that I should pay a visit to Bombay for a few days and then go to
Wardha. But for the last two or three days I have become a little
undecided. Perhaps it may be better to go to Wardha first and then to
Bombay. But I am thinking. Since Jawaharlal has been released, it is
necessary that I should see him also. I can do that even in Wardha,
However. Ultimately, what is decreed will happen. I, therefore, don’t
make any plans.
My health is improving day by day. I can drink two pounds of
milk and eat vegetables and fruit.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2924

460. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September 4, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I had your postcard. There has been no letter after that. I wrote
one postcard to you. I hope you have been able to keep up your
health. I have made you all prisoners and escaped myself. How
strange!
I don’t worry about you, for I believe that your equanimity will
help you to remain unaffected by anything.
I am improving now. I intend to leave for Bombay next Friday.
I shall probably stay there for about a week. After that, I intend to go
to Wardha.
I had Jamna’s letter. Let me know your plans. I had a long letter
from Chimanlal2.
At present, Ba, Mira, Prabhavati, Mathuradas, Chandrashankar
and Nair are with me. Brijkrishna spends the whole day with me. I get
more service than I need.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8392. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
1
2

Dated August 30; vide “Telegram to Jamnalal Bajaj”, 30-8-1933.
Chimanlal Shah

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

367

461. LETTER TO PARIKSHITLAL L. MAJMUDAR
September 4, 1933
BHAI PARIKSHITLAL,

I have read your letter to Chandrashankar. If you have come to
know what made the Hindus of Vina abandon their boycott
unconditionally, please let me know. Have they realized their
folly?
I hope necessary steps are being taken regarding the problem in
Bhalada. If the caste Hindus do not change their attitude, and if it is
possible, the Harijans may even have to be removed from such a
village. If there is anything else which is worth knowing, please let me
know. 1
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3997

462. LETTER TO SHOORJI VALLABHDAS
September 4, 1933
BHAI SHOORJI,

I was thinking of writing to you, when I got your letter. I hope
to reach Bombay on Friday. I will not, therefore, give you trouble by
asking you to come here. I am certainly eager to see you, but I will
have patience for a few days. I hope the girl’s health is improving,
and that you are well, too.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4095

1

368

Vide “Congratulations”, 10-9-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

463. A LETTER
Silence Day, September 4, 1933
CHI. . . .1

I got your letter three or four days ago and felt pity for you.
I am observing silence today and so I have found the time to write
this.
You cannot ride two horses at a time. If you wish to observe the
vow of brahmacharya, you should never be alone with your
wife or any other woman, leave alone sharing the same bed. If you
cannot control yourself and avoid being alone with her or stop
sleeping in the same bed with her, you should give up the vow of
brahmacharya. You should leave the Ashram, too, and lead an honest
householder’s life as others do. There is no disgrace in doing so.
Everybody should live with due regard to his strength. If anybody
attempts more than that, hypocrisy is bound to creep in. I would,
therefore, advise you to reflect carefully and come to a definite
decision. Your present way does not do justice to your wife either. She
cannot satisfy passion when she feels it, but you satisfy yours
whenever you please and, thereby, increase her suffering. We accept
the women’s independence, but your conduct does not show that you
know it. Think carefully about this and then do what seems best to
you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9511

464. LETTER TO DUDHIBEHN V. DESAI
September 4, 1933
CHI. DUDHIBEHN,

I got your letter. I had been waiting for one. Do write to me
occasionally. If you have any problem, let me know about it. Don’t
worry about me. I am regaining my strength now. I don’t know how
long I shall be out. I intend to go to Bombay on Friday, and from
1

The name has been omitted.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

369

there hope to go to Wardha after a week. Ba, Mirabehn and Prabhavati
are with me.
Blessings from

BAPU
S MT. DUDHIBEHN VALJI DESAI
C/ O DAKSHINAMURTI, B HAVNAGAR, K ATHIAWAR
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 3134. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

465. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
September 4, 1933
DEAR DAUGHTER AMTUSSALAAM,

How are you now? Ba told me that you were not well but I hope
you must have recovered by now. There is nothing to worry about
me. So long as God wishes to protect me nothing will happen to me.
And when He wishes to take me away no one here can keep me back.
Give up, therefore, all fear for me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: G.N. 288

466. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
P OONA ,

September 5, 1933
CHI. AMALA,

I have your letter together with the one from your mother. You
do not want me to write to her again, do you? If you wish me to, I will
write with pleasure.
The date of my reaching Wardha is not yet fixed, but it would
not be before the last week of the month.
While you say that chapatis are a nuisance and while you
consider them to be unwholesome, chapatis take no time in
preparation and are quite wholesome if they are made with whole
wheatmeal.
370

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

You say that Hindi is the first language you will know. Give me
the list of the 11 languages.
I am getting on well.
Give me your day’s diary.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

467. TELEGRAM TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
P OONA ,

September 6, 1933
JAMNALAL BAJAJ
WARDHA
GOING

LUCKNOW

BENARES

HILL

STATION

AT

PROBABLY
ONE

SATURDAY.

WEEK.

REACHING

UNNECESSARY.

ONCE.
I

GO

DO

TAKE

JAWAHARLAL
BOMBAY

WARDHA

NOT

TEN

REACHING

NEXT
EARLIER

WEEK.

DAYS
HERE

STAYING

TWENTY-THIRD.

AM KEEPING QUITE WELL. DISTRUST NEWSPAPER REPORT.

BAPU
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 116

468. STATEMENT ON HARIJAN DAY1
[September 7, 1933] 2
The Servants of Untouchables Society has declared 24th of this
month to be the Harijan Day. It is the anniversary of the Yeravda Pact,
miscalled Poona Pact. It is a happy coincidence that 24th is a Sunday.
It is to be hoped that the day will be celebrated in a manner befitting
the occasion. Each person, each Harijan organization, should take
stock of his or its year’s activity and contribution to the removal of
the canker of untouchability. Societies and individuals can make a
budget or resolution for the year to follow. Subscriptions can be
collected from door to door for the work to be done. All the various
activities that have hitherto been followed on Harijan Days will,
1
2

This appeared under the tide “Harijan Day”.
From The Bombay Chornicle, 9-9-1933

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

371

I have no doubt, be taken up with greater emphasis on the 24th
instant.
I hope that Harijans will also take stock of their contribution
towards their own purification and, therefore, the purification of
Hinduism. But there is no doubt that by far the greatest responsibility
rests on the shoulders of caste Hindus. Reformers should make it a
point of winning over the orthodox people to the movement
by gentleness, humility, self-sacrifice, and increasing purity of
character.
M. K. GANDHI

Harijan, 9-9-1933

469. INTERVIEW ON GOSEVA1
September 8, 19332
I don’t have sufficient enthusiasm to give a message,3
because nobody does goseva in accordance with my views. I had
explained these views to your President. I had also suggested the lines
along which improvements could be made in the present movement.
The President had agreed to implement my suggestions and had even
assured me that he would do so. But he didn’t keep his promise. What
is the use, then, of my giving a message?
GANDHIJI:

INTERVIEWER: This refers to only some of the workers engaged in goseva.
Many other persons and goshalas are doing this work. They all can know your views
on this movement only through a message. If you wish you can in the same message
point out the shortcomings and suggest improvements.

G. I may dispose of you with an ordinary message in the same
way as when a goseva worker approaches one for contribution; one
usually disposes of him by paying him a few coins. But I don’t think
that any useful purpose will be served by such a message.
I. Well, leaving aside the subject of message, may I ask you whether you would
like, after all these years, to revise any of your views on goseva expressed earlier?
What you had said was: ‘(I) goseva alone will bring swaraj nearer. (2) As long as cows
are being slaughtered, I feel myself being slaughtered. My efforts to save cows are
1

This is published as “Introduction” in the source.
The interview was concluded on a subsequent date, which is not ascertainable.
3
The interviewer, a representative of an institution, had asked Gandhiji for a
message for his monthly.
2

372

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

going on uninterruptedly. All my efforts are directed to stopping cow-slaughter.
Anyone who is not ready to give his life to save the cow is not a Hindu. (3) My
deepest aspirations are, eradication of untouchability and service of the cow. We shall
achieve swaraj only when we succeed in these two tasks. I see moksha lies in their
achievement.’
G. I wish to make no change in this statement of my views. But
in interpreting them, the context of the circumstances in which I
expressed them and the wide meaning which I give to goseva should
be kept in mind. In goseva of my conception, I include all living
creatures. Probably you do not know that I have said much more than
the remarks you have quoted. For instance, I had also said that the
ideal of cow-protection was the most important gift of Hinduism to
mankind. But this remark of mine referred only to goseva of my
peculiar conception.
I. I see what you mean. I will now ask one more question relating to the same
aspect. Some people say that while doing cow-protection work in a disinterested
spirit, one need not make any distinction between truth and untruth, and that any
means can be adopted for cow-protection. What is your view in this regard?

G. To sacrifice truth for the sake of cow-protection would
amount to sacrificing the cow herself. Similarly to betray truth
for the sake of a public cause is to betray that cause itself. These
peculiar views of mine have not commended themselves to the people,
and they are not convinced by them. I have, therefore, no desire to
interest myself in the present cow-protection movement. In fact, even
today I am doing my utmost for cow-protection. How that is so is a
riddle. What appears in newspapers will not help you to solve it. But I
myself am convinced about it. Maybe you have found the solution.
I.

Yes Sir, I understand what you mean.

G. I have made a deep study of the problem of goseva. Very few
would have visited as many goshalas as I have. I have carefully studied
the working of every institution I visited and have even written down
my opinion of them in the visitors’ books.
I. Will you then describe the defects that you have noticed in the present
cow-protection work?

G.

Those are mostly of the nature described in what you read

out.
I.

Well, then, according to you how can the cow be protected?

G.

I will explain all that, but now the time allotted for this

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

373

interview is over. So please come once again after fixing an
appointment. I will certainly grant an interview. We will discuss the
problem further then, and if you are really enthusiastic about this
work, then either I will co-operate with you or you will co-operate
with me and we will do this work together.
II
[After September 8, 1933]
I. If I have properly understood you, then the distinctive feature of your idea of
cow-protection is complete adherence to truth and non-violence, absence of
communal ill will, utmost forbearance and love, and attention to the economic
aspect, that is, increasing the number of dairies and tanneries and thereby the value of
cows. Isn’t this your particular point of view regarding goseva?

G. Perfectly true. Those who slaughter cows are ignorant people.
Their ignorance cannot be removed by killing them. To remove their
ignorance efforts of a different kind, love and sympathy, are required.
And from the economic point of view also, there is no other way but
to increase the value of cows.
I. Surely it is not your view that, while doing all this, we need not share or try
to preserve the peculiar religious sentiment, that is, the feeling of reverence
for cows?

G. No, no. on the contrary, this sentiment or feeling of reverence
will be kept alive and preserved only by implementing all the items in
my plan of goseva.
I. If we accept your idea, what should we do in future for the progress of the
work? Would you suggest a yearly or three-yearly plan?

G.

Whether you have a yearly or a three-yearly plan, you must
do these things:
1. Stress should be laid on consumption of cow’s milk and
consumption of other milk should be stopped;
2. efforts should be made to utilize all the parts of the dead
body of a cow and to see that no part is wasted, and propaganda
should be carried on in this regard;
3. efforts should be made to improve the breed of cows;
4. the cow’s yield of milk should be improved, etc.
I.

Do you expect goseva workers who are engaged in these activities to work
also for removal of untouchability and for Hindu-Muslim unity?
G.

374

Not at all. It would be enough if they realize the wider
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

significance of goseva. Much can be done through such awareness
itself. It would only mean that you had taken up one special aspect of
goseva. It is in this sense that I claim to be doing goseva work while
working for the removal of untouchability.
I.

If we wish to work in the manner suggested by you, what help or
co-operation from you can we expect?
G. I believe that certain virtues are essential for public workers.
If you or anybody from among you pass that test, then I can free
them from financial worries.
I.

Do you think it necessary that a paper like Harijan should be started for this

work?
G.

To start a newspaper is the next step, or rather the last step.
First of all an organization should start functioning, inspired by a
particular ideal. Only then would it be proper to start a paper. That
has been my attitude in regard to Harijan.
I. At present we lay great stress on the unification of all institutions engaged
in goseva. How far do you approve of this?

G. It is a very difficult task, but I totally approve of it. If you
succeed in it, I will congratulate you.

[From Gujarati]
Goseva, pp. 5-9

470. WAS IT COERCIVE?
In the current number of The Modern Review, amongst the
notes which are always worth reading, there are some paragraphs on
my most recent fast1. The writer of these notes quotes the following
from my letter 2 to the authorities dated 14th August last and then
remarks3:
. . . But we . . . are constrained to observe that, though fasts undertaken
solely for one’s own purification and consolation are the exclusive concern of
the individual fasting, fasts undertaken directly or indirectly to bring about
political or social changes have coercive effect, even though coercion may
not be intended. Like other coercion, this sort of unintended coercion . . . does
not lead to universally sincere conduct and lasting reform.
1

From August 16 to 23, 1933
Vide “Letter to Home Secretary, Government of Bombay”, 14-8-1933.
3
Only extracts are reproduced here.
2

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

375

I propose to deal with this criticism because it affects a matter
that is by no means closed. Fasting has been for years past an integral
part of my life and I may have to resume it whether outside or inside
prison walls. I cannot, therefore, write too often on the science of
fasting, if I may use the sacred word ‘science’ in connection with my
fasts. It is necessary to write on this matter as well for those who would
thoughtlessly imitate me, as for those who criticize me sometimes
without being in possession of full data.
With much of what the writer says I can readily agree. I do
admit that my fast of September1 did unfortunately coerce some
people into action which they would not have endorsed without my
fast. I do admit also that my last fast coerced the Government
into releasing me. I admit, too, that such coercion can and does
sometimes lead to insincere conduct. This is about the extent of my
agreement.
These admissions do not cut at the very root of fasts. They only
show that there is great need for caution and that special qualifications
are necessary for those who would resort to fasting as a method of
reform or securing justice.
In any examination of moral conduct, the intention is the chief
ingredient. Being concerned with the morality of my action, I asserted
that the intention behind the fast was not to exert coercion or pressure
upon the Government. I wanted the Government to take me at my
word and let me die in peace, if they could not see the justice of
granting me the facilities I desired. The production of my letter would
have absolved them from the charge of heartlessness, if I had died in
prison. I did, indeed, know that my fast was likely, in spite of the
declaration of my intention to the contrary, to influence Government
to some extent. But one may not be deflected from the right course
for fear of possible but unintended consequences. If one were to be so
deterred it could be shown that hardly any great action could be
undertaken.
To make my meaning clearer, let me take the September fast. It
is a better illustration for examination seeing that it was unconnected
with the Government. It was intended to influence both the caste and
the Harijan Hindus. But there the intention was most decidedly not to
induce, irrespective of merits, the decision I desired, but it was to stir
1

376

September 20 to 26. 1932.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

the Hindus to action on my submission. The intention was completely
fulfilled and to that extent the fast was not, therefore, from the
practical standpoint, open to objection. That it went beyond the
intention and coerced some people into giving a decision against their
conviction was unfortunate. But such conduct is of daily occurrence
in the ordinary affairs of life. People do not always act independently
of others or of surrounding circumstances. But I am able to say that
vast majority of people concerned with the Pact would not accept it
without a full and free discussion, and that what they accepted was
accepted because they considered it to be on the whole just and fair.
They did not sacrifice principle for saving my life.
And now whilst I am on the Pact I may observe parenthetically
that, if any injustice was done, it is not yet beyond repair. If injustice
can be proved to the satisfaction of the parties concerned, it is not too
late to redress it. And I need hardly give the assurance that I should
regard it as my sacred duty to exert myself to the best of my ability in
helping to secure redress of any real injustice.
To revert to the issue under examination, I may say that
I began my experiments in fasting on any large scale as an instrument of reform in 1913.1 I had fasted often enough before, but not in
the manner of 1913. My definite opinion is that the general result of
my numerous fasts was without doubt beneficial. They invariably
quickened the conscience of the people interested in and sought to be
influenced by those fasts. I am not aware of any injustice having been
perpetrated through those fasts. If Bengal proves injustice, it will be an
exception. In no case was there any idea of exercising coercion on
anyone. Indeed, I think that the word coercion would be a misnomer
for the influence that was exerted by the fasts under criticism.
Coercion means some harmful force used against a person who is
expected to do something desired by the user of the force. In the fasts
in question, the force used was against myself. Surely, force of
self-suffering cannot be put in the same category as the force of
suffering caused to the party sought to be influenced. If I fast in order
to awaken the conscience of an erring friend whose error is beyond
question, I am not coercing him in the ordinary sense of the word.
The writer of the notes says that there can be fasts that have no
“coercive effect”, but if the expression ‘coercive effect’ can be
1

The reference is to the fast undertaken to atone for the moral lapse on the part
of an inmate of the Phoenix Ashram.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

377

lawfully used for my fasts, then in that sense, all fasts can be proved to
have that effect to a greater or less extent. The fact is that all spiritual
fasts always influence those who come within the zone of their
influence. That is why spiritual fasting is described as tapas. And all
tapas invariably exerts purifying influence on those in whose behalf it
is undertaken.
Of course, it is not to be denied that fasts can be really coercive.
Such are fasts to attain a selfish object. A fast undertaken to wring
money from a person or for fulfilling some such personal end would
amount to the exercise of coercion or undue influence. I would
unhesitatingly advocate resistance of such undue influence. I have
myself successfully resisted it in the fasts that have been undertaken or
threatened against me. And if it is argued that the dividing line
between a selfish and an unselfish end is often very thin, I would urge
that a person who regards the end of a fast to be selfish or otherwise
base should resolutely refuse to yield to it, even though the refusal
may result in the death of the fasting person. If people will cultivate
the habit of disregarding fasts which in their opinion are taken for
unworthy ends, such fasts will be robbed of the taint of coercion and
undue influence. Like all human institutions, fasting can be both
legitimately and illegitimately used. But as a great weapon in the
armoury of satyagraha, it cannot be given up because of its possible
abuse. Satyagraha has been designed as an effective substitute for
violence. This use is in its infancy and, therefore, not yet perfected.
But as the author of modern satyagraha I cannot give up any of its
manifold uses without forfeiting my claim to handle it in the spirit of
a humble seeker.
Harijan, 9-9-1933

471. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
‘PARNAKUTI’,

September 9, 1933
MY DEAR BROTHER,

I like your letter.1
1
On September 4, the addressee had among other things written: “I was
touched by your reply. It was full and reasoned. Neither of us forms an opinion in a
hurry or drops it in a hurry. But there is a satisfaction in knowing the other side. In all
circumstances, we shall carefully understand and make allowances for each other. . . . I
plead for Congress being freed from your rule. If you wait for its consent to the
course, a very long delay is inevitable. Grant the freedom immediately. Must you,
like the British Raj, put off the consummation till it becomes inevitable?”

378

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

I want you to continue to strive with me and believe, as Gokhale
used to believe of me, that whilst I often appeared to be
uncompromising, I had a compromising and accommodating nature.
I have always prized the certificate that he gave me and have
endeavoured to live up to it. If the freedom that you desire for the
Congress was in my giving, I assure you that I would give it today, but
it is not such a simple performance. When at Patna I surrendered all
powers to the Swaraj Party,1 Motilalji handsomely admitted that,
though I was always ready to give, the party was only then to take
them. The fact is that I do not want power. I look upon it as a
privileged service. The moment I feel that I can get out of it to the
benefit of the Congress, I will not fail. However, you may depend
upon me that I shall strain every nerve to adopt your advice. A great
deal will depend upon Jawaharlal, whom I expect here on Saturday.
Love.
M. K. GANDHI
Letters of Srinivasa Sastri, pp. 264-5

472. LETTER TO DHIRU C. JOSHI
September 9, 1933
CHI. DHIRU,

I would be happier if you write with ink and improve your
handwriting. Pay careful attention to your studies. Write a letter to
Chhaganlal2 and send it to Rama3 who will pass it on to him along with
her own.
Take plenty of exercise. Write to me regularly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5813

1

At the All-India Congress Committee meeting held in September 1925.
Addressee’s father and mother
3
ibid.
2

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

379

473. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI A. MEHTA
September 9, 1933
BHAISHRI BHAGWANJI,

You have done well in going to Rangoon. I hope your trip will
bear fruit and there will be complete understanding among the
brothers.1
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5818. Also C.W. 3041. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

474. LETTER TO MAGANLAL P. MEHTA
September 9, 1933
CHI. MAGANLAL2 ,

I had hoped to get a letter from you and Manjula 3. She must
have got my previous letter. I had written it to the Mogul Street
address.
I enclose Jakibeans’4 letter, which I received today. Think over it
and reply to her.
Write to me a detailed letter. I can work well enough now. How
is your business? Do you continue your study? Do you go out for
walks? Urmila5 must have grown quite a bit now. I would be very
happy indeed if an understanding is reached.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5819. Also C.W. 3042. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

1

The reference is to the dispute among the sons of Dr. Pranjivan Mehta over
their ancestral property; vide also the following item.
2
Youngest son of Dr. Pranjivan J. Mehta
3
Addressee’s wife
4
Jayakunwar Doctor, addressee’s sister
5
Addressee’s daughter

380

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

475. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI P. PANDYA
Saturday, September 9, 1933
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

I had both your letters. You do not seem to have received mine.
I am sure by and by you will decide to stay permanently in Vadaj. For
the present, if you find it convenient you may stay in the Parsi
bungalow and cook your own meals. If you find a Harijan who can
cook to your taste, train him. Do your work with due regard for your
health. I have also explained to Chimanlal that it should not be at the
cost of health. If Liladhar himself treats Shanti, I am helpless. There
will be no harm, however, if he has the necessary knowledge. Write to
me regularly. I shall be leaving for Bombay next Thursday or Friday.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI BHAGWANJI
C/ O DR. L ILADHAR DHARAMSHI
OLD VADAJ , A HMEDABAD
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 362. Courtesy: Bhagwanji P. Pandya

476. LETTER TO MAHENDRA V. DESAI
September 9, 1933
CHI. MANU 1 ,

I got your letter. It is better to use pen for writing. I think I
owed you a letter. And now you will owe me one. You seem to be
making good progress in your study.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 3159. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

477. LETTER TO DUDHIBEHN V. DESAI
September 9, 1933
CHI. DUDHIBEHN,

I got your letter. I am all right. I will go to Bombay next week.
You will find herewith letters for the five boys. I hope when Kusum
1

Eldest son of Valji G. Desai

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

381

comes over there she will keep good health. You are doing right in
looking after all our children [of the Ashram]. That is just the right
thing for us to do.
Valji is in Nasik Road Central Jail. He keeps good health. I have
heard that all the prisoners are well. Write to me from time to time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 3135. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

478. LETTER TO MADALASA BAJAJ
September 9, 1933
CHI. MADALASA,

I got your letter. You should not be afraid that you will be a
burden on Vinoba. It is a teacher’s duty that he should help a pupil to
overcome his or her shortcomings. If you were perfect, why would
you require a teacher’s help?
Why are you so much afraid of getting your hair cut? Like grass
it will grow again. I have seen the hair of many girls, who had it cut,
grow even longer than it was before. If, therefore, you are not very
much in love with your hair, get it cut. As for your dress, you don’t
require much change except that you should wear shorts. The dress
for a girl like you can easily be made comfortable. But we shall meet
shortly now.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 315

479. LETTER TO BIPIN BIHARI VARMA
September 9, 1933
BHAI BIPIN,

I have your letter. I am pained to learn of your illness. May God
grant you quick recovery. As for the money, talk over with
382

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

Brijkishorebabu. I have not yet made up my mind. Write to me again
if I am still out. I am sending your letter to Brijkishorebabu.
Blessings from

BAPU
S JT. B IPIN BIHARI VARMA, BAR-AT -LAW
S HAKARPUR P.O. NARKATIA GANJ
C HAMPARAN
From a photostat of the Hindi: C.W. 9669

480. DISCUSSION WITH A FRIEND1
[Before September 10, 1933]
Don’t lose heart. Of course I can understand your deep
sentiment.
But how much you suffered!

Oh, it was the body that suffered, besides I had invited the
suffering myself. When God creates for us a situation involving
suffering He also gives us the strength to bear it. It would surely be
painful for me if I did not act on His prompting to undertake a fast.
This is not a new thing in my life.
But what about [the risk to] your life?

The path of life is not straight and smooth. It has so many turns
and twists, so many ups and downs. It is not like a railway track on
which, once released, the train simply goes on.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 10-9-1933

1

This and the following two items are extracted from Chandrashankar Shukla’s
“Weekly Letter”. This appeared under the sub-title, “God’s Insurance”.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

383

481. ADVICE TO GIRLS, PARNAKUTI KANYASHALA 1
[Before September 10, 1933]
GANDHIJI: If in order to keep up and strengthen one’s faith in
God man is called upon to undergo this much trouble, he should be
prepared to do so.
A GIRL:

G.

Should prayers be compulsory or voluntary?

Is eating compulsory or voluntary?

A GIRL:

one cannot do without it.

G.

In that case, we should not be able to do without prayer too.
Just as our body cannot grow without food, our atman cannot grow
without prayer. Just as food is the nourishment for our body, prayer is
the nourishment for our atman. Without prayer the atman becomes
lustreless. How can we say that it is killed? For, the Bhagavad Gita
tells us that the atman is deathless. But atman may be deluded. There
are countless people in the world who do not pray, they are as good as
lost. He who is not conscious of the atman is only an ignorant fool.
Prayer can never be said to be compulsory. It can be only voluntary.
If anyone insists on making prayer compulsory, it will result in
hypocrisy. But we must make it compulsory of our own accord. It is
not one’s duty to eat. One can do without eating for a while. One can
never eat when one has already eaten too much. But one can never
have too much of prayers. We must make prayer so obligatory for
ourselves that we can never do without it. If you girls resolve that you
would not tell a lie even if you get a kingdom in return, would it be
called compulsory or voluntary? What if you have decided on your
own and made it a rule to offer your prayers at 4 o’clock in the
morning and at 7.30 in the evening —even at the instance of the
elders? In such matters we must be hard on ourselves. You can pray
only if you have made such a rule. Nothing in the world happens
without a law of its own.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 10-9-1933
1

This appeared under the sub-title, “Should Prayers be Compulsory or
Voluntary?” C. S. Shukla had reported that in answer to a question put by one of the
girls as to why he went on fast, Gandhiji was explaining the significance of his
recent three fasts.

384

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

482. ADVICE TO A STUDENT 1
[Before September 10, 1933]
I am asking you to spin for half an hour every day. Do you
think it is too much? Suppose you spin only enough to bring you one
pice. If you multiply it by 30 crores it would mean 30 crore pice.
How much would it amount to in terms of rupees in a year? The
national wealth of this poor country would increase to that extent and
the problem of poverty would be largely solved. This is not asking too
much from you.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 10-9-1933

483. WHAT SHOULD A BRAHMIN DO?
A Maharashtrian writes:2

I hope not many persons have had the experience that this
Brahmin has had. Of course, no one should have it. Anyone who is
qualified for a job should get one. There should be no discrimination
in this regard, on the basis of caste, varna or religion. It should be easy
for any person belonging to this country to find himself a job, or
practise a profession here.
This represents the ideal. Ideas of ‘high’ and ‘low’ are
deep-rooted in our country and hence caste, varna and religion are
given greater attention than merit or demerits. Hence it is not
surprising that Brahmins are not given employment where there is a
ban on their recruitment. Unfortunate incidents will persist, because of
our sins and the rot that has entered our religion. We should,
therefore, suffer them in a spirit of atonement.
But then, why should one who wishes to observe the dharma
ordained for a Brahmin look for employment? Those who profess to
be Brahmins, should spread Brahmavidya3 amongst the people and
for livelihood depend upon religiously-inclined patrons. A Brahmin
1

Who had approached Gandhiji after the evening prayers. This appeared under
the sub-title, “The Price of an Autograph”.
2
The letter is not translated here. The correspondent had pointed out that
an educated gentleman had failed to obtain employment because of his being a
Brahmin.
3
Knowledge of Brahman
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

385

who is out to seek employment should find true consolation in the
practice of his own dharma, so that he will have no cause for despair.
I hope I will not be criticized on the ground that I who assert
that varnadharma has ceased to exist, take refuge in this system when
faced with a difficult situation. This is because, to say that
varnadharma has disappeared does not imply that no one should
observe it. Anyone who believes in it ought to observe it studiously as
far as he is personally involved. The. fact that this Brahmin claims to
be one suggests that he believes in varnadharma. Hence, I would
advise him to observe it and give up the lure of employment,
Even in these difficult times, individual Brahmins have rendered
no mean service to the country. Compared with others, the sacrifice of
Brahmins is indeed greater. However, the supreme sacrifice on the part
of Brahmins will be to give up all pursuit of wealth such as
employment, etc. The Brahmin’s dharma could shine only by
paramartha1. If the Brahmins understood the idea behind varnadharma and acted accordingly, it could easily be revived. Hence my
advice to this Brahmin and to those in a similar plight is that they
should become worthy of practising their Brahmin dharma, act
accordingly and give up the lure of wealth.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 10-9-1933

484. CONGRATULATIONS
Both caste Hindus and Harijans of Vina deserve to be
congratulated on having resolved the differences and the internal
disputes which had arisen between them and on having ended the
boycott of Harijans. I hope the harmonious relationship will endure. I
also compliment the Harijan Sevak Sangh on its successful efforts.
A similar atmosphere of tension and bitterness seems to have
been generated in Bhalada. As I write this, I have no information
whether or not a settlement has been reached there. I hope the people
have been reconciled there too.
Such quarrels are a disgrace to us. In every village the number
of our Harijan brothers and sisters is very small compared to the rest
of the population. To persecute them is like engaging an army to
1

386

Pursuit of the the highest values
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

fight ants. To suspect Harijans or to implicate them in the death or
disease of cattle, is nothing but superstition. It might be that some
Harijans were involved, but beating or boycotting them will not make
them give up the practice, but by having love for them, by spreading
knowledge amongst them, by treating them well and by regarding
them as our brothers and sisters, it is likely that they will overcome the
habit. In other words, the only royal road to make Harijans real
children of God (Hari) is by abolishing untouchability wholly.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 10-9-1933

485. LETTER TO MADHAVDAS AND KRISHNA KAPADIA
September 10, 1933
CHI. MADHAVDAS AND KRISHNA,

I got the letters of you both. Happiness and unhappiness are a
part of our lot, as heat and cold are. One day we may be owning a
motor-car and the next day we may have to go walking on foot. Why
need that make us unhappy? Never lose courage and patience. They
are one’s real wealth. We hope to arrive in Mani Bhavan on Friday
evening.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI MADHAVDAS GOKULDAS
S HAMJI S AVAJI ’S C HAWL
MANORDAS S TREET
F ORT, B OMBAY
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXII

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

387

486. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
September 10, 1933
CHI. KANTA,

I have written to Brother about you. I can understand your thirst
for learning. But the question before me is where and how to find the
money for such a purpose at the present time?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

487. MESSAGE TO WORLD FELLOWSHIP OF FAITHS
[Before September 11, 1933] 1
What message can I send through the pen if I am not sending
any through the life I am living?
The Hindu, 12-9-1933

488. MESSAGE TO SWADESHI EXHIBITION AND BAZAAR 2
[Before September 11, 1933] 3
If women do not uphold the cause of swadeshi, what can men
alone do? your exhibition is organized by women. It must therefore
be well ordered and well decorated.
The Hindu, 12-9-1933

1

This message was reported under the date-line: “Chicago, September 11,

1933”.
2

Organised by the Gujarat and Broach branches of All-India Women’s
Conference
3
The message was published under the date-line: “Ahmedabad, September 11,
1933”.

388

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

489. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
September 11, 1933
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

I had written you a letter specially but you have not
acknowledged it so far. I hope it has not gone astray. In it I had asked
you about Shrimati’s brother1, a barrister. Send me a telegram if you
have not got the letter. This should reach you tomorrow morning.
I have received Gulazarilal’s2 letters. Since I shall be seeing him
in Bombay I have not answered. I had earlier written to him to come
over if the matter was urgent. Ohterwise Bombay seemed a suitable
place in all respects.
Pass on the enclosed letter to the children.
I am well.
I hope to reach Bombay on Friday.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 32798

490. LETTER TO VIYOGI HARI
September 11, 1933
3

BHAI VIYOGI HARI ,

Your letter. We must, first of all, find out the rules of the
tramway. The problem is quite simple if it is only a matter of clothing.
Even otherwise we have to teach Harijans the rules of cleanliness. The
tramway authorities have no right to ask anyone to disclose his
identity, hence neither a Harijan nor anyone else is obliged to answer
the question. I shall certainly write for Harijan Sevak when I have the
time.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI VIYOGI HARI
S ERVANTS OF UNTOUCHABLES S OCIETY
BIRLA MILLS, D ELHI
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1094
1
2
3

Gunottam Hutheesingh, vide also “Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru”, 3-9-1933.
Gulzarilal Nanda, Secretary of the Ahmedabad Labour Association
Hindi poet and editor of Harijan Sevak

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

389

491. LETTER TO RAMA DEVI CHOWDHARY 1
September 11, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

Your letter to hand. Your work seems to be proceeding well.
May it progress thus. Keep writing to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI R AMA DEVI
S ERVANTS OF UNTOUCHABLES S OCIETY
C UTTACK
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2783

492. TALK WITH A JAPANESE MONK 2
[September 12, 1933] 3
You can help in several ways.4 Every country must attain its own
freedom. But those who are indebted to India can do her service in
many ways.
I am not a preacher. Rather, I am a man of action. I can only
show you how to work. This spinning-wheel is a wheel of upasana 5
and also a wheel of action. When you ply this wheel, you work and
pray at one and the same time. Here is work for you. This I
recommend to you. Look at the yarn it spins. When you have
mastered this, I shall show you some other work. I teach only action.
And there is no doubt about this. Learning to spin also means that
you should know cleaning and carding cotton. Then you can claim to
have joined the charkha movement. This is enough for the time being.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 17-9-1933

1
2
3
4
5

390

Wife of Gopabandhu Chowdhary
This appeared under the title ‘‘Charkha—the wheel of Action”.
From Gandhi:1915-1948——A Detailed Chronology
The Japanese monk was eager to serve India and had asked for instruction.
Prayer
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

493. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
September 14, 1933
As a rule, during my long course of public service, the next
moment’s step has been clear before me, but since my unexpected
release from prison on August 23 last, darkness has surrounded me.
The path of duly has, therefore, not been clear to me. My present state
of health is such that it may yet take several weeks for me to regain
my lost strength.
To seek imprisonment as soon as I was physically fit, or to
restrain myself for the interrupted year of imprisonment was the
question before me.
After hard praying and thinking, I have come to the conclusion
that up to the termination of the period of my sentence, that is, up to
August 3 next, I must not court imprisonment by offering aggressive
civil resistance. This, however, in no way affects the advice given in the
statement issued by me after the informal conference1 at Poona. That I
have to suspend action for myself is unfortunate but inevitable.
My release has placed me in a most embarrassing position, but
as a satyagrahi, that is, as a humble seeker of Truth, somehow or other
it offends my sense of propriety to court imprisonment in the
circumstances created by my discharge. Whatever the motive behind
it, I may not quarrel with my release. I must example examine act on
its merits. It appears to me to be petty to force the Government to
re-arrest me by taking aggressive action during the unexpired term of
imprisonment, unless extraordinary circumstances, which I cannot
foresee, arise compelling me to revise my decision. There is no room
for smallness in civil resistance.
This self-imposed restraint is a bitter cup. When I said at my
2
trial after arrest that to remain outside and be a helpless witness of the
devastating and demoralizing effect of the Ordinance Rule was an
unbearable agony, I stated a simple and unvarnished fact. That agony
is no less today than it was on August 4. But I must bear it.
I cannot be a willing party to an undignified cat-and-mouse
game if Government have any such thing in contemplation.
Therefore, when and if I am arrested again and denied Harijan service,
1
Vide “Speech at Leaders’ Conference, Poona-I”, 12-7-1933 and “Speech at
Leaders’ Conference, Poona-II”, 12-7-1933.
2
On. August 4; vide “Trial at Poona”, 4-8-1933.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

391

I would not hesitate, if I had the inner urge, to undertake a fast to the
finish which would not be broken even if Government released me, as
they did on August 23 last, when the danger point had been reached.
I must state the limitations of my self-restraint in clear terms.
Whilst I can refrain from aggressive civil resistance, I cannot, so long
as I am free, help guiding those who will seek my advice, and
preventing national movement from running into wrong channels. It
is an ever-growing belief with me that truth cannot be found by
violent means.
The attainment of national independence is to me a search after
truth. Terrorist methods, whether adopted by an oppressor or his
victim can, I am convinced, never be effectively answered by violent
resistance but only by civil resistance.
I would, therefore, be guilty of disloyalty to my creed, if I
attempted to put greater restraint on myself than I have adumbrated in
this statement. If then Government leave me free, I propose to devote
this period to Harijan service and if possible to such constructive
activities as my health may permit.
It is needless to repeat here that peace is as much a part of my
being as civil resistance. Indeed a civil resister offers resistance only
when peace becomes impossible. Therefore, so far as I am concerned
and so long as I am free, I shall make all endeavours in my power to
explore every possible avenue of an honourable peace.
The Bombay Chronicle, 15-9-1933

494. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
‘PARNAKUTI’, POONA ,

September 14, 1933
MY. DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I am glad you have written so fully and frankly.
When, on my return from London at the end of 1931, I found
you to have been suddenly snatched away from me,1 I felt the
separation keenly. I was, therefore, most anxious to meet you and
exchange views.2
1

The addressee was arrested on December 26, 1931, while on his way to see
Gandhiji.
2
Gandhiji and Jawaharlal Nehru met and had long discussions from september
10.

392

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

With much of what you have said in your letter I am in complete
agreement. The experience gained after the karachi Congress has, if
possible, strengthened my faith in the main resolution and the
economic programme referred to by you. I have no doubt in my
mind that our goal can be no less than ‘Complete Independence’. I
am also in whole-hearted agreement with you when you say that
without a material revision of vested interests the condition of the
masses can never be improved. I believe, too, though I may not go as
far as you do, that before India can become one homogeneous entity,
the princes will have to part with much of their power and become
popular representatives of the people over whom they are ruling
today. I can corroborate from first-hand experience much of what
you say about the Round Table Conference. Nor have I the slightest
difficulty in agreeing with you that in these days of rapid
intercommunication and a growing consciousness of the oneness of
all mankind, we must recognize that our nationalism must not be
inconsistent with progressive internationalism. India cannot stand in
isolation and unaffected by what is going on in other parts of the
world. I can, therefore, go the whole length with you and say that ‘we
should range ourselves with the progressive forces of the world’. But I
know that though there is such an agreement between you and me in
the enunciation of ideals, there are temperamental differences between
us. Thus you have emphasized the necessity of a clear statement of the
goal, but having once determined it, I have never attached importance
to the repetition. The clearest possible definition of the goal and its
appreciation would fail to take us there if we do not know and utilize
the means of achieving it. I have, therefore, concerned myself
principally with the conservation of the means and their progressive
use. I know that if we can take care of them, attainment of the goal is
assured. I feel too that our progress towards the goal will be in exact
proportion to the purity of our means. If we can give an ocular
demonstration of our uttermost truthfulness and non-violence, I am
convinced that our statement of the national goal cannot long offend
the interests which your letter would appear to attack. We know that
the princes, the zamindars, and those who depend for their existence
upon the exploitation of the masses, would cease to fear and distrust
us, if we could but ensure the innocence of our methods. We do not
seek to coerce any. We seek to convert them. This method may
appear to be long, perhaps too long, but I am convinced that it is the
shortest.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

393

In the main I agree with your interpretation of Sjt. Aney’s
instructions and my note upon them. I am quite clear in my mind that
had those instructions not been issued, the whole movement of civil
resistance would have collapsed through growing internal weakness;
for Congressmen were deluding themselves into the belief that there
were organizations effectively functioning to which they could look
for guidance, when, as a matter of fact, under the organized terrorism
which the Ordinance Rule means, organized functioning of Congress
Committees had become impossible. A false belief in the functioning
of organizations, rendered illegal and largely impotent, was fast
producing a demoralization which had to be arrested. There is no
such thing as demoralization in civil resistance properly applied. You
have said rightly that after all “civil disobe-dience is essentially an
individual affair”. I go a step further and say that so long as there is
one civil resister offering resistance, the move-ment cannot die and
must succeed in the end. Individual civil resisters do not need the aid
of an organization. After all an organization is nothing without the
individuals composing it. Sjt. Aney’s instructions were, therefore, I
hold, an affective answer to the Ordinances and if only men and
women belonging to the Congress will appreciate the necessity of
those instructions with all their implications, the Ordinances will be
rendered nugatory, at least so far as the resisters are concerned. They
can form a nucleus around which an army of invincible civil resisters
can be built up. Nothing ill Sjt. Aney’s instructions or in my note
would warrant the supposition that they preclude organized action by
Congressmen in any shape or form.
I would like to warn you against thinking that there is no
fundamental difference between individual cavil resistance and mass
civil resistance. I think that the fundamental difference is implied in
your own admission that “it is essentially an individual affair”. The
chief distinction between mass civil resistance and individual civil
resistance is that in the latter everyone is a complete independent unit
and his fall does not affect the others; in mass civil resistance the fall
of one generally adversely affects the rest. Again, in mass civil
resistance leadership is essential, in individual civil resistance every
resister is his own leader. Then again, in mass civil resistance, there is a
possibility of failure; in individual civil resistance failure is an
impossibility. Finally, a State may cope with mass civil resistance; no
State has yet been found able to cope with individual civil resistance.
394

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

Nor may much be made of my statement that an organization
which feels its own strength can at its own risk adopt mass civil
resistance. While, as an opinion, it is unexceptionable, I know that at
the present moment there is no organization that can shoulder the
burden. I do not want to raise false hopes.
Now about the secret methods. I am as firm as ever that they
must be tabooed. I am myself unable to make any exceptions.
Secrecy has caused much mischief and if it is not put down with a
firm hand, it may ruin the movement. There may be exceptional
circumstances that may warrant secret methods. I would forgo that
advantage for the sake of the masses whom we want to educate in
fearlessness. I will not confuse their minds by leading them to think
that under certain circumstances, they may resort to secret methods.
Secrecy is inimical to the growth of the spirit of civil resistance. If
Congressmen will realize that all property is liable to be confiscated at
any moment, they will learn to be utterly independent of it.
I quite agree with you that it is ludicrous for individuals to send
notices to the local authorities of their intention to offer a particular
form of civil disobedience. We do not want to make a great movement
ridiculous. Therefore when civil resistance is offered it should be
offered seriously and in an effective manner, in so far as this is
possible, in furtherance of the Congress programme.
I notice one gap in your letter. You make no mention of the
various constructive activities of the Congress. They became an
integral part of the Congress programme that was framed after mature
deliberations in 1920. With civil resistance as the background we
cannot possibly do without the constructive activities such as
communal unity, removal of untouchability and universalization of
the spinning-wheel and khaddar. I am as strong as ever about these.
We must recognize that whilst the Congressmen can be counted by
hundreds of thousands, civil resisters imprisoned have never amounted
to more than one lakh at the outside. I feel that there is something
radically wrong if paralysis has overtaken the remaining lakhs. There
is nothing to be ashamed of in an open confession by those who for
any reason whatsoever are unable to join the civil resisters’ ranks.
They are also serving the cause of the country and bringing it nearer
to the goal who are engaged in any of the constructive activities I have
named and several other kindred activities I can add to the list.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

395

Ordinance or no Ordinance, if individual Congressmen and Congresswomen will learn the art of contributing their share to the work of
building of the house of independence and realize their own
importance, dark as the horizon seems to us, there is absolutely no
cause for despair or disappointment.
Finally, if I can say so without incurring the risk of your
accusing me of egotism, I would like to say that I have no sense of
defeat in me and the hope in me that this country of ours is fast
marching towards its goal is burning as bright as it did in 1920; for I
have an undying faith in the efficacy of civil resistance. But as you are
aware, after full and prayerful consideration, I have decided not to
take the offensive during the unexpired period of the sentence of
imprisonment that was pronounced against me on the 4th of August
last by the court that met in Yeravda Jail. I need not go into the
reasons as I have already issued a separate statement about it. This
personal suspension, although it may be misunderstood for a while,
will show how and when it may become a duty. And if it is a duty, it
cannot possibly injure the cause.
Yours,

BAPU
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
P OONA
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch File No.
800(40)(14), pp. 153-61; also Mahatma, Vol. III, pp. 308-11

495. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
‘PARNAKUTI’, POONA ,

September 15, 1933
CHI. MANI,

Since you must be getting letters from Nasik 1 regularly, I did
not write any. Now I see that if I had written, you would have got my
letters. But let that be. If I am out of prison, I am sure, you will come
and see me wherever I may be. I know you will stay in Belgaum for a
1

396

Vallabhbhai Patel was then in Nasik Jail.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

couple of days and then go to Nasik. I hope you keep good health. I
am well. I am leaving for Bombay today. 21st Ahmedabad, 23rd
Wardha.
Blessings from

BAPU
S MT. M ANIBEHN P ATEL
C ENTRAL P RISON, H INDALAGA
BELGAUM

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, pp. 107-8

496. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
ON THE TRAIN FROM P OONA TO BOMBAY,

September 15, 1933
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

I got your letter in the train and I am writing this reply
immediately. I am going to Bombay. On Wednesday I will go to
Ahmedabad. I have to perform two ceremonies 1 there on Thursday.
You must have read about that. I expect to reach Wardha on the 23rd.
The programme after that will be decided there.
Don’t worry at all about my health. I do take, and will continue
to take, the utmost care. I can drink two pounds of milk and eat fruit
and vegetables. My weight is 100 pounds. The body is massaged
daily. Dr. Dinshaw takes great care of my health. He will come to
Bombay also. Premlilabehn literally bathed me in her love.
‘Parnakuti’ has practically become a second home to me. I am very
glad that you have continued honey. Should I ask her to send you
some? She will be coming to Bombay tomorrow. She frequently visits
the place. Aunt2 was with me all the time. She is an amazing mixture.
There is no doubt about her love, but she always creates difficulties.
Jawaharlal’s health is excellent. He has still preserved the qualities of
1

Unveiling a statue of Chinubhai Madhavlal and laying the foundation stone
of the Sheth Maneklal Jethalal Library; vide “Speech at Ahmedabad-I & II”,
21-9-1933.
2
Sarojini Naidu
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

397

character which his name1 connotes. He will now go to Lucknow. He
stayed in ‘Parnakuti’ with me. He was accompanied by Upadhyaya2.
Manzar Ali3 and Professor 4 also were there. Professor had fever, but
there is no cause for anxiety. Andrews has remained behind in Poona
for two days to have some rest. Devdhar5 has become very weak. Write
a letter inquiring after his health. Shastri 6 is all right now and has
returned to Poona. Most probably Chandrashankar will accopany me
on my visits. The only difficulty is about his health. Mathuradas7 also
is accompanying. But it is not certain whether he will come to Wardha.
Most probably he will accompany up to there. Mirabehn, of course,
will be in the party. Prabhavati also is with me up to now. I had a long
letter from Mahadev. He is fairly well. He reads and spins. Pannalal8
was in Poona and will now go to Bombay. Kaka also will come to
Bombay in two or three days. Ba is quite well. Do the needful about
your tooth. Have you kept up the study of Sanskrit? Don’t worry
about anything. I have written9 to Mani and told her that, when she is
released, she should go and see you and then see me wherever I am.
Kamala Nehru has a cardiac ailment. She is in Lucknow.
Why should we care whether or not we get any company?10 Why
should one who feels the presence of God need other company?
However, you have done right in writing about that, as also about
visits.
I have to draw up a tour programme for Harijan work in
consultation with Ghanshyamdas (Birla) and Thakkar Bapa.
Anandi is well on the whole. Narahari’s children have been ill
for some time. They are being properly looked after and treated.
Bablo has gone to live with his aunt. He went on crying till he had his
way. Nirmala11 is all right, and so also Sharda 12. I get letters from
1

‘Jawahar’, literally means a jewel.
Nehru’s Private Secretary
3
Manzar Ali Sokata, a Muslim leader
4
J. B. Kripalani
5
G. K. Devdhar
6
R. V. Sastri
7
Mathuradas Trikumji
8
Pannalal Jhaveri
9
Vide the preceding item.
10
The addressee was kept alone and the Government had been requested for a
companion.
11
Mahadev Desai’s sister
12
Daughter of Chimanlal Shah
2

398

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATM GANDHI

Anandi. In Bombay I shall be staying in Mani Bhavan, and in
Ahmedabad at Ranchhodbhai’s1 place.
Send for anything you want. Mahadev has taken over charge of
making envelopes2.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 22-5

497. SOME QUESTIONS
I have several letters from Harijans, lying in my file, putting a
number of questions. I take up the most important. Before answering
them, I would like to warn correspondents against putting questions
for the sake of putting them, or what is worse, of advertising
themselves. I would beseech them to avoid the vices or shortcomings
of the so-called superior classes or the so-called caste Hindus. I would
like the yet very few Harijan workers to be above board, incorruptible
and selfless, for they have to shoulder a tremendous burden. Whilst, as
I have repeatedly said in these columns, it is the duty of caste Hindus
to rid themselves of the curse of untouchability, ultimately the
salvation of Harijans will have to come from within. In pursuance of
the advice tendered by me, I withhold the names of my
correspondents in anticipation of their approval of my action.
The first question I pick up is as follows:
Generally

social work is being done in town areas, but practically

nothing is being done in the villages, though the latter are admittedly more in
need. What is to be done?

I am afraid that what the correspondent says is very largely
true. Unfortunately, workers are very few compared to the magnitude
of the task before the reformer, and, the majority of workers being
town-bred, they are disinclined to go to the villages and settle there.
1
2

Ranchhodlal Amritlal Shodhan, a mill-owner
The addressee used to make envelopes out of waste paper as a hobby.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

399

The Central Board1 is quite alive to the problem, and effort is being
made of penetrate the villages, not without some success. The answer,
therefore, to the question, ‘what is to be done’, is that the effort has to
be intensified. Village workers have to be found or made and, when
once the fear of settling in villages is overcome, the response to the
demand for a large number of workers will be much greater than it is
today. Given continuance of the effort, success is bound to attend it.
The second question is:
Will it not hasten the removal of untouchability if caste Hindus took
Harijans as domestic servants?

This is no new advice. Swami Shraddhanandji used to lay very
great emphasis on the necessity of caste Hindus employing Harijans as
domestic servants precisely on the same terms as any other. But I fear
that receiving Harijans as domestic servants will be, when it becomes
at all general, not a spur to the removal of untouchability, but a sign
of removal. Nevertheless, it is the duty of every reformer who has got
rid of untouchability from his own household to have a Harijan
domestic servant. No doubt, for the reformer it would be better still if
he would take a Harijan boy or girl, not as a servant, but as a member
of his family.
The third question is:
What should Harijans do in the present drive against untouch-ability?

I can only repeat the answer I have given so often before. They
should carry on vigorous internal reform among themselves and
remove every cause of reproach.
The fourth question is:
In two villages of Kaira, Harijans have been boycotted by caste Hindus
because they asked for adequate remuneration for carrying carcasses. What
should the Harijans do in such cases?

I am happy to be able to say that in one of these villages, owing
to the efforts of workers of the local Society, the boycott was lifted,
and the information as to the other village, at the time of writing this,
is that there is every probability of a similar amicable settlement. But
assuming that in some villages caste Hindus remain obstinate and
persist in boycotting Harijans, if the latter have any self-consciousness
they would persist in their refusal to render service without adequate
1

400

Of the Harijan Sevak Sangh.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

remuneration, and, if the boycott proves to be too hot for them, they
would quietly vacate the offending village. I know that this is easier
said than done. And I know also that there is not sufficient awakening
among the Harijans to induce them to adopt the method suggested by
me. But I have also no doubt that the time is coming soon when caste
Hindus will have to think a hundred times before resorting to such
boycotts.
The fifth question is:
What has come out of your proposal that there should be an all-India
advisory board of Harijans to advise the Servants of Untouchables Society?

The proposal referred to was made by me in Ahmedabad. It had
reference to the Provincial Board, but what is true of the Provincial
Board is also true of the Central Board. It should be remembered that
the advice was given to the Harijans and it is for them to make a
move and appoint such committees. I have no doubt that the Central
Board and the Provincial organizations will function in a proper
manner. Much good can be done through them.
The sixth question is:
Do you know that some temples which had been opened to Harijans were
subsequently closed against them? What is your solution?

For the time being, we have to assume that such temples were
opened under some sort of coercion or that the trustees have been
since coercd into closing them against Harijans. I know one or two
instances of the latter kind. My solution in either case is that for the
time being we should suffer this deprivation.
The seventh question is:
The temple-entry movement seems to have come to a dead stop. Do you
contemplate any move?

I do not think that the temple-entry movement has suffered any
such stop as the correspondent suggests. The spectacular part of it is,
no doubt, under check, but the effort for opening new temples and reopening old temples is steadily going forward, as the pages of the
Harijan can show.
The eighth question is:
Will you be a party to a modification of the Yeravda Pact, if all the
parties to it come to a common understanding?

VOL. 61 : 27 APEIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

401

Naturally the Pact would be modified, but, so far as I am
concerned, it can never be modified to the detriment of Harijans.
The ninth question is:
Neither the Bombay Government nor the public are giving effect to the
Council resolution as to the opening of public wells to Harijans. Will you
advise satyagraha on their part?

In the first place, I have no definite information in the matter.
Secondly, I am unable to advise satyagraha, at the present stage at any
rate.
The tenth and last question is:
Do you favour the idea of an all-India conference of Harijan leaders for
dealing with the question of untouchability?

A thoroughly representative conference cannot fail to be
helpful. I should, therefore, welcome the holding of such a
conference.
Harijan, 16-9-1933

498. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
September 16, 1933
CHI. AMALA

1

,

I have your several letters. You must shed this wretched fear of
me. Whatever I said and did at the Ashram was said and done in pure
love and for your good. Why should you fear me, if you believe what
I say? You have therefore no need to avoid me or fear me. I am
keeping well in spite of blood-pressure.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.

1
A German lady who was taking training at the Ashram for Harijan work.
Gandhiji later gave her the Indian name Amala.

402

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

499. TALK WITH WOMEN WORKERS

1

[September 16, 1933] 2
I have been saying for years now that those who understand
must participate in the production of khadi. But the suggestion has
not been taken up. Had it been adopted, khadi activity would have
now become widespread and we would not have had to face a difficult
situation. What would we lose if we span for half an hour every day?
But today it seems as though it were a mere waste. Weavers who are
willing to use hand-spun yarn do not get it. I had to tell some of them
that I would arrange to get some for them. But if they could not get it,
they may use mill yarn. I did not want them to lose their trade. This
half an hour of spinning demanded of you should be regarded as
easy. If people do not talk flatteringly when you go to sell them
khadi, you should put up with their harshness. You deserve it. But if
you do as I say, there would be no question of having to hear harsh
things from them.
Q. When women used to spin, there was no arrangement for weaving.

That is true. It was brought to my notice. But what the women
used to spin was no yarn at all—what about that? If women were to
spin ropes, what should the weavers do? We have so many weaving
centres. So, the women themselves are to blame since they did not
attempt to learn spinning.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 24-9-1933

500. ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS 3
[Before September 16, 1933]
Happiness and unhappiness always follow us like cold and
sunshine.4 What is there to be happy or unhappy about having a
1

This appeared in Chandrashankar Shukla’s “Weekly Letter” under the title
“The Easy Way”. Two women workers had come to greet Gandhiji on his 65th
birthday which, according to the Vikram calendar, fell on September 16. One of them
had complained about the fall in khadi sales.
2
ibid.
3
Addressed to different correspondents, these appeared under the subtitle
“Some Letters’. This and the following four items are translated from Chandrashankar
Shukla’s weekly letter in Harijanbandhu, 17-9-1933.
4
The correspondent had written about his financial difficulties.
VOL. 61 : 27 APEIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

403

motor-car one day and having to go on foot the next day? Never give
up courage and patience. They are the real wealth.
One’s dharma is to serve in whatever way one can. Happiness
and unhappiness are only attitudes of the mind. But what unhappiness
can you have? Unhappiness lies in forgetting Ramanama, and you
never forget it.
There is no doubt that God has saved you. He wants you to
render more service.
What can we do if some shortcomings1 come to stay in the body,
which in any case is surely going to drop some time? But how can we
bestow that power of endurance on all young men? The hope of life
does not leave even the old, not to speak of poor little children. God
is, of course, the saviour of all.
We cannot insist on applying to Harijans what applies to you
and me. We have excluded Harijans from our society. Moreover, we
should also look to the situation as it obtains today. Barring a few
individuals, where is the boycott of schools and colleges to be found?
It would, therefore, be gross injustice if we told Harijans that they
would get no help if they went to the common schools and colleges.2
I am already devoting a major portion of my energy to Harijan
work. And whether I am in prison or outside, I shall of course
continue to do Harijan work till the last moment of my life.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 17-9-1933

501. A LETTER 3
[Before September 17, 1933]
To a certain extent self-criticism is necessary. But I have noticed
that some people get into this habit and then they can make no
progress.4 Self-criticism can be useful only in so far as it helps
progress. If we are not committing now all the heinous crimes that we
1

The correspondent had fractured his arm.
This was in reply to a Harijan worker who had asked why Gandhiji helped
Harijans secure scholarships for attending schools and colleges which, at one time,
he wanted to be boycotted. What follows is the reply to another correspondent, a
Harijan leader, who had requested Gandhiji to concentrate his energy on Harijan work.
3
This appeared under the title “The Mark of Bhakti”.
4
This was in reply to a Harijan worker who was obsessed with his own
shortcomings.
2

404

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

may have committed in the past it would be as good as piling up those
crimes if we wrung our soul by brooding over them. I agree that we
must publicly acknowledge a major crime. A votary of truth can do
nothing less. But owning up of the crime should not leave any burden
on one’s mind. Having once washed off the accumulated dross, does
one burden oneself with it? But you seem to be doing something of
the sort. It is only when truth reveals itself through us that untruth
cannot remain hidden from us. But we cannot always find out what
untruth is hidden in which part of our being. My sole purpose in
writing this is that you must cast off this burden from your mind. That
is the mark of bhakti.1 After having sought protection from God a
bhakta 2 would never feel choked. He would not weep over the
thought of his past. He would have no worry about the future. He is
master of the present; let him mind it. And God has provided him with
the key. “Whatever thou doest……dedicate all to me.” 3 If a bhakta
could do this much, he can dance with abandon. If you can thus free
your mind, all diseases of body and mind will disappear, and we will
take service from you to our heart’s content. Please unburden your
mind.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 17-9-1933

502. TALK WITH A HARIJAN WORKER

4

[Before September 17, 1933]
My way of service is altogether different. Anyone who wishes to
do first-class work, anyone who wishes to be a pure, true servant, needs
must acquire the ability. Ordinarily one may do any work one
chooses. Who is there to stop him? But the reason why our work does
not make rapid progress is that the workers take it up without training
themselves for it.5
I am willing to go abroad for training.
1

Devotion.
Devotee
3
Bhagavad Gita, IX. 27
4
This appeared under the title “Be Like Nanda”.
5
The Harijan worker was not content with serving through the charkha and
wanted to know how he could render immediate service without prior training.
2

VOL. 61 : 27 APEIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

405

So much expenditure for so little work ! Take whatever vocational
training is available here. Then we may think of going abroad. And,
anyway, how many persons can be sent abroad?
Please let me know what social service I can do.

This includes everything. Cannot one serve while learning to do
it? You must acquire the ability. You will not have what you want
unless you are worthy of it. There are any number of people rushing
about in the name of service; but have they been doing any good to
the community? Anyone who wishes to do constructive work, to
render true pure service to his community, acts in a different way
altogether. If you want people to build up their character, you must
acquire the necessary strength. If you cannot settle down to business,
take up some employment and do your job honestly. You can serve
the community in this manner also. You would have served your
community even by creating an impression that no one can be purer
than you. Is it a small matter if people could say about a person that
his honesty is unlimited? I can cite some instances of honest servants
who have been in charge of the management of their employers’
establishments. Employers worship such servants.
I do not want to earn money.

It is not a question of earning money. If you acquire so
much prestige that the Hindu community can look upon you as
the ideal of an honest Harijan, it will not be a matter of small
importance. I have got to say that there have been saints like Nanda1
among Harijans. Four or five centuries have passed since Nanda’s
time, but they still sing his praise. Why can such a person not be born
among Harijans today? If it could happen in his age, it can as well
happen now. We can attain the goal we seek only if Harijans become
like Nanda. As for me, I am carrying on the campaign among caste
Hindus for the eradication of untouchability and at the same time
telling Harijans what their dharma is.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 17-9-1933

1

406

Nandanar of Chidambaram, one of the 63 Saivite saints of Tamil Nadu
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

503. ADVICE TO A WORKER 1
[Before September 17, 1933]
Workers should be like Malaviyaji, like Narayanshastri2 ,
Lakshmanshastri3 , or Shridharshastri Pathak. They should be men
whose character is as pure as gold. How can we find workers by
publishing advertisements? Such people would memorize and reel off
speeches. What use could they be to us? And, should we carry on with
counterfeit coins because we cannot have mohurs? It is like building
castles in the air. I do not approve of it all. I have never worked in this
manner.
Now, how can I all of a sudden assure you that I am going to
produce workers?
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 17-9-1933

504. TALK TO STUDENTS OF GURUKUL KANGRI

4

[Before September 17, 1933]
We can serve Harijans only by purifying our character. True
purity is required for it. It means that you must do penance. I
undertook fasts by way of such penance. It did have some immediate
effect. And it should continue for many years. Although generally we
should keep purifying our atman the service of Harijans needs special
purification on our part. The purer we are, the better we shall serve the
Harijans. Even if there is just one pure man he would have an impact.
Such a man would be able to work if he goes among the Harijans, and
to melt the hearts of even the sanatanists if he were to go to them. I
have no doubt at all that more than Harijans, the sanatanists need to be
1

This appeared under the title “Qualities of a Worker”. It had been suggested
that some paid workers be sent for fighting untouchability through propaganda.
Chandrashankar Shukla prefaced the report with the following: “Gandhiji expects the
propagators to have certain qualification, such as religious knowledge and purity of
character. He said, ‘Propaganda cannot be a business. It should be a religious
mission’. He disapproved the proposal to have paid workers.”
2
Narayanshastri Marathe, popularly known as Swami Kevalananda
3
Tarkateertha,Lakshmanshastri Joshi
4
This appeared under the title “Purity, a worker’s Capital”.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

407

purified. But who can convince an arrogant man? We would go
among the sanatanists and persuade them. If they abuse us, we would
not abuse them back. We would not retaliate if they resort to violence.
We would nurse them if they were ill; if they are strict about observing
rules of conduct, we would be stricter. We would acquire a greater
knowledge of the scriptures than they may be having. And then we
would be able to make an impression upon them. Wiping out
untouchability is a hard task. It cannot be achieved while remaining
selfish. We have to work with a benevolent outlook. For that purpose
we must purify ourselves day after day.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 17-9-1933

505. WHAT SHOULD A BRAHMIN DO?
In response to my article 1 under the above heading, the same
correspondent who hails from Maharashtra writes again as follows.2
Many questions arise out of this letter. It is not that the others do
not have to suffer the inconveniences which Brahmins do suffer.
Nowadays everyone finds it more or less difficult to get employment.
Till now, Brahmins could easily find jobs. That is not the case now.
There is no doubt that the others faced earlier the same situation
which the Brahmins are or appear to be facing now. Where castes
prevail, such rise and fall will always be. Hence it is difficult to satisfy
everyone.
At the root of this difficulty lies something, which deserves
consideration. The number of jobs will always be limited. The number
of candidates will go on increasing with time. Hence the right way
seems to be to learn to turn away from jobs, turn towards othere occupations and qualify ourselves for these. In attempting such changes,
difficulties will certainly be experienced during the transit-ional
period, but the result can only be good. Other countries have had
similar experiences and, those who were hitherto confined to jobs have
taken to professions.
1

Vide “What should a Brahmin do?”, 10-9-1933
The letter is not translated here. The correspondent had argued that Brahmins
could not earn livelihood by imparting the knowledge of Brahman as the general
public was not interested in it; the only alternative was employment. Brahmins did
not expect any privileges while seeking jobs but at the same time they expected that
they would not be penalized for being Brahmins.
2

408

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Another noteworthy point is to cut down our expenses, reduce
our family’s as well as our own wants. The need to make our lives
simple is becoming more and more obvious to the whole world. There
is an English adage recommending ‘plain living and high thinking’.
In India, simplicity is not just a virtue, it is part of dharma.
It is imperative that the women in the family also contribute
towards the household expenditure to the best of their abilities.
Women of the working class, in addition to housekeeping,earn a little
bit by their own labour; why should not other women do likewise? If
there is a lone earning member in a family and many mouths to feed,
the burden on him cannot but be too much. Hence, those Brahmins
who find it difficult to secure employment should consider this
suggestion also.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 17-9-1933

506. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
September 17, 1933
CHI. JAMNALAL,

You must have read everything in newspapers. I deliberately
omitted to give details in my letters. I hesitate these days to put any
burden on you. I did not feel happy, either, that you had to come
down from Chikhalda so soon. We will talk now when we meet. I too
shall require plenty of rest. Gopi, Gajanan’s1 wife, will most probably
accompany me, and I have also invited one Kisan2 , who is a very good
woman. She used to enjoy good health, but recently it has gone down
a little. I know that, true to your nature, you will willingly shoulder all
this burden, but I will try to see that we become no burden to you.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Jawaharlal is leaving tonight for Lucknow. He may perhaps
come to Wardha later. Jnana must have arrived there now.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2925

1
2

Son of Rameshwardas Birla.
Kisan Ghumatkar

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

409

507. TRIBUTE TO ANNIE BESANT
[September 20, 1933] 1
Whilst the people will thank the Almighty for relieving Dr.
Besant from lingering illness by sending to her the Angel of Death,
thousands will, at the same time, mourn the event. So long as India
lives, the memory of the magnificent services rendered by Dr. Besant
will also live. She had endeared herself to India by making it the
country of her adoption and dedicating her all to her.
M. K. GANDHI

The Bombay Chronicle, 21-9-1933

508. LETTER TO TOTARAM SANADHYA
R ANCHHOD NIVAS, A HMEDABAD,

[September 21, 1933] 2
DEAR TOTARAMJI,

I have you letter. Do go to Wardha and before that anywhere
else you think necessary. We shall be meeting at Wardha this month.
There is no cause to worry about Hariprasad3 .
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Hindi original: Banarsidas Chaturvedi papers. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

509. SPEECH AT AHMEDABAD-I 4
September 21, 1933
You have obliged me by asking me to perform this noble
ceremony. I feel highly honoured in doing it. The President 5 has left
little for me to say. We heard from him the long list of donations by
Sir Chinubhai. While listening to it, it struck me that Sir Chinubhai’s
donations match the world-famous Parsi donations. Sir Girijaprasad
1

Dr. Annie Besant died on September 20,1933.
The addressee has supplied the date “September 28”. However, Gandhiji was
at Ranchhod Nivas only on September 21.
3
Adopted son of addressee
4
On unveiling the statue of Sir Chinubhai Madhavlal, Baronet
5
Manibhai Chaturbhai Shah, President, Ahmedabad Municipality
2

410

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

said that Sir Chinubhai’s donations were not meant for the members
of one community or religion, but for all. Their benefit was available
to all the citizens of Ahmedabad. Sir Chinubhai did all he could to
encourage the education which he himself had and which helped him
rise in life. The President reminded me that it was Sir Chinubhai who
had presented me the address when I first arrived in Ahmedabad.1 The
picture is still vivid before my eyes. In donating this statue to the
citizens of Ahmedabad, Sir Girijaprasad has given us a glimpse of his
filial devotion. I only say “a glimpse” because, as Sir Girijaprasad
has rightly observed, one can never completely discharge one’s debt
to one’s parents. Let us all hope—and he has certainly given us
reason to hope—that the illustrious son of Sir Chinubhai earns as
much as the father and equally liberally gives it away.
Once on an important occasion I had said that the rich have
right to earn and accumulate wealth. This world will always call some
to adventure. It cannot be stopped. I say then, let these people earn
much but let them spend it as if it belonged to the people and give of
it generously to others. One of my cherished hopes is that in our
country there should be no ill will, no conflict, between the rich and
the poor, that both may realize their own dharma and adhere to it. In
the world a fierce battle is going on between capital and labour,
between the rich and the poor. May our country be saved from this
strife. One man’s wish cannot achieve it. But if many cherished the
wish we could achieve this ideal. Through Sir Girijaprasad, I wish to
convey to the rich people of Ahmedabad—and by the grace of God
there are many here— that they should enhance the legacy left by Sir
Chinubhai. It is up to the rich to reach the ideal which I have placed
before them. It is my ambition that Ahmedabad may set an example
for India, in fact for the whole world.
Before performing the noble ceremony of unveiling the statue, I
may say one thing. This statue was long ago but because of your
desire that it should be unveiled either by Sardar or by me, its
installation has had to wait.2 I was released unexpectedly and when the
request came to me, I could not turn it down. I think it is by the grace
of God that I have the opportunity to perform this good deed. How
1

Vide “Speech at Reception by Ahmedabad Citizens”, 2-2-1915.
The Bombay Chronicle, 22-9-1933, here reports: Mahatmaji felt acutely for
the absence of Sardar Vallabhbhai and said it would have been more desirable if this
grand and important ceremony had been performed by his hands.
2

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

411

can I thank you all—men and women who have come here to
demonstrate your respect for Sir Chinubhai? You should show due
regard for your fellow citizens who have rendered service to the city.
May all the citizens of Ahmedabad, rich as well as poor, live in
happiness. This is my prayer to God.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 1-10-1933

510. SPEECH AT AHMEDABAD-II 1
September 21, 1933
You honoured me by asking me to perform a noble ceremony
the first thing in the morning. 2 And now you are asking me to
perform another such ceremony. I thank the Municipality as well as
the citizens of Ahmedabad for the double honour they have conferred
on me. My task has now become a little difficult. In the first place, I
would like to express my opinion about the suggestion made by Bhai
Rasiklal. I heard only this morning about the proposal to associate my
name with this library. There is, I think, no institution with which I
have allowed my name to be associated. I have decided to allow
nothing of the kind. With apologies to the donors, and without hurting
their feelings, I would like to say that ever since I entered public life,
or rather I was fortunately thrown into it, I have always either
prevented or tried to prevent, whom-ever I could so advise, from
associating their or their elders’ names with the donations. I do not
mean to say that it is a sin to associate one’s or one’s elder’s name
with a donation. But such a tendency prevails among people and I
have seen this temptation leading to ridiculous results. I have therefore
been dissuading all whom I could. I have succeeded in some cases,
and where I have failed I have accommodated myself and have also
accepted such donations. When I do this I don’t mean to sing my own
praise or to point out other people’s shortcomings. I only wish you
would not press me to act contrary to what I have been doing and
advocating. I have no false modesty. I cannot have it while adhering
to my principles.
There is another potent reason. I am only instrumental in having
these books donated. I did not own them. There is not a single thing
1
2

412

While laying the foundation-stone of the Maneklal Jethalal Library.
Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in the Ashram which exclusively belongs to me. Nor am I a trustee.
There is another practice I have adhered to, viz., I should not be a
trustee for anything that once belonged to me. I had no right to
donate these books. But I exercised the moral right that I enjoyed to
persuade the trustees and the Ashramites. Hence I am only a medium
or say a post office. I delivered the Ashram’s letter to the Municipality. The same is true in the case of the Vidyapith. I cannot give
away its books. Kakasaheb and the Vidyapith Committee have the
right. I had proposed to amalgamate the Ashram library with the
Vidyapith’s so that the former could be better utilized. The Ashram is
after all a place for manual labour. Moreover we cannot afford a paid
librarian there. My idea therefore was to combine the two libraries
when eventually peace would return and the library too. Now when
the Ashram library has been transferred to the Municipality, I received
a letter from Kakasaheb telling me that the Vidyapith library and the
building were not in our custody and that if the Government returned
the books they too should be handed over to the Municipality. In this
way the Vidyapith books also came to the Municipality. I am
therefore not responsible for the twin gifts and cannot claim credit for
them.
I shall give you the third reason. How can learning be associated
with my name? Only manual labour can be associated with my name.
So please spare me this burden. I do not want to say just now what is
more befitting for me to do. I had a talk with the President and
Balubhai in the morning and if they like my suggestion they will put
it before you. In any case please do spare me.
Now I come to a different subject. In the morning also I made a
reference to Sardar’s absence. We have been working together for
about eighteen years, and with the passage of time we have been
coming closer. The Shastras tell us that husband and wife are two
persons but their souls are one. The same applies to the relationship
between Sardar and I. I will not ask you to decide who is the wife and
who is the husband. We came very close only this time. In spite of
working together we never had the time for a heart-to-heart talk.
Vallabhbhai stayed with me in Kaira for months but I don’t
remember if he ever came to see me except on business. During the
other struggles too we had only short business-like meetings. Only
this time in jail we stayed together. Since there was no work we
opened out to each other. At night too we used to draw our cots side
by side and talk of the joys and sorrows of life. I say joys and sorrows
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

413

because it is customary to put it that way; in fact there was no sorrow
to speak of, we only spoke of our moments of joy; sorrows we had left
behind for you! If asleep Sardar would dream of India. He is a clever
man so he believes what applies to him applies to the universe. He has
come to the general conclusion that what is true of Ahmedabad is true
of Gujarat and what is true of Gujarat is true of India and what is true
of India is true of the world. He often dreamt about Ahmedabad. All
the time he thought of ‘my waterworks’, and ‘my municipality’. It is
true that Ranchhodbhai had the waterworks installed but isn’t Sardar
his heir? Can Girijaprasad say that the waterworks belong to him?
When Ranchhodbhai gave up his ownership it went to the city of
Ahmedabad, i.e., to Sardar. You will thus see how fond Sardar is of
Ahmedabad. I would know nothing about the Vadilal Hospital1 . I have
never interfered in Vallabhbhai’s special activities. I was confident
that Vallabhbhai managed them excellently. I came to know a good
deal about the hospital while in jail. Although it is presumptuous—
since one cannot compare a human being to God—but as Kalapi 2
would put it, I say, wherever I look, I find evidence of Sardar’s
performance. Sardar, therefore, can well carry the burden. He is a
capable person. I cannot carry it.
I congratulate the Municipality too on having had Sardar as its
president. This Municipality came into existence with a rich man [as
its president]. Then it had a fakir as its president. I wanted
Ahmedabad to be a city beautiful. But beautiful in my own sense of
the word. Of course it should have good looking men and women,
gardens and scenic beauty but I expect it to have inner beauty as well.
Sardar dreams of making Ahmedabad an ideal city and its civic body
too an ideal municipality. And he has worked to achieve it. I too share
his dreams. When I decided to settle in Ahmedabad I had cherished
the dream of beginning my public life here because I saw that this city
had wealth and wisdom, it was the capital of Gujarat, the State in which
I was born. Ever since then it has been my fond desire to have in
Ahmedabad the best library and also other institutions which could
draw many people to it. Do not think that the climate of the place is
bad. Once there was a proposal that I should go to Mussoorie. Dr.
Kanuga said to me that Ahmedabad was as good as Mussoorie. Soon
after I gave up the idea of going there. If anything is bad here we are
1
2

414

Vadilal Sarabhai Hospital.
Sursinhji Takhtsinhji Gohil, a poet.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to blame for it. We have made Ahmedabad dirty. Dr. Hariprasad1 tried
hard to make it clean. Yet to this day I cannot certify that Ahmedabad
is a clean city. There is no fragrance, the whole city stinks. The
neighbourhoods could be cleaned if Dr. Hariprasad could again rally
men and women volunteers to do it.
Before I stop, let me set out the ideals I cherish about the
library. Have the building of the library planned in such a way that
when it expands into new departments, new structures could be
annexed to the parent building without their looking hemmed in or
without reducing the architecture to a monstrosity. While planning the
building see that it can serve as a public lecture hall, a quiet place for
students to read and study as also for research scholars. Our ideal
should be to make it the largest and the best library in the world. God
will grant us the necessary strength. Kakasaheb has suggested that the
Vidyapith museum should also be housed in the library. There is no
dearth of art in Gujarat. The like of the stone screen of Bhadra is not
to be found in the whole world. The crafts of Ahmedabad can hardly
be matched. I have been amazed by the skill of the Ahmedabad
craftsmen. I have seen them working in the slums. Masters of art do
not wait for encouragement. If someone donates Rs. 50,000 to have
the museum here itself, it can be done.
Please see that the library makes progress day by day. It would
be better if you get one or two persons who could give most of their
time to the library. Do not have as your librarian a merchant who can
only preserve your books but have someone who appreciates them
and can select them. If no one volunteers for the task, offer higher
remuneration. Allow the Harijans free use of the library and let them
take books home. Please bear the loss if they soil or steal the books.
They are lowest even among the poor. Allow this concession to all the
poor if you can. That will bring credit to you.
My appeal is the same as that of Bhai Rasiklal that you should
select the members of the library committee carefully. It should
comprise men of letters. They will help keep the library alive. Do not
think of having only the worldly-wise on the committee. Only the
learned will know what a good library is and how it can shine forth.
Carnegie gave donations to many libraries and many scholars
accepted the onerous conditions. But the scholars of Scotland told
Carnegie plainly that they did not care for his donations if he were to
1

Dr. Hariprasad Desai.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

415

stipulate such conditions. How would you know what books ought to
be had? Masters do not set out to hawk their art. In Gujarat a priceless
collection of books lies in the coustody of the merchant class.
Beautiful collections of Jain literature are wrapped up in their silk
cloths. My heart is sore at the sight of these books. What use can these
books be when they have fallen into the hands of the ignorant
merchants who can only pile up wealth? The Jain religion, too, is
withering in their hands because they have reduced dharma to a
formal business. Indeed, can dharma adjust itself to the ways of
commerce? It is for commerce to adjust itself to the claims of dharma.
I therefore appeal to you to have, as far as you can, learned men as
members of your committee. May this library prosper.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 1-10-1933

511. A BELATED ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Sir Lallubhai Samaldas brought from Japan Rs. 1,699-11-0 for
Harijan work. This amount was received in Yeravda, but the letter with
names accompanying it was given to me only after my release. I was,
therefore, unable to acknowledge the donation before now. It comes
from the Indian Silk Merchants’ Association of Kobe and the letter
giving cover to the cheque contains the names of forty-two
subscribers. The majority are Sindhi merchants. Whilst I thank them
for their donations, I warn them that I had expected much more than
what they have sent. I knew the generosity of my Sindhi friends in
South Africa. They cannot be different in Japan. I, therefore, regard
their cheque as an earnest of more to come.
Harijan, 23-9-1933

512. ANOTHER PLAGUE SPOT
The reader may remember that some months ago I drew public
attention to the disgraceful condition of the bastis of Allahabad.1
Professor Malkani2 has now sent me his impressions of the Delhi
bastis. They are published in The Hindustan Times. These impressions
show that the Delhi bastis are not much better than the Allahabad
1
2

416

Vide “Immediate Duty”, 22-4-1933
N. R. Malkani
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

ones. There is the same tale of indescribable filth and consequent
degradation. The scavengers, on whose careful labour largely depends
the health of the inhabitants of Delhi, are housed in cells which are
windowless and lightless holes. I cannot do better than reproduce
Professor Malkani’s closing sentences1 :
So long as we tolerate such plague spots and so long as we
continue to treat most useful servants of society as if they were
beyond the pale of humanity, there need be no wonder that we have
more than our fair share of diseases which are due to filth and
insanitation. Even as a rotten limb affects and corrupts the whole
body, so does the condition of scavengers, representing a rotten limb
of society, corrupt the whole of it. Unless, therefore, we wake up
betimes and adopt summary measures to improve the condition of the
scavengers, God’s judgment must overtake us. This question of
providing decent habitations for the scavengers is not merely for
Hindus to tackle but it is for the society at large to deal with. In this
matter, therefore, there need be no distinction between reformers and
the orthodox, or between Hindus and non-Hindus. Let us hope that
the Delhi Municipality, now that its attention is drawn to the
disgraceful condition of its bastis, will waste no time in taking
energetic measures and removing the disgrace.
Harijan, 23-9-1933

513. SHOCKING, IF TRUE
Dayananda Dalitoddhar Sabha had its conference at Chamba. I
take the following from its resolutions:2
It is difficult to believe that any State in India considers the
refusal by a class of people to do particular work a crime. I hope that
the Chamba State authorities have a convincing reply to the charges
embodied in the resolutions, or that the practices referred to by the
conference will be given up by the State in response to the respectful
request of the conference. I notice that those who took part in the
conference were educated and responsible men.
Harijan, 23-9-1933
1

Not reproduced here. The extract described the filthy and unhygienic
condition of the slums in which Harijans lived.
2
Not reproduced here. The Aryas had protested against the illegal prosecution
of Halies and other communities for refusing to handle carcasses or do other kinds of
forced labour and for declining to offer animal sacrifice to a deity.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

417

514. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Unrevised

September 23, 1933

MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I was ready to write to you only yesterday. My inquiry was
completed at 1 p.m. I have now met Kasturbhai, Mrs. Hathisingh and
Shankerlal who knows the family well. I am not quite satisfied with
my experiences. I have missed straightforwardness. And yet I have
nothing to say against the proposed match. Krishna 1 will be happy
enough in the new surroundings. What is more, she seems to have set
her heart upon the match. She has been corresponding with Raja’s
mother. Rajababu is the pet name of her chosen one. There is no
question of their leaving anything in Krishna’s name. Of course I
made it perfectly clear to them that the suggestion as to leaving
something in Krishna’s name was purely mine, and that even so, I had
no intention of making it a condition of marriage. I made the
proposal, I told them, because I believe in such arrangement for all
girls wherever it was possible. If the match is to be finally fixed up,
you have to write to Mrs. Hathisingh, Ahmedabad, making the
proposal definitely and she will send you her acceptance. She is quite
ready for the marriage to take place as early as Krishna wishes. She is
desirous (and I concur) that the betrothal and marriage should take
place simultaneously. You may now write to young Hathisingh and
send for him when you like.
I hope Mother is better as also Kamala2 .
I reached Wardha this morning. Except for the high blood
pressure which the doctors register, there is nothing wrong with me.
Nevertheless I am not to move about for at least three weeks from
today, i.e., up to 15th October next.
Mathuradas3 is in Bombay. Chandrashankar4 and Nayar are with
me of course, apart from Ba, Mirabehn and Prabhavati. Prabhudas5 is
also with me.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
1
2
3
4
5

418

Addressee’s younger sister.
Addressee’s wife
Mathuradas Trikumji
Chandrashankar Pranshankar Shukla, Editor, Harijanbandh
Son of Chhaganlal Gandhi
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

515. TELEGRAM TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
WARDHAGANJ,

September 23, 1933
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
LUCKNOW
YOUR WIRE, POSTED LETTER 1 TODAY. COMPLETED INQUIRY YESTERDAY. RESULT
ON WHOLE SATISFACTORY. YOU WILL WRITE MRS. HATHISINGH FORMALLY
OFFERING

HAND.

GLAD

MOTHER

BETTER.

BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

516. TALK WITH HARIJAN WORKERS

2

[Before September 24, 1933] 3
Many people feel that their value in the field of service would
not be fully recognized till they could earn money themselves. I
would tell these people that they would be well protected if they
accepted less than what they may be able to earn elsewhere. They run
a risk if they received more than what they may be able to get
elsewhere. And why should a public servant accumulate any money at
all?
If I fall ill I will have to go to a hospital.

And there you would receive right royal treatment.
I never feel that I have lost what I have given away. I have said
that I am the richest man in the world. I have never experienced want
of money.
I have kept aside some money for spending it in public service.

If you have the money, you would feel like spending it when it
seems necessary. But who are you to spend it?
The subtle pride corrodes man. One can over come the pride
that is apparent. But one can do nothing about the subtlepride. It has
brought about the miserable downfall of many a man. From the
popular point of view the man who has money and yet does not spend
1

Vide the preceding item.
The talk appeared under the title “Reliance on God or on Money”. This and
the following item are translated from the weekly letter in Harijanbandhu, 24-9-1933.
3
ibid.
2

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

419

it for himself is a saint. It can be said of him that he spends the money
for the people. In that case, why should he not hand it over to the
people? I say this because I have acted on this principle. I used to
think that I had been practising law for the sake of the people. But
then I wondered why I should not devote to the service of the people
the time I spent in practising law. That is why I gave up my practice.
Whatever money I had in reserve, I used to spend for the people. Then
I thought, “Why not hand over to the people what is to be used for
them?” Again, I thought why I should not form a trust for the use of
money if it was to be given away. I formed a trust but I was not one of
the trustees. Nor was I on [the board of] the Phoenix Trust. I am not
associated with the Ashram Trust either. I exercise only moral
authority. The trustees can drive me out any time they want. After all,
I judge others as I would myself. I have been watching one thing after
another. Ever since I came to India I have been telling you that it is
unbearable that you should have so much money with you.
I feel ashamed of going abegging.

You should not find it difficult. It hurts me to know that you
find it difficult to ask for money. What could be done about it? Either
you must live in such a way that you would need no money at all, or if
you do need it, you should not feel ashamed to ask for it. There are
56 lakhs of vagrants in India and they get their food. And when you
are devoting all your twenty- four hours to the country you do have a
right to get your food. We have two alternatives: either we go and ask
for it when there is the need, or we do not move out even when the
need is there. What would be the result? We would be in great trouble
at the most, wouldn’t we? God does not ask of us more than that. This
is true freedom. Why should we rely so much on money? Why not
seek the help of God instead of relying on the money lying with us?
That at least is the test I would propose. Years ago I had taken out an
insurance policy in Bombay at the instance of my brother. Then from
Africa I wrote to Revashankarbhai that the policy should be
cancelled.1 I let go the amount I had been paying for seven years. I
asked why not trust God instead of trusting the money? I asked
myself whether I wanted to serve the people or myself. If I wanted to
serve the peole, what need did I have for money? At least a few people
must come forward who would voluntarily accept poverty.
Please forgive me for talking to you in such plain words. But
1

420

Vide “An Autobiography—Part IV, Chapter IV” 3-2-1929.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

who else would talk that way if not I?
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 24-9-1933

517. APPEAL AT PRAYER MEETING 1
[ Before September 24, 1933]
I would like to tell all the men and women who have come to
attend the prayer that if the Government allows me to remain free, I
would devote myself mainly to Harijan work. And so, it is my duty to
beg for the sake of the Harijans. Men and women who come to attend
the prayers may bring with them whatever they feel like and whatever
they can afford. It serves two purposes: some amount is collected for
Harijans, and then, we have an idea as to how many persons give for
the service of Harijans and how many approve of the work. I do not
want a single pie from those who do not approve of this work. If
anyone gave for my sake, it would be meaningless. Hence, I wish that
only those people who have faith in this work should donate money.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 24-9-1933

518. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
September 24, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I had a talk today with Jamnalalji about the proposed match. He
seems to know the family well. He is decidedly of opinion that the
family, apart from Kasturbhai of course, is not as well off as they
would appear to be. He is even of opinion that they may be actually in
want. I thought I should pass this news on to you. He too is anxious
that I should let you have his opinion. Personally I remain unaffected
by it. But he thinks that Krishna should know it. So far as I can judge,
nothing will affect Krishna’s choice unless she has something definite
against the young man. And she would be quite right. Kasturbhai is
strongly of opinion that Krishna’s choice is good.
Love to you all.
BAPU
1

This appeared under the title “The Begging Bowl”.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

421

[PS.]
You may succeed in making persons like me not addressing you
as Pundit but I see that the adjective with abide with you.
[PPS.]
What I wanted to suggest was that if this if this marriage comes
off and if Mother agrees, the religious ceremony may be performed at
Wardha. I know the difficulty. I am thinking selfishly I know. I have
simply thrown out the suggestion. Let us see what happens. I am
likely to see Kasturbhai.
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

519. LETTER TO NIRMAL KUMAR BOSE
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, W ARDHA,

September 24, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter.
As Sjt. Satis Chandra Das Gupta is well acquainted with my
writings I would like you to show your collection1 to him, and, if he
approves, I have no objection to your printing the book. You may
show this postcard to him.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G. N. 10522

520. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
WARDHA,

September 24, 1933
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

I got your letter of the 19th in Bombay and of the 21st today in
Wardha after I had entered upon my weekly silence.
*

*

2

*

I understand what you say regarding your teeth. I think you
should be able to carry on with them for some time.
1
2

422

Selections from Gandhi
Omission as in the source
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

With me are Ba, Mirabehn, Chandrashankar, Prabhudas, Nayar,
Anandi1 , Nirmala (Mahadev’s), Sharada (Chimanlal’s) and Prabhavati.
Brijkishan also is here. He will return home on Tuesday. I met Radha2
and Santok 3 on the way. Radha keeps good health these days. She is
your neighbour. Write to her. Lilavati4 is in a sanatorium at Deolali.
Keshu 5 is here. He is working in Jamnalalji’s gin. I have got his pay
fixed at Rs. 50 per month. The nature of his work is good. If he is
steady, he will go forward. Jamnalalji seems to be satisfied with him.
N.6 and Amala are problems. The former is an emotional type, and the
latter has no sense. She can’t do any work. Both are something of a
burden here. I will try to see if the burden can be lightened. Duncan
and Mary Barr are doing very well. Both are hard-working and
upright. Narahari’s children, Vanamala and Mohan, don’t keep good
health and have gone to Kathlal. I met them in Ahmedabad. They
were to leave for Kathlal on Friday. Amina’s 7 children feel perfectly
happy with the other children. They will stay during the vacation in
the red bungalow 8 . Sirius was ill. He is all right now. He was in a
hospital. I met Rama Joshi. She was quite well. Her health is
improving rapidly indeed. She could raise her arm fairly well. Mani
came to Bombay on the very day I left it. She spent most of the time
with me. I took her with me even when I called on Elwin 9 . I have
advised her to see you and then come to me after getting her teeth and
eyes treated. Aunt is still in Bombay, and so also Mathuradas. He feels
very much tired. He had shouldered a fairly heavy rsponsibility. Sastri
(of Harijan) is doing well. Chandrashankar will accompany me and
send all the Gujarati material from where we are. I have written to
Prithuraj10 to stay on in Calicut. Indu 11 is in Bhavnagar. He is doing
fairly well there. Jayaprakash must have returned to his father. He was
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Daughter of Lakshmidas Asar
Daughter of Maganlal Gandhi
Widow of Maganlal Gandhi
Lilavati Asar
Keshav, Maganlal Gandhi’s son
An American woman. The name is omitted in this and subsequent times.
Amina Qureshi, wife of Gulam Rasool Qureshi
Dr. Pranjivan Mehha’s house near the Ashram
Verrier Elwin
Son of Lakshmidas Asar
Indu Parekh, an Ashram student

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

423

in Bombay till I left. He used to come and see me. He saw Prabhavati
daily. I know his charge against me. But I am helpless. He seems to
have calmed down a little now. Ramdas’s own mind is his enemy. And
so I can’t say anything about him. When will he become really calm?
Nimu 1 keeps indifferent health. The Bengal problem2 is in my mind. I
will see what I can do. Jamnalal will not go again to a hill station just
now. He had been to one and stayed there for ten days. I will try to
persuade him, though he feels better these days.
Anandi and the other girls and Qureshi’s children are in
Anasuyabehn’s Harijan Boarding. I thought that was the proper place
for our children. They are very happy there. Narandas’s Purushottam
is engaged to the daughter of Harakhchand3 , the brother of Jivanlal4 . I
didn’t like the engagement because both the parties belong to the
same caste. But they say that she is a good girl, and so Narandas also
gave his consent. Jamna5 is in Rajkot. Kanu 6 also is there. He studies
what he can in Jamnadas’s7 school. Mahadev’s Babu 8 is with his
mother’s sister in Bulsar. he has written to me that he will go and stay
with Anandi after Diwali. I get reports about Rajenbabu every other
day. His health is improving very well. Lakshmi9 is here. She was to
go to Jullundur. On second thoughts, Devdas got the plan abandoned.
It is still not finally decided what should be done. Prabhudas’s
problem is still not solved. That is why he has come with me. . . .10 has
as good as become a sadhu. He is all the time discontented.
Even if you stop after completing the Gita, you will have made
fairly good progress.
The Ashram dairy is being run near Kankaria. Titus is in charge
of it and Shankerlal Banker exercises general supervision. It is
1

Nirmala, wife of Ramdas Gandhi
The reference is to the agitation of the caste Hindus of Bengal against the
Yeravda Pact.
3
a social worker from Chorwad
4
Jivanlal Motichand Shah
5
Wife of Narandas Gandhi
6
Son of Narandas Gandhi
7
Jamnadas Gandhi of the National School, Rajkot
8
Narayan Desai, usually referred to as Bablo
9
Wife of Devdas Gandhi.
10
The name is omitted in the source.
2

424

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

running fairly well. Jawaharlal’s Krishnakumari will most probably be
engaged to the son of Kasturbhai’s sister, who has just returned from
England after qualifying for the Bar. I met Kasturbhai, his sister and
her son. It was the parties’ own choice. They had met in Bombay
twice or thrice at Rao’s place. Saruprani1 has given her consent. The
formal betrothal will take place in a few days. If it does, a big load will
be off Saruprani’s head.
I am fairly well. I don’t know whether or not the bloodpressure
remains high here. The doctors here are not of that level. Nor is there
the need. I drink one pound of milk at present and eat green
vegetables twice every day. The latter include gourd, ridge gourd, etc.
The weight was 99 lb. when I was weighed on my arrival here. I will
weigh myself again after a few days. Ba is fine, and so is Mira.
Jamnalalji’s Kamala2 was in Dinshaw Mehta’s sanatorium. She seems
to have benefited a little. She has come with me here. Kamalnayan 3
also is here. Vakil’s school is closed at present because of the plague.
It will be shifted to Vile Parle now.
My programme, up to October 15, is to rest here itself.
Since the Government has not taken possession of the Ashram4 ,
it is now being converted permanently into a Harijan colony. Jamnalal
has approved of the idea. Friends in Ahmedabad, Ranchhodbhai and
others have also approved of it. It is planned to have some Harijan
quarters, a tannery, a Harijan hostel and an office of the Harijan Seva
Sangh there. I am thinking of handing over the land and the buildings
to the All-India Harijan Seva Sangh. If you wish to offer any
comments about this, please write to me. I think I have written a fairly
long letter.
Are you satisfied now?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 26-30

1

Mother of Jawaharlal Nehru
Kamala Nevatia, wife of Rameshwardas
3
Son of Jamnala Bajaj
4
In July 1933, Gandhiji had offered to hand over the Ashram to the
Govermment; Vide “Letter to Hoome Secretary, Government of Bombay”, 26-7-1933.
2

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

425

521. APPEAL FOR FLOOD RELIEF IN ORISSA
September 24, 1933
Appealing for funds for the relief of flood-stricken Orissa, Mr. Gandhi says
that the affected area covers two thousand miles. The people affected number three
lakhs. One thousand five hundred villages have been destroyed. Twenty thousand
houses have collapsed and the damage is estimated at Rs. 15,00,000. Mr. Gandhi says
that it would be necessary to provide relief to people actually in want of food and
clothing for twelve months, for they will not have, till the next year’s crops are
ready, the wherewithal to keep body and soul together. At least, five lakhs of rupees
will be required to help those who can be proved to be clearly indigent.

The Indian Annual Register, July-December 1933, Vol. II, p. 10

522. MESSAGE FOR HARIJAN DAY
[September 24, 1933] 1
On the occasion of the Harijan Day, I sincerely hope that pure
love will be roused in the hearts of caste Hindus towards their Harijan
brothers and sisters, and that every Hindu, man or woman, will be
convinced of the need for the eradication of untouchability.
The Hindu, 25-9-1933

523. LETTER TO N. R. MALKANI
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, W ARDHA,

[September] 2 26, 1933
MY DEAR MALKANI,

I have your letter of 8th inst. in rely to mine of the 2nd inst. I
was not able to acknowlege that letter earlier, and now I have your
latest letter enclosing your report on the bastis. I have already tackled
the first portion of the report3 . But I shall write to you later on it, after
I have finished reading the whole.
Your suggestions about Harijan work are good. I can be of little
help to you,expecially at the present moment. But you must discuss
them with Thakkar Bapa. You will presently hear something about
industrial schools. I quite agree with you as to the importance of the
1

The message was read at the third Harijan Day meeting held at Wardha on
September 24, under the presidentship of Jamnalal Bajaj. The first and the second
Harijan Day were observed on December 18, 1932 and April 30, 1933.
2
Illegible in the source
3
Vide “Another Plague Spot”, 23-9-1933.

426

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

tanning industry. I am working at the problem even now.
The work among Bhangis is certainly essential, if it is also
uphill.
I endorse your suggestion that you should be offered facilities
for travelling and studying the various organizations.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S JT. N. R. M ALKANI
S ERVANTS OF THE UNTOUCHABLES SOCIETY
BIRLA MILLS, DELHI
From a photostat: G.N. 900

524. LETTER TO V. RAGHAVIAH 1
September 26, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter.
In coming to the various decisions I had all the agruments
before me. You will not, therefore, expect me, especially in the present
state of my health, to cover the same ground again in defence of what
I have done. But the time will certainly show which way truth lay.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S JT. V ENNELAKANTI R AGHAVIAH
NELLORE
(SOUTH INDIA)
From a copy: C. W. 10448. Courtsey: K. Lingaraju

525. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
September 28, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I have your several letters. I had a long chat with Rafi2 . He will
tell you all about it. I adhere to the opinion that it will do no good to
1

The addressee, a congressman and tribal welfare worker, had protested against
Gandhiji’s fast in connection with the Harijan problem and wrote that he was sidetracking the economic issue.
2
Rafi Ahmed Kidwai.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

427

have the A.I.C.C. meeting. But that does not mean that it will deeply
hurt me if such a meeting was held. On the contrary if a sufficient
number desire it, it is their duty to send a requisition for the meeting.
What I feel is that we may not take the initiative. If you personally feel
that it is better to hold the meeting even though there is no requisition,
you should hold it. I know that I am not in touch even with the
opinion of workers. Therefore my opinion may safely be discounted
by those who have a decided opinion the other way.
The other point I would like to clear apart from the impression
that Rafi may give you of my talks is about the workers. Whilst I shall
try to do what I can, I am firmly of opinion that every province
should support its own workers and that every district or tehsil should
support its. Unless we reach that state, ours must remain a house of
cards. I think that you should take up the begging bowl in the
province and set the pace and the example. My ideal is that every
worker should find his maintenance from the area he may serve and
feel proud of it. Every labourer is worthy of his hire.
The rest from Rafi.
I hope both Ma and Kamala are better. You will tell me in due
course what Dr. Bidhan has to say.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Of the personal letters I need say nothing. I hope you had my
two letters1 written . . . 2
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.

526. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
September 28, 1933
3

CHI. MARY ,

I am delighted you are normal today. I think that it is better for
you to take the orthodox medical treatment and get well. Injections
1

Vide “Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru”, 23-9-1933 and ; 24-9-1933.
The source is illegible here.
3
The superscription in this and other letters to the addressee is in Devanagari
2

script.

428

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

are the order of the day nowadays. You had better take them. And
take what food they permit. If you do not need N’s help, let her come
away. I know that the introduction of strangers disturbs doctors in a
well-managed hospital.
My God be with you
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 6007. Also C.W. 3333. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

527. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI A. MEHTA
WARDHA,

September 28, 1933
BHAI BHAGWANJI,

I got your letter . . . .1 May your efforts succeed. Leave nothing
undone . . . . 2 If they cannot live together in perfect harmony, do not
hesitate to separate the shares.3
I am not writing a separate letter to Ratubhai4 .
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5820. Also C.W. 3043. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

528. LETTER TO NANABHAI I. MASHRUWALA
WARDHA,

September 28, 1933
5

BHAI NANABHAI ,

I got your letter. You ought not to come here despite your weak
health. I am quite well. When I have regained complete strength and
1
2
3
4
5

The source is damaged here.
ibid.
This was regarding the property of Pranjivandas Mehta.
Ratilal Sheth, father-in-law of Chhaganlal Mehta.
Father-in-law of Manilal Gandhi

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

429

can travel, your love will certainly draw me to Akola. Manilal1 seems
quite busy. He has undertaken a big responsibility.
Jamnalalji gave me a report about Tara2 .
Blessings from

BAPU
S JT. N ANABHAI MASHRUWALA
AKOLA, BERAR
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 6689. Also C.W. 4334. Courtesy:
Kanubhai Mashruwala

529. LETTER TO NALINIKANT SHETH
WARDHA,

September 28, 1933
CHI. NALINIKANT,

I got the letters sent by you. I have sent a reply to Rangoon. I
am quite well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7174. Also C.W. 4670. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

530. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI 3
September 28, 1933
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I had been awaiting your letter today when I got it. We shall use
the Rs. 250 for aid to be given to the farmers. Amalabehn’s 4 money
should be deposited in a savings account if there is no alternative. Can
it be deposited there in her name? If you can think of any other way
you may let me know.
1

Manilal Gandhi
Addressee’s daughter
3
An extract from this letter appears in”Letter to Mathuradas Trikumji”,
28-9-1933.
4
Name given by Gandhiji to Margarete Spiegel, a German lady who was taking
training at the Ashram for Harijan work
2

430

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Has any amount been collected for Utkal? Did you see
anybody? You must not exert yourself at the cost of your health. In
fact you should stay out of prison for some time and take complete
rest. Can you do that?
We have a lot of company here. Rafi 1 has come. He will go
tomorrow. There is no special reason; he came merely to have a talk
with me.
I have perfect peace here. No one is allowed to visit me before
four o’clock. The visiting time is restricted to between 4 and 5, in case
anyone comes. I do my spinning at this hour. I sleep on the terrace. I
take a fair quantity of milk. Since yesterday I have started taking 3 lb.
of it. If I cannot go on I shall reduce the quantity. So do not go by
whatever Jamnalalji might report. The blood pressure will go on its
own. It is only now that I shall be gaining some weight.
Now for some time Lakshmi2 will stay here. The Jullunder
programme is now being pursued for the present.
I have written to Premlilabehn 3 at the Parnakuti address. She
should be getting the letter. Please dispel her worry.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

531. TELEGRAM TO “MATHRUBHUMI”
September 29, 1933
MR. MADHAVAN NAIR’S DEATH IS A GREAT NATIONAL
CONDOLENCE

TO

THE

FAMILY

ON

BEHALF

OF

LOSS.4

CONVEY

JAMNALALJI

AND

SELF.

The Hindu, 30-9-1933

1

Rafi Ahmed Kidwai
Wife of Devdas Gandhi
3
Lady Premlila Thackersey; Vide also”Letter to F. Marry Barr”, 2-10-1933.
4
Vide also “Speech at Public Meeting, Calicut”, 13-1-1934
2

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

431

532. TELEGRAM TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
WARDHA,

September 29, 1933
MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
53 M INT R OAD
BOMBAY
HEALTH

EXCELLENT.

ASSURE

PREMLILABEHN.

BAPU
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

533. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, W ARDHA,

September 29, 1933
MY DEAR AGATHA,

I know I have not been fair to you. You have been pouring
letters on me, and I have been satisfied with merely sending you a
line. The fact is that I have not yet regained all the lost energy, and
what there is of it has to be devoted to the immediate work at hand.
Hence, I have to neglect many things that I would otherwise have
done. Your letters have come under the category of neglected ones. I
have relied upon Andrews and Mira for writing to you. But your two
letters, those of 9th and 16th inst., demand a fairly full answer from
me.
I understand all that you say and that you have omitted to say
about the Midnapore incident. I hope that you got copies of all the
statements made by me. I offer no apology for what I have said about
Midnapore.1 I could say nothing less and nothing more; for that
statement contained cent per cent truth. But how is one to overtake the
deliberate campaign of misrepresentation? Every word that I say is
distorted. Where distortion is not possible they do not hesitate to cut
out sentences from my statements, which would make them read
differently from what they would if they were read in conjunction
with the sentences cut out. But I remain unmoved by these tactics.
1

432

Vide “Statement to the Press”, 3-9-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

They are not new to me. I have boundless faith in my mission and in
my own truth. The only thing, therefore, to do is not to enter into an
elaborate explanation, for it means nothing, but on due occasion to
repeat the same truth with added emphasis.
The position of friends in England is somewhat different. They
are naturally anxious to show some result. I would, however, ask
friends on such occasions to remain unperturbed, because at the
present moment yours will be a voice in the wilderness, and if you
attempted to be apologetic about what I might have said, you would
be doing an injury to the cause. I am trying a tremendous experiment.
Non-violence regulates every breath of my life. I do not embellish
what I write. I conceal nothing. Therefore, I would not like friends
excusing any action or word of mine. When they do not understand it
they may remain silent. When they disagree, after having all the facts
and after having weighed them, I would not mind their open
disapproval. It would really serve the cause. Take this Midnapore
statement. I know that terrorism is taking a deeper root owing to the
counterterrorism of the Government. The counter-terrorism is much
more mischievous in its effect, because it is organized and corrupts a
whole people. Instead of rooting out terrorism it creates an
atmosphere for the approval of terrorist methods and thus gives them
an artificial stimulus. It may not show immediate results, but it
certainly prepares the future for wider activities along those lines.
Hence, it is necessary to bring out this point forcibly when any
eruption takes place as that of Midnapore, and if the truth cannot be
said forcibly, it is obvious that silence is the only alternative. A halfhearted operation is much more dangerous than no operation. I say
all this with my knowledge of non-violence and of ascertained facts.
Then take my fast, or rather all the recent fasts. If friends over
there have not understood them to the extent of being able to justify
them, they could ignore them, or, having procured all the materials for
a judgment, if the judgment went against me, they should not hesitate
to pronounce it, and if they endorse them, then their approval should
be unequivocal. You are there in a hopeless minority. All I wish,
therefore, for you is to be firm in whatever action you take, that is, if
you have faith in yourselves, in the Indian cause and in me through
whom today the cause is represented to you. I shall never
misunderstand you. I know that whatever you, a mere handful, do you
will do whole heartedly. More than that I do not expect, no one can or
should.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

433

I do not know whether I have made myself clearly understood
by you. If I have failed, you should dismiss this letter from your mind
and tell me where you have not understood me.
As for my health I am slowly regaining strength. I am supposed
to have quiet and rest at least up to the 23rd October after which, if all
goes well, a touring programme will be fixed up. Andrews is in Orissa.
Mahadev is in the Belgaum Jail, Devdas in Multan Jail. His wife is
here. Pyarelal is in the Nasik Jail. His mother and brother are here, on
their way to Nasik. Mira is here, of course.
Love.
BAPU
MISS AGATHA HARRISON
2 C RANBOURNE C OURT
ALBERT BRIDGE R OAD
LONDON S.W. 11
From a photostat: G.N. 1468

534. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
September 29, 1933
CHI. MARY,

Your love note to hand. One may not whim patients beyond a
point. I made a stupid mistake in sending N. in the very first instance
with you. Please do not ask for her. When you are restored and come
back to me, I shall be able to convince you that I was right. I am
detaining her for her sake. I now understand that Duncan will stay
with you. I am glad. I cannot trace Saraswati. As soon as I do, I shall
speak to her. If she consents, she will be sent. You must forgive the
changes for the time being. If N. had not been withdrawn, no changes
would have been necessary. As soon as you are suited there will be no
change. I hope however that the nursing staff there is quite suitable
and adequate.
May God restore you soon.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
I am not sending Mira because she has to give nearly four hours
daily to Amala. She is wasting her time.
BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 6008. Also C.W. 3334. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

434

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

535. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS PODDAR
September 29, 1933
CHI. RAMESHWARDAS,

There can be no doubt at all that Ramanama is the most
effective remedy for you, me and everybody else who has the faith. It
is not for the blameless and the healthy, but for people like us who are
sinful and full of disease. We should, therefore, go on repeating it with
unwavering faith whether or not we see any result.
Blessings from
BAPU

S JT. R AMESHWARDAS [C/O] BHOLARAM JOHARMAL
DHULIA, D IST. K HANDESH
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 209

536. LETTER TO PARIKSHITLAL L. MAJMUDAR
September 29, 1933
BHAI PARIKSHITLAL,

I got your letter. Jivanlalbhai and Nanabhai1 will try about the
Ashram in Kathiawar after Diwali. We will give them whatever help we
can in their efforts. If they can do nothing, I think it will not be
possible for us to maintain the Ashram. But I am sure that they will
not let it die. Whether the ashrams at Bhavnagar and Vartej should be
combined, requires to be considered.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3996

537. LETTER TO JASHBHAI
September 29, 1933
BHAI JASHBHAI

I got your letter. I cannot guide you from here. Do as
Chimanlal advises. If necessary, he will consult me. Don’t yield to
anything helplessness.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a Photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 23173
1

Nrisimhaprasad Kalidas Bhatt

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

435

538. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
September 29, 1933
CHI. MANI,

I got your postcard. Stay there as long as necessary and get well,
and then come. I also had a letter from Father, from which I have
come to know that now Chandubhai 1 is with him. I am very glad.
Continue to write to me. Inform Dahyabhai 2 that I have written to
Karamchand and replied to the questions. I am well.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI MANIBEHN P ATEL
P AREKH S TREET
S ANDHURST R OAD
BOMBAY 4

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 108

539. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
[Before September 30, 1933] 3
CHI. KAKA,

. . .4
I have been thinking of handing over the Ashram permanently
to the All-India Harijan Sevak Sangh for use as a Harijan settlement, a
Harijan hostel, office of the Harijan Sevak Sangh and a tannery. What
do you think about it? Jamnalalji liked the idea very much.
Chhaganlal, Chimanlal and Maganbhai also have liked it.
Let me know your plans.
I am fixed here up to October 15 for reasons of health.
I am well on the whole. I have brought a large army with me.
1

Dr. Chandubhai Desai
Addressee’s brother
3
From the reference to Gandhiji’s intention of handing over the Satyagraha
Ashram to the Harijan Sevak Sangh; vide “Letter to G. D. Birla”, 30-9-1933.
4
Some portion has been scored out here.
2

436

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Anandi, Bachu1 and Babu 2 have accompanied me, as also Prabhudas.
Mohan 3 and Vanamala4 have gone to Kathlal.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 9478. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

540. NEED FOR A DEFINITION
A curious case was filed in the Court of the Munsif of Orai. The
suit was in respect of the official nomination of a Mussalman as a
representative of the Harijans of Konch and was brought by three
Harijans against the Secretary of State for India in Council and others,
for unseating the nominated member and for a declaration that, under
the Municipalities Act, only a Hindu Harijan could be nominated. The
judgment of the Court went against the plaintiff, owing to the
proverbial uncertainty of law. I do not propose to examine the merits
of the judgment. I simply want the public to know and realize that the
law is not only uncertain about the definition of the Harijan class,
described in the judgment as ‘depressed classes’, but there is as yet, if
the judgment is correct, no legal definition at all of the term. If such is
the case, it is not difficult to understand that this want of definition
may easily lead to gross injustice or even more deplorable results. It
can be a fruitful source of irritation and internal quarrels; quarrels
between caste Hindus and Harijans, between Harijans and Harijans,
and between Hindus and non-Hindus. If untouchability is not to be
clothed with statutory sanction, it is surely necessary for the public to
concentrate their attention on arriving at a proper defintition. The
reader will understand my meaning more fully,if he carefully studies
the following extract5 from the judgment I have referred to.
Harijan, 30-9-1933

1

Nirmala, step-sister of Mahadev Desai
Sharda, daughter of Chimanlal Shah
3
Son and daughter of Narhari Parikh
4
ibid.
5
Not reproduced here. It was stated in the judgment: “The phrase ‘depressed
classes’ is nowhere defined in the body of the Municipalities Act. The court is not
aware that there exists any legal definition of this phrase as yet recognized by law... ”
2

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

437

541. HARIJAN BOARDING HOUSES
The manager of a Harijan boarding house writes:1
This is an old tale. I have no doubt that in every boarding house
for students, all labour, including scavenging, should be performed by
the boarders. Such a plan does not interfere with the boarders’
studies. Indeed, it adds reality to them and promotes the health of the
students,and saves money into the bargain. Those managers, therefore,
who, for the sake of gaining cheap popularity, or, being too lazy to
discuss such matters with their students, will not induce the latter to
perform all the necessary labour for their homes, will be doing a
distinct disservice to their wards. Such labour should be regarded as
part of the students’ education. But there is one condition attached to
the demand upon students to do the daily labour. Then there will be
no danger of “the low mentality worsening”.
Harijan, 30-9-1933

542. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, W ARDHA,

September 30, 1933
DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,

As you are aware, the ‘Satyagraha Ashram’ grounds with the
buildings in Sabarmati were abandoned on the 1st of August last by
the Ashram people. I had expected that the Government would, in
view of my letter2 addressed to them take charge of this abandoned
property, but they did not do so. It then became a question with me as
to what was my duty in the circumstances. I felt that it was wrong
altogether to allow the valuable buildings to waste. I consulted friends
and co-workers and came to the conclusion that the best use to make
of the Ashram was to dedicate it once for all for the service of the
Harijans. I placed my proposal before the trustees3 of the Ashram who
are out, as also fellow members. They have, I am happy to say, wholeheartedly approved of it. When the property was abandoned there
certainly was the expectation that some day, whether through an
1
The letter is not reproduced here. The correspondent had asked if Gandhiji
considered it objectionable “to ask the inmates to clean the vessels”.
2
Dated July 26, Vide “Letter to Home Secretary, Government of Bombay” 267-1933.
3
Jamnala Bajaj and Chhaganlal Gandhi

438

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

honourable settlement or India coming to her own, the trustees would
resume possession. Under the new proposal, the trustees divest
themselves entirely of the property. This procedure is permissible
under the Trust-deed1 , service of the Harijans being one of the objects
of the trust. Therefore, the new proposal is wholly in keeping with the
letter and spirit of the constitution2 of the Ashram, as also of the Trust.
The question that the trustees and I had to consider was, to
whom was the property to be tansferred for the specific use I have
mentioned; and we came unanimously to the conclusion that it should
be transferred to the all-India Harijan organization for all-India use.
The objects of the Trust are: (i) to settle on the Ashram ground
approved Harijan families subject to regulations to be framed; (ii) to
open a hostel for Harijan boys and girls with liberty to take nonHarijans; (iii) to conduct a technological department for teaching the
art of skinning carcasses, tanning the hide so obtained, curing it and
mnufacturing leather so prepared into shoes, sandals and other articles
of daily use; and lastly to use the premises as offices for the Central
Board or the Gujarat provincial organization or both, and such other
allied uses that the committee, referred to in the following paragraph,
may think proper.
On behalf of the trustees, I suggest that the Servants of
Untouchables Society should appoint a special committee with
yourself and the Secretary as ex-officio members, and three
Ahmedabad citizens, with power to this committee to add to their
number to take over this Trust and to give effect to its objects.
Two friends who have been always associated with the Ashram,
viz, Sjts. Budhabhai and Juthabhai, have offered to reside on the
premises as honorary managers. They have their own means and have
been devoted to the service of the Harijans for a long time. There is
also an inmate3 of the Ashram, who has dedicated his life to Harijan
service, and who will gladly stay on the premises. He has almost
become a specialist as a teacher of Harijan boys and girls. The
committee I have suggested, therefore, should have no difficulty in
managing the Trust; nor is it necessary that all the activities I have
mentioned should be simultaneously and immediately undertaken.
1

Vide “Ashram Trust-Deed”, 2-2-1926.
Vide “Satyagraha Ashram”, 14-6-1928.
3
Bhagwanji Purushottam Pandya who had left Burma to settle in the Ashram
2

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

439

Some Harijan families, as you are aware, are already living there. It
has long been a dream of the members of the ashram to establish a
colony of Harijan families, but beyond having a few of them we were
not able to make further progress. Experiments in tanning were also
conducted there. Manufacture of sandals was going on up to the time
of disbandment. The buildings contain a spacious hostel easily
accommodating 100 boarders. It has a fairly big weaving shed and
other buildings exceptionally fitted for the uses I have named. The
property contains 100 acres. I venture to say, therefore, that the site is
none too large for the fulfilment of the objects mentioned, but it is
large enough for the response that may be reasonably expected for
some time to come. I hope that the Society will have no objection to
accept the offer of the trustees and to take over the responsibility
implied in the acceptance.1
Your sincerely,

M.K. GANDHI
S JT. G HANSHYAMDAS BIRLA
P RESIDENT
S ERVANTS OF UNTOUCHABLES S OCIETY
BIRLA MILLS, D ELHI
C.W. 7937. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

543. LETTER TO ATMA S. KAMALANI
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, W ARDHA,

September 30, 1933
MY DEAR KAMALANI,

I have your letter.
You have not given me any alternative to fasts. But you need not
be agitated over my prospective fasts. They are not lightly undertaken
and for the most part they are inspired and therefore I may not be
held responsible for them. The inspiration may be a hallucination.
Whilst the hallucination lasts, reason is suspended and all appeal to it
1
In his reply dated October 4, 1933, the addressee accepted Gandhiji’s offer
and requested him to ask those who were already there to continue to stay and look
after the estate as before.

440

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

becomes vain. Do you not see this insurmountable difficulty in the
way of myself or friends dissuading me for a fast so undertaken?
Yours sincerely,

M.K. GANDHI
S JT. A TMA S. K AMALANI
JT. H ON. S ECRETARY
‘FRIENDS OF INDIA’
46 L ANCASTER GATE
LONDON W. 2
From a photostat: G. N. 1531

544. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
WARDHA,

September 30, 1933
MY DEAR CHARLIE,

The pot is calling the kettle black ! I see that anxiety complex is
again on you? Have I not said ‘Do not trust newspaper reports’? I am
not going out touring till doctors pronounce me as fit and in no case
before 23rd October. I assure you that nothing will be done in a
hurry. And why will you not trust the man on the spot? Surely
Jamnalalji won’t let me stir out till he is quite satisfied as to my fitness
for doing so.
After all I was able to spare a few minutes to peep into Verrier’s
room. He was looking fit. He is making very steady progress.
My weight has gone up and the blood-pressure is decidedly less
than at Bombay.
Love.
MOHAN

[PS.]
What about Amiyo?
From a photostat: G. N. 3795

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

441

545. LETTER TO TEJ BAHADUR SAPRU
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, W ARDHA,

September 30, 1933
DEAR DR. SAPRU,

I was delighted to receive your letter. Of course, I knew why you
were not writing to me. I could never be guilty of thinking that the
absence of my letter from you was due to want of affection or
courtesy.
I am still trying to regain my lost strength. It is slowly coming to
me. I am trying all I can to overtake the orthodox prejudices against
harijans. I quite agree with you that “our attitude towards them is the
darkest blot on our character”. I know that in this matter I can rely
upon your whole-hearted assistance, but in writing to me I don’t like
your confining yourself merely to the Harijan question. You may not
take any active part in politics or political discussions, but surely you
will not debar friends from the benefit of your advice, guidance and
ripe experience. Whatever may be the differences between us in our
outlook, you know that I have very high regard for you and your
opinions. I would, therefore, like you to give me briefly your London
experiences1 and the opinion you have formed upon them.
Seth Jamnalalji joins me in sending you regards.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S IR. T EJ BAHADUR S APRU
19 ALBERT R OAD, A LLAHABAD
Gandhi-Sapru correspondence: G. 26. Courtesy: National Library, Calcutta

546. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
WARDHA,

September 30, 1933
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

I got your letter of the 26th.
I had a letter from Mani yesterday. It appears she has an
enlarged spleen. She is, therefore, under treatment for it and will take
1

The addressee had gone to England in April to attend the meetings of the
Joint Parliamentary Committee.

442

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

some time before she comes here. Budhabhai, Juthabhai and
Bhagwanji at any rate will be there to run the Ashram as a Harijan
colony. All three of them are honest, hard-working and efficient. We
shall not have to pay anything to the first two.
Ramdas will settle down by and by. There is no cause for worry.
Anandi keeps fairly well. Prithuraj is in Calicut. Indu writes to
me occasionally from Bhavnagar . . . .1
I hope you are well. I hope Chandubhai also is all right.
Lakshmi will probably go to Madras in a few days.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 31

547. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI 2
September 30, 1933
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have you letter. It is long, yet short, because you could not
have expressed yourself in fewer words.
I can give my opinion if I have with me copies of the letters I
wrote to Gokhale and Bapa Sola. You must meet Gokhale. He is an
honest man. Whatever opinion I may have expressed must have been
only after hearing him. My impression was that Gokhale was not
merely a banker. Now who is asking for money and for what
purpose? It is not likely to be such a simple question as you think. But
hear Gokhale’s version and write to me. Sarojini Devi said she would
write to me about it. She has not written as yet.
Let Purushottamdas not be on the Orissa Committee3 . Would he
not even give the money? Have you received any money? from any
where?
Do meet Hasanbhai in connection with the market. Meet Lalji
Sheth also. You can write to Mathuradas Vasanji and ask him. Even if
the present owner gives a satisfactory answer we cannot know the real
1

Omission as in the source.
An extract from this letter appears in “Letter to Mathuradas Trikumji”,
30-9-1933
3
The Orissa Flood Relief Committee
2

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

443

reason for the boycott. We cannot ask Tersey right now. Send the
enclosed letter to him.
What has appeared in the Press about me is correct and yet not
correct. Doctors will always write in that way. But anyone who knows
will not be scared by that because my blood pressure was definitely
higher there than what it is here. Increase or decrease in weight cannot
have much to do with my health. But now 101 lb. is the very
minimum. I am having sufficient rest. I take 3 lb. of milk. I may have
to reduce the quantity now.
I am returning your letter. If you are not keeping good health
there, you may as well stay at Singhadh when Mehta goes there. Or
you may come here for a few day.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushial Nayyar

548. A NOTE 1
WARDHA,

September 30, 1933
This money is to be sent to the Servants of Untouchables
Society, Delhi, as contribution to the Harijan Fund.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of Gujarati: G. N. 3071

549. VARNADHARMA OF THE FUTURE
A “Sanatani” 2 Writes:3
It is difficult to give a straight answer to the question posed here.
Only a prophet could do it. Others can only hazard a guess. For me.
awareness of the present and conduct in accordance with it, are
sufficient. Theists as well as atheists can honestly sing: Enjoy who you
1

This presumably is the note referred to by Gandhiji in “Letter to Amrital V.
Thakkar”, 14-10-1933.
2
A pen name
3
The letter is not translated here. The correspondent, referring to the article
“To The Harijans of Gujarat” (vide “To the Harijans of Gujarat”20-8-1933) had
expressed his doubts about the revival of varnadharma in its true spirit.

444

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

get today, for who knows about tomorrow?” Whereas the atheist’s
pleasure merely consists of eating, drinking and enjoying himself, the
theist would be pleased to forget himself in devotion to the Lord, that
is, in the duty which falls to his lot. I regard myself as a theist and find
fulfilment in making the best of what I can do today. As we sow, so
shall we reap,that is, the future will follow the present— that is a
certainty. Hence, I am not worried about the future of varnadharma. I
would also ask “Sanatani” not to worry about it. Those like me who
believe in varnadharma and accept my definition of it should think
and act accordingly, and they would be said to have observed their
dharma in respect of varna.
Moreover, there is another thing which also deserves to be borne
in mind. The basic tenets of any religion should be such as could be
applied universally. Those which do not fulfil this condition cannot be
regarded as the basic tenets. If varnadharma is not such a principle, it
owes its origin to certain time, place and circumstances, and, if one of
them should change, it must itself change. If the varna is a device
which is so short-lived, no thought need be given to whether it should
continue to exist or not but I regard the varnadharma as defined by
me as a universal principle. The existence of human society depends
upon it. If my viewpoint is based on facts, varnadharma will certainly
become universal in future, although it may then be called by some
other name. Varnadharma implies that everyone must ramain content
with his hereditary means of livelihood. At the root of this scheme of
things there is non-violence, the Divine law, simple economics and
human reason. If it is not followed, a civil war, the like of which as
never been seen, is bound to overtake us. As millions of people
awaken, they will all want to become rich, they will all want to attain
greatness, no one will want to take up professions which are regarded
as low and class feelings will intensify. I for one feel that this could
lead to no result other than fratricidal conflicts.
However, as the instinct for self-preservation is ingrained in
human nature, man will escape this fate by taking recourse to
varnadharma. Everyone will live practising the profession to which he
is born, without regarding any profession as high or low. In that case
it would matter little if people were to be known not as Brahmins or
Kshatriyas but by some other names. Instead of four, there may be
only two varnas, or, even more than four. One thing is obvious—that
by observing the great law of varna, we guard ourselves against
conflicts arising out of capitalism communism, etc, In such a structure,
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

445

there would not be, on the one hand, excessive greed, concentration of
wealth or arrogance and, on the other helplessness, destitution or
poverty. All would live in harmony and no one would regard anyone
else as high or low.
Having written this, let my fancy range a little farther. If anyone
entrusted me with reconstructing a varna system and I happened to be
in India, I would start with the Brahmins. If they become the
custodians of knowledge derived from experience and of the code of
conduct to be based on it, the other varnas would automatically fall
into position. The Brahmins’ knowledge being self-evident and
themselves being free from selfish motives, others will readily follow
them. Besides, they will also have the power to influence others. The
question as to who should be called a Brahmin will not arise. The socalled Harijan of today may become a Brahmin respected by all and
the so-called Brahmin may not shrink from calling himself a Shudra.
I shall encounter no obstacle in this age of my fancy, because the
feeling of ‘high’ and ‘low’ will then have been wholly uprooted and
as all will be following their hereditary professions, they will soon take
their own places. There is not much point in prolonging the flight of
my fancy. Hence, I conclude after thus indicating the way. However,
this article of mine should mean that, since varnadharma has been
accepted as a non-violent institution, there is no room in it for penal
measures or for the use of force. If varnadharma is ingrained in
human nature, it will revive spontaneously. If it runs contrary to
human nature, it is in the fitness of things that it has disappeared now.
Here we are talking of man, not as a certain species of animals, but as
one that is progressively shedding the animal qualities and who,
having come out of his delusion, is directing all efforts towards the
realization of atman. Man is an animal created to discover his atman,
and as atman all men are one. Hence, at some time or the other, man
will rid himself of the mire of high and low and, of his own accord,
accept varnadharma which fosters unity.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 1-10-1933

446

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

550. LETTER TO PADMA
October 1, 1933
CHI. PADMA 1 ,

You will forgive me, won’t you? Daily I wanted to write to you
but could not for want of time. I hope you and Sarojinidevi 2 are all
right now. Let me know your daily time-table of work. I will write
more in reply to your next letter. Anandi, Babu, Bachu, Prabhavati,
Mirabehn and Ba are with me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 6144. Also C. W. 3499. Courtesy:
Prabhudas Gandhi

551. LETTER TO SUDARSHAN V. DESAI
October 1, 1933
CHI. MAVO,

Are you as sweet as mavo3 is? If not, be. Try every day to
improve your handwriting. Are you very happy there?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 5763. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

552. LETTER TO DHIRU C. JOSHI
October 1, 1933
CHI. DHIRU,

I hope the fever has left you now. Spend the vacation there and
rest. Gijubhai4 says that you can stay there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 5316

1
2
3
4

Daughter of Sitla Sahai, a Congress worker from U.P.
Addressee’s mother
Dehydrated milk
Gijubhai Badheka, author and educationist

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL, 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

447

553. LETTER TO DUDHIBEHN V. DESAI
WARDHA,

October 1, 1933
CHI. DUDHIBEHN,

I often wanted to write to you but could get no time. It seems
you feel quite at home there. I think Kusum’s1 dharma is, if she
understands it, to stay in Ranavav and improve her health. I hope you
are in the best of spirits. If there is anything interesting in Valji’s
letters, please let me know. I enclose letters for all, Kusum, Balbhadra2 ,
Indu, Nanu3 , Mavo4 and Dhiru.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 7453. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

554. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
October 1, 1933
CHI. KAKA,

I got your letter. You kept me waiting for a long time. I
understand the reason now.
You need not get Jamnalalji’s permission, since you are an
inmate of the Ashram. . . .5
I have dispatched today to Ghanhyamdas the letter 6 regarding
the handing over of the Ashram. Personally I liked your letter to
Vallabhabhai.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 9479. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

1
2
3
4
5
6

448

Kusum Gandhi, who suffered from tuberculosis
Balbhadra N. Patel
Addressee’s sons Vimalchandra Desai and Sudarshan Desai
ibid
Some portion has been scored out here.
Vide “Letter tto G.D. Birla”, 30-9-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

555. LETTER TO JAISHREE RAIJI
October 1, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

You have sought may blessings in the work that you have
undertaken. You have them because it is no trouble giving blessings.
You have not expressed a desire for anything more. Please do correct
me if I am making a mistake in understanding you. And I shall
certainly do whatever I can after you have put in plain words what you
want.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a facsimile of the Gujarati in Bapujini Sheetal Chhayaman, facing p. 8

556. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
October 2, 1933
CHI. MARY,

Duncan brings me your and his love as I am walking on the
terrace. I shall treasure that love. But I want you to be free from your
weakness and be up and doing as early as possible. May God restore
you soon. Of course I keep myself informed of your progress.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 6006. Also C. W. 3332. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

557. LETTER TO PREMLILA THACKERSEY
October 2, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

I got your letter. Mathuradas also says in his letter that you
worry about me. But I am quite happy here. I eat with appetite, the
weight is increasing and the blood-pressure is coming down. There is,
therefore, no cause for worry, nor is it necessary to go to
Mahabaleshwar. I don’t think I would be able to do as much work
there as I can here. Besides, I don’t see any immediate need for
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

449

incurring so much expenditure.
I hope your cold has left you completely.
Ba has gone to Nagpur today for khadi work.
My blessings to the girls.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 4833. Courtesy: Premlila Thackersey

558. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
Unrevised

S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, W ARDHA,

October 3, 1933
MY DEAR CHARLIE,

I have your letter.
I understand what you say about the better and responsive
atmosphere is Orissa and I am glad of it. Thakkar Bapa cannot
possibly go to Orissa at least just now, but the next best man will be
there within a short time.
I corrected your use of the expression ‘fast unto death’, but I
see that you have returned to it again. I told you that hitherto all my
fasts have been conditional; even the last one1 was conditional. I can
well understand anybody being repelled by an unconditional fast unto
death, though I have told you that in my scheme of life even an
unconditional fast, under very extraordinary circumstances, has a
place, but I don’t need to argue out that extreme position. All I want
to say is that in your discussion with Gurudev you should take care to
avoid arguments around a ‘fast unto death’, taking the expression
literally. Therefore, the best thing would be to centre your discussion
around all my fasts which Gurudev has not been able to reconcile
himself to, as perhaps the last one, and there too it would be one thing
to say that the facts hitherto known will not justify the fast, and
another thing to say that under no circumstances could a fast over the
Harijan issue, such as I raised at Yeravda, be justified. I have before
me a most painful but interesting case in which I have invited a worker
to take a penitential fast for the sake of truth and invited a worker to
take a penitential fast for the sake of truth and honour. I have
1

450

From August 16 to 23.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

discussed it in the pages of the Gujarati Harijan.1 You will find it also
discussed in the English Harijan next week.2
I hope you are not overworking yourself. I am getting on
famously. I wroteto you day before yesterday setting you at ease over
my prospective tour.
Love.
MOHAN
From a photostat: G. N. 3796

559. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
Unrevised

October 3, 1933

MY DEAR KUMARAPPA,

Your letter has come exactly at the time I expected it. When you
acknowledge this you must tell me all about your physical condition.
You can come here whenever you like and can any time before the
23rd inst. I may begin the tour after that if the doctors give me a
certifcate of discharge.
I am doing a fair amount of work and seeing visitors at least for
one hour during the day. This is always exceeded. Therefore, you
need not worry and I know that you would not tax me.
I hope that your sister is bravely putting up the domesitc sorrow
that God has sent her. I have come to see that such sorrows are
sometimes more real gifts from God than unbroken happiness which
is dependent upon external circumstances.
Chandrashanker who is helping me wishes specially to be
remembered to you. I expect Kakasahab to be here any time during
the week, and he may remain here a little while.
Love.
BAPU
S JT. J. C. K UMARAPPA
C/ O C. V. NARASIAH, ESQ.
C OIMBATORE (S. INDIA)
From a photostat: G.N. 10100

1
2

Vide “A case for Fasting”. 27-10-1933.
Vide “Letter to C.F. Andrews”, 30-9-1933.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

451

560. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
October 3, 1933
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

I got your letter.
1
*
*
*
You will read in one of the papers my letter 2 regarding the
Ashram. If necessary, I will send Totaramji3 . Parikshitlal also will stay
there. There will be no difficulty.
I have written to Mani and told her that she should come here
only after getting herself the right treatment.
. . . 4 will always go on like that. To try to reform him is like
trying to straighten a dog’s tail by tying it to a stone. You must have
read the news about Krishna Nehru.
I wish to attend to some other work now, and so I will stop here
today. Jamnalal, who is sitting near me, asks you not to worry about
him. If necessary, he will go to a hill station. His weight has gone up
to 190.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 32

561. ADVICE TO JAPANESE BUDDHIST PRIESTS 5
October 4, 1933
I was glad to be able to see you and have interesting
conversations. I have carefully gone through your long letter to me.
I can fully appreciate your desire to see that Buddhism is
revived in India; only, I would like to point out to you that whatever
Buddhism may mean, the substance of the teaching of Gautama, the
1

Omission as in the source
Vide “letter to G. D. Birla”, 30-9-1933, which appeared in Harijan,
7-10-1993.
3
Totaram Sanadhya, an Ashram inmate
4
The name is omitted in the source.
5
Rev. Fuji and Rev. Okitsu met Gandhiji on October 4. A brief report of the
interview appeared in The Hindu, 5-10-1933.
2

452

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Enlightened One, has been incorporated in Hinduism, and in my
opinion, comparatively speaking, the purity of the teaching of that
great reformer has been best preserved in India. In the countries of its
adoption it has, as it seems to me, deteriorated: as for instance,
Buddha’s teaching essentially was not merely Brotherhood of Man
but the Brotherhood of all Life. Nor is this to be wondered at. In my
opinion, Buddha did not found a new religion. As a Hindu of Hindus,
he gave a new orientation to Hinduism. I would, therefore, suggest to
you that you should amplify your knowlege of that teaching by
studying Sanskrit and Pali. A study of Sanskrit is necessary for
knowing the setting in which the teaching was fitted and from which it
was derived, and it is obvious that a study of Pali is necessary because
the original scriptures are to be found in that language. And, since
you have decided to cast in your lot with the Indian people, I would
commend to your attention the necessity of learning Hindi or
Hindustani.
Lastly, may I suggest to you that whatever religious revival may
be necessary, it can only be done not by eloquence, not by learning,
but by daily increase in the purity of one’s life and a prayerful
reliance upon the Great Intelligence, the Living Truth that animates,
illumines and sustains the universe.
The Hindu, 12-10-1933

562. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
WARDHA,

October 5, 1933
CHI. MRIDULA,

I have you letter. Do stay on for your treatment and to see about
the preparations for Mani and then come1 . I am here only till
November 7. I shall give whatever time you want. I may not be able to
spare all the time at once. Surely you will be here for a few days? The
climate is beautiful.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11184. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

1

The addressee and Manibehn Patel reached Wardha on October 25.

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

453

563. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
WARDHA,

October 6, 1933
BHAISHRI THAKKAR BAPA,

I got both your letters. I am glad you reminded me about
Bidhan Roy. My memory seems to be slumbering. If you had not
reminded me, I would have cleanly forgotten about the matter. Now a
letter will go immediately tomorrow.
And now about the tour. Ghanshyamdas writes and tells me that
I should not start before November 15. Dr. Khare1 also has been
insisting that I should take rest for at least six weeks. I, therefore, have
agreed not to start before November 8. I will start on Wednesday, the
8th. This has satisfied Jamnalalji. I also feel that there will be no harm
if I rest till the 8th. Meanwhile, I will be able to attend to some work
which has been pending with me. I shall also have to think about the
Harijan settlement. Then there is the problem of the workers in
Ahmedabad, and some matters here, too, which require my attention.
If, therefore, you think that this delay is justified, please make the
necessary changes in the programme. Draw up the entire programme
of the tour as follows. Let Jamnalalji draw up model programme for
the Central Provinces in consultation with the local workers. Assign to
the other provinces their respective weeks and ask them to draw up
their own programmes. If this is done, it will not be necessary to make
changes afterwards. When the programme is ready, we need not
publish the whole programme for nine months at a time but publish in
advance the programme for one province only, so that, if we find it
necessary to make minor changes, there may be no difficulty. If we
follow this method, we may publish the programme for just two
provinces together and afterwards the programme for the next
province as soon as we have finished one. This will also make the
work easier. I will write more after Jamnalalji is ready with his
suggestions.
And now about the Harijan settlement, namely, what name we
should give to it. I feel that we should not use the word Harijan, but
that our aim should be clear in the name that we select. Our ultimate
aim is that we should stop using the name Harijan, or that all of us
1

454

Dr. N. B. Khare
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

should become Harijans. Hence Vinoba has suggested the name
Sarvodaya1 Mandir, or Samabhava1 Mandir. I naturally like the first
name, for I called Ruskin’s famous book2 by the name Sarvodaya as
far back as 20 years ago. That name, therefore, will include Harijans.
Discuss the suggestion with Ghanshyamdas and let me know. Explain
to him the other thing, too, which I have mentioned in this letter.
I am very happy that Bhai Babal 3 listened to your advice and
mine. If he had not withdrawn his name, a very embarrassing situation
would have arisen.
BAPU

[PS.]
We need not make any provision for Delhi, as we need not make
any for Kathiawar. I had heard all about Shrivastavaji’s performance
long ago. But to whom can we complain when our own people turn
against us?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 1124

564. LETTER TO MANEKLAL
October 6, 1933
CHI. MANEKLAL,

You did well in writing to me. What is your present job
? What is your pay? The other things you will know from my letter to
Radha.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIII, 369

565. LETTER TO RADHA GANDHI
October 6, 1933
CHI. RADHA,

I plead guilty. I remain so busy that sometimes I forget the dear
1

Welfare of all
Equality of all
2
Unto This Last.
3
Babalbhai Mehta
1

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

455

ones like you and leave them without [letters]. I remember you all but
writing letters to you continues to be postponed on and on. I am
content to know that you are all happy and find pleasure in your own
respective fields. I would only hope you served as much as you can
and bless you for a long life. Whether I write or not I do like your
writing to me. I see your face always before me. I am all right. Ba is
here. Ramdas and his wife are also here. Devdas is in jail.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIII

566. LETTER TO SULTANA, WAHEED AND
HAMEED QURESHI
October 6, 1933
DEAR SULTANA, WAHEED AND HAMEED,

I should have letters from you. I am glad to know that you are
happy there. Anandibehn, etc., will be going there in a few days. What
have you learnt from the Koran?
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 11273. Courtesy: Gulam Rasul Qureshi

567. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
October 6, 1933
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have not been able to reply to your letters on time. I have
already written to you about the moneys of the Swaraj Party. Your last
letter is yet to come. Till then I have nothing to write.
I have received a long and amusing letter in English from
Tersey. I am glad that I wrote. Tell him that I shall not burden him by
writing to him again. His health must have improved. If the doctor
thinks that it is necessary for him to rest for more than 20 days he
should do so. He can do a certain amount of service even while taking
rest.
Send the money for Utkal when the new treasurer is appointed
or when you are reinstated in your position. Do not worry if that takes
456

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

some time. In the meantime Harakhchand1 will be ready to go. Have
you heard that Andrews has been made president? I met Sahu. He
seems to be a nice man.
I am also returning herewith another letter which you may
consider important.
Did you like my letter to Ghanshyamdas? Did you like the step
taken? Can you suggest another name for the Ashram?
My health is steadily improving. It was never really bad.
Lakshmi will leave for Madras tomorrow. You would be in
touch with the ladies.
Let me know if you think it is necessary that I should write to
someone about Orissa.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

568. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
October 6, 1933
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

Anandi and others are getting on well. Anandi is a devoted
worker and so when she read the news of Nimu’s going there, she at
once said: “Do not send me to Sharda Mandir. Make arrangements
for my being taught English, Gujarati and arithmetic, so that I can
learn something of these and also serve others.” This pleased me
much and I promised her that I would write to you to that effect.
Ramnarayan Pathak and Maganbhai2 are there in the Ashram. One of
them can arrange for her to be taught. Following Anandi, Bachu 3 ,
Babu 4 and Vanamala5 may also want to do the same. Should they so
decide a small class can be formed. Either the girls or I should go
1

Harakhchand Motichand Shah, who had been sent to Orissa in order to help
the local Flood Relief Committee
2
Maganbhai P. Desai
3
Nirmala, sister of Mahadev Desai
4
Sharda C. Shah
5
Vanamala Parikh
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

457

there. I shall say nothing about myself as Gulzarilal is himself coming
to oversee my work.
Blessings from
BAPU

[PS.]
Tell the girls’ teacher to write and tell me what he teaches.
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 32792

569. NOTES
HOW TO C OLLECT F UNDS

Many workers of institutions think that they can get funds for
their institutions for the mere issuing of appeals. But that is true only
of very few well-known and tried workers. A Muller or a Ramakrishna
has been known to get funds even for the silent praying. Mere mute
wishes of such rare saints reach people like irresistible wireless
messages. But the majority have to plod before they can get any
response. And the best way of plodding is to pay house-to-house
visits. When a cause is just, as ours undoubtedly is, and the worker is
known for his or her integrity, response is assured. Such house-tohouse begging is also the best propaganda. Donors are, and should be
always exacting. They want to know, or ought to want to know, all the
needs of the institution they are called upon to support. Therefore,
workers who go on begging expeditions have to be well armed with
facts and figures. What is, however, most needed is patience. They
must be prepared even to put up with insults. In the end they will find
that funds cause the least difficulty when honesty and ability are
assured. In the absence of these two qualities, funds are a burden as we
find today regarding many so-called religious institutions which are
decaying, though they have ample funds.
Unscrupulous and indolent trustees are ill able to discharge their
trust, and the moneys in their hands are either locked up profitlessly
or wasted on irreligious orgies or other superstitious practices.
A S UGGESTION FROM AMERICA

An American friend, who knows Indian conditions somewhat
and is deeply interested in Harijan work, writes in reply to a letter
from me:1
1

458

Only extract from the letter are reproduced here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

. . . I feel that where there is room the reports would be more effective if,
in addition to telling what has been done, they would also compare it with the
previous conditions. . . . Also to tell the approximate number of Harijans in
each such locality, so as to show how many people the new facilities will
serve and how adequate or inadequate even the improvement is. Also to
contrast it with corresponding facilities for upper caste people in the same
place. . . .

The underlying note of the American friend’s suggestion is a
plea for more truth. The reports of our work can never be too
accurate. They must be mirrors both of our strength and our
weakness. We may not, therefore, embellish them. Too often reports
are made attractive by rosy pictures of institutions to which they refer.
But not being true to life, they share the fate of ordinary newspaper
paragraphs or advertisements. Readers simply do not read them or,
when they do, they distrust them. Comparative statements, such as the
writer suggests, will better enable the reader to grasp the meaning of
figures and facts. Reports should never contain declamations or
writers’ opinions, except when the latter are relevant. They should be
brief and to the point. When there is no apparent progress, workers
very often say they have nothing to report. Such men forget that waht
is wanted is a truthful record of their activities. if, therefore, systematic
work has been done, a correct record of it cannot fail to be of great
value to other workers. We may not always command success, but we
can always show increasing effort and concentration which are
forerunners of success.
VALUE OF REPORTS
Thakkar Bapa has often complained to me that the various
organizations do not send prompt periodical reports and those that are
sent often contain opinions and declamations rather than facts and
figures. Secretaries and workers do not always realize that reports are
required, not for the pleasure of the central organization, but for the
guidance of the centre in framing its policy from day to day, for
checking and co-ordinating the work of the different organizations
and for informing the public from time to time of the progress of the
movement. The duty, faithfully performed, of drawing up reports will
automatically stimulate the activity of workers all round, and keep
organizations up to the mark. Thus, if all workers sent in their reports
of work done on the Harijan Day (24th Septemeber last), it would be
possible to have an idea of the successes and failures in the various
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

459

provinces. It would also be possible then to know what instructions to
issue for the next Harijan Day. I hope, therefore, that, if such reports
have not already been, they will be, sent at once to the headquarters in
Delhi. And if any reader has anything striking to report about his
experiences, I would ask him to send them directly to me. I hope that
all the reports would contain accurate account of takings and
expenditure incurred in making preparations for the observance of
the Day.
Harijan, 7-10-1933

570. WHAT THEY BELIEVE
Rao Bahadur M. C. Rajah sent me some time ago a copy of his
speech, delivered at the Legislative Assembly on 24th August last, in
connection with the Temple-entry Bill 1 . The reader will find below
copious extracts2 from that speech, which interruptions, his repartees
and some other non-historical portions omitted.
The value of the speech consists, not so much in the accuracy of
his historical statements, as in the fact that many people actually
believe in them with as much tenacity as the so-called sanatanists, who
credit Harijans with hardly any human rights, believe in statements
supporting untouchability. The issue will ultimately be decided, not
by historical evidence or by interpretation of Sanskrit texts of
doubtful religious value, but by the prayerful and incessant labours of
reformers of sinless purity. No religion has ever lived on its past
achievements. It dies unless it is nourished and sustained by the
continuing tapas3 of its votaries. Not by learning but by right conduct
can religions flourish. Untouchabilty, as we practise it today, crept in
when watchfulness of pure custodians waned. It will only go when an
unbroken and unbreakable chain of continuing tapas is established.
Not even a unanimous verdict of all the pundits and shastris will
remove the idea of high and low which has been dragged into the
minds of the masses since generations past. The latter will want the
evidence of the practice of those whom they believe to be pureminded
representatives of their religion.
1
2
3

460

Introduced by Ranga Iyer.
Not reproduced here
Austere effort
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Nevertheless, I commend Rao Bahadur Rajah’s speech to the students
of Hinduism form the historical standpoint. It is of some importance
to have it indubitably proved that the Harijans of the South, at any
rate, represented a civilization which was destroyed by a conquering
race, calling itself Aryan (noble) in contempt of the original
inhabitants, whom it used for its own selfish ends and reduced to
slavery. I must confess that I have always entertained grave doubts as
to the truth of the story. I should refuse to credit such claimants of
superiority with being repositories of a noble religion. If the historical
evidence is beyond question, one is forced to the conclusion that all
that is noble in Hinduism came, not from the conquerors, but from the
conquered and that untouchablitiy is a corruption which the
conquerors superimposed upon it, whilst they adopted the religion
and culture of the conquered. Whichever way the truth lies between
the two schools of thought, untouchability is a recognized evil that has
to be removed if Hinduism is to live. It is further clear that, according
to the two schools, Hinduism,whether it is indigenous or imported, did
not, in its orginal state, have any taint of untouchability about it. And
in any case, now that there is no distinction between the non-Aryan
and the Aryan, who is said to have come from outside India and has
fused with the original inhabitants of the country, it is not of much, if
any, practical importance to decide or even know who was truly Arya
or noble. What is of tremendous importance is the fact that the
monster of untouchability will tax the resources of all Hindus before it
receives its death-blow.
Harijan, 7-10-1993

571. LETTER TO KRISHNA NEHRU
[October 7, 1933 ]1
CHI. KRISHNA,

You are now going to be reborn, for marriage is a sort of
rebirth, is it not?
Swarup 2 came as a bride to Kathiawar but persuaded her
husband to go and settle down in her old province—U.P. Ranjit claims
to be a Kathiawari as well as a Maharashtrian. Gunottam is only a
Gujarati, and I do not think you will try to take him away to
1
2

Vide the following item.
Vijaylakshmi Pandit, addressee’s elder sister

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

461

Allahabad. You will have to make Gujarat your home, or may be
Bombay. My only wish is that wherever you are, may you be happy
and add lustre to the already bright name of your illustrious parents.
May God help you and Gunottam. I am unable to attend your
marriage, so I shall have to content myself with sending you my
blessings.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Koi Shikayat Nahin, pp. 113-4

572. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
October 7, 1993
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I have your two letters. The first did not call for a reply.
I see that Krishna’s marriage comes off on 20th inst. I am glad.
I must not attempt to come to Allahabad. It is much better for me to
remain in the purdah till the medical men declare me to be quite fit.
Herewith a letter1 for Krishna.
I see Mother is not yet quite out of the wood. Let us hope she
will be fit enough to attend the wedding.
Your article2 for the D. H. I like very much. I am sending it to
Agatha for such use as she can make of it. She is a wounderful
worker.
Mira had forgotten all about the note of her prison experiences.
Her draft is now ready. It will be sent to you to be handed to Andrews
and such other use that you may wish.
I am thinking out what is possible to do for the workers.
What is this I read about Tandon’s differences? Have you seen
the paragraph?
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

1
2

462

Vide the preceding item.
This is not available.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

573. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
WARDHA,

October 7, 1933
CHI. MANI,

I have your letter. See all the people whom you wish to see and
then come. But please do not take this to mean that you may come in
the next millennium. Do bring along Baba 1 . He will like this place. I
am improving, that is, regaining my strength. I shall be here till
November 7.
Blessings from
BAPU

S HRIMATI MANIBEHN P ATEL
R AMNIVAS, P AREKH S TREET
BOMBAY 4

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 109

574. LETTER TO JIVANJI D. DESAI
October 7, 1933
BHAISHRI JIVANJI,

I got both your letters. I had read your notice. It is all right.
Arrange to send Bablo here after Diwali. He has promised to come.
He has, therefore, bound himself. I hope he will keep his promise. I
have not received the list yet.
Blessings from
BAPU

[PS.]
I will write the preface2 to ‘Varnadharma’ as early as I can.
S JT. J IVANJI DESAI
NAVAJIVAN P RAKASHAN M ANDIR
GANDHI R OAD
AHMEDABAD, B. B.&. C. I. RLY.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9931. Also C.W. 6906. Courtesy:
Jivanji D. Desai
1

Dahyabhi Patel’s son
A collection of Gandhiji’s views published under the title Varnavyavastha.
For the preface.
2

VOL. 61: 27 APRIL 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

463

575. LETTER TO BIPIN PATEL
WARDHA,

October 7, 1933
CHI. BABA,1

I have your letter. Learn to make each letter as beautiful as a
pearl. Do come along with Aunt. 2 I would like it. You will certainly
get opportunities to play; there are children of your age. Do you write
to Grandfather?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 163

576. SURRENDER OF THE ASHRAM 3
[Before October 8, 1933]
We have given up the trusteeship [of the Ashram]. We have
given it up not out of rancour but out of a feeling of oneness with it,
because we saw that while keeping it under our control we could not
observe our dharma. The Government may take it over, but are not
doing so. I do not want it to be ruined . . . . Giving up control of the
Ashram does not mean that we would never be staying there. I do
hope we could stay there. Even if the Government sells it away, I hope
that the inmates of the Ashram would settle nowhere but on that land.
. . . may it become a place of pilgrimage for Harijans. May it be for
them a temple. May it also be a place which would remind the caste
Hindus of their own dharma. The caste Hindus should know that they
have reason for atonement and that this will also mean service to
themselves.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 8-10-1933

1

Eldest son of Dahyabhai Patel
Manibehn Patel; vide “Letter to Manibehn Patel”, 7-10-1933.
3
This and the following three items have been translated from Chandrashankar Shukla’s weekly letter.
2

464

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

577. LETTER TO HARIBHAU UPADHYAYA
[Before October 8, 1933] 1
DEAR HARIBHAU,

Received your letter. I shall find time and discuss with Ramnarayan. You must be keeping good health. Jamnalalji tells me that you
are preparing for the yatra. I am trying to be an ideal prisoner even
here. The ethical codes prescribed by you for Chaitanya Muni appear
to be correct. But if he does not have a spontaneous desire and
depends on my advice, my duty is to prevent him from changing the
dress, because the fault is not in that dress but in its misuse. Chaitanya
Muni can become a thorough scholar and render great service by
pointing out his religion without fear and following it in practice. He
must endeavour to study in depth Sanskrit and Magadhi. This is of
primary importance in the dress of a Jain muni. But the munis hardly
follow it in practice. Untouchability or what is today known as
varnashramadharma has no place at all in the Jain philosophy. They
must vehemently point it out, and before they talk about it, they must
be fully convinced about it. There is no restriction on a Jain muni
teaching anyone. Hence, he must get around at least a few Harijan
children and educate them. If he has been convinced that Jainism is
not different from Hinduism, he must establish it. If this leads to
boycott, he must lovingly face it and continue in his path of service. I
think this includes everything.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Haribhau Upadhyaya Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

578. DISCUSSION ON DANGER OF CIVIL STRIFE
[Before October 8, 1933]
Q. Do you think this problem is so important that it must be tackled just now?
Many people are afraid that this work will lead to fighting and civil strife among
Hindus.
1

This letter appears in “Answers to Correspondents”, Before 8-10-1933 as a
reply to a correspondent under “Answer to Correspondents”. The whole letter, with
the exception of the first few sentences, has been Reproduced in Harijanbandhu,
8-10-1933.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

465

A. Without doing this work we cannot reach the road to swaraj.
And even supposing we did, that swaraj would not be true swaraj, but
the reign of blind superstition and irreligion. Today many Hindus
believe that Hinduism would perish with the eradication of
untouchability. But I see the end of Hinduism unless untouchability is
wiped out. In this age people do not fight with swords for the sake of
religion. Religious awakening is not and should not be brought about
nor religion protected at the point of the sword. But religions will be
compared and judged by our reasons and hearts. Untouchability is
opposed to reason and sentiment. It is a great crime. As Congressmen
we must accept this. If in consequence only a handful of Hindus
remain in the Congress, let it be so. The Congress will then be come a
powerful organization. Today there is only a risk of civil strife. If,
however, untouchability is not wiped out, civil strife is a certainty.
Unless we take bold measures against untouchability, civil strife is
bound to follow.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 8-10-1933

579. TALK WITH A WORKER

1

[Before October 8, 1933]
Q. Since removal of untouchability is included in the Congress programme,
why should we not do this work as a political activity?

A. The movement will fizzle out if it is carried on as a political
activity. It has political implications, and nobody can prevent them
from following. But the work itslef cannot be considered a political
acitivity. if it is so considered, it will not last, for, it is a pure religious
cause. Hence, to those who suggest that it should be restricted to a
purely political aim and that such a difficult item like temple-entry
should be omitted from the programme, I would say that if this is
done, the movement will lose its very life.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 8-10-1933

1

466

This appeared under the title “Purely Religious Work”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

580. TALK ON NEED FOR HUMILITY
[Before October 8, 1933]
After taking a vow, do not start soaring in the sky but remain on
the earth. We are but grains of sand, we are like particles of dust. I
truly believe the saying, “For dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou
return.” We are born out of dust, we are mere images of clay. What
should we be proud of? We are not capable even of building anything
like the artistic anthill that ants can build. Sparrows, ants, etc., have
attained perfection, which we have not. We are imperfect. We are not
perfect even physically. That is why we seek perfection elsewhere. We
are never content to be what we are. This “divine discontent” is put in
us by God. Because of it, we keep on saying “not this, not this”, and
endeavour to go further and further. An ant is perfect, because it does
not wish to become better. But we have got to progress. We should,
therefore, be humble and live as particles of dust, be ciphers. Modern
physicists and astronomers tell us that each atom contains the entire
universe within itself. The seers of the Upanishads had known this
truth thousands of yers ago. That is why they said: “As in the
individual so in the universe.” We can become part of the Divine
when we become like an atom, become a mere cipher, for the atom is
universal, imperishable. We must, therefore, learn not to soar in the
sky, but to become like a particle of dust.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 8-10-1933

581. ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS 1
[Before October 8, 1933]
I believe in the system of the four varnas. 2 But the aim of the
varna system was to determine and limit the field of occupations.
Restrictions about marriage and dining were never regarded as part of
the varnadharma., Ordinarily, people will naturally marry within their
own varna but we know from historical evidence that there have
always been inter-varna marriages in certain circumstances. I have
1

The report, which appeared under the title “From the Mail Bag”, gives only a
gist of Gandhiji’s answers to the correspondents.
2
A gentleman had asked why, since Gandhiji belived in the system of the four
varnas, he approved of inter-varna marriages.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

467

gradually come to the firm conclusion that as a result of complete
confusion in the matter of the choice of occupations there is a total
chaos in the functioning of the varna system as well. Today
varnadharma exists only in name; the beautiful varna system has been
abused to spread the degrading notion of high and low. I have no
ready solution to the problem how true varnadharma can be
established. But I have no doubt at all that its reival will depend on the
present generation following the right path. Its outward form will
perhaps have changed a little. In religious matters it should be
remembered that we have to seek the spirit behind the outward form,
that mere form without spirit is of no use.
Thank you for your frank letter. 1 No person can absolve
another from the moral consequences of breach of vow. God alone
can do that. But I do not know that God does. However, I can
understand your difficulty. But I hope you will wear khadi as far as
possible. You need not return the autograph.
(1) God is Truth.2
(2) Hence, for realizing God one should follow truth in thought,
word and deed.
(3) Constant repetition of Ramanama from the heart is a sure
means of realizing the self.
(4) Realization of self means realization of Truth.
Where there is a clash between sanatanists and Harijans, we
should do our best to pacify the parties. We cannot accept foreign
cloth, etc., that may be offered as gifts for Harijans.3
The ethical principles which you have explained to the muni
seem all right.4 If, however, he does not feel a spontaneous call from
within and depends on my advice, my duty is to dissuade him from
giving up his holy dress. For, the fault is not in the dress itself but in
1
This was in reply to a student from Poona who had obtained Gandhiji’s
autograph by promising that he would spin for half an hour daily, but had
subsequently written to Gandhiji saying that he could not keep his promise and
requested him to absolve him from it. he had also offered to return the autograph.
vide, “Advice to a student”, Before 10-9-1933.
2
This and the following three replies are to questions about methods of
realizing God.
3
This was addressed to a “Worker”.
4
This was in reply to a common friend who had sought Gandhiji’s advice on
behalf of a Jain monk who wished to give up his holy dress which he regarded as an
obstacle to public service.

468

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

its abuse. The muni can render great service by becoming a perfect
scholar and fearlessly pointing out the path of dharma and following
it himself. He should strive hard and make a deep study of Sankrit
and Magadhi. This is the primary duty of those who accept the holy
dress of a Jain muni, but few of them do it. They must emphatically
tell the people that untouchability and the present-day varnadharma
have no place in Jainism, after first convincing themselves about it.
There is no restriction on a Jain muni teaching anybody. Hence, he
should gather at least a few Harijan children and teach them. If they
are convinced that Jainism is not different from Hinduism, they
should explain that to the people. If in consequence they have to face
boycott, they should do so with love and continue their service. I think
this fully answers your question.
I see that you have become impatient.1 There is nothing wrong
in being impatient in a good cause. Your ambition is good; I should
like you to give it another and a better direction. I have always
believed that young people wrongly entertain the ambition of going
to England for study. It is a very expensive hobby. It is possible to
have in India most of what you can get in England. I believe that it is
wrong for us to entertain an ambition which only a handful of persons
can realize. If anybody does want to realize such an ambition, he
should do it with his own resources, not with the aid of a public
organization or even with private help. If you do depend on outside
help, you should ask for such help as others also in your position
would be able to get.
As far as I can see, your aim in going to England is to earn
more so that you can give more money for Harijan work. But you will
have to admit that, no matter how much you give, your contribution
will be a mere drop in the ocean. Hence, instead of following the
tortuous path of earning more in order to give more, why should you
not adopt a better way? That way is to dedicate yourself to Harijan
work. That would not be like a drop in the ocean, but it would be a
glowing example for countless others to follow. I want to impress
upon you that education of the heart is infinitely more important than
education of the head. And education of the heart can be had here in
the same measure as anywhere else in the world. Moreover, it will cost
you nothing.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 8-10-1933
1

This was in reply to a Harijan teacher’s request for help from the Harijan
Sevak Sangh to enable him to go abroad for advanced studies.
VOL. 61: 27 APRIL 1933- 7 OCTOBER, 1933

469

582. SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM IN NEW FORM 1
[Before October 8, 1933]
The responsibility of the caste Hindus of Ahmedabad as also of
the Harijans has increased as a result of the donation of the land and
buildings of the Satyagraha Ashram for the service of Harijans. Very
few institutions own so many buildings and so much land; I do not
know of any Harijan institution as big as this one. However, land and
buildings without men are no better than ruins. They have no
independent value of their own. The big place is not going to justify
itself if just any Harijans go and live there, nor is the object behind it
going to be fulfilled. The Ashram can become an ideal institution and
a place of pilgrimage only when worthy Harijans live there observing
all the rules, and caste Hindus take interest in their progress, devoting
their time and applying their talents, etc., to it. It is obvious that the
caste Hindus and Harijans living in and around Ahmedabad alone can
do all this. I hope both will do their duty.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 8-10-1933

1

470

This appeared under “Notes”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I
INTERVIEW TO “THE TIMES OF INDIA 1

May 2, 1933
I have received messages from dear friends in England, which make me happy.
They seem to have been convinced in their hearts about the propriety of the step I am
going to take. They have not said this in so many words but that is how I interpret
their messages. I was afraid that they might not be able to understand the uniqueness
of this fast. But my fear has been proved to be baseless. Mr. Andrews has sent a
message on his own behalf and on behalf of friends. Another message is from Mr. and
Mrs. Polak. They have never hesitated to criticize me whenever they have not
understood any of my actions. I had a vague fear that they might not approve of my
present step. I have been receiving messages from friends in India too and I hope that
in a few days’ time they will understand the propriety of my step. Whatever it be, I am
becoming more and more convinced that it was not possible for me to avoid this fast.
There was no other way if this movement was to be kept on a purely moral plane and
saved from being besmirched by selfish and impure elements that have infiltrated into
it. Now I hope that those engaged in it will start working with redoubled zest and
fulfil the various tasks connected with the removal of untouchability, including the
task of educating public opinion in favour of the Bill for the abolition of
untouchability. I am convinced that the progress would have stopped if I had not
taken the step. I wish that the sanatanists and reformers should work in co-operation
during the coming weeks and remove whatever defects they find in the existing laws
and come to a settlement.
You ask me [what I will do] if I am released. This is a question I really cannot at
the moment consider.

[From Gujarati]
Mahade vbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 279-80

1

Vide “Interview to the press”, 1-5-1933.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

471

APPENDIX II
LETTER FROM V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI 1
Private
MYLAPORE,

May 7, 1933
DEAREST BROTHER,

After much thought and destruction of several drafts, I have decided that the
best reply to your ‘begging’ and most touching letter of the 2nd instant is the
enclosed extract. I trust it will sustain you ever so little in the ordeal which will have
begun when it reaches Yeravda. It would have been useless and, as you said in your
first statement, embarrassing for me to try to dissuade. What remains for your friends
and associates is to wish that you may come out of the ordeal not merely unscathed,
but armed afresh with the strength of tapas for the struggle that seems without end.
I will not pretend for a moment that I approve of your fast. To one like me,
born in Hinduism and bred up in it for long years, the arguments pro and con are
thoroughly familiar. From sacred texts one might confute most of the reasoning in
your statements. But beyond texts and mere authority is reason and humanity, on
which you habitually fall back. Even in that ultimate court I fear we shall not be found
on the same side. Our values are different fandamentally. The difference is radical, no
sophistry can abolish it.
In spite of what you have said in the last revelation of your heart, I
believe that too much self-communion and internal debate have undermined your
judgment. The state of ecstasy when values are reversed, when day becomes night and
night day, when pleasure becomes pain and pain pleasure, is rare even in the
experience of mystics. The attempt to make it habitual and to adopt the language
appropriate to that state as the language of everyday speech is, if I may use the
expression, to walk on moral stilts. On occasions you appear to me, in strange
contrast to your realism, to impose that mode of movement on the common men and
women around you. The atmosphere in such circumstances if apt to be thick with
disappointment and grievous failure. And if the only correction possible were
self-correction, the master must needs find himself doomed to the cell of penitence,
which is next door to suicide. You have enough philosophy to understand that to
claim divine sanction for a course of conduct is to withdraw it from the field of
discussion and deprive it of direct validity to other minds. Whenever I come across
the claim in your writing I cannot help quoting to myself the famous line of Kalidasa:
1

472

Vide “Letter to V. S. Srinivasa Sastri”, 2-5-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

‘‘You appear to me to be confounded by anxious thought.”
Yours always,
V. S. S RINIVASAN
ENCLOSURE
‘Revolution and Religion’ is a review by John Middleton Murry of a book
called Moral Man and Immoral Society by Reinhold Neibuhr. The review appears in
the Aryan Path of this month. Below are transcribed the concluding paragraphs in
which reference is made to Gandhi.
‘What then are those who are convinced alike of the material and spiritual
necessity . . . for the social struggle in the Western world? There is our tragedy. It is a
most significant tribute to Gandhi that he should be the figure in whom the rigorous
yet imaginative arguments of Neibuhr’s book inevitably culminate. Of the book
itself, I can only say that it seems to be of an altogether higher order than any other
examination of the menacing problem of Western civilization with which I am
acquainted. It is a prophetic book; and I do not believe I shall be found the victim of
romantic illusionism when I say that I believe it will prove to be the forerunner of a
new and enduring political movement in the English-speaking world.’
Letter s of Sriniv asa Sastri , pp. 252-4

APPENDIX III
LETTER FROM JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 1
DEHRADUN J AIL,

May 5, 1933
MY DEAR BAPU,

Your letter came today. I was half expecting it for your large heart never
permits you to forget anyone. I have sent you a telegram already.
As my telegram will indicate, I feel utterly at a loss and do not know
what I can say to you. Religion is not familiar ground for me, and as I have grown
older I have definitely drifted away from it. I suppose I have something else in its
place, something other than just intellect, reason, which gives me strength and hope.
Apart from this undefinable and indefinite urge, which may have just a tinge of
religion in it but is wholly different from it, I have grown to rely entirely on the
workings of the mind. Perhaps they are weak supports to rely upon, but, search as I
will, I can see no better ones. Religion seems to me to lead to emotion and
1

Vide “Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru”, 2-5-1933.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

473

sentimentality and they are still more unreliable guides. Intuition—undoubtedly there
is such a thing, though where it comes from I cannot say! Perhaps from the stored up
experiences at the back of the mind, the sub-conscious self.
The Harijan question is bad, very bad, but it seems to me incorrect to say that
there is nothing so bad in all the world. I think I could point to much that was equally
bad and even worse. All over the world there is this same Harijan question in various
forms. Is it not the outcome of special causes ? Surely it is due to something more
than mere ignorance and ill will. To remove those causes or to neutralize their effect
appears to be the only way to deal with the roots of the matter. But why should I write
of these matters now! I do not want to argue in this letter as the stage for argument
seems to be past.
It is hard to be so far from you, and yet it would be harder to be near you. This
crowded world is a very lonely place, and you want to make it still lonelier. Life and
death matter little, or should matter little. The only thing that matters is the cause
that one works for, and if one could be sure that the best service to it is to die for it,
then death would seem simpler. I have loved life—the mountains and the sea, the sun
and rain and storm and snow, and animals, and books and art, and even human
beings—and life has been good to me. But the idea of death has never frightened me,
from a distance it seems fitting enough as the crown of one’s endeavour. But at close
quarters, it is not pleasant to contemplate.
The last fourteen or fifteen years have been a wonderful time for me, ever since
I had the good fortune to be associated with you in various activities. Life became
fuller and richer and more worthwhile, and that is a dear and precious memory which
nothing can take from me. And whenever the future happens to be dark, this vision of
the past will relieve the gloom and give strength.
All my love to you.
Yours affectionately,

J

[PS.]
Kamala is staying in Dehradun. I shall communicate your message to her.
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy: Nehru. Memorial Museum and Library

474

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX IV
TALK WITH C. RAJAGOPALACHARI 1
May 4, 1933
GANDHIJI: Even jurisprudence admits the right of self-destruction. You will ask
me whether Ramatirtha, Ramakrishna, Vivekananda did this sort of tapasya, whether
the suicide of Ramatirtha—deliberate or resulting from a trance—produced any
results, whether Jesus mounting the cross left any impact.
C. R.

But Hinduism does not sanction suicide.

G.

I don’t know. But Mahadev was telling me that there is a practice of
drowning oneself in the Ganga.
C . R . That is to purify oneself with the water of the Ganga. I do admit that if
you are the cause of all these sins you may commit suicide. Logically it would be your
victory, but then you do not seek such a victory, do you ?
G. I want to atone for the sins. Moral ends require moral means. Cardinal
Manning was kept on three biscuits and water. It is easier to undertake twenty-one
days’ fast than to die the kind of slow death as Cardinal Manning is said to have died.
A moral reform can be brought about only through tapashcharya and self-purification.
We should learn from the experience of scientists who have gone through this. My
mother and I were born in families where such fasts were an everyday affair. They were
a part of their experience. It is probable that my father did not approve of the severe
fasts my mother used to undertake but she showed no ill-effects from the fasting and
they made us respect her all the more.
C . R . This is only an instance of association of ideas. Can you defend your case
by saying that just because your mother fasted you also must? If someone pierces
himself with a needle, how will that convince people that it is sinful to regard a
person as an untouchable?
G. Then supposing I fast only for a few days? Supposing I don’t die at the end
of the fast?
C . R . The two things are not related at all. You seem to believe that there is a
secret connection between self-mortification and people’s convictions. Buddha was
the first to raise his voice against such self-mortification.
G. In a true fast the mind and the soul co-operate with the body. Buddha was
against purely physical fasting.
C. R.

1

Will you have the strength to think clearly after ten days?

Vide “Letter to C. Rajagopalachari”, 5-5-1933.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

475

G. On former occasions I did have it. Thoughts become purer during a pure fast
even though there may not be any outward sign of that. A co-worker undertook a fast
for fifty-five days, still his thoughts have not become pure because his mind was not
pure. The very first day he started discussing with me what he would do after the fast.
Even now his mind is not steady. He wrote me a letter in which he described the
impurity of his mind. But to a man who has his mind fixed on God or on some noble
act things that were obscure at first gradually become clearer and clearer.
C . R . This can be true only to a certain extent.
G. In saying this you tread on dangerous ground. You must accept the
conclusion of a scientist. One who is pure, who adheres to truth and wants to cling to
it is as much a scientist as a physicists.
C . R . But this is an unnatural situation.
G. It may be unnatural for animals, not for human beings. If you wish to see
the unseeable you have to become unseeable.
C . R . Do you wish to see the unseeable?
G. Yes, because I want to serve the Harijans in the best way possible. If
untouchability is to be eradicated we must touch the hearts of 160 million people.
C . R . There is a superstition of touching wood to save oneself from ghosts and
spirits and God is brought into it. But there must be a limit to such beliefs in the
occult.
G. I am not ashamed of the occult element. You seem to say that it is harmful to
believe in the occult.
C . R . Yes, if it results in death.
G. You want to have the cake and eat it, too. For the sake of argument I shall
grant that fasts which end in death are wrong. Your argument implies that
mortification of the flesh can never do good.
C . R . It may sometimes.
G. From the medical point of view?
C . R . No. Even from the spiritual point of view.
G. Then you have lost. If that is the case it should be left to the person who
wishes to undertake a fast. I did not undertake this fast of my own free will. I was
commanded.
C . R . All right. Can friends advise on this?
G. Certainly.
C . R . If there is an eighty per cent chance of death resulting from this, it is a
gamble. You will say that it is a good gamble. I feel that you have been brooding over
the same thing in jail and so you have lost your sense of proportion. You have a great
fondness for conducting experiments. You are now experimenting with death and
you are misguided in it. Can you show me even one person who approves of your
step? G. Duncan, Andrews.

476

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

C . R . What could be the value of their opinion ? My opinion has greater
weight. Andrews does not even know how to lock a room and he is talking about
locking up one’s life. And how can you claim fully to know God’s law? I tell you, you
should be more cautious. It is possible to get inspiration from God sometimes but not
always.
G. Then you accept the possibility of inspiration from God? If you accept this
you have lost your case.
C . R . But the inspiration may be wrong in this instance. It is rashness to close
one’s mind to reason. Sometimes God appears in the form of rashness, sometimes of
the wicked, sometimes of the fish and sometimes of a tortoise. I just want you to
realize that sometimes even you can be wrong. In this case I want you to realize that.
G. But how can I accept my mistake unless the result shows it? I have decided
to undertake the fast in spite of myself. Mahadev will tell you from my letters how my
mind has been working.
C . R . You are deliberately suppressing your thoughts.
G. If I accept your argument I should stop working altogether.
C . R . But there can be no such inspiration which is against reason.
1
G. It may not be against my reason . . . .
There is only one aim, that of purification. My own purification as well as my
co-workers’. Other effects will also flow from it. I see that impurity can exist in my
presence. That means there is impurity in me.
I have not attained complete freedom from unwanted thoughts.
Suppose the things I consider impure are proved to be pure, I must still
undertake the fast. There are impurities and I feel I am responsible for them.
Moreover, it is a mistake to regard this as a political issue. The main thing is that
this movement should be conducted in a purely religious spirit.
Religion is concerned with the inner self. It is a matter of the heart, of faith
and of eternal verities. The body has no lasting value. God says that everything that
has name and form shall perish. Even the sun is not eternal. Science also proves this.
But our activities are concerned with material things. My fast is for a wholly spiritual
purpose. How can I stand in argument with those who are intellectually much superior
to me? But when it comes to what the heart says, I am able to hold my own against
them because it does not require any knowledge of Sanskrit. It is a blessing that God
dwells in the hearts of the poor and my fast is for heart-searching. There certainly is a
tradition of undertaking fasts for rains and other material things. . . . You must
respect my convictions. You are telling me to dismiss them summarily. You may
strive with me, argue with me. It is possible that I am mistaken but you are telling me
to accept the possibility as a certainty. I should be a liar if I undertake the fast with

1

Omissions are as in the source.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

477

the certainty that it would end in my death. So long as you cannot convince me, by
quoting my own statements, that I am mistaken you should not undermine my faith.
Nobody can attain to a certitude like God’s. But after all, am I not myself the captain
1
of my ship?
[From Gujarati]
Mahade vbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 284-9

APPENDIX V
M. S. ANEY’S STATEMENT SUSPENDING CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE 1
POONA,

May 9, 1933
I feel sure that although the news of the fast of Mahatma Gandhi is bound to
cast a dark shadow of anxiety and gloom throughout the country, it will be some relief
to his countrymen as well as to his friends and followers throughout the world to
know that Government has, at any rate, released him unconditionally and allowed him
to observe his vow and practise his great penance as a free citizen. In a statement
issued to the Press last night, after his release, he has expressed his views on the
conduct of the civil disobedience movement which, I have no doubt, will receive the
consideration they deserve from every civil resister. It is perfectly true that during the
period of fast, the civil resisters will be in a state of suspense and as a consequence he
has advised me to declare officially and suspend the civil disobedience campaign for
one month or even six weeks.
In his statement he has emphatically stated what I have been saying more than
once during the last four months in reply to various critics of the civil disobedience
movement that the civil disobedience cannot be withdrawn so long as many civil
resisters are imprisoned, and no settlement can be arrived at so long as Sardar
Vallabhbhai Patel, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan and others are
in jail.
‘Indeed the withdrawal of the civil disobedience movement is not within the
power of men who are out of prison. It is possible only for the original Working
Committee to do so.’ I repeat the position so lucidly and emphatically enumerated by
Mahatma Gandhi above, which is the only rational an constitutional position for the
Congressmen to take on the point of withdrawal of the civil disobedience campaign.
But the question of suspending the campaign to serve any definite object of a limited
period undoubtedly stands on a different footing. It is no doubt a serious
responsibility which I have been called to shoulder. But I am armed with a weapon—it
1

478

Vide “Statement suspending Civil Disobedience Movement”, 8-5-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

is an advice that comes from one who is not only the author of the present civil
disobedience campaign but the originator and sole authority on the science and
practice of civil disobedience itself. In response to his suggestion which also strikes
me as a proper thing to do at this time in order to eliminate from the atmosphere all
The elements of excitement and render it pure for all of us to inhale, to be in a
prayerful mood to invoke the blessings of the Almighty on the great cause for which
Mahatma Gandhi is undergoing this penance and supply him with an abundance of
spiritual food so necessary for him to sustain through this ordeal, I declare officially
that civil disobedience shall be suspended for six weeks beginning with Tuesday the
9th of May.
In conclusion I repeat my appeal to every man and woman to utilize this period
to the best of his or her ability and energy in the service of such work for the uplift of
Harijans as may be most commending itself to him or her.

The Hindustan Times, 10-5-1933
APPENDIX VI
BREAKING OF THE FAST 1
So The Day arrived for which hundreds and thousands had prayed for. The
scenes were as solemn as on the 8th May. Men and women of all faiths were
represented there by those who were present on the occasion in response to the
invitation of the door-keeper, Shrimati Sarojini Naidu, who for once in her life had
forsaken her extravagant generosity and become niggardly in the interest of the
patient, for whom she had kept tireless vigil. On any other occasion of rejoicing, she
might have invited the whole city of Poona, but not that day. I had been expecting
the Harijan boy who had entered into that contract with Gandhiji on the 8th of May to
appear punctually on the noon of the 29th. I had entreated the door-keeper to find him
out and allow him in. Unfortunately, I did not know his address; otherwise, I should
have fetched him myself. He did not turn up, and the orange juice was supplied not by
him but by the kind hostess, Lady Thackersey, who perhaps felt the luckiest woman
that day, as Dr. Ansari, the proudest man. The Harijan boy was not there, but the
door-keeper had flung the doors open to all Harijans, and the first and only garland
offered to Gandhiji before the break of the fast was that of a Harijan girl, who then sat
in the midst of her sisters of rank and station. In the centre and with Sjt. Amritlal
Thakkar and Seth Jamnalal Bajaj, sat the Harijans among whom there were some who
had come from far off Ahmedabad. With the name of Rama on our lips we began the

1

Vide “Note to Mathuradas Trikumji”, 28-5-1933. This was extracted from
“Sparks from the Sacred Fire-VI by Mahadev Desai.
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

479

function, which was inaugurated by Dr. Ansari with texts from the Koran on the
spiritual meaning of fasting, during which the aspirant after grace had to feast himself
on good and fast from all evil. Brothers from the Christ Seva Sangha sang Gandhiji’s
favourite: “When I survey the Wondrous Cross.” Prof. Wadia sang the Parsi prayer
which, as he said, could be the universal prayer; and Kakasaheb sang the verse in
which the devotee offers his prayers to the embodiment of all good, of all freedom
from passion and hatred, of all love and compassion, whatever be the name by which
men call Him. Then came the Poet’s song wherein he invokes the Almighty to come
with a torrent of mercy when the springs of life dry up and with nectared music when
all the sweetness is missing. The Poet could not be there, as at the break of the
September Fast, to sing it and so I sang it in his name. Last came the hymn of ‘the
true Vaishnava’, which is almost as life-breath to Gandhiji and is sung on all
occasions when we are called upon to face sorrow and joy with equanimity.
Harijan, 3-6-1933

APPENDIX VII
TALKS WITH C. RAJAGOPALACHARI 1
June 1, 1933
GANDHIJI: It is difficult for either party to retreat after having taken such a
stand. The position of each is absolutely clear. I can very well imagine that
Government wants ruthlessly to implement the policy they have adopted. I can
understand its attitude. I am also absolutely clear in my mind as to our reply to it. We
should not involve the peasantry and the masses in this struggle. We should not put
any burden on them. We should depend only on such people from the educated or
enlightened class who are willing to join our party. They also should not depend on
any financial assistance from the Congress. Those who need it may secure it from
friends, neighbours or others. They should uninterruptedly go to jail. There is no need
for demonstrations. For instance, Congress meetings should stop. If necessary, a
nominal dictator may be appointed. But I see that there will be difficulty in doing so;
it will be as well not to appoint any dictator.
There should be no secrecy in the struggle. And no no-tax programme either. I
have always felt that a no-tax campaign for swaraj will be a difficult thing. It is of
course important but we have never been adequately prepared for it. The no-tax
campaigns we have conducted so far have been necessarily limited in their aims. But
conducting a no-tax campaign for attaining swaraj is no joke. Let us make it clear to
the public through our statements that in restricting the movement we are not giving

1

480

Vide ”Letter to Mirabehn”, 3-6-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

it up, or deserting those who have suffered but are taking the struggle to a higher
plane. People should have faith that one day we are bound to get back all the land
which had been confiscated. Those who do not have this faith may take it that they
have lost their land. In wars people lost their lives as well as property.
We should once again let the people know our demands and our ideals. Let us
put forward our programmes before the nation unhesitatingly and do whatever has to
be done to bring the nation nearer the goal. I have discussed this with Vallabhbhai. I
have thought much over this and have arrived at these broad conclusions.
C . R . But what about the people who have already lost their land, etc.? It is
only this thought that confiscated properties will be returned that tempts me to secure
power. I see from the constitution they are framing that it would not be difficult to get
back the properties. I do not know whether I have this feeling because I am weak or
because I understand the mind of the British.
G. There is no question of weakness at all. I have also thought of taking power
in our hands on account of this and other such things. And Vallabhbhai has also
agreed to it. But today we should not think of taking power in our hands at all. At the
moment we should think only of keeping up the struggle on the highest level of
intensity. It does not worry me if only half a dozen of we are left to do that.
C . R . 1. Can we do anything more on an organized basis in addition to what we
can do as individual?
2. In this scheme it is impossible to keep up contacts and maintain
organization.
G. Personally I would be satisfied with whatever I can do as an individual.
C .R . Since you forbid secrecy, plans of certain type become absolutely
impossible.
G. I want to inspire the finest spirit of self-sacrifice in a few. For that the pure
gold of patriotism is necessary. We will be able to build a beautiful edifice over it. If
we are not able to do this the whole thing will fall like a house of cards. Let us
manifest true satyagraha through this. One pure thing is much better than many which
are not completely pure.

Morning, 6 a.m., June 2, 1933
C . R . Is there anything that needs to be done after your statement on the
conclusion of the fast?
G. We should renew the plea I had made earlier for a meeting with the Viceroy. I
will again ask for the Gandhi-Irwin Pact to be implemented, people to be allowed to
collect salt and do peaceful picketing of foreign-cloth shops and liquor shops.
C . R . They have already sent a reply to your statement. Do you think we
should write anything more?

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

481

G. I feel that we should scrupulously keep to the word I gave that negotiations
would be resumed from the point at which they were broken off.
C . R . But they say we should go to them only after first completely
withdrawing civil disobedience.
G. They can say this only after the negotiations start and the conditions for
settlement are discussed. Where is today the agency that will withdraw civil
disobedience? Who-will withdraw it? So there can be no condition of withdrawal of
civil disobedience till the prisoners are released. I do not at all feel defeated. We just
cannot admit having done something wrong or having committed breach of the Pact.
No settlement is possible on the basis of such a condition. If we agree to any such
condition we would lose the game and will be ruined. Our claim is that there has been
no breach of the Gandhi-Irwin Pact from our side. If they think otherwise, they can
appoint an enquiry committee. I am ready to abide by the decision of an impartial
enquiry committee. But they are not ready to accept any such suggestion. I feel this
time also we will get the same reply from the Viceroy as we got on the previous
occasion. He would say that, if we wanted to discuss anything without
unconditionally and completely giving up civil disobedience, in his view there was
no point in my meeting him. Still I feel it is necessary to write a letter not suggesting
a way out but asking for an interview.
C . R . Do you not want to write anything to the Secretary of State?
G. I already know his views. Rangaswami had told me that Hoare had written to
him a friendly letter saying that there was nothing in the White Paper that could not
be changed and so he should go and see him. So Rangaswami went and saw him. Hoare
thinks that it is his job to polish off rough edges and show to the world that he is
getting co-operation from all the parties, even from the Moderates and the Congress.
‘It would be a good thing if Rangaswami could be persuaded to say something in
favour of the reform. It would be equally well if he does not’. That seems to be Hoare’s
attitude. Moreover, he runs the administration at Simla too. He is behind all this and
not the Viceroy. He is carrying on Birkenhead’s policy in a more gentle way. I am not
saying anything new in this because I returned from London with all this
information. And all of them in England—Irwin, Baldwin, Archbishop of
Canterbury—are defending his policy.
C . R . Irwin seems to think that there has been so much breach of the
Settlement that it cannot be revived and so it is altogether unnecessary to refer to it.
G. We can raise the issue provided the discussion reaches that stage. But even
if we meet, ultimately nothing will come out of all that. Birkenhead and [Lord]
Reading also said: ‘If you do not want war you should accept what the Parliament
offers you. Parliament will give reforms gradually. You should be satisfied with that.
But at the moment there is no mutual faith or mutual respect at all.’

482

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

C . R . This whole chapter has been fully discussed by Sastri. shall we ask him
his opinion today?
G. If you want to see him you may. He will of course not come here. At the
annual function of the Servants of India Society he did not say anything special or
make his policy known.
C . R . The policy you recommend can be followed only by a few as it is very
revolutionary. But it will have no effect on either the Government or the people.
G. I don’t care. It is possible what you say is true but I am prepared for it. I am
hurt by these pin-pricks. Only those who willingly set out will have to suffer.
C . R . Then the mass struggle comes to an end.
G. That exactly is going to be the key to the whole affair. We have made a
mistake in letting the mass struggle go on without any plan. Only when the people
have understood a definite plan from the beginning to the end, will a mass straggle
come. When responsible persons feel that people are prepared to lose their property
and are ready for even greater hardships, they will start the struggle.
C . R . Don’t you think that the call for a no-tax campaign in January 1932 was
premature?
G. Of course it was. I had told Tandon and others in 1931 that I did not have
faith in our strength to carry on a no-tax campaign for attaining swaraj.
C . R . If it was a mistake, should we not rectify it?
G. I will not say that the struggle should be called off even for that purpose.
C . R . Government will not return all the properties even if we withdraw the
struggle.
G. Government will not hear of any such thing.

[From Gujarati]
Mahade vbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 296-301

APPENDIX VIII
ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 1

July 14, 1933
I have been asked whether I will again start Harijan work after going to jail. In
answer to this I can only say that I will have to see what kind of imprisonment it is.
No matter what it is, I will try to see whether it is possible to continue Harijan work.
Our struggle was started in 1920. We have expanded its scope through the Lahore and
Karachi resolutions. I hope that the struggle will continue till we attain
independence. I have one foot in Yeravda and one here. It is for you to see that our
1

Vide “Speech at Leaders’ Conference, Poona-II”, 14-7-1933.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

483

struggle continues. This is an informal meeting. Here nobody, not even the Acting
President, has the right to call off the movement. Whatever I say here is also by way
of advice. If you want to withdraw the struggle you should call the Congress
Committee. If you allow me to write to the Viceroy my role will be that of a
negotiator. I will have to get the approval of the Congress for whatever conditions I
wish to propose. Independence will be a long way from any settlement that may be
reached. It is not in the hands of the British to give us freedom. We will have to
achieve it with our own strength. At the moment those who know are of the view that
reforms will be introduced by the end of 1935. But before we attain independence we
will have to fight and risk our lives for it. Every satyagrahi will have to chalk out his
own programme for civil disobedience. Even thirty crores can offer individual civil
disobedience, each one being his own leader. Or under the leadership of one person, a
hundred men can get together and offer individual civil disobedience. In individual
civil disobedience a man’s strength or enthusiasm can never be curbed. It is irrelevant
what my position is. Under the constitution I have the full right to carry on civil
disobedience. It is possible that I may be jailed before the All-India Congress
Committee meets. Will it befit me or any one of you to obey the order when I come to
know that I cannot talk with you more freely or an order is passed imposing some sort
of ban on me? That is what I meant when I said in my speech that we are under
constant restraint.
QUESTION: What is the position of the dictator of the Congress in individual
civil disobedience?
ANSWER : One who offers individual civil disobedience need not ask permission
from any dictator. Everyone becomes his own leader. There is no need for any head in
individual civil disobedience. There is no need for any orders either.
Q.

If any taluka wishes to sacrifice itself, can it do so?

A.

Certainly. I wish that every taluka would do so. There is no need for any
orders from the Congress for it. But that taluka should do so in the name and under the
patronage of the Congress. . . 1 I am not itching to write to the Viceroy. If you do not
permit me I will not do so. . . . The condition of releasing the prisoners of Garhwal
and Meerut is not essential for a settlement.
Q. Can a person who is going to offer civil disobedience after a few months
give his approval to your Suggestion of individual civil disobedience?
A. This is a delicate question. A person can give his assent but he should be
faithful to the country and himself. . . . From their childhood I have taught my
children to rebel against myself. . . . I don’t expect that one who gives his vote today
will be in jail the next day. . . . As long as he lives it is not proper for a satyagrahi to
say that the organization is without a guide. . . . Anyone who tries to appear brave is
usually not truly brave. . . . I don’t consider as honourable conditions which do not
protect the common public. . . . The Congress will not order any farmer to pay land

1

484

Omissions are as in the source.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

revenue. It will of course commend those who will go to jail or suffer other hardships.

[From Gujarati]
Mahade vbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 315-7

APPENDIX IX
M. S. ANEY’S STATEMENT DISCONTINUING MASS CIVIL
DISOBEDIENCE1

July 22, 1933
Having considered very carefully the recommendations of the informal
conference recently held at Poona and the discussions among Congressmen in the
Conference and outside, and the advice tendered by Mr. Gandhi, I have come to the
conclusion that the country’s best interest will be served by the following
instructions being carried out:
Firstly, the civil disobedience campaign should not be unconditionally
withdrawn in the existing circumstances..
Secondly, mass civil disobedience, including no-tax and no-rent campaign,
should be discontinued for the time being, the right of individuals who may be ready
for every suffering, and are prepared at their own responsibilities to continue civil
disobedience being reserved.
Thirdly, all those able and willing to offer individual civil disobedience on
their own responsibilities without expectation of any help from the Congress
organization are expected to do so.
Fourthly, secret methods followed hitherto should be abandoned. Fifthly, all
Congress organizations, including the All-India Congress Committee office, should
cease to exist for the time being, provided however that wherever possible dictators
in the provinces and all-India dictators should continue.
Sixthly, all the Congressmen unable for any reason whatsoever to offer civil
disobedience are expected to carry on individually or corporately such constructive
activities of the Congress for which they are fitted.
I regret it has not been possible to call off the movement, and it has become
necessary for me to issue these instructions. I share with many others, Congressmen
or others, the disappointment that Mahatma Gandhi’s very simple request,
unaccompanied by any condition, for an interview with the Viceroy in order to
explore peace possibilities, was summarily rejected. His Excellency has very
wrongly allowed himself to be influenced by unauthorized reports of confidential
proceedings of the informal conference which for the sake of furthering peace efforts
1

Vide “Interview on M. S. Aney’s statement”, 24-7-1933.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

485

were purposely held back from publication. His Excellency should know that at the
conference overwhelming opinion favoured seeking such an interview for honourable
peace. I hold it impossible for any Congress organization or its representative to
accept the terms peremptorily laid down by His Excellency as a condition precedent
to peace conversation. I hope the nation will compel revision of this attitude by
developing requisite strength, whatever the cost be.
Despite the instructions, suspension of the campaign till the end of this
month stands.
The Indian Annual Regist er, 1933, Vol. II, PP. 332-3

APPENDIX X
CABLE FROM RABINDRANATH TAGORE TO SIR NRIPENDRANATH
SIRCAR 1
I REMEMBER TO HAVE SENT A CABLE

TO THE PRIME MINISTER REQUESTING HIM

NOT SO DELAY IN ACCEPTING THE PROPOSAL ABOUT COMMUNAL AWARDS SUBMITTED
TO HIM BY

MAHATMAJI.

AT

THAT

MOMENT A

SITUATION

HAD

BEEN

CREATED

WHICH WAS EXTREMELY PAINFUL NOT AFFORDING US THE LEAST TIME OR

PEACE

OF MIND TO ENABLE US TO THINK QUIETLY ABOUT THE POSSIBLE CONSEQUENCES OF THE
POONA

PACT

WHEN

SAPRU

WHICH
AND

HAD

BEEN

JAYAKAR

HAD

EFFECTED
ALREADY

BEFORE

LEFT,

MY

WITH

ARRIVAL,

THE

HELP

OF

MEMBERS AMONG WHOM THERE WAS NOT A SIN SINGLE RESPONSIBLE REPRESENTATIVE
FROM BENGAL. UPON THE IMMEDIATE SETTLEMENT OF THIS QUESTION MAHATMAJI’S
LIFE DEPENDED AND THE INTOLERABLE ANXIETY CAUSED BY SUCH A CRISIS DROVE
ME PRECIPITATELY TO THE COMMITMENT WHICH

I NOW

REALIZE AS

A

WRONG

DONE AGAINST OUR COUNTRY’S PERMANENT INTEREST. NEVER HAVING EXPERIENCE
IN

POLITICAL DEALINGS

WHILE

ENTERTAINING

A

GREAT

LOVE

FOR

MAHATMAJI

AND A COMPLETE FAITH IN HIS WISDOM IN INDIAN POLITICS I DARE NOT WAIT
FOR FURTHER CONSIDERATION NOT HEEDING THAT JUSTICE HAD BEEN SACRIFICED IN
CASE OF BENGAL. I HAVE NOT THE LEAST DOUBT NOW THAT SUCH AN INJUSTICE
WILL

CONTINUE

TO

CAUSE

ALIVE THE SPIRIT OF
FORM

MAKING

MINISTERS
RECONSIDER

OF

PEACEFUL
THE

CONTAINED

DOES

SURPRISE

NOT

1

486

IN
OR

FOR

OF

ALL

CONFLICT

GOVERNMENT

BRITISH

THIS SUBJECT

PROPOSALS

MISCHIEF

COMMUNAL

IN

PARTIES

OUR

PERPETUALLY

GOVERNMENT

CONCERNED

PROVINCE

SHOULD

DIFFICULT.
BRUSQUELY

A VITAL IMPORTANCE TO US

THE
HURT

WHITE
ME

PAPER

TOO

ARE

MUCH.

IN

BEING

FOR

HAVE

WHILE
FREELY
THEY

AN

KEEPING
INTENSE

THAT

THE

REFUSE
ALL

TO

OTHER

REHANDLED
NOT

OFTEN

Vide “Letter to Rabindranath Tagore”, 27-7-1933 and 7-8-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

EXULTANGLY
FIGHT

THE

PROPHESIED

OF

FRATRICIDAL

THE

EVIL

TURBULENCE

DAYS

WHEN

WITHOUT

WE

THEIR

MIGHT
AID

NATURALLY THEY MAY LACK TODAY ENTHUSIASM TO HELP US
PATH

TOO

SMOOTH

TOWARDS

COMMUNAL

INDIAN MEMBERS OF

THE CONFERENCE

OURS

ONLY

SHOULD

AGGRAVATING
GOOD

FOR

NOT

BENGAL’S

OUR

FUTURE

REMAIN

MISFORTUNE

RECONCILIATION.

BELONGING

APATHETIC
IS

TO

BE

AND

LEFT
FAIL?

TO
AND

IN MAKING OUR
BUT

PROVINCES

THAT
OTHER

BUT

ACTIVELY

TAKE

TERRIBLY

OMINOUS

PRESAGING

THE
THAN

PART

IN
NO

HISTORY.

R ABINDRANATH TAGORE
Home Department, Political File No. 3/17/33, pp. 16-7. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

APPENDIX XI
ORDER RESTRAINING GANDHIJI’S MOVEMENTS1
ORDER NO. S. D. 3806
TO

MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI
Whereas the Governor-in-Council is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds
for believing that you, Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, have acted and are about to act
in a manner prejudicial to the public Safety and peace and in furtherance of a
movement prejudicial to the public safety and peace and whereas the
Governor-in-Council has taken into his consideration the record in writing made
by the District Magistrate, Poona, of the Statement made by you; now, therefore,
in exercise of the powers conferred by Sub-section (1) of Section 4 of the Bombay
Special (Emergency) Powers Act, 1932, the Governor-in-Council is hereby pleased
by order in writing to direct:
1. that you shall remove yourself from the village of Yeravda before 9.30 a.m.
of this day; that you shall not enter Poona Cantonment area; that you shall reside and
remain in Poona City municipal limits from 10.30 a.m. of this day; and that you shall
not depart from the said municipal limits;
2. that you shall abstain from every act in furtherance of the civil disobedience
movement or of any movement prejudicial to the public safety or peace;
3. that you shall abstain from encouraging or inciting any person to interfere
with the administration of the law or with the maintenance of law and order or to
commit any offence or to refuse or to defer payment of any land revenue, tax, rate,
1

Vide “Letter to Home Secretary, Government of Bombay”, 3-8-1933 and
“Statement disobeying restraint order”, 4-8-1933.
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

487

cess or other due or amount payable to Government;
4. that except with the previous per permission of the District Magistrate of
Poona you shall abstain from being present at or addressing or participating in any
meeting of twelve or more persons or any public demonstration or procession.
The Governor-in-Council is pleased under Sub-section(2) of Section 4 to direct
that this order shall remain in force for more than one month from the making thereof
and until further orders.
By order of the Governor-in-Council, dated at Poona, this 4th day of August,
1933.
R. M. M AXWELL
SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF
BOMBAY, HOME DEPARTMENT
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(4),
Pt. V, p. 67

APPENDIX XII
EXCERPTS FROM VICEROY’S CABLE TO SECRETARY OF STATE1

August 13, 1933
5.

IT HAS BEEN EXPLAINED TO MR.

GANDHI THAT THE ORDERS

PERMITTED HIM

TO INTERVIEW THE EDITOR OF THE “HARIJAN” AS ONE OF HIS DAILY VISITORS AND
TO HAND HIM HIS MANUSCRIPT, AND THAT LETTERS SO FAR AS THEY DEALT WITH
HARIJAN MATTERS WOULD BE DELIVERED TO MR. GANDHI.
6.

GOVERNMENT

ARE

NOT

AWARE

WHAT

THAT THEY HAVE ADMITTED PERMISSION

TO

MR.
DO

GANDHI
HARIJAN

MEANS
WORK

BY
IN

SAYING

PRISON

IS

IMPLIED IN THE YERAVDA PACT, THOUGH IT IS TRUE THAT IN THE EXCEPTIONAL
CIRCUMSTANCES

PREVAILING

IMMEDIATELY

AFTER

THAT

PACT

THE

GOVERNMENT

DID PERMIT MR. GANDHI AS A STATE PRISONER TO INAUGURATE THE MOVEMENT TO
WHICH

HE APPEARED TO BE

DEVOTING HIS WHOLE ATTENTION.

PROTESTS

WERE

MADE AT THE TIME ON BEHALF OF THE ORTHODOX HINDU COMMUNITY, WHO DID
NOT AGREE WITH MR.

GANDHI’S

POLICY

ALLOWED FACILITIES TO CONDUCT
WELL

BE

FREEDOM

ARGUED
COURTED

THAT

MR.

ALLOWED

OTHER

PRISONERS.

A-CLASS

RELUCTANT TO TAKE

1

488

GANDHI,

IMPRISONMENT

SHOULD NOT BE

ANY

ACTION

IN

PUBLIC

MATTER,

HAVING

AGAIN

SPECIAL

THIS

CAMPAIGN FROM

ON

NOW
A

TREATMENT

NEVERTHELESS

THE

WHICH

BE

COULD

AGAINST

AFTER

PURELY
THAT.

A

BEING

PERIOD

POLITICAL
IS

GOVERNMENT
REGARDED

HIS

JAIL, AND IT MIGHT

AS

NOT

OF

ISSUE,

GIVEN

HAVE

TO

BEEN

UNREASONABLE

Vide “Letter to Home Secretary, Government of Bombay”, 19-8-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

INTERFERENCE WITH A WORK OF SOCIAL REFORM OR TO TAKE THEIR STAND TOO
RIGIDLY ON THE FACT

THAT MR.

GANDHI IS BY

HIS OWN

DELIBERATE ACT

PRISONER CONVICTED FOR A BREACH OF THE LAW. IN SPITE OF
ENCE

TO

JAIL

DISCIPLINE AND

THE

ANOMALY

OF

THE

POSITION,

ALLOWED MR. GANDHI FACILITIES FOR PURSUING HIS WORK
LITY

WHICH

WILL

ENABLE

CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS

HIM

IT. IT WAS

TO

MAKE

AN

A

THE INCONVENITHEY

HAVE

ON ANTI-UNTOUCHABI-

IMPORTANT

NOTICEABLE THAT WHEN

AND

EFFECTIVE

MR.

GANDHI WAS

AT LIBERTY HE DID NOT APPEAR TO DEVOTE THE MAJOR PART OF

HIS TIME OR

ATTENTION TO THIS MOVEMENT. HIS MAIN ENERGIES WERE EMPLOYED ON POLITICS
AND ON THE CONTINUANCE
MOVEMENT OF

CIVIL

IN

WHATEVER

DISOBEDIENCE.

ALLOWED FROM PRISON TO CARRY

HIS

FROM

MIGHT

BE

PRESENT

CLAIM

THAT

ON HIS HARIJAN

WORK

POSSIBLE
HE

OF

THE

SHOULD

BE

“ WITHOUT LET OR

HINDRANCE”, AMOUNTS TO A REFUSAL TO ACCEPT FOR HIMSELF THE NORMAL CONCOMITANTS
OF

IMPRISONMENT,

EXCEPT

RESTRICTION

ON

HIS

ACTUAL

PHYSICAL

LIBERTY, AND IN EFFECT IS A CLAIM TO DICTATE THE TERMS OF HIS IMPRISONMENT.
THE GOVERNMENT ARE SATISFIED THAT THE FACILITIES THEY HAVE ALLOWED
ARE AMPLE TO ENABLE MR. GANDHI TO CONDUCT SUCH WORK IN FAVOUR OF THE
REMOVAL OF UNTOUCHABILITY AS IS IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES REASONABLE. IF MR.
GANDHI NOW FEELS HOWEVER
NOT DO HARIJAN

THAT LIFE CEASES TO INTEREST HIM IF HE MAY

SERVICE WITHOUT LET OR

HINDRANCE,

THE GOVERNMENT ARE

PREPARED, PROVIDED MR. GANDHI IS WILLING TO ABANDON ALL CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE
ACTIVITIES AND INCITEMENTS, TO SET HIM AT LIBERTY AT ONCE SO THAT HE CAN
DEVOTE HIMSELF WHOLLY AND WITHOUT RESTRICTION TO THE CAUSE

OF

SOCIAL

REFORM MR. GANDHI HAS BEEN INFORMED ACCORDINGLY.

Home Department, Political File No. 3/l7/33, 1933, pp. 38-9. Courtesy:
Notional Archives of India

APPENDIX XIII
LETTER FROM V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI1
COIMBATORE,

August 27, 1933
DEAREST BROTHER,

Government might well have given you the old facilities. A curse has disabled
them from generous or timely action.
But they haven’t conferred a right on you or made you a promise. What they
conceded to you at one time and in one set of conditions they are not bound to
1

Vide “Letter to V. S. Srinivasa Sastri”, 30-8-1933.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

489

concede to you at another time and in another set of conditions. The order made after
the Poona Pact, from which you quote, does not amount to an irrevocable or
unconditional promise. You indulge in special pleading of a bad type when you
charge them with a breach of promise. The addition of the words ‘made to a prisoner
in their custody’ loses the point it might have had otherwise.
It might be said by an observer who wasn’t prejudiced against Government
that, while Harijan uplift was dear to you, putting blame on Government was dearer. It
has been said in my hearing by well-disposed persons that you would love nothing so
much as to die in gaol and leave Government burdened with the responsibility.
Behind and beyond your present tussle with Government lies the future of the
country. How can Congress best secure that future? Your answer is clear. But another
answer is taking shape in people’s minds. It is that civil disobedience, both mass and
individual, must be given up. A new policy, aiming at constructive national good in
legislation, finance and administration all round has long been overdue and must be
tried, over and above what is now called the constructive programme of Congress. I
believe this feeling is common outside Congress, and is gaining ground inside
Congress. How can this orientation be brought about?
It is so different from your present policy, in look so opposed to it, that one
doubts whether you can undertake it. Perhaps your whole preparation and equipment
lie in a different direction. It is no disparagement to anyone that he is not fitted to
lead the nation in all contingencies and in all directions. Unfortunately no man,
however big, can be always trusted to know his limitations and make room when the
cause to which he is devoted requires it. His very greatness stands in the way of
change. And as I have told you more than once, you have out-topped all other leaders
so long and so decisively that there is no man in sight to take your place at once.
What a blessing it would be if you could be transformed and re-made, as it were, for the
fresh era! But you are too good, too true to yourself to pretend you are the same
teacher when the creed is no longer yours and the ritual is something you have never
conducted.
In this sore strait, the country looks to you to play a greater part than you
have ever played. (Pardon me: what I mean is the greater part of the country as I figure
out the parties.) Save your individual conscience, pursue civil disobedience, seek the
gaol and embarrass Government as you like; but leave Congress free to evolve a new
programme. It simply cannot do so, while it has to give authority and countenance to
individual disobedience. You remember I begged you to adopt this course when I was
last with you at Parnakuti. You told me you put it to the Working Committee, but they
would have none of it. Naturally and in a way properly too. The Committee couldn’t
face the odium of abandoning you. I don’t wonder the thought was abhorrent to them.
The moment is come—in my opinion it came long ago— for you to say, ‘I set

490

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Congress free to try other methods. I have plenty of God’s work to do, for the
nation’s welfare, with Harijans.’
There, then, I have told you the truth as it seems to me. May one hope that you
will see the problem from a new angle? I know one thing. There is no self-effacement
to which you are not equal. The only thing is, it must seem to you to be called for.
All that a friend and brother can do is to give an indication.
Yours affectionately,

V. S. S RINIVASAN
Letter s of Sriniv asa Sastri , pp. 258-60

APPENDIX XIV
LETTER FROM JAWAHARLAL NEHRU1
‘PARNAKUTI’,

September 13, 1933
MY DEAR BAPU,

In our recent conversation you will remember that I laid stress on the
reiteration and clearer definition of our national objective. The objective of political
independence has been finally laid down by the Congress and there is nothing to add
to it or take away from it. We stand for complete independence. Sometimes a little
confusion arises because of vague phraseology and misleading propaganda and it is
therefore as well to remove this confusion by a reiteration of our political demand.
Even the word ‘independence’ is used with a variety of meanings. Obviously it must
include, as the Congress has clearly and definitely laid down, full control of the army
and of foreign relations, as well as financial and economic control.
In regard to economic matters, the Karachi Congress by passing the important
resolution on ‘Fundamental Rights and Economic Policy’ gave a lead and pointed out
the direction in which we should move. I attach great importance to that resolution
but I would personally like to go much further and to clarify the position still more.
It seems to me that if we are to improve the condition of the masses, to raise
them economically and give them freedom, it is inevitable that vested interests in
India will have to give up their special position and many of their privileges. It is
inconceivable to me how else the masses can rise. Therefore the problem of
achieving freedom becomes one of revising vested interests in favour of the masses.
To the extent this is done, to that extent only will freedom come. The biggest vested
interest in India is that of the British Government next come the Indian Princes; and
1

Vide “Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru”, 14-9-1933.

VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

491

others follow. We do not wish to injure any class or group and the divesting
should be done as gently as possible and with every effort to avoid injury. But it is
obvious that the divesting is bound to cause loss to the classes or groups which
enjoy special privileges at the expense of the masses. It is also obvious that the
process of divesting must be as speedy as possible to bring relief to the masses
whose condition, as you know, is as bad as it can well be. Indeed economic forces
themselves are acting with amazing rapidity today and breaking up the old order. The
big zamindari and taluqdari system in the United Provinces has largely collapsed,
though it may be kept up for some time longer by outside agencies. Even the
condition of the zamindars is very bad and the peasantry of course are in a far worse
position.
We are all agreed that the Round Table Conference and its various productions
are utterly useless to solve even one of India’s many problems. As I conceive it, the
Round Table Conference was an effort to consolidate the vested interests of India
behind the British Government so as to face the rising and powerful national and
economic movements in the country which threaten these interests. Essentially, in
international parlance, it was a fascist grouping of vested and possessing interests,
and fascist methods were adopted in India to suppress the national movement. And
because the mere preservation of all these vested interests in India cannot possibly
solve our economic ills, whether those of the masses or even of the middle classes,
the effort is foredoomed to inevitable failure. Even from the point of view of a
democratic nationalism, as you yourself stated at the Round Table Conference,
democracy and autocracy can ill go together.
Another aspect has to be borne in mind. The problem of Indian freedom cannot
be separated from the vital international problems of the world. The present crisis in
the world’s affairs is having its repercussions in India. At any moment it may result
in a complete breakdown or in a violent international conflagration. Everywhere
there is a conflict and a contest between the forces of progress and betterment of the
masses and the forces of reaction and vested interests. We cannot remain silent
witnesses to this titanic struggle for it affects us intimately. Both on the narrower
ground of our own interests and the wider ground of international welfare and human
progress, we must, I feel, range ourselves with the progressive forces of the world.
This ranging ourselves at present can of course be ideological only.
These are some of the larger issues that fill my mind and I am convinced, not
only that we ignore them at our peril, but that a true appreciation of them will vitalize
and give new meaning to our struggle for freedom which we must continue till the full
objective is achieved.
These wider issues are of great importance but at present, as you know, the
minds of large numbers of our countrymen are greatly exercised over immediate
national problems and especially the question of carrying on the struggle. The

492

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

statements that you and Sjt. M. S. Aney issued some time ago to guide the country
have, I am afraid, produced some confusion and there has even been some resentment
in regard to particular directions contained in them. There is a vague talk, in quarters
which ought to know better, that the Congress has been dissolved. It is obvious that
nothing of the kind has been done or could be done under the constitution. Your
directions and those of Mr. Aney were, I take it, in the nature of advice or suggestions
to meet a certain position that had arisen. The Congress continues as before but it is
clear that it cannot function normally when Government declare its committees to be
illegal. There can be no regular offices or open activity. To recognize this fact and to
adapt ourselves to it is not to wind up any Congress Committee, much less the
Congress organization as a whole.
A necessary consequence from this was to avoid the possibility of a few
newcomers who formed committees, when the old members and other reliable workers
went to prison, or even individuals, committing the Congress to an undesirable
course of action. As is known, we have had to face this risk in The past and unreliable
persons have come to the helm of affairs in some local areas with the intention of
obstructing and even stopping the very activities they were supposed to further. It
thus becomes desirable to prevent such unreliable persons from exploiting the name
of the Congress Committee. This of course does not prevent Congress workers in any
area from co-operating together in an organized way for the furtherance of our
programme.
Confusion has also arisen in the country about the implications of individual
and mass civil disobedience. I appreciate to some extent the difference but this
difference does not appear to me to be a fundamental one, as, in any event, civil
disobedience is essentially an individual affair. Individual civil disobedience can
develop into mass civil disobedience. Besides, you told me that if an organization
felt strong enough to undertake the responsibility and the risk, it could, of its own
initiative, take up mass civil disobedience. Indeed you were of opinion that a local
organization could, in this manner go ahead in any direction which was not contrary
to Congress methods or policy.
Stress was laid in your previous statement on the undesirability of secrecy,
although you pointed out that there was nothing inherently illegitimate in secret
methods. I think that most of us agree, and certainly I am of that opinion, that our
movement is essentially an open one and secret methods do not fit in with it. Such
methods, if indulged in to any large extent, are likely to change the whole character
of the movement, as it has been conceived, and produce a certain amount of
demoralization. Agreeing with this, some of us feel that, to some extent as for
instance in communicating with each other or sending directions or keeping
contacts, a measure of secrecy may be necessary. Perhaps secrecy is hardly the word
for those activities and privacy would suit them better. Privacy of course is always
VOL. 61 : 27 APRIL, 1933 - 7 OCTOBER, 1933

493

open to all groups and individuals. Secrecy or the avoidance of it, as you said, cannot
be made into a fetish.
But secrecy is certainly involved in the production of printed or duplicated
news-sheets and bulletins. These bulletins have often served a useful purpose in the
past in keeping contact between headquarters and districts and in sending information
or directions. You pointed out to me the difficulties and undesirable consequences of
running these secret presses and duplicating machines. Many good workers are tied up
and have to avoid aggressive action; money has to be invested in such machines and
frequently they are taken away by the police. Even from the practical point of view
this continuous rain and tying up of workers is not desirable, and undoubtedly it
sometimes results in demoralization. You suggested that the best way was to have
hand written copies of bulletins, etc., containing the name of the publisher.
Generally, I agree with all this and appreciate the force of your argument. But I do feel
that under certain circumstances it may be desirable for a local or Provincial
committee or group to issue bulletins of directions, etc., secretly. This must not be
encouraged; indeed it should be discouraged, but a certain latitude in exceptional
circumstances might be permitted.
There is one other small matter which seems to me rather ridiculous. It was
right and proper, if I may say so, for you to court imprisonment by giving previous
intimation of your intention to do so to the authorities. But it seems to me to be
perfectly absurd for others, and even Congress volunteers, to send such notices or
communications to the authorities. Any person desiring to offer civil resistance
should openly carry on activities which further our cause and thus court arrest. He
must not forget or ignore these activities and merely ask to be arrested.
This letter has become long enough. I do not mention here the many other
matters which I had the privilege of discussing with you.
Yours affectionately,
J AWAHAR
MAHATMA GANDHI
POONA
Bombay Secret Abstra cts, Home Depart ment, Specia l Branch , File No.
800(40 ) (11)-C; also Mahatm a, Vol. III, pp. 305-8

494

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

