1. LETTER TO SHAH JAMIL ALAM
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 2, 1926
I have your letter. A pure heart enable[s] one to find and see
truth. Every one of us therefore must aim after purity of heart. All
else follows as a matter of course.
From a photostat : S.N. 11057

2. LETTER TO A. JOSEPH
April 2, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter enclosing copies of your letters to The Hindu
and to Mr. Satyamurti. I have also copies of The Hindu containing
the advertisements referred to by you. I am entirely of opinion that
advertisements about things injurious to the nation should not be
taken by public journals at all but it is very difficult for me to
interfere in such matters. I can only express my own opinion through
the columns of Young India which I do from time to time. As you
might have noticed, I had occasion to refer to this matter of immoral
advertisements1 only recently.
Yours sincerely,

A. JOSEPH, E SQ.
519, SILVER S TREET
S T. T HOMAS MOUNT
MADRAS
From a photostat : S.N. 12162

3. LETTER TO DIRENDRANATH DAS GUPTA
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
April 2, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter with a report of khadi work. Satis Babu was
1

Vide “Exercise the Copyright”, 25-3-1926.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

1

here recently, and I had a talk about you with him. He told me thet he
was anxious to help you all he could. I have really no money apart
from the Charkha Sangh fund that I can send you and the Charkha
Sangh fund can only be utilized in the ordinary manner. I do hope
therefore that you will write to Satis Babu and secure help you want
through him.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. D IRENDRANATH DAS GUPTA
VIDYASHRAM
BEAMIBAZAR P. O.
S YLHET
From a microfilm : S.N. 19409

4. LETTER TO C. V. KRISHNA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 2, 1926
MY DEAR KRISHNA,

I hope you received my letter1 about Hanumantharao which was
written immediately after your telegram was received. I hope also that
you received my telegram. Together with your letter, I sent a letter
for Mrs. Hanumantharao and another for his brother. I am anxious to
know whether they have been received. I now send you a letter which
was addressed to Hanumantharao and which has been returned
undelivered. I send it to you as it contains a reference to the Ashram.
I am anxiously waiting for a letter from you.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. K RISHNA
NELLORE
From a microfilm : S.N. 19410

1

2

Dated March 21, 1926
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

5. LETTER TO N. S. VARADACHARI
AND S. V. PUNTAMBEKAR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 2, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

Your joint production1 is now being revised and I am sorry to
observe that there are too many defects in it. You have expected the
proof-reader to find out books and the references you want quoted.
How can the books be found? Where you have not given pages, how
is one to find the quotations? Do you not think that the quotations
should have been neatly copied out by yourself and references given?
Nor have you supported all your statements with references in
footnotes. Proper names have been written as if they were ordinary
words. It is very difficult to trace all the names so written. The
collection too seems to have been hastily done. The printing is almost
held up on account of these defects. I do not know how I can cope
with the difficulty that stares in the face. Where can I find the
references? Can you suggest a way out of the difficulty? If one of
you come here and fill in the gaps, it would expedite matters. Or if
you wish, I could send a copy to one of you. The letter is posted to
both of you at your respective addresses.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. N. S. V ARADACHARI
ERODE
S JT. P UNTAMBEKAR
HINDU UNIVERSITY
BANARAS
From a microfilm : S.N. 19411

1

Hand Spinning and Hand Weaving—An Essay by S. V. Puntambekar and N.
S. Varadachari
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

3

6. LETTER TO DEVCHAND PAREKH
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Friday [April 2, 1926] 1
BHAI DEVCHANDBHAI,

I have your letter. I note that the committee2 meets here on the
13th at 2 o’clock. I shall be ready.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 5711

7. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Friday [April 2, 1926] 3
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your telegram. Surely it does not mean that your health
has taken a turn for the worse?
Blessings from

BAPU
S JT. M ATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
WINDY HALL
NASIK R OAD
DEOLALI (G.I.P.)
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

8. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
S ABARMATI ASHRAM,

Friday [April 2, 1926] 4
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

I have just received a wire from Mathuradas saying that
1
2
3
4

4

From the postmark
Working Committee of the Kathiawar Political Conference
From the postmark
From the postmark. Also April 2 was a Friday.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Devdascannot be spared from Deolali. Mahadev tells me that Swami
himself will be going there in a day or two. I will know more today. If
he goes, he himself will bring you along with him. If he does not go,
Pritamlal will go and bring you back with him. If neither of them is
likely to go, I will send somebody from here.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI P RABHUDAS GANDHI
P ATTANI’S BUNGALOW
LONAVALA
(G.I.P)
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33038

9. LETTER TO HERBERT ANDERSON1
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 3, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I am enquiring about Young India. It is true
that subscriptions are all reckoned from quarter to quarter or year to
year. Otherwise, book-keeping becomes a most difficult thing. The
proper way therefore is to subscribe from the 1st of March and to get
the previous numbers commencing with the biographical chapters. I
am sending herewith either a copy of my criticism on the Prohibition
Convention or a copy of Young India containing the criticism if the
latter is possible.
With reference to the last paragraph of your letter : In the
prohibition campaign you refer to, picketing was the essence of that
campaign. It was done under the most adverse circumstances
including opposition, both silent and open, as you will have seen from
the report of enquiry conducted in Assam by Mr. Andrews. The only
lasting remedy is total prohibition because, the drunkard is a diseased
man quite unable to help himself. Many of them would gladly
welcome outside help in the shape of total prohibition. The two
1

In reply to his letter dated 30-3-1926. Herein the addressee had request for a
message for the first issue of his quarterly, Prohibition
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

5

things, therefore, have, in my opinion, to go side by side.
Yours sincerely,

Encl.
R EV. H ERBERT ANDERSON
59, KING’S R OAD
HOWRAH
From a photostat : S.N. 12166

10. LETTER TO L. GIBARTI

1

ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 3, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter for which I thank you. I appreciate the
sentiment underlying your proposal. But I consider myself wholly
unfit to shoulder the burden. My methods too of serving the oppressed people are so different from those generally accepted by
Socialists and they are yet in the nature of an experiment. I therefore
fight shy of belonging to any organization that I do not know
thoroughly and that I cannot serve usefully.
Yours sincerely,

L. GIBARTI, E SQ.
S ECRETARY
INDIAN DEPT.
LIGAGEGEN KOLONIALGREUEL UND
UNTERDRUCKUNG
BAMBERGER S TR. 60
BERLIN, W, 50
From a photostat : S.N. 12458

11. LETTER TO HELENE HAUSSDING
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 3, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I am glad that your persistence has been
1
In reply to the request on behalf of the League against Cruelties and
Suppression in the Colonies to include Gandhiji’s name as the International
Chairman for India. This League had its branches in many countries.

6

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

rewarded and that you will be soon in our midst. I am not going to
discourage you any longer now, nor give you any warning. I am
hoping that you will be able to retain your health here and that you
will have no cause for disappointment. I shall try my best to make
you comfortable and to keep you employed.
The specimen of wool of your own spinning that you have sent
is quite good.
Yes, the name of the bank is “Bank of Baroda, Ahmedabad”.
Do please bring your sewing machine as also your music and all
the books of your library. You shall have all the necessary assistance
for learning Hindustani.
Yours sincerely,

F RAULEIN HELENE HAUSSDING
26, LINDENBERGSTRASSE
WERNIG R OAD, a. HARZ
From a photostat : S.N. 12459

12. LETTER TO D. V. RAMASWAMI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 3, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I note that you have not yet received the
letters1 I sent to you and the widow through Krishna 2 . I have no
doubt, that for the time being, at any rate, you must continue to earn
and simplify as much as possible the lives of those who are dependent
on you.
In the letter to the widow I have said that if she would come to
the Ashram to be here, she will be welcome and the Ashram people
will give her all the attention that is possible. Please understand that
this is not a formal proposal. There should be therefore no hesitation
about accepting it if it is at all possible.
1

Vide “Letter to Mrs. Hanumantharao”, 21-3-1926, and “Letter to D. V.
Ramaswami”, 21-3-1926.
2
Vide “Letter to C. V. Krishna”, 21-3-1926.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

7

You do not want me to write the preface before seeing your
book.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. D. V. R AMASWAMI
VIZAGAPATAM
From a microfilm : S.N. 19412

13. LETTER TO R. D. SUBRAMANIAM
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 3, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter as also the packet of yarn sent by you. The
yarn is now being tested. I shall await further supply.
I hope my previous letter does not bear the interpretation that
the count may not be above 20. The idea was not to have the count
below 20. If what you have sent is uniformly 55, it would be all the
more welcome on that account.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. R. D. S UBRAMANIAM
WEST S REERANGAPALAYAM R OAD EXTENSION
S ALEM
From a microfilm : S.N. 19413

14. LETTER TO G. P. NAIR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 3, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. You leave me more confused than I was
before as to the meaning of the word “Republic”. I notice that there
is the widest possible difference between your views and mine. How
can I then send you any note of encouragement?
I do not for one moment believe that the N.C.O.1 movement has
lost its charm nor am I at all convinced that the Bardoli decision was a
blunder. And, I am more than ever convinced that those who care for
1

8

Non-co-operation
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the poor and who understand them cannot do better than concentrate
the whole of their energy on the spread of the charkha and khaddar
and boycott of foreign cloth.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. G. P. N AIR
EDITOR, “REPUBLIC”
MALL R OAD, C AWNPORE
From a microfilm : S.N. 19414

15. LETTER TO P. GOVINDAN KUTTI MENON
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 3, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. Here are my answers :
1. I wish to see God face to face not as I would like to see
Him but exactly as He is.
2. If the whole world becomes celibate in my sense, it will be
transfigured into something infinitely superior to what it is today
but there is not much chance, I fear, of the whole world taking to a
life of complete self-restraint all of a sudden. There- fore we thus
talk of grahasthashrama, the stage next to that of complete celibacy.
3. There is not much hope of my visiting Kerala in the near
future. You are misinformed in thinking that purity amongst the
untouchables and unapproachables is not preached. Not only is it
preached but it is practised.
4. I do not desire total abolition of English but if you will
think in terms of the millions of each province, you will find that for
them English can never be the medium of instruction. Hindi should
be the language of intercommunication between provinces and
English should be the language of intercommunication between India
and the World. It therefore comes third in point of time as also
importance.
5. I do not think that there ever will be one religion in India
or elsewhere. But there will be and should be sincere respect and
toleration for one another’s religion.
6. If everybody spins regularly there need be no surplus selfspun yarn but there will be enough for all and that with the least
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

9

possible trouble and expenditure that the world has ever conceived.
And if there was a surplus, we could automatically reduce the time
spent by each on spinning.
7. I have put nothing before the people which the most
ordinary man cannot do. For instance, what is the difficulty in everyone handling a spinning-wheel, or giving up foreign cloth, or giving
up drink, or in believing and in promoting Hindu-Muslim unity, or in
regarding an untouchable as his own brother, or in learning Hindi in
addition to his own language?
8. One’s food should consist of grains, fruit, milk and the
fewest condiments, if any at all. Much fat should be avoided. The
quantity and quality should be regulated by actual and careful
experiments.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. P. G OVINDAN KUTTI MENON
P ANDARATHIL HOUSE
P UDUCODE
VIA OTTAPALAM
S. M ALABAR
From a photostat : S.N. 19415

16. LETTER TO DHARMA VIR
ASHRAM,

April 3, 1926
BHAI DHARMAVIRJI,

Your letter. Concentration of mind can be attained only by
constant practice.
1. Concentration can be practised by devoting ourselves to
noble and desirable activities; for instance, some people busy
themselves with nursing the sick, some in service of the Antyajas, some
in plying the charkha and propagating khadi.
2. Some attain concentration by repetition of Ramanama with
sincere faith, and some by yogic and the other methods.
Yours,

MOHANDAS GANDHI
S HRI DHARMAVIR
VAIDIK P USTAKALAYA
LAHORE R OAD, L AHORE
From a microfilm of the Hindi : S.N. 19894

10

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

17. LETTER TO RAMRISH THAKUR
ASHRAM,

April 3, 1926
SIR,

I have your letter. Maulana Shaukat Ali has sent in his yarn for
a few months and we expect to have the arrears. Those who do not
send in their yarn, whoever they may be, will not be eligible for
membership. Maulana Mohamed Ali has sent no yarn, so he is
obviously not a member.
Yours,

MOHANDAS GANDHI
S HRI R AMRISH THAKUR
NO. 22, G OENKA LANE
BORA BAZAR, C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm of the Hindi : S.N. 19895

18. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
April 3, 1926
CHI. MANILAL,

I read your letter to Ramdas; also Fatima’s. And of course I
had anticipated this; Jalbhai did give a hint. You are a free man; so I
cannot force you to do anything. But I write to you as a friend.
What you desire is contrary to dharma. If you stick to
Hinduism and Fatima follows Islam it will be like putting two swords
in one sheath; or you both may lose your faith. And then what
should be your children’s faith? Whose influence are they to grow
under? It is not dharma, but, only adharma if Fatima agrees to
conversion just for marrying you. Faith is not a thing like a garment
which can be changed to suit our convenience. For the sake of
dharma a person shall forgo matrimony, forsake his home, why, even
lay down his life; but for nothing may faith be given up. May not
Fatima have meat at her father’s? If she does not, she has as good as
changed her religion.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

11

Nor is it in the interests of our society to form this relationship.
Your marriage will have a powerful impact on the Hindu-Muslim
question. Intercommunal marriages are no solution to this problem.
You cannot forget nor will society forget that you are my son.
If you enter into this relationship, you may not be able to render
any service. I fear you may no more be the right person to run
Indian Opinion.
It will be impossible for you, I think, after this to come and settle
in India.
I cannot ask for Ba’s permission. She will not give it. Her life
will be embittered for ever.
In proposing this marriage you have thought only of
momentary pleasure. You have not at all considered your ultimate
happiness.
Pure love is as between brother and sister. Whereas here the
main urge is carnal pleasure.
I want you to get out of your infatuation. As far as I
understand, Ramdas and Devdas also have arrived independently at
the same conclusion, as mine.
I could not embolden myself to discuss this with Ba.
May God show you the right path.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C.W. 1118. Courtesy : Sushilabehn Gandhi

19. LETTER TO MANSINGH JASRAJ
ASHRAM,

April 3, 1926
BHAISHRI MANSINGH,

Your letter. Your guess is correct. I have no daughter. And
that woman has been playing the hoax everywhere. This has appeared
12

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

once in Navajivan; but I shall write again.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS GANDHI
S HRI MANSINGH JASRAJ
C/ O S JT. S HAMALBHAI BABARBHAI
ADEN C AMP
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19890

20. LETTER TO NARBHERAM P. MEHTA
ASHRAM,

April 3, 1926
BHAI NARBHERAM POPATLAL,

I do not wish to write anything more than what I have already
done about Swami Dayanand Sarasvati’s book.
2. Menstruation is a monthly sickness demanding utmost
peace and quiet for the woman, and a contact with a passionate man is
horrible for her.
3. The same reason applies to a nursing mother and I believe
it is a very good convention to have her confined for at least twenty
days. But it is the other extreme to say that even kinswomen may not
touch her.
4. To practise what we believe is what seems to me the correct
meaning of achara.
5. It is not true that anyone in the Amreli centre is given
more pay than he deserves, or that they are given more funds than
their produce is worth.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS GANDHI
S HRI NARBHERAM P OPATLAL MEHTA, R ANSIKI
P.O. KUMBHAJINI DERDI (KATHIAWAR)
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19891

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

13

21. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL B. PATEL
ASHRAM,

April 3, 1926
BHAISHRI CHIMANLAL,

The best instruction can be imparted when one identifies oneself
with the students. For this the teacher has to get fully conversant with
the subject he teaches.
2. Out of the Gita and the Ramayana, read carefully, one can
get everything.
3. As regards diet, wheat, milk and green vegetables should be
enough for the most part. Spices and oil should be given up.
4. If you feel very hungry in the evening you may take a little
milk and, if you find it heavy, you may have an orange, or some
grapes or some such juicy fruit. You should take, as far as possible,
long walks in the open air.
5. For purifying the heart and concentration of mind, reading
of the above mentioned books and meditation on them, as also
repetition of Ramanama while not busy with benevolent activities, are
very helpful.
6. We should keep on trying and have faith that our efforts
shall not go unrewarded.
7. The only means of self-realization is total annihilation of
the sixfold passion.
Virtuous deeds will certainly bring you great peace.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS GANDHI
S HRI C HIMANLAL BHOGILAL P ATEL
MAKANJI’S C HAWL
GHATKOPAR, B OMBAY
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19892

22. LETTER TO DAHYABHAI M. PATEL
ASHRAM,

April 3, 1926
BHAI DAHYABHAI,

. . . .1 You have searched your heart pretty well. You can devote
yourself to the charkha; this can be a great social service. You will
1

14

As in the source
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

attain contentment, I am sure, if you have this faith, and ultimately
you will also see the good results. But perhaps you will set a limit to
your patience. It is no patience which has an end. May you succeed
in your resolve.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI DAHYABHAI MANORDAS P ATEL
DHOLKA
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19893

23. LETTER TO A SISTER
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, Chaitra Vad [5] 1 [April 3, 1926]
DEAR SISTER,

I have your letter. I share your grief. You may come here with
your husband, or if you send your husband, I shall surely talk to him,
try to bring him peace. He cannot stay here for long; within a few
days I myself have to go to Mussoorie. So if both of you come here
or your husband does, it should be immediately. Do not lose your
faith and forbearance. Seek happiness in the midst of misery. You
should not start from the wrong premise that you can never attain the
strength of Savitri2 .
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19416

24. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, Chaitra Vad [5] 3 [April 3, 1926]
CHI. DEVDAS,

I have your letter. Ramdas also showed [his] letter which he will
reply himself. It is right that you decided to stay back. Siddaiya is
1

The source has Chaitra Vad 6 which, however, was neither a Saturday nor the
3rd of April.
2
A heroine in the Mahabharata who successfully strove with Death to regain
her husband Satyawan
3
The source has Chaitra Vad 6 which, however, was neither a Saturday nor the
3rd of April.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

15

with Kaka; he has to return soon. Swami is therefore writing to him
today. He shall get the letter on Monday so that by Tuesday or
Wednesday Prabhudas should be here. What we can do about him will
be discussed after Prabhudas’s arrival. There is nothing seriously
wrong with his health. A healthy person has only himself to blame if
he is not fit there, and you cannot be included among the unhealthy.
It is good that you started taking neem juice. One must not have the
least mental worry. Helene Haussding, the German lady, wanted to
come here. She has got her visa, so it seems she will be here in about
a month or so. It looks as if she is Mirabai’s double. Arrangements
for accommodation at Panchgani are under way. I am not writing
separately to Mathuradas.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19417

25. LETTER TO THAKORELAL
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, Chaitra Vad [5] 12 [April 3, 1926]
BHAI THAKORELAL,

I have your letter. I find it impossible to guide or advise you
through letters. I certainly do not want you to stay here, giving up
your studies. If you come here during your vacation, we can talk
about this and, may be, you will get some consolation. Owing to
certain difficulties we had to withdraw all stocks of silk from the
Khadi Bhandars.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19418

26. THE NATIONAL WEEK
[April 4, 1926] 2
Let us not fritter away the precious time at our disposal. The
week that will soon close upon us should be a week of deep
heartsearching no matter to what faith we may belong. Let everyone
ask himself or herself what he or she has done for the land of his or
her birth. Swaraj is not to be had merely by making speeches or
merely by entering Councils or writing essays on swaraj or even by
1

The source has Chaitra Vad 6 which, however, was neither a Saturday nor the
3rd of April.
2
Vide “Partial Fast During the Satyagraha Week”, 4-4-1926.

16

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

editing newspapers, though all these things may help and some of
them may be considered even necessary; but what is that which
everyone can do without much effort and which would increase the
wealth of India, which increases the powers of combination and
organization and makes us feel akin to one another? The answer
unhesitatingly is the spinning-wheel. Hence it is that I have
recommended an intensive khaddar propaganda during the week. If
therefore you have not already taken up some khaddar work, it is not
yet too late. Every little thing helps. There is unsold khaddar
everywhere in the chief centres, as for instance, Tamilnadu, Bihar, the
Punjab, Gujarat and Bengal, etc. You need not think of any particular
province. Wherever you are if you are not wearing khaddar invest in
some now and you help to reduce the stock all over India. If you
have enough khaddar and do not need to buy any more, but if you
have money to spare send your donation to the All-India Spinners’
Association and it will be used for khaddar production. If you have
any minutes to spare, (and who has not?) give them to the spinningwheel yourself and send the yarn to the Association. If you have any
friends whom you can influence, ask them to do all or any of the
things I have just mentioned. Remember that by contributing to
khaddar work you associate yourself with the poor people, you assist
the cause of swaraj and you take part in perpetuating Deshbandhu’s
memory.
Young India, 8-4-1926

27. ON “BRAHMACHARYA”1
I am being inundated with letters on brahmacharya and means
to its attainment. Let me repeat in different language what I have
already said or written on previous occasions. Brahmacharya is not
mere mechanical celibacy, it means complete control over all the
senses and freedom from lust in thought, word and deed. As such it is
the royal road to self-realization or attainment of Brahman.
The ideal brahmachari had not to struggle with sensual desire or
desire for procreation; it never troubles him at all. The whole world
will be to him one vast family, he will centre all his ambition in
relieving the misery of mankind and the desire for procreation will be
1

The original Gujarati article appeared in Navajivan, 4-4-1926. The is a
translation by Mahadev Desai.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

17

to him as gall and wormwood. He who has realized the misery of
mankind in all its magnitude will never be stirred by passion. He will
instinctively know the fountain of strength in him, and he will ever
persevere to keep it undefiled. His humble strength will command
respect of the world, and he will wield an influence greater than that of
the sceptred monarch.
But I am told that this is an impossible ideal, that I do not take
count of the natural attraction between man and women. I refuse to
believe that the sensual affinity referred to here can be at all regarded
as natural; in that case the deluge would soon be over us. The natural
affinity between man and woman is the attraction between brother and
sister, mother and son, or father and daughter. It is that natural
attraction that sustains the world. I should find it impossible to live,
much less carry on my work, if I did not regard the whole of
womankind as sisters, daughters or mothers. If I looked at them with
lustful eyes, it would be the surest way to perdition.
Procreation is a natural phenomenon indeed, but within
specific limits. A transgression of those limits imperils womankind,
emasculates the race, induces disease, puts a premium on vice, and
makes the world ungodly. A man in the grip of the sensual desire is a
man without moorings. If such a one were to guide society, to flood it
with his writings and men were to be swayed by them, where would
society be? And yet we have the very thing happening today.
Supposing a moth whirling round a light were to record the moments
of its fleeting joy and we were to imitate it, regarding it as an
exemplar, where would we be? No, I must declare with all the power I
can command that sensual attraction even between husband and wife
is unnatural. Marriage is meant to cleanse the hearts of the couple of
sordid passions and take them nearer to God. Lustless love between
husband and wife is not impossible. Man is not a brute. He has risen
to a higher state after countless births in brute creation. He is born to
stand, not to walk on all fours or crawl. Bestiality is as far removed
from manhood, as matter from spirit.
In conclusion I shall summarize the means to its attainment.
The first step is the realization of its necessity.
The next is gradual control of the senses. A brahmachari must
needs control his palate. He must eat to live, and not for enjoyment.
He must see only clean things and close his eyes before anything
unclean. It is thus a sign of polite breeding to walk with one’s eyes
18

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

towards the goround and not wandering about from object to object.
A brahmachari will likewise hear nothing obscene or unclean, smell
no strong, stimulating, things. The smell of clean earth is far sweeter
than the fragrance of artificial scents and essences. Let the aspirant to
brahmacharya also keep his hands and feet engaged in all waking
hours in healthful activity. Let him also fast occasionally.
The third step is to have clean companions—clean friends and
clean books.
The last and not the least is prayer. Let him repeat Ramanama
with all his heart regularly every day, and ask for divine grace.
None of these things are difficult for an average man or
woman. they are simplicity itself. But their very simplicity is
embarrassing. Where there is a will, the way is simple enough. Men
have not the will for it and hence vainly grope. The fact that the
world rests on the observance, more or less, of brahmacharya or
restraint, means that it is necessary and practicable.
Young India, 29-4-1926

28. SATYAGRAHA WEEK
This week is drawing near. I suggest the best way, according to
my lights, of observing it. Satyagraha is a great religious principle,
and a universal one. It is to be found in all religions. No religion can
live long without it. Satyagraha is the very basis of religion. It can
never be employed without a well developed religious consciousness.
Countless people now accept that we cannot get swaraj except through
satyagraha, and also that we shall never win it with the help of the
sword. But only a handful know how it can be employed.
I am firmly of the view that till we have imbibed the spirit of
peace exemplified by the spinning-wheel, have placed our relations
with the poor on a pure basis and given a place of honour to khadi we
shall not be fit to employ satyagraha.
I, therefore, suggest that those who have any faith in khadi
should observe the week by spending it in promoting the spread of
khadi. There are several ways to do this.
1. One may spin, and also persuade others to spin, more yarn
than at other times.
2. One may wear khadi and persuade others to do so.
3. Wherever stocks of khadi have accumulated, one may go
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

19

round selling it.
4. One may help, and persuade others to help, in the
production of khadi.
5. One may contribute money, according to one’s means, for
khadi work.
This week should see all the accumulated stocks of khadi
cleared.
If the people cannot do even this, what else can they achieve?
Khadi work does not come in the way of other activities of public
welfare, but supplements them; for the spread of khadi increases
national wealth and the benefit of the increase naturally goes to the
poor.
I, therefore, suggest that even those who wish to give something
as charity should make a gift of khadi. And for those who have not
yet given up using foreign cloth, can we hope that during this week
they will take the pledge and start wearing khadi, and thereby
contribute their share in the swaraj-yajna?
Those who have any doubts about khadi may put this question to themselves : “If not through khadi, through what other
means can we win swaraj, and can I myself join in such activity?” I
have put this question to myself time and again but have been able to
think of no other activity. To those who think that khadi by itself will
not bring swaraj, I may say that the question does not arise at all.
There can be no swaraj without khadi, and in any case we shall lose
nothing through it. Hence, whether we do other work or not, we
should certainly help in promoting the spread of khadi.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 4-4-1926

29. PARTIAL FAST DURING THE SATYAGRAHA WEEK
I cannot summon the courage to suggest a partial fast on the 6th
and the 13th during the Satyagraha Week. I did not, therefore, touch
upon this point when I wrote the Young India article on this subject.1
But those who aspire to swaraj of the spirit, wish to win swaraj through
self-purification, will certainly observe partial fasts on these two days,
1

20

Vide “The National Week”, 4-4-1926.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

search deep within themselves for their shortcomings and try to
remove them.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 4-4-1926

30. HILL TRIBES
Shri Amritlal Thakkar is adding glory to his sannyasa. Though
he has not donned the ochre robe nor does he profess to be a sannyasi, the work he is doing, being entirely philanthropic, is such as
would bcome a true sannyasi. He has grown old, but takes no rest
nor gives any to others round him. When a wildfire of misery is
raging, who can rest in peace? Only an idler can. Shri Amritlal has
been a friend of the Antyajas, and now he is working hard to become
a friend of the hill tribes. I hope that everyone will read and ponder
over his touching articles 1 .Those who have not yet read the article
which appeared last week should read it forthwith. This week’s article,
too, should be read and thought over. We shall discuss later what
contribution we can make to the programme of work suggested by
Shri Amritlal, and how.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 4-4-1926

31. ALL-INDIA DESHBANDHU MEMORIAL
The following friends from Standerton, Transvaal, have sent
their contribution to the fund for the Deshbandhu Memorial through
Shri Dayal Naran.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
Shri Dayal Naran
10–0–0
Shri Vallabh Bhula
5–11–3
Shri Devchand
Shri Nagin
Durlabh
2–2–0
Narasinh
5– 0–0
Shri Dayaram
Shri Vallabh
Bhagwan
0–10–6
Bhagawan
0–15–0
Shri Uka Naran
1– 1–0
Shri Parbhu Harakha
1– 1–0
1

“Our Ancient Tribes”, Navajivan, 28-3-1926, and “Proselytization among
Hill Tribes”, Navajivan, 4-4-1926.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

21

Shri Bhula Hira

3– 3–0

Shri Vashan Dahya

-------------------------------

5– 5–0
---------------------------------

16–16–6

17–12–3
Total
£ 34– 8–9
I hope that others too, will send their contributions for this
cause.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 4-4-1926

32. MEMORIES OF SAINTS’ LIVES
While thinking about how the Satyagraha Week should be
celebrated, I came apon the following paragraph in Shri Kaka
Kalelkar’s article written for students. I reproduce it here for the
benefit of readers of Navajivan : 1
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 4-4-1926

33. LETTER TO LAJPAT RAI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 4, 1926
DEAR LALAJI,

I have dealt with the matter I referred to in the enclosed cutting
in the pages of Young India. Have you studied the question
of
total prohibition? What is at the back of this criminal apathy in the
Punjab?
Yours sincerely,

LALA LAJPAT R AI
LAHORE
From a photostat : S.N. 19420

1
The passage is not translated here. It describes how Eknath, a celebrated
saint of Maharashtra, fed Antyajas with shraddha offerings and once saved a
donkey’s life by fetching water for it from a river.

22

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

34. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
AHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Sunday, April 4, 1926
CHI. JAMNALAL,

Your letter. I sent you a telegram saying I can start on the
22nd. It is not convenient to leave earlier, and it is now cool rather
than warm here. This time again I have gained half a pound; i.e., now
it has gone up to 104 lbs. I am having plenty of rest. I have gone
through your draft letter to Hakim Saheb; it is all right. Herewith I
return it. Most probably I shall be accompanied by Pyarelal,
Mahadev, Subbaiya, Pyar Ali, Noorbanobehn and their attendant.
Pyar Ali intends to rent separate quarters and have his meals cooked
for him. If it is not necessary for you at present to stay in Bombay, I
would certainly like to have you with me in Mussoorie. If you are
there we can certainly attend to some jobs. I do not wish to detain
you, however, if your work requires you to go to Bombay or Calcutta.
So it is for you to make the final decision after considering your
convenience.
It seems you have been quite successful with the Gurukul.
Rajagopalachari has enough worries regarding his own ashram, so
he will have to return soon. Abbas Tyabji can be persuaded
to
undertake touring. Manilal has since returned from Rangoon but it
seems he will not be ready to run around so soon. He will now have
to give some time for railway workers which means he cannot tour for
the present. He will leave this place on Tuesday.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 2458

35. LETTER TO MILTON NEWBERRY FRANTZ
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 6, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I am afraid it is not possible for me to
subscribe to the creed you have sent me. The subscriber is made to
believe that the highest manifestation of the unseen reality was Jesus
Christ. In spite of all my efforts, I have not been able to feel the truth
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

23

of that statement. I have not been able to move beyond the belief that
Jesus was one of the great teachers of mankind. Do you not think that
religious unity is to be had not by a mechanical subscription and a
common creed but by all respecting the creed of each other? In my
opinion difference in creed there must be so long as there are
different brains. But what does it matter if all these are. . .1 upon the
common path of love and mutual judgment.
I return the stamp kindly sent by you. It cannot be used in
India.
Yours sincerely,

MILTON NEWBERRY F RANTZ, E SQ.
C OLLEGEVILLE
From a photostat : S.N. 12461

36. LETTER TO G. K. DEVADHAR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 6, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I am glad you like my notes in Young India 2
about the work of the Seva Sadan. I shall certainly be delighted to
visit the institution at Sholapur and make the acquaintance of your
workers.
I hope to go away for a month to Mussoorie in the expectation
of ridding myself of the weakness still left in me owing to the last
attack of malaria.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. G. K. D EVADHAR
HON. O RGANIZER AND GENERAL S ECRETARY
THE P OONA S EVA S ADAN S OCIETY
789-790, SADASHIV P ETH
P OONA C ITY
From a microfilm : S.N. 19421

1
2

24

The source has a blank here.
Vide “Mission to the Women of India”, 4-3-1926.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

37. LETTER TO GREAVES COTTON AND COMPANY
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 6, 1926
GENTLEMEN,

A correspondent writes1 to me to say that upon his applying for
the post of a stenographer in your office, he was asked to present
himself but as soon as he appeared before the Manager, he was told
that he could not be employed unless he put away his khaddar
clothes. These are the very words quoted by the correspondent :
“Our principle is not to allow it in any of our offices and if you want
to serve in European firms, this khaddar dress will not do.”
MESSRS GREAVES C OTTON & C OMPANY
F ORT
BOMBAY

As I have had chats with the Chairman of the European Association and several European merchants on this very point and as they
repu-diated the suggestion that they would not allow their employees
to wear khaddar dress, I hesitated to believe the information sent to me
by my correspondent. I shall be obliged if you will kindly let me
know whether there is any truth in the information sent to me by my
correspondent.
Yours faithfully,
From a microfilm : S.N. 19422

38. LETTER TO VICE-CHAIRMAN,
DISTRICT BOARD, PURI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 6, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I was interested in your letter to the Secretary, All-India
Spinners’ Association, regarding spinning in the girls’ schools of
your district. I feel tempted to suggest to you that you can save much
of the money voted for spinning if instead of the charkhas you will
have taklis. The Spinners’ Association has now published an
authorized Takli Teacher prepared by two experts. It gives fairly
exhaustive information and hints on takli. The experience of the
Association is that takli spinning is the best and the most efficient for
1

Vide “For and against Khadi”, 22-4-1926.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

25

schools because in the schools the boys and girls can naturally give
only a short time. The collective output is therefore greater through
takli spinning than through the spinning-wheel for the simple reason
that the takli spinning could be done by hundreds of children at the
same time without requiring any extra space whatsoever. Moreover,
the cost of a takli would be [a] few annas as against a few rupees for
the spinning-wheel and the takli rarely goes out of order. It may be
advisable for you to spend a little of the grant made by the Board for
sending your teachers to Ahmedabad to watch the takli spinning that
is being done in the schools here.
Yours sincerely,

THE VICE C HAIRMAN
THE DISTRICT BOARD
P URI
From a microfilm : S.N. 19423

39. LETTER TO P. S. S. RAMA IYER
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 6, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I am sorry I have not been able to reach your letter earlier. You
cannot find satisfaction from the spinning-wheel unless you associate
the spinning-wheel with the poor people and believe it to be an
instrument for alleviating their economic distress. Is there no
satisfaction in helping the poor by labouring for them? There is a
Latin proverb which means to labour is to pray, i.e., when you labour
for others.
You ask me to whom to pray. The only Being to pray to is the
Supreme Deity. We must have faith that He exists, if we are not
satisfied with the ocular demonstration of the awe-inspiring
phenomenon that goes on about us the whole of the 24 hours. There
is undoubtedly an intelligence beyond it, that is God. But if the
phenomenon is not convincing we must have faith based upon the
experience of all the greatest teachers of mankind. It is that
intelligence which hears our prayers and answers. Contemplate on
that All-pervading essence when you are at the spinning-wheel and
26

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

then tell me whether it does not give you satisfaction.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. P. S. S. R AMA IYER
S. I. R Y. A GENCY
C OCHIN
From a microfilm : S.N. 19424

40. LETTER TO RAJENDRA PRASAD
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 6, 1926
DEAR RAJENDRA BABU,

Please go through the portion marked about untouchability in
the enclosed letter1 and let me know what the truth is.
Yours sincerely,

Encl. 1 : That of Sjt. Rakhal Chandra Maity, Sadakat Ashram,
Dighaghat P.O., Patna
BABU R AJENDRA P RASAD
MURAD P UR
P ATNA
From a microfilm : S.N. 19425

41. LETTER TO RAKHAL CHANDRA MAITY
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 6, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. What you say about the classification as to
dining at the Sadakat Ashram surprises me. I am sending your letter
to Sjt. Rajendra Babu asking him to reply to it.
I agree with you that the prayer should be short, intelligible and
that it should proceed from the heart. It should be addressed to the
Supreme God and in a college or any such institution, it should be a
1

Enclosure not in the source

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

27

prayer common to all.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. R AKHAL C HANDRA MAITY
S ADAKAT ASHRAM
DIGHAGHAT P.O.
P ATNA
From a microfilm : S.N. 19426

42. LETTER TO JOHN HAYNES HOLMES
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 6, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter of the 16th February last. I did not
understand from your cable that you intended it to be exclusively for
Unity. This idea of exclusion regarding one’s writings is new ill my
life. Your cable about Macmillan Company’s offer set me athinking
and I felt that it might be as well to let them have the exclusive right of
publishing the Autobiography in book form if the terms were
satisfactory. I should simply put the whole of the proceeds for the
development of khaddar.
When the time comes for publishing the chapters in book form, it may be
syndicated as you suggest but before they are published in book form, the chapters
will have to undergo a slight revision which is already being done and if the
negotiations with Macmillan Company bear fruit, you will have the revised copy.
Yours sincerely,

JOHN HAYNES HOLMES, E SQ.
12 P ARK AVENUE
34TH S TREET, N EW YORK C ITY
From a copy : S.N. 32319

43. LETTER TO V. L. PHADKE
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Tuesday, April 6, 1926
BHAI MURABBI MAMA,

I have your letter. You can come over if you can do so without
28

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

any difficulty. By the 10th Nanabhai too will return from Singhagarh.
Bring with you the letter I wrote on what was talked over with Nanabhai. Swami is here. I shall ask him about Chhagan when I see him.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3813

44. LETTER TO LALLU MORAR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Tuesday, April 6, 1926
BAHI LALLU MORAR,

I have your letter. I am sorry to learn about your disunity. If
only one of you will humble himself, follow the path of truth and
engage in the service of others, the rest will readily gather round him.
At the moment we are in no position to send anyone. However, if you
wish to consult me please do so. Do you subscribe to Navajivan? If
not, it is desirable that you become a subscriber. The subscription is
sh. 10 a year.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati ; S.N. 19427

45. LETTER TO KHANDERIA
ASHRAM,

April 6, 1926
BHAI KHANDERIA,

. . . 1 Inmates of the Ashram or other persons eating at odd
places should not take offence if you serve them in a separate row.
And even if they take offence I do not think you are wrong in serving
them apart. We should treat the Antyajas irrespective of their food
habits just as we treat other communities, without inquiring what they
eat or drink.
ANTYAJASHALA
LAKHTAR
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19896
1

As in the source

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

29

46. LETTER TO G.G. JOG
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 7, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. The interesting cutting you have sent me
appears to me to be perfectly hysterical. There were at that time 33
vegetarian restaurants. I do not know how many there [are] at the
present moment. And so far as I am aware, people used to take the
dishes the writer describes with great relish and profit to themselves.
But then these are all matters of the mind. The sausages he describes
with gusto create in me a nausea.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. G. G. J OG
MOTIMAHAL
C AWNPORE
From a microfilm : S.N. 19432

47. A LETTER
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 7, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I had your welcome letter. I am at the Ashram in Sabarmati up
to the 21st instant. Generally I am always available at 4 p.m. except
on Mondays but I could give you an appointment for any other hour
on those days. After 22nd, I shall be available in Mussoorie. Do
please therefore make your choice.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S.N. 19433

48. LETTER TO AMRITLAL NANAVATI AND OTHERS
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Wednesday, April 7, 1926
BHAISHRI AMRITLAL AND OTHERS,

I have your letter. I never take up an activity of my own accord,
nor do I think it proper to concern myself with any odd activity.
30

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Regarding the Palitana affair I know the Sangh leaders are making
some move; how can I interfere with it? In my opinion if you too
have anything to say you had better say it through the leaders. This is
not a movement wherein any shravak may start on a satyagraha on his
own. Even if you think it has reached the stage for satyagraha, you
should start it through the Sangh. Some time back some people had
come to consult me about it. I explained all this to them.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 10871

49. LETTER TO SOMNATH PANCHAL
ASHRAM,

April 7, 1926
BHAI SOMNATH,

Your letter. I certainly think it right to render financial
assistance to persons whose predicament is like that of the old persons
you describe. It is society’s duty to support invalids. It is, I think,
irreligious to support the able-bodied without getting some work from
them.
If abstention is not possible under the same roof, it is necessary
to live separately. It is certainly not your duty to stay in the same
house even if abstention is not possible.
From a microfilm of the Gujatati : S.N. 10872

50. LETTER TO PRANJIVAN K. DESAI
ASHRAM, S ABARAMTI,

April 7, 1926
BHAISHRI PRANJIVAN,

A couple who, as you say, have given themselves up to
indulgence do not observe the conjugal law. I have no hesitation in
saying that they are worse than beasts. A girl of twelve or thirteen is
absolutely unsuited to lead a conjugal life. It is a grievous sin to
cohabit with her. I cannot imagine what you have written regarding a
woman in menses. I cannot accept that the husband has a duty to
sleep with her after the expiry of four days. I should think the
husband is forbidden to touch her as long as the discharge continues.
After the discharge stops, I see nothing wrong in their coming
together if both of them desire progeny.
M. K. G ANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 12184

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

31

51. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
ASHRAM, S ABARAMTI,

April 7, 1926
CHI. MANILAL,

I got the two letters sent direct by you. I got your contribution
towards the Deshbandhu Memorial after I had written to you. I am
surprised that you did not get a receipt. I hope to collect the receipt
and post it along with this. I would then know the amount received.
Mr. Andrews should have come here by now. However, I have
no telegram about his departure. There is no limit to the strain he is
putting himself to. I have sent you another letter through Ramdas
also. I expect a reply to it. Send a telegram if possible. Ask Shanti to
write to me. I have written him a letter to which he has not replied. Is
there no means of curing his asthma? What happened to the
employees’ demand for higher pay? Ramdas went recently to Amreli
after a few days’ stay here. Devdas is at Deolali looking after Mathuradas. But he is himself not quite well. There is no cause for anxiety.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19428

52. LETTER TO MATHURDAS TRIKUMJI
ASHRAM, S ABARAMTI,

Wednesday, April 7, 1926
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. In his letter Devdas particularly asks for
Pyarelal or Surendra. Therefore, I am sending Pyarelal today.
Personally, however, I would suggest that Devdas should come over
here after Rajagopalachari goes there and Pyarelal should for the
present stay with you. You alone can say whether or not you find
Pyarelal agreeable. A letter has been sent to Sir Prabhashanker
regarding Panchagani; A reply is expected in a day or two.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19429

53. LETTER TO MANEKLAL
ASHRAM, S ABARAMTI,

Wednesday, April 7, 1926
CHI. MANEKLAL,

Herewith Anandlal’s reply to my letter regarding Vrajlal’s share
of the rent of the house at Rajkot.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19430

32

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

54. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
ASHRAM, S ABARAMTI,

Wednesday, April 7, 1926
CHI. DEVDAS,

I have your letter. Since you had such an illness, how well it
would have been if you had informed me of it immediately. There
was no need to hide it from me. I have often found that by this sort
of false kindness people have been unkind to me. Jaundice can be
cured very easily. For this there is no remedy like fasting. It soon
subsides with fasting and flushing by drinking plenty of water, and the
appetite is restored. I have never believed in the theory that a patient
grows weaker by withstanding hunger or by fasting. If you must take
buttermilk, all butter should be removed from it. Curds cannot be
taken in any case. Rice is an un-necessary burden. I remember in the
year 1896 I had a severe attack of jaundice. At that time I had trust
in the prescriptions only of Manishankar Vaid. He had administered
to me some mixture with sodium. . . .1 the main treatment was,
however, a fast. For about ten days I was allowed to have neither milk,
nor buttermilk nor rice. These ten days I was allowed only some fresh
fruits, i.e., oranges, grapes and sugarcane. No sugar. I did not have
to lie down for a single day, and all the while I went about my
business. At that time I used to move about quite a lot for the South
African cause. I suggest you should come over here; you can soon
recover with treatment. You may stay as long as Rajagopalachari is
there. You may spend a day or two in talking to Pyarelal and introducing him to the job. I did not tell ba about this. But she came to
know about it and now asks to send for you immediately. It seems
Rajagopalachari has spoken to her to the same effect. Let me know
your decision immediately.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 19431

55. LETTER TO RUSTOMJI D. BATLIWALA
ASHRAM,

April 7, 1926
BHAISHRI RUSTOMJI,

Your letter. If your report is correct, you had a right to
mention any faults you found there. Smoking at the club cannot be
1

The source has a blank here.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

33

regarded a personal matter. From what you say I see no reason to
apologize.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS GANDHI
S HRI R USTOMJI D. B ATLIWALA
HILL R OAD
BANDRA, B OMBAY
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19897

56. LETTER TO BECHAR BHANJI
April 7, 1926
BHAISHRI BECHAR BHANJI,

I have your letter. I do not think I have any previous letters. I
am surprised that you did not get a reply. Herewith my answer to the
questions you have raised in your latest letter.
The examples of Harishchandra and Shrigalsha Sheth are
meant to emphasize that for preserving our dharma we should be
prepared to sacrifice the dearest of our belongings. We must never let
dharma perish. We are not obliged to believe in the historicity of
either story; they are, however, quite plausible. The entire story should
be read only in the context of the maxim that passion and godliness
do not go together. We should reject a legend which does not fit into
our code of conduct. We cannot compromise morality merely to
support a legend.
Vendemataram from

MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19898

57. LETTER TO A STUDENT
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Wednesday, April 7, 1926
BHAI . . . 1 ,

I have your letter from which I learn that you have not at all
lived with your wife. You were never intimate with her and yet, you
1

34

Name dropped
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

are afraid, she is pregnant. And this worries you. But I see no cause
for worry. If your wife is pregnant, you can put her aside not in
hatred but with pity. She may, if she can, live with the man with whom
she misbehaved and if that man is already married she may stay with
her parents. To them you should convey the news gently but firmly.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 10853-A

58. OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED
You say that swaraj can only come to us as the result of a bloody battle
in the bad old way or through spinning away for all we are worth in our
village homes in the good new way of the Mahatma. This is only another
instance of hypnosis by a catchword. What steps have been taken, by you or
the others concerned, beyond mere repetition of the doctrine, to convince
people that this spinning away (1) is possible, (2) is desirable, (3) will be
effective? I have yet to see a plain, intelligible, fairly well-reasoned-out
statement, answering doubts and questions as to (1) whether it is possible, in
view of the rent and revenue laws, to retain and detain the needed cotton within
the country, and in the hands of the right persons; (2) whether and how far it
is desirable to do so, in view of the effects of such a step, upon the other
industries which have grown up; (3) whether it will be effectual, and if so
directly requiring other steps, and, if so, what steps, to bring about swaraj
(whatever that might mean!). I have repeatedly tried to get leading exponents
of the cult to thrash out the thing, pro and con in public print, or even private
discussion, but have failed so far. Only once I had an opportunity of
questioning the fountain-head of the doctrine himself, viz., Mahatmaji, and
the opportunity was limited to putting only the question as to the possibility.
He contented himself with simply saying, “Yes, it is possible.” There were
many other persons, and more important matters, to deal with; so my doubts
and fears remained unallayed.

The preceding quotation is from an informing letter by Babu
Bhagwandas to Maulana Mahomed Ali and published by him in the
Comrade. Though it is to be found in an old issue (18th December
last), I regret to say I saw it only during the current week. I may say
at the outset that I do not remember the conversation referred to by
Babu Bhagwandas. For me nothing in the political world is more
important than the spinning-wheel. I can recall many occasions when
I have postponed other matters to make room for a discussion on the
spinning-wheel as central part of our economics or politics. But
whatever fate overtook Babu Bhagwandas’s question put to me when I
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

35

had the privilege of being his guest, the root questions raised by him
must be answered. That the spinning-wheel is possible is being daily
demonstrated with increasing force. Amid the many seeming
impossibilities, e.g., Hindu-Muslim unity, the spinning-wheel alone is
being demonstrated as a possibility, as witness the growing organizations in Tamilnad, Andhra, Karnatak, the Punjab, Bihar and Bengal,
etc. If the organizations are not more numerous, it is because the
workers are too few. There is no inherent impossibility in the wheel.
It has been worked before with the greatest success. There are
millions who can work it, who have the required leisure for it and who
are in need of a cottage occupation.
That it is desirable may be proved from the mere fact that it is
the best adapted for this vast country of seven hundred thousand
villages.
No one can say with certainty whether it will be effective. If it is
permissible to infer the experience being gained in the several
provinces, it can be safely asserted that it is highly probable that it will
be effective. It can even be boldly asserted that no other industry has
as yet been proved to be as effective as the spinning-wheel for the
purpose intended.
Babu Bhagwandas mentions the adverse effect of rent and
revenue laws. He thereby draws attention to the difficulty, not the
impossibility, of revival of the one national industry that gave the
peasantry its staying power one century ago. Revenue and rent laws
are not immutable. In so far as they interfere with the growth of the
spinning industry, they must be altered.“But” it will be said, “they
cannot be altered without swaraj”. The answer is that swaraj cannot
be obtained without organizing spinning in spite of the laws. For the
fight for swaraj means fighting difficulties however great they may be.
Violence is the accepted, though barbarous, method of fighting.
Organizing the spinning-wheel is the moral method of fighting for
swaraj. Organizing the spinning-wheel is the easiest and the cheapest
method of peacefully organizing the masses. Surely, if cotton can be
exported thousands of miles away, there spun, brought back in the
shape of yarn for sale to the very exporters, there should be no
difficulty about shifting it, in India itself, a few miles away from the
seat of its cultivation. There is no difficulty about a non-rice-growing
province importing rice from the rice-growing province. Why should
there be any in so handling cotton? The process is going on today.
36

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Bihar has to import from Wardha or Cawnpore.
But, says Babu Bhagwandas, it may be undesirable “in view of
the effects of such a step upon the other industries which have grown
up”. What other industries? And if they are adversely affected,
shouldthat interfere with the prosecution of an industry which is as
necessary to the national life as either lung is to the body? Should we
be afraid to promote total prohibition because it must interfere with
the established distilleries? Ormust a reformer be deterred from
advoca-ting abstention from the opium habit for fear of harming the
opium growers? Babu Bhagwandas cited the Champaran ryot who
could not keep enough food grains for sustenance. That was because
he had not enough for all his wants. If he had spun or if the taxation
was light, he could have kept enough for his wants. He got partial
relief by the removal of the burden of growing indigo compulsorily.
He could still further better his condition if he would utilize his idle
hours (he has many) by spinning unless he found a more profitable
industry. But he will not spin, unless the educated class set the fashion
and assure him that the wheel is not to be a nine days’ wonder.
Babu Bhagwandas however exclaims :
If to spin away is so easily possible, so desirable, so effective, there
must after all be some reason why the three-hundred millions do not take to it
at once, why the Congress membership has dwindled down to nine thousand
odd.

Surely he knows many things “possible, desirable, and
effective,” not happening for want of will or effort. Universal
education is“possible, desirable and effective” but people do not
resort to it readily. And, it will require the energy of an army of
trained workers to instil into the minds of the people the necessity of
taking the trouble to be educated. Sanitary precautions are “possible,
desirable and effective”. But why do the villagers not take to them as
soon as they are brought to their notice? The answer seems to be
simple. Progress is slow. It is lame. It requires effort, organization,
time and expense in exact proportion to its importance. The greatest
stumbling block in the way of the more rapid progress of spinning,
great as it is, is the disinclination or the inability of the cultured
classes, the natural leaders of the people, to recognize the supreme
place the spinning-wheel has in any scheme of national regeneration.
The very simplicity of it seems to bewilder them.
Young India, 8-4-1926
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

37

59. NEED FOR CHARTS
A correspondent writes to say that instead of giving figures, in
order to impress facts on the minds of the readers, charts should be
given showing fluctuations in the production and sale of khadi. He
rejects the forebodings of people who say that khadi is dying out but
says that though they can be refuted by those who have read the
annual report of the All-India Spinners’ Association, but few have the
patience to go through it. He says :
People think that the more the khadi-cap-wearers, the greater the production
and sale of khaddar. . . .1

The remarks of the correspondent are very true. Arrangements
are being made to prepare a chart such as the correspondent suggests.
Mean-while the figures given this week in C. R.’s note on Tamilnadu
are eloquent enough to demonstrate the progress of khadi.
Young India, 8-4-1926

60. DOES INDIA WANT PROHIBITION?
Much has been made by the opponents of total prohibition in
India of the speech of Mr. King, Financial Commissioner in the
Punjab, who was reported to have said that the Local Option Act which
was passed over a year ago in the Punjab has been a perfect failure.
The Commissioner quotes in support of his statement the following
facts:
That out of nearly 200 municipalities, district boards, etc., only
19 have asked to be empowered under the Act. Of the 19, only six
took further steps. And in the six the referendum that was held had
precious little support. At Rawalpindi for instance out of 7,000 voters,
only six registered their votes. At Ludhiana out of 12,500 voters at
the first referendum not one turned up. Of the other four only in one
small town, that of Tohana, out of 1,052 voters, 802 voted for total
prohibition.
Mr. King argued, as he would be entitled to argue if he was a
stranger to India and Indian conditions, that there was no demand for
total prohibition in the Punjab. Unfortunately for India the conditions
are that people are apathetic even about things that concern them as a
society. The methods adopted for referendum are new to them.
1

38

The rest of the letter is not reproduced here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Probably, the voters knew nothing of the fact that there was a referendum being taken about total prohibition. Mr. King must have
known the fact which everyone knows who knows anything of India
that the vast majority of the people of India do not drink and that
drinking intoxicants is contrary to Islam and Hinduism. The inference
therefore to be drawn from the so-called failure referred to by Mr.
King is not that the Punjab is against total prohibition but that the
Punjabis being themselves as a class teetotallers do not bother their
heads about those who are ruining themselves through the drink
curse. He is also entitled to draw the inference that the Municipal
commissioners and the members of the local boards have been
criminally negligent of their duties to the voters in this matter of great
social importance. But to argue from the facts cited that Punjab is
opposed to total prohibition is to throw dust in the eyes of strangers or
ignorant people. That unfortunately is the way of the officials. Instead
of looking at things impartially or from the popular stand-point, they
constitute themselves pleaders for what the Government stands or for
methods which the Gov-ernment may wish to defend at any cost. It is
a well-known fact that the Hindus are against the slaughter of the cow
and her progeny. Supposing there was a referendum taken precisely
in the manner in which it was taken in the Punjab regarding drink and
the millions of Hindus fail to register their vote, will anyone who
knows Indian conditions argue therefrom, for one moment, that
Hindus want slaughter houses where the sacred cow is done to death?
The fact is that there is not that consciousness created amongst the
people that is impatient of social wrong. It is no doubt a deplorable
thing. It is being gradually mended. But it is a wicked thing to
suppress facts which would warrant an inference totally different from
the one that may, in the absence of those facts, be drawn from another
set of facts. As the Manchester Guardian has mildly put it, the case
against total prohibition in India is much weaker than the case against
it in America or England where respectable people see nothing wrong
or harmful in moderate drinking.
Young India, 8-4-1926

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

39

61. MESSAGE TO MYSORE LAWYERS’
CONFERENCE, TUMKUR1
ASRAM, S ABARMATI,
April 8, 1926
P RISEDENT
R ECEPTION C OMMITTEE
F OURTH MYSORE LAWYERS’ C ONFERENCE
TUMKUR
(I) HOPE (THE) LAWYERS IN CONFERENCE WILL APPRECIATE (THE)
MESSAGE OF (THE) SPINNING- WHEEL AND ADOPT KHADDAR AND
MAKE SOME RETURN TO
THE POOR
BY DEVOTING
SOME TIME
RELIGIOUSLY TO SPINNING AND PAY A PORTION OF THEIR INCOME
TO (THE) DESH- BANDHU
MEMORIAL FUND WHOSE OBJECT IS UNIVERSALIZATION OF KHADDAR.

GANDHI
From a microfilm: S. N. 19435

62. LETTER TO G. K. DEVADHAR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 8, 1926
MY DEAR DEVADHAR,

I have your letter. Manorama talked to me about your letter last
night and I told her that she was not only free to go but that Seva
Sadan being an institution specially designed for women would
probably more suit her requirements than the Ashram. She told me
she would make her final decision in a day or two and let me know. I
shall hand your letter to her and talk to her again. I knew that she was
before, at the Seva Sadan. I was not really prepared to take her in if
only because the Ashram is at present overcrowded and it is so
difficult to look after young girls. But as she was insistent, I put her
with Mrs. Gandhi. Her ambition to remain a maiden and lead a life of
service attracted me.
You shall hear from me again after I have had a chat with her.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S. N. 19434

1

This message is typed on a telegraphic form and the words in brackets were
encircled for deletion.

40

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

63. FOREWORD
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 8, 1926
Hemendra Babu has asked me to write a foreward to his Life of
Deshbandhu. Unfortunately I do not know Bengali. I had hoped to be
able to have portions read to me but I have not been able to find the
time to do so. Hemendra Babu was one of the devotees of
Deshbandhu. I know his love and veneration for the departed leader. I
have therefore no doubt that whatever he has said about Deshbandhu
will be readable. Time cannot efface the memory of a man so great
and good as Deshbandhu. It can only make it more hallowed. At this
time of trial for the nation there is no Indian who does not feel the
void created by his death. May Hemedra Babu’s pages help us to
realize our duty to the country for which Deshbandhu lived and died.
From a photostat: S. N. 19436

64. LETTER TO NAGJIBHAI
ASHRAM,

April 8, 1926
BHAI NAGJIBHAI,

I have your letter. If you regard Vishwamitra, Vasishtha and
others as historical figures, it will be difficult to answer your questions.
If you can look upon the Ramayana as a religious work and the
legends of Vishwamitra, Parashurama and others as allegorical, you
will be able yourself to understand their significance.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S. N. 19899

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

41

65. LETTER TO HARNARAYAN
[On or After April 8, 1926] 1
Your letter. If the friend you refer to really means to be saved,
he must leave his present position, and should look for some job
which will involve far less, if any, contact with women. Again his work
should be such as would keep him physically occupied for the whole
day. And privacy is of course out of the question.
In the case of the other friend, what the couple need is courage.
Whenever they are referred to as barren, they shoud take it for a
compliment. He who has a vow to observe and wants to know the
Brahman does not care what the world says.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S. N. 12095

66. TELEGRAM TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
S ABARMATI,

April 9, 1926
MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
WINDY HALL
DEVLALI
DEVDAS SHOULD SEE DALAL ON WAY HERE.

BAPU
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

67. LETTER TO KATHERINE MAYO
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 9, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I hope you received my previous letter2 in reply to your enquiry
1

This is written on a sheet from the addressee’s letter dated Adhik Cheitra Vad
11, 82, to which this is the reply.
2
Vide “Letter to Katherine Mayo“, 26-3-1926.

42

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

about the sources of my information on poverty of India.
I have now your second letter1 enclosing copy of your notes 2 . I
have tried to fill in the gaps left by you. I have been obliged to do the
same somewhat hurriedly but I hope it will answer the purpose.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S. N. 12462

68. LETTER TO SARAT CHANDRA BOSE3
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 9, 1926
DEAR SARAT BABU,

Manilal Kothari has given your massage. I wish I could send
you something stirring, something decisive and rapid in reply but I
have no such thing in the present state of the country. Meetings and
resolution of protests in the Councils have been overdone. We must do
something tangible so that we can feel our power. I can think of
nothing else therefore but boycott of foreign cloth which in its turn is
impossible without khaddar and therefore for the ills including these
wretched imprisonments, I have nothing but the charkha. But how can
I convince the people that it is a sovereign remedy. My faith however
in it remains undiminished. Day by day it increases. And therefore
during the National Week we have some spinning-wheels going on the
whole of the week, night and day at the Ashram. We are doing it with
the implict faith that some day through it will rise a power that will
enable us to realize our cherished desire.
I know that there is an alternative to the charkha and that is
rowdyism. But I am useless at it and what is more, I have no faith in it.
And as a practical man I know that our rowdyism is nothing
compared to the rowdyism of the Government. I have therefore burnt
my boats and staked my all on the charkha. I invite all who are
troubled by this knowledge of the many woes of the nation to join me
in the effort. Believe me it requires all the skill, all the discipline, all
the organizing power that we can summon to its aid.
1
2
3

Dated 24-3-1926.
Vide “Interview to Katherine Mayo”, 17-3-1926.
This was reproduced in Young India, 22-4-1926.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

43

I hope the Forward and the Memorial Hospital are doing well.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S ARAT BOSE
C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm : S. N. 19437

69. LETTER TO V. N. S. CHARY
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 9, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I too have seen many a lizard going for
cockroaches and have watched cockroaches going for lasser forms but
I have not felt called upon to prevent the operation of the law of the
larger living on the smaller. I do not claim to penetrate into the awful
mystery but from watching these very oprations, I learn that the law of
the beast is not the law of the Man; that Man has by painful striving to
surmount and survive the animal in him and from the tragedy of the
himsa which is being acted around him he has to learn the supreme
lesson of ahimsa for himself. Man must, therefore, if he is to realize
his dignity and his own mission, cease to take part in the destruction
and refuse to prey upon his weaker fellow creatures. He can only keep
that as an ideal for himself and endeavour day after day to reach it.
Complete success is possible only when he has attained moksha, a state
in which the spirit becomes and remains independent of physical
existence.
Yours sincerely,

S H. V. N. S. C HARY
7, H IGH R OAD
EGMORE
From a microfilm: S. N. 19438

70. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Friday [April 9, 1926] 1
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I notice that the illness of Devdas has made you anxious. But
1

44

From the postmark
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

that is how life is. I have only today sent a telegram saying that
Devdas should come here after consulting Dr. Dalal. I am convinced
that he should return here. That is what Ba wants. Nevertheless, I sense
from the letters of Devdas that he would rather that I did not send for
him. I have explained to Pyarelal and Rajagopalachari what my own
opinion is. Now you may do what you all think proper. The
Panchgani matter will not be settled soon. The bungalow had been let
out before Sir Prabhashankar Pattani received my letter. After June he
will be willing and eager to give it for as long as we may want it. It can
be arranged for you to be at Sinhgadh till June. Have you consulted
Dr. Metha about that place?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

71. LETTER TO S. GOVINDASWAMI IYER
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 10, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I should be sorry if the information you give
me is found to be correct. I do not know the addresses of the
gentlemen whose names you have given me, namely Messers K. S.
Nambudripad and Velu Pillay, if the latter also was guilty of making
speeches like the one attributed to Mr. Nambudripad. If you will give
me their addresses, I shall certainly enquire.
I note what you say about your name not being disclosed.
Your sincerely,

S JT. S. G OVINDASWAMI IYER, B. A. B. L.
GOPI VILAS
P ULIMUD
TRIVANDRUM
From a microfilm: S. N. 19439

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

45

72. LETTER TO HAKIM AJMAL KHAN
AHSRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 10, 1926
DEAR HAKIMJI SAHEB,

I had your letter. I must not delay replying to it for the pleasure
of enabling me to write in Urdu. Your letter makes painful reading.
You are despondent. But you cannot afford to be. You and I want to
see Hindus and Mussalmans shed the insanity and live together in
peace and friendship. We must attend also the ceremony of establishing swaraj.
You should rejoice to think that I shall see you so often in
Mussoorie. Will you not precede me and give yourself rest now. I wish
I could compel you to take a vow not to leave Mussoorie for two
months, even to go to Rangpur.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S. N. 19440

73. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 10, 1926
DEAR SATIS BABU,

There is a letter from Mr. Chatterjee enclosing a cutting from
Welfare. Do please answer the criticism in the Bengal Press and let me
have a copy of your reply so as to enable me to make use of it for the
columns of Young India. When you send me copy of your reply,
please return the cuttings.
Yours sincerely,

Enc. 1 (to be returned)
From a microfilm: S. N. 19441

74. LETTER TO J. CHATTERJEE
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 10, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter for which I thank you. I have sent your letter
and the cutting to Satis Babu, Dr. Ray’s expert who is in charge of the
relief depot. I know the working of the depot myself and I may
inform you that there is no difficulty about answering the criticim
even from the figures used in the Welfare. But I agree that it would be
46

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

more satisfactory to have an official refutation from those who are
working the depot.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. J. C HATTERJEE
1, JOHNSTONGANJ
ALLAHABAD
From a microfilm: S. N. 19442

75. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 10, 1926
DEAR SATIS BABU,

I have your letter about Niranjan Babu. My letter 1 was not
written to cast any reflection upon you at all. It was based purely on
the last month’s figures that were put before me. If I had the time to
confer with Shankerlal and to look into all the papers, I would have
found all the information that you say exists in the papers sent by
you. But you know the difficult position I find myself in at present. I
have no time for anything over and above every day’s routine work
and so I hastily dictated the letter asking for the information from
Niranjan Babu as he could supply the information without having to
refer to many papers. And I wrote to you because Niranjan Babu was
at that time with you and thought would be with you till you received
the letter or if he had gone you will forward the letter to him. I know
nothing about how much you were to look after and how much you
were not to look after. I think you got all the packets.
Niranjan Babu has now telegraphed that he is sending me all the
information. I shall therefore wait for his letter. Meanwhile do I
understand that if we pay Utkal Rs. 250 per month up to September, it
will be self-supporting—that is the meaning I gather from your letter.
And if such is the meaning, it is simple and Utkal will certainly have
done wonderfully well.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S. N. 19443

1

Vide “Letter to Satis Chandra Das Gupta”, 29-3-1926.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

47

76. LETTER TO JAGJIVANDAS
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, Chaitra Vad 1 [3] 1 [April 10, 1926]
BHAISHRI JAGJIVANDAS,

The delay was deliberate because I know you would still be on
your pilgrimage and would not reach Amereli for some time. Today I
am sending a hundi for Rs. 500 to the adress given by you.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 10865

77. LETTER TO GULABDAS
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, Chaitra Vad 1 [3]2 April [10, 1926]2
BHAI GULABADAS,

I have your letter. Brahmacharya can be observed by keeping
good company, reading good books and repeating Ramanama. The
mind and the body should not be idle for a single moment. You can
certainly stick to the spinning-wheel if you want to. Your father can
be persuaded by your humility. There is in Calcutta a college of
indigenous medicine that has connection with the Government, but it
is quite expensive. Likewise there is Tibbia College in Delhi, also
equally expensive.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 10869

78. A RAY OF HOPE
Shri Dahyabhai writes from Dholka:3
This example is worthy of notice. Those who, though not poor,
take up spinning and other connected work either through sympathy
or patriotism deserve to be complimented on their spirit. I very much
hope that Shri Dahyabhai will keep up his faith and continue his
efforts for the progress of the spinning-wheel, and that the people of
Rampar will go on doing the work which they have started and will
not give any grounds to others to say of them, “Brave in the
beginning, faint-hearted by and by.” I find it necessary to utter this
1

The source has Chaitra Vad 12 but Saturday was Chaitra Vad 13.
Addressees letter is dated 6-4-1926.
3
The letter is not translated here. The correspondent had described how the
farmers of Rampar had taken up khadi work and were doing it with enthusiasm.
2

48

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

caution because, in the very letter in which Dahyabhai has described
the awakening in Rampar, he also writes:
A friend had, of his own free will, taken the pledge of spinning regularly. He
knows spinning, and has time for it too, but he has given it up through sheer
lethargy.

We come across such instance all over the country. It is a
matter for no little pain that people do not pause and reflect before
taking a pledge and then fail to keep it. Such weaknesses of ours
have sapped the foundation of dhrama and reduced the country to a
state of slavery.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 11-4-1926

79. GURUKUL AND KHADI
Shri Jamnalalji writes from Hardwar:1
His list2 contains contains forty names. I need not giveall the
names here, but an analysis of the list will be found intresting. The
first name it it is that of the Principal of the Gurukul; there are five
teachers, seven fresh graduates, holding the degrees of Snataka or
Vedalankar or Vidyalankar. There are five students from the
fourteenth grade, seven from the thirteenth, four from the twelfth and
five from the eleventh. The list contains the names of two women
members of the Gurukul and three other women from Delhi—
Shrimati Vidyavati Sethi (B.A.), Principal, Kanya Gurukul, and two
teachers, Shrimati Sitadevi and Shrimati Chandravati.
The Khadi Inspector in the Punjab writes: 3
I compliment these bodies.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 11-4-1926

80. “NIRAMISHAHAR” MEANS “ANNAHAR”
I have invited readers of Navajivan to suggest a simpler word
for niramishahar4 . Some readers do not like this word. In its place,
they suggest nirmansahar or amasahar. But neither word seems
acceptable. People who have never eaten meat in their lives do not like
1
The extract is not translated here. The correspondent had described the keen
interest which members of the Gurukul were taking in khadi activities.
2
Of new members of the Spinners’ Association enrolled by him.
3
The extract is not translated here. The correspondent had reported that the
Gurukul in Multan Cantonment and a Destitutes’ Home in another place run by the
Arya Samaj had started buying khadi for all their needs.
4
Non-meat diet

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

49

to hear the word mans 1 . To such persons, an unafamiliar word would
be more acceptable. As people shrink from uttering the very name of
a thing which repels them, so they shrink form the word mans and,
therefore, use the word paramati 2 instead. The phrase zade javin 3
sounds indecent, whereas jungle javun 4 sounds a little less offensive.
Recently, the word shauch 5 has come into use in place of either.
Following this principle, I have been using the word niramishahar. A
friend has suggested vanaspatyahar6 in preference to it. But this word
does not seem simpler than the other one. Trying to find an
alternative expression, I felt that annahar 7 would serve the purpose all
right. This word does not cover milk. Strictly speaking, it does not
cover even fruits. From another point of view, however, food includes
milk and fruits. In the last resort, if we define the meaning which we
attach to a word and, after a little use, can get that meaning accepted
by others, we become entitled to use the word in the sense we have
attached to it. Exercising that right, Navajivan will hencforth use the
word annahar in place of niramishahar and to convey the meaning
that that word does.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 11-4-1926

81. MISUNDERSTANDING
I observe that the misunderstanding occasioned by my visit to
Kutch8 still persists, and that Shri Manasingh Kachrabhai and Shri
Manilal Kothari are being blamed. I, therefore, wish to state once
again that, far from regretting my tour of Kutch, I look upon it as one
of the precious experiences of my life. The Reception Committee did
not commit and should not be blamed for the slight fault of omission.
I found in Kuth the same love and enjoyed the same comforts which I
have found and enjoyed in the other places. The Reception
Committee had spared no pains to look after my convenience so that I
1

Meat
Literally, another’s dust or clay; euphemistically meat
3
To go for evacuation of bowels
4
To go behind a bush
5
Washing
6
A diet of herbs
7
A diet of boiled careals; Gandhiji suggested that this word should be
made to singify vegetarian diet; another word, shakahar, has however, gained
wider currency.
8
In 1925 vide “Reminiscences of Kutch (-I)”, 2-11-1925 and “Reminiscences
of Kutch (-II)”.
2

50

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

could rest. They left nothing undone so that I might get as much rest
as possible. It was not Shri Manasingh who had originally extended
the invitation to me. I also know that Shri Manilal was obliged at a
later stage to join the others. In going to Kutch, I did nothing but
follow my own nature. It was in my soul that I suffered during the
tour. How does the Reception Committee deserve to be blamed if
suprestitions have struck deep roots among the people? The hypocrisy
and insincerity which I found in some villages were not a new
experience to me. It is contrary to my nature to run away from a place
where I find fanaticism among the Hindus. I regard it as my dharma
to try to win over even fanatics with love. I have, therefore, no other
feeling but that of satisfaction for my Kutch tour. I do not regard it as
a failure at all. I came across selfless workers in Kutch as in other
parts of the country. It was also a great pleasure to me to visit the
places of their activities. It cannot be a ground of complaint that the
contributions did not come up to my expectations. I have received in
the past generous help from residents of Kutch for my activities. Why
should one feel disappointed if one’s expectations are occasionally
not fulfilled? My only disappointment is at the thought that Hindus
still regard the sin of untouchability as a virtuous practice. It was not a
part of the work of the Reception Committee to try to soften the hard
hearts of the people. It was my work. Workers invite me to their respective places for this purpose. If people’s hearts have not softened, I
must quarrel with myself. I am the cause of my disappointment on
that score. But I am not such a simpleton that I would quarrel with
myself. I quarrel with God. Why did he create me weak or deny power
to my word so that I do not always succeed in softening people’s
hearts? Whom should I blame if Hindus do not give up the practice of
untouchability, if Hindus and Muslims quarrel with each other and if
all the Indians do not wear khadi? Hinduism shows only one remedy
for this.
Every time the gods were in distress, they called
on the Dweller in the hearts of all;
And He who is the support of the Earth, the
Lord of Narasinh, rescued them from danger.

Vishwamitra performed tapascharya1 so that he might become a
bramarshi2 , and Parvati in order to win Siva as husband. Likewise,
1
2

Penance
A rishi attaining Brahman

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

51

those who wish to serve their country or their dharma should do
tapascharya for the purposes and not point to the weaknesses of the
people. Not only was I not disappointed by my visit to Kutch but, as I
promised at the time of leaving it, if the workers there continue their
work and desire my presence, and if I can find the time, I will
certainly go there again, will visit the areas which, not being easily
accessible, were left out this time and call for an account from the
residents of the places which I visited.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 11-4-1926

82. LETTER TO S. NAGASUNDARAM

1

ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 11, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I must not deal with the matter referred to
you in the pages of Young India. I said all that had to be said on the
incident in 1921. I am never in an uncompromising mood. Viceroy
never made a single offer that could be accepted by any selfrespecting person. When I advised the Ali Brothers to sign that famous
document called apology, I went nearest the edge of weakness. But I
do not regret it. That ‘apology’ did the Brothers and the nation much
good.When their trial came it was an issue that was as hon-ourable to
1

This was Gandhiji’s reply to the addressee who had written to him
about an article “The Change of Viceroys” in the Indian Social Reformer
of April 3,
which had stated; “Lord Reading hands over charge of the Viceroyalty to Lord Irwin
today. The political situation today is quite calm, whereas when Lord Reading arrived
in the country, it was highly charged with distrubance. The Non-co-operation movement was moving rapidly towards its zenith. Lord Reading, for several months after
assuming charge of his high office, tried to come to an understanding with Mahatma
Gandhi, but the latter was in an uncompromising mood. The prosecution of the Ali
Brothers made conciliation impossible. The Prince of Wales was due to visit the
country in a few months and the Viceroy strained every nerve to reach at least a temporary settlement in order to allow His Royal Highness’ visit to pass off quietly. He
offered a Round Table Conference to discuss the next step in political advance and,
although the late Mr. C. R. Das, who was undergoing imprisonment for breach of the
notification declaring the Congress volunteers to be unlawful body, counselled acceptance of the offer, Mr. Gandhi refused and great opportunity was lost. This seems to
have convincd Lord Reading that the method of conciliation was not likely to succeed, and soon after the Prince left these shores, the Mahatma himself was prose-cuted
and sent to jail.“

52

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

them as it was dishonourable for the Government.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S. N AGASUNDARAM
F IRST F LOOR
LAKSHMINIVAS BUILDING
NEAR KING’S C IRCLE
MATUNGA, B OMBAY
From a microfilm : S. N. 19444

83. LETTER TO RICHARD B. GREGG
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 11, 1926
MY DEAR GOVIND,

How funny I received your letter just after I had dictated my
notes on your article on Machinery. Do no bother about the German
book. You may return it. I shall get it translated if need be by
someone else. The work you mention is far more important than
translating those letters in the midst of difficulties that surround you.
I am glad you are doing gardening and cooking your own
meals. When you get a little bit of leisure do give me an idea of the
school there. The attendance, capacity of the boys, subjects being
taught, etc., and tell me what we should adopt from that school.
I leave for Mussoorie on the 22nd instant. Mira is doing
wonderfully well. Have you heard that during the Satyagraha Week
there are five wheels going all day and night. It is a stirring sight. The
daily output has at least quintupled I think. We shall have the accurate
figures next week. Hence during the week Kanti did 4444 turns
(equals 5925 yards) that means at least 14 hours work for the boy.
Yours,

RICHARD B. GREGG, ESQ.
From a photostat : S. N. 19445

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

53

84. LETTER TO SHAUKAT ALI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 11, 1926
MY DEAR FRIEND AND BROTHER,

Our thoughts have certainly crossed one another. I was thinking
of dictating a letter to you taking you to task for such a small quantity
of so indifferenly spun yarn. But by anticipating my letter, you have
deprived my rebuke of its sharpnness.
I heard about Mahomad Ali’s difficulties. My heart is with him.
My head rebels against him. He is so improvident and for want of
method, of all the public workers, he, perhaps, takes the first rank.
Do please give a silent hour to the spinning-wheel, concentrating
all your attention upon it. You cannot afford to neglect it. A
correspondent wrote to me the other day taking me to task for the
absence of any yarn contribution from you and Mahomad Ali. I
wrote to the latter nearely a fortnight ago.
I shall look forward to meeting you on the 16th. I expect to see
you hale and hearty.
I had recently a despondent letter from Hakim Saheb. When
you reach Delhi, you must cheer him up. Where is Shwaib? Love to
everybody in the office including yourself.
Yours,
From a photostat: S. N. 19446

85. LETTER TO PYARELAL NAYYAR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 11, 1926
MY DEAR PYARELAL,

You should continue to write in Hindi. For saving time, I must
dictate in English, at least today. I was never troubled about Devdas’s
illness. I am troubled about his suppression of it till it had gone too
far. I am glad Mathuradas is so much better now. You must take
good care of yourself, keep regular hours for your meals and for
everything consistently with nursing the patient, if Mathuradas may be
still described as a patient. Give me your day’s routine. Give me also
54

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the condition of Gomati Ben especially while Kishorelal is away.
Yours,

S JT. P YARELAL NAYYAR
C/ O MATHURADAS TRIKUMJEE, E SQ.
WINDY HALL
DEOLALI
NASIK R OAD
From a photostat : S. N. 19447

86. LETTER TO A. IRBE
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 11, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. I hardly think I shall have to go to
Finland. But if I do, and if I have to pass through Latvia, I would
certainly like to make the acquaintance of your father. You will watch
the papers and if I do go, you will perhaps send me the necessary
letter.
Yours sincerely,

MRS. A. IRBE
WEAVING S CHOOL
C. S. M.
MAYAVARAM
From a photostat : S. N. 19448

87. LETTER TO BAGALA PRASANNA GUHA ROY
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 11, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. Please tell me why Prakash Babu was forced
to resign the Secretaryship and where he is?
I understand your difficulty about the Tippera khadi. The only
way to overcome that difficulty is to become weavers yourselves and
to induce the middle-class people to spin for love. The yarn we may
thus get can be added to the yarn that we may have to pay for. You
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

55

can then sell your khadi as cheap as Tippera khadi. I am aware that
this is more easily said than done. But there is no short cut to solve
these difficult problems. You may also try to find out tracts where
cotton can be easily grown.
Lastly khadi cannot be worked in a district where there are no
poor people having idle hours at their disposal. The whole scheme of
khadi rests upon the supposition that there are millions of poor people
in India who have no work during at least 4 months in the year. If
your part of India has no such people, you need not worry about
production of khaddar. You have then merely to sell khaddar that
may be produced in less happy districts.
You should go to Satis Babu, confer with him, discuss
everything and follow his advice.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. B AGALA P RASANNA GUHA R OY
S ECRETARY, J ATIYA S HIKSHAMUTH
LAKSHMIPUR, U PASHI P. O.
F ARIDPUR (BENGAL)

88. MESSAGE ON JALLIANWALA BAGH1
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 11, 1926
Your Secertary has asked for a message for the 13th about
Jallianwala Bagh. Here is the message:
The wanton massacre in Jallianwala Bagh that took place on the
13th day of April, 1919, is a perpetual reminder to us that it will recur
as often as we attempt to lift up our heads and desire no longer to live
in bondage. British rule is imposed on India not for India’s service
but for her exploitation. It is indeed to protect the commerce that is
imposed upon India. The central item of that commerce is Manchester
piece-goods. If we will avenge the humiliation of Jallianwala and the
crawling 2 lane we must at least cease to wear foreign cloth and pledge
ourselves to wear hand-spun khaddar. The former sterilizes British
commerce, the latter binds us to the poor whom we have neglected all
these long years. Though [we have] not been exploiters of the outside
world, we have exploited the peasantry in order to have ease and
comfort. If we refuse to discard foreign cloth, if we find khaddar too
1

Read out by Mrs. Sarojini Naidu, who was presiding over a public meeting in
Marwadi Vidyalaya compound on 13th April under the auspices of the Bombay
Provincial Congress Committee
2
Vide “Congress Report on the Punjab Disorders”, 25-3-1920.

56

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

uncomfortable, so far as I can see we must accommodate ourselves to
perpetual slavery. All the reform that we may get will be turned [to]
dust if we are afraid to sacrifice ease, comfort, and much more for the
sake of the country.
Yours,

S RIMATI S AROJINI NAIDU
TAJMAHAL HOTEL
BOMBAY
From a photostat: S. N. 19450

89. LETTER TO G. K. DEVADHAR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 11, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have now seen Manorama. She is writing to you. She speaks
broken Gujarati and Hindustani and so far as I can gather from her,
before she proceeds to Poona, she wants to be sure of her readmission
to the Seva Sadan. She did’t seem to relish the charge that she was
unstable before.
Here, for the time being, she is learning weaving. She gives 4
hours to it. If she continues to weave for about a year and likes that
work, she would be able to support herself without the slightest
difficulty. But if she proves unsteady, she is not likely to learn
weaving because it requires constant effort and much plodding.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. G. K. DEVADHAR
BOMBAY
From a photostat: S. N. 19451

90. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Sunday, April 11, 1926
BHAI GHANSHYAMDASJI,

I have your letter, which explains quite a few things. I used to
read newspaper reports of the riot. I am convinced that I at any rate
connot stop the two communities fron quarrelling. I was therefore not
upset by the Calcutta incident. But then I have also let it be known that
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

57

if the Hindus want to retaliate they should no more look upon
ruthlessness as a vice; they should rather cultivate it, regarding it a
virtue. And this seems to have happened in Calcutta. That you were
impartial in offering protection to members of both the communities
and that the Marwaries saved the life of some three hundred Muslims
is a matter of pride for the Hindu community.
I congratulate you on your khadi vow and also those who
persuaded you to take it. You will personally gain by this, and the
public too will benefit by it. I shall leave for Mussoorie on the 22nd. I
am keeping very fine health. Since we are observing the Satyagraha
Week, I spin for two hours daily and we have in the Ashram five
charkhas plying round the clock. I was very glad that you declined
the title. For this you do not have to regard the Government an enemy
nor condemn the title. As for me, I certainly look upon titles as bad in
our present condition.

From the Hindi original: C. W. 6124. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

91. LETTER TO MOTIBEHN CHOKSI 1
ASHRAM,

Sunday, Chaitra Vad 14 [April 11, 1926]
CHI. MOTI,

I have your letter, but I may say it is rather late this time. The
handwriting is not as good as in your previous letter.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 12124

92. LETTER TO MOTIBEHN CHOKSI
Sunday, April 11, 1926
CHI. MOTI,

Now at last a letter form you. I always knew your ways and I
had also spoken to Lakshmindas about my fears. There is a couplet in
Sanskrit which says: A man of honour prefers death to disohonour2 .
A man of honour is one who cherishes self-respect. It is our appointed
task to overcome temptation. How could you eat coal with the same
1
In place of the subscription, the letter carries the note: Written by Mani on
behalf of Poojya Bapuji.”
2
Bhagavad Gita, II, 34

58

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

mouth which had chewed betel? You should remember that your lapse
will severely affect others. Think how it will pain your elders and
know that you will have nothing left by way of self-respect. I believe
the craze for jewels is only a cover for the desire for sensual pleasures.
At the moment you may not see it but the snake is under the carpet. If
it were not, the desire for jewels would never have arisen. Man devotes
himself to learning and other activities lest he should fall into such
temptations. Do you not want to serve the Antyajas? To wash the feel
of the poor? Can these tasks be done with jewels on your person? I
have only this advice. Cast off your temptation looking upon it as so
much dirt. I have shown your letter to no one. I do not propose to
read it even to Lakshmidas and have therefore destroyed it. I shall wait
for your serious resolution. But if you cannot resolve do not at all
deceive yourself. May God help you.

BAPU

[PS.]
Bhai Najuklal,
This covers everything. Time is running out, so I do not write
separately to you.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 12125

93. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
April 12, 1926
DEAR SATIS BABU,

I have your letter about Assam. I see you and Shankerlal are not
[at] one. The appointment of Rajendra Babu was my suggestion. I
knew that the Assam workers were prejudiced against you, nothing
could be spent there without some responsible party taking charge. I
therefore suggested that Rajen Babu should report. I knew nothing of
the previous day’s conversation. I shall inquire when I see Shankerlal.
I am just not writing this to tell you of the hand I had in appointing
Rajen Babu. And I write so that to the extent that it is possible you
may revise your view about Shankerlal. I am anxious that the Council
should act as one man. I am aware of Shankerlal’s limitations. He is
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

59

hasty, emotional, nervous, forgetful. But he has a heart of gold. He is
an able organizer. He loves khadi. We must bear one another’s
burdens. I write this during the week of purification and on Monday.
I want you to be perfect. But we cannot be anything mechanically.
This must therefore be taken for what it is worth.
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 1558

94. LETTER TO K. T. PAUL 1
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 13, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. When Mr. Buchman met me my inclination
was all towards not attending the Convention; but I left it then an open
question because of his insistance. Since then, I have not made much
advance. But a few friends with whom I have discussed the thing
favour the idea of my accepting the invitation. The motive is mixed.
Probably, the stronger reason with them is that the voyage and outing
may benefit me physically. With me the only determining factor
should be whether I can render any service, in other words whether
God wants me to go. I have no clear light. I propose therefore to leave
it to you as a friend to decide. And in advising me or coming to a
decision on my behalf you will naturally bear in mind all I am about
to say.
You know my strange dress. It is not possible for me to alter it
materially. I can make such alterations as would be required by the
weather conditions. I do not know how far this consideration is lekely
to weigh with you but I felt that you should know this.
If I am wanted for making speeches, I shall be useless. The only
way I might be of service would be heart-to-heart conversations with
the students. My real work consists in these conversations. Speech
making I regard as the least important of my activities. I made this
quite clear to Mr. Buchman.
1
In repely to his letter dated 6-4-1926 requesting Gandhiji “to consider an
invitation to the World Conference of the Young Men’s Christian Association . . . to
be held this coming August in Helsingfors, Finland,” (S. N. 11341)

60

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

My food is also a bother. I am not merely a vegetarian but my
dietary is restricted. The principal article of food is goat’s milk. And
if you have to arrange for the passage and so on, this very
inconvenient detail has to be looked to.
If I am to go, there will be one companion, possibly two.
If you come to the conclusion that I should accept the invitation,
please let me know when one has to start, how long will the
Convention last, who is to arrange for the passports? Are there to be
any conditions attached to the passports?
I am here up to the 22nd instant. I leave for Mussoorie on the
22nd. Please tell me who is this Central Committee that sends the
invitation. Who is the President and who is the Secretary? Needless to
say I shall make no statement to the Press about your letter. As a
matter of fact I was disturbed even when I saw the first reference in the
papers. I avoided the pressmen for some time. And I made the
guarded statement that I did when I saw no escape from some
statement.

From a photostat : S. N. 11342

95. LETTER TO MAHASUKH
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Tuesday, April 13, 1926
BHAISHRI MAHASUKH,

Your letter. I congratulate you on stating some of your doubts.
But you should not resent the answers which you have asked for from
the addressee; and never doubt his sincerity. Otherwise, we had better
not write to a person whose word we doubt. Why do you say that what
I wrote to you was so much jugglery of words? How do you say that I
was on the look-out for swaraj or some such movement? Let me
repeat to you that I gave you a well-considered answer and I believe
every word of it. And I ask you to accept my word as the truth.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S. N. 10884

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

61

96. LETTER TO BHAGAWANDAS BRAHMACHARI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Tuesday, April 13, 1926
BHAI BHAGAWANDAS BRAHMACHARI,

I have your letter. I follow [what you say] regarding Sanskrit. I
can think of nothing to say in the matter. “Vegetarian” is an
imperfect expression because the ordinary Western vegetarians take
milk and eggs; they do not take fish. They have therefore already
coined a neologism, viz., VEM diet, i.e., vegetables, eggs and milk.
Ordinary vegetarians do not take fish; they take onion. They do not
make it a point to give up garlic. The expression “sattvik” 1 die will
not do. Because those who take chillies cannot be regarded as sattvik
eaters and many meat-eaters will take meat claiming it as sattvik. I
have selected the expression annahar keeping in mind the special
meaning of the word anna, which includes all that we eat barring
meat, etc. Of course this definition too is rather wide, but I have found
annahar better than all expressions I have come across till now.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S. N. 10885-A

97. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Tuesday, April 13, 1926
BHAISHRI CHHAGANLAL,

I have your letter. Bhai Bhansali told me that you had fever. Be
careful. I see that the illness was not there before or during the
holidays. I did guess you would need more money; if the need is not
urgent we may discuss it when you come here. In the meanwhile I
shall certainly talk to Kishorelal and others. Do not hesitate to write to
me if there is any urgency.
I must continue to be silent about Shivjibhai of Madhada. I
continue to get indignant letters from which I can imagine what must
be going on. How can my silence be exploited? If I am not upset by
their attempts at exploitation they, not I, will stand to lose. If you must
1

62

Pure, clear
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

think of ‘transmigration’, try to think of it as blissful. We grieve only
because of our ignorance and weakness.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S. N. 19452

98. LETTER TO NARGIS CAPTAIN
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 14, 1926
I was thankful to receive your letter and to hear that Perin was
better and more cheerful. I wish she could have stayed longer with
you. I am sure that fasting would be good for your headache. It is a
superstition to think that lean people cannot fast.
I do not want you in Mussoorie. If you will only go to Kashmir
even for two months, I am sure you will benefit by the visit. I am not
likely to stay in Mussoorie beyond the middle of June if so much. Is
Dr. Bahadurji still spinning ? When they do come please remember
me to him and to Manekbai.
Yours,

MRS. N ARGIS C APTAIN
P UNCHGANI
From a microfilm : S. N. 19458

99. LETTER TO MOTILAL
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Wednesday, April 14, 1926
BHAI MOTILAL,

I have your letter and Rs. 101 for khadi work. Thank you.
From a copy of the Gujarati : S. N. 19453-R

100. LETTER TO LABHSHANKAR MEHTA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Wednesday, April 14, 1926
BHAISHRI LABHSHANKAR,

1. The English maxim you quote applies generally in the case
of ailments. One learns mostly from experience where to apply such
maxims.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

63

2. Never have I seen or heard of one becoming rich by
sweating. There is however a saying that everyone should sweat to
earn his livelihood.
3. I do not think it is right to say that the principles
propounded in Hind Swaraj are not workable just because I cannot
practise them perfectly. The maxim that you quote can certainly not
apply to me, because not only do I refuse to excuse myself, but
positively confess my shortcoming.
4. If you must make a distinction between a vow and a
resolve, the vow is certainly worthier. It is a resolve that cannot be
given up. A resolve that can be is worthless.
5. I do not understand your fifth question. Is there really any
principle behind the Latin proverb you quote? What could it mean?
6. I cannot appreciate the relationship that you describe.
7. I regard the study of astronomy as essential.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S. N. 10883

101. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Wednesday, April 14, 1926
CHI. RAMDAS,

No letter from you after your last postcard. I may be said to
have some leisure today because the Week is over. I have been,
however, busy with the Committee meetings as soon as the Week was
over. The Parishad Committee met yesterday; and again today. Now
the Vidyapith Committee.
Devdas has arrived today; he had quite an attack of jaundice. He
has gone very weak. One cannot bear to look at him, but the jaundice
is now subsiding. His bowels are cleared; so he will get well in a short
time. Pyarelal has been sent to Deolali. I intend to take Devdas to
Mussoorie. I am eager to know what could be accomplished there
during this Week. They have done a good job here. Kanti, Keshu,
Krishnadas, the Antyaja student Keshavlal, Somabhai, Jaisimha and
others spun for about ten hours daily and some of them for 22 hours,
which means they slept hardly for an hour. In 22.5 hours Keshu spun
9119 tars, i.e., 12024 yards. This is very good speed. Keshu’s yarn
was 17 counts. Ba also spun quite a lot. One day Manu spun more
64

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

than a thousand [tars].
I hope you are well. Devchandbhai and others will most
probably leave today.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S. N. 19454

102. LETTER TO PRATAPSIMHA
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Wednesday, Second Chaitra Sud 2 [April 14, 1926] 1
KUMARSHRI PRATAPSIMHAJI,

The [Working] Committee of the Kathiawar Political Conference met today. I hoped to have the reply to my letter before this.
But since I did not, I could not give satisfactory answers to the
members of the Committee. I have to leave for Mussoorie on the
22nd. I shall be obliged if I can have your reply before I leave.

From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S. N. 19455

103. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Wednesday, April 14, 1926
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,

The Parishad’s [Working] Committee have resolved to take over
the Amreli Centre, and they have further resolved to convert it into a
trust. There was much discussion. Credit to the account of the
Conference whatever commission falls due to Gariyadhar and panch
Talawadi. Do not clear any dues in cash.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S. N. 19456

1

From the reference to the meeting of the Kathiawar Political Conference and
Gandhiji’s proposed trip to Mussoorie
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

65

104. LETTER TO ADAMSALEH A. PATEL
ASHRAM,

April 14, 1926
BHAI ADAMSALEH ALIBHAI,

You have left me far behind. I have undertaken to reform a
single person, and that is my own self. And I realize how difficult it is
to reform him. Now, need I answer your questions?
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS GANDHI
S JT. A. A. P ATEL
P ANOLI
DISTRICT BROACH
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S. N. 19901

105. LETTER TO QUAYAM ALI M. SALEMWALA
ASHRAM,

April 14, 1926
BHAISHRI QUAYAM ALI,

I have your letter. The site of the Jallianwala Bagh was
purchased with the help of the funds raised for the purpose. The site
was cleared to make room for the park. No memorial has been raised
because the circumstances in the country are not favourable.
How can we raise the edifice of freedom while we undermine its
foundations? The trustees, I believe, fight shy of a memorial because
they have this fear.

S HRI QUAYAM ALI MOHAMAD ALI S ALEMWALA
C/ O MOHAMAD ALI & S ONS
S OMERSET S TREET, C AMP
KARACHI
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S. N. 19902

66

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

106. “THE TAKLI TEACHER”
This is the title of a booklet covering 80 pages issued by the AllIndia Spinners’ Association, Ahmedabad, and prepared at its instance
by Messrs Richard B. Gregg and Maganlal K. Gandhi. It contains 23
clear, well-thought-out illustrations showing the different forms of
takli and the various positions in handling this simple little instrument
of household use and national importance. It gives accurate hints on
spinning by the takli, so that anybody who will read the booklet
carefully can master the art of spinning by the takli. It also dwells
upon the different uses to which the takli can be put and compares the
advantages of the takli over the charkha in some instances. It also
teaches how to make a takli and winds up with historical information
about this instrument which enabled the spinners of Dacca to spin the
finest yarn, the like of which no machine has yet been able to
produce. There are valuable hints which are useful to the spinner both
on the takli and on the charkha.
Of the educational value of the takli, the writers explain that it
develops in the spinner patience, persistence, concentration, selfcontrol, calmness, realization of importance and value of detail, ability
to do more than one thing at a time, making one of them so habitual
that its control and operation are almost unconscious, sensitiveness,
sureness and delicacy of touch and of muscular control and coordination, realization of value of cumulative and sustained individual
effort even though separate efforts be of short duration; thus a
realization of the value of co-operative work, self-respect and selfreliance arising from recognition of one’s ability to create something
of economic value useful to oneself, to one’s family, to the school and
to the village, province or nation. There are several other values
mentioned in this short chapter which the reader interested in the
national spinning movement may see for himself in the book.
The publishers invite criticism of the book from those who are
versed in the art of spinning on the takli, and they would welcome any
suggestion, advice or information that may be sent to them so as to
enable them to incorporate them in a future edition.
The book is being simultaneously published in Hindi with the
same illustrations and the same get up. Whether in Hindi or English,
the book can be had at the Ashram, Sabarmati, on payment of Rs. 7
including postage.
I hope that every takli teacher in municipal and national schools
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

67

where takli has been introduced will procure the book for his own
guidance and that of his pupils.
Young India, 15-4-1926

107. PANDIT NEHRU AND KHADDAR
Pandit Motilalji has never been persona grata with The Times of
India. The latest offence committed by him is that of hawking
khaddar in Allahabad where only a few years ago he could hardly be
seen going anywhere except in his grand motor car. But in the elegant
language of the writer: “Even in India it must be recognized that
Pandit Nehru is mak-ing an ass of himself.” It is to be wished that
many leaders will follow Panditji and earn the title that has been so
courteously bestowed upon Panditji by The Times of India. It is
generally time to rejoice when one receives a curse from opponents.
Their praises should make one cautious. The Romans feared the
Greeks especially when they brought gifts.
The Times’ writer has out-done himself in showing his contempt
for the Congress, khaddar and Congressmen. I must let the reader
judge for himself. The writer says :
The completeness of the Congress collapse, the utter futility of the socalled Congress creed, and the total absence among Congress supporters of a
single reasonable political idea are illustrated by a telegram despatched in all
earnestness from Allahabad.

The Writer then proceeds :
If the British public learnt that Lord Birkenhead, wearing a Union Jack
waistcoat, had been selling true blue Tory rosettes beneath the lions in
Trafalgar Square, that Mr. Baldwin had been promoting Empire industries by
hawking trays of British toys in Piccadilly, that Mr. Ramsay Macdonald,
attired in corduroys and a muffler, had been disposing of red flags among the
workers in Limehouse, or that the Clydeside Bolshevists had set up a stall on
Clydeside for the sale of miniature sickles and hammers, the unanimous
conclusion of all classes would be that their leaders had gone mad.

The inference naturally is that the distinguished hawkers of
khaddar such as Pandit Nehru and Mr. Rangaswami Iyengar who
accompanied him in his hawking have gone mad. The language used
by the writer is not only insulting but it is also highly misleading.
What possible comparison can there be between “true blue Tory
rosettes” hawked by a British Tory and khaddar which, rightly or
68

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

wrongly, represents to thousands of Indians an emblem of a real bond
between the classes and the masses? For only by khaddar the classes,
through whom the British Government holds sway over the toiling
dumb millions, could make some little return to the masses, for the
bleeding process which the latter have to undergo in order to feed the
British Government. The insult has been possible only because the
fashion has been set by the Liberal politicians to belittle khadi and all
it means. Who does not remember that at the time the War broke out,
young and old, men and women, great and small, in fact all who were
not enlisted or could not be enlisted as soldiers, were expected to sew,
as a matter of fact did sew, garments for the wounded soldiers who
were received in the various hospitals? People at that time vied with
one another in doing this little service and those who did not know
how to stitch were thankful if they received preliminary training from
their neighbours. All distinctions were erased in the face of
the
awful calamity that had overtaken the British people. I make bold to
say that if it was patriotic and necessary for everyone to do the sewing
and hundreds of other odd jobs which in ordinary life they never did,
it is a thousand times necessary and patriotic for every Indian to wear
khaddar to the exclusion of all foreign cloth and thus find the only
occupation, that is, of hand-spinning, which is possible for the millions
of India to undertake.
We read in English books that when a movement is ridiculed by
its opponents, it may be said to be making headway and when it
excites the anger of their opponents, it is said to be producing the
desired effect. If The Times of India at all represents British public
opinion, khaddar is evidently producing the desired effect.
The writer of the article in question assures the readers that “the
Allahabad public does not want the Congress grave-clothes”, as he
has called khaddar, “any more than they are wanted in any other part
of India”. If so it is difficult to understand all the contempt poured
upon khaddar. But it is for the Congress leaders to prove that khaddar
is not the “grave-clothes” of the Congress but that it establishes an
unbreakable link between the Congress and the masses and thus
makes the former more representative than it ever has been.
In fairness, however, to Europeans, let me say that in the
venomous abuse of khaddar, The Times of India writer by no means
represents the general European opinion. I know several Europeans in
India who believe in the message of khaddar and some who use it
themselves. Its message has even reached Europe. Here is a letter from
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

69

a professor from far-off Poland regarding khaddar :
Do you not think it would be a good thing if an attempt were made to sell
Indian tissues in Europe to friends of India? I might try on a small scale here if
you send me tissues of your cloth with indication of prices in English currency
and an English address to which the money could be sent. I think that even if
the amount of sales would not be very great, it would be useful for propaganda
and I hope that many people at least in Poland would be proud and happy to
wear Indian cloth in order to show their sympathy with your work. . . This is
perhaps the most efficient way to gain universal sympathy for the
emancipation of India. I could not easily undertake to spin myself but I can
undertake to go from house to house and encourage the buying of Indian cloth
even if it is more expensive than our own products.

Young India, 15-4-1926

108. WHAT IS IT LIKE?
An Englishman writing to his relatives in London thus gives vent
to his feelings after having been in New York for 48 hours:
It is all quite true—skyscrapers, iced water, elevators express to the 25th
floor, subways, Negroes; I never quite believed it before. But that’s all I know.
I have been here 48 hours—never such a 48 hours before —Ican’t last much
longer. I’ve been walked about, talked at, dined, lunched, theatred; I’m so
tired, I can hardly see. Incredible, inconceivable. My timetable is arranged to
the minute—I am telephoned to wherever I am to see that I am moving on the
next engagement. By a subterfuge I have escaped. I am to go out to dinner in
an hour or so. You must not expect anything more than postcards. It’s very
cold out-freezing-while it boils within. My head goes into solution in these
temperatures.

Englishmen will sympathize with me when I say that I felt about
as uncomfortable reaching London for the first time as the writer of
the foregoing did on reaching New York. And I know that a villager
going to Bombay feels similarly bewildered and lost in finding
himself in the midst of the hubbub and bustle of Bombay.
Young India, 15-4-1926

70

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

109. NOTES
‘T HE MORALS OF MACHINERY’ 1
The Current Thought for February has reproduced Mr. Richard
B. Gregg’s letter to a friend on the “Morals of Machinery” Mr.
Gregg is an ex-American lawyer with a wide experience of his own
country. He has lived in the midst of the very things he describes in
his letter and has at one time in his life contributed to their growth. He
therefore writes with authority. He says :
Most people accept mechanism for its immediatey results and are quite
blind to the secondary results of slower growth. But these latter are the most
important.

He then recounts in detail the evils of multiplication of
mach-inery. He puts ‘enormous concentration of material power and
wealth in the hands of the few’ first in the list. Mr. Gregg truly says :
Machinery and modern industry have taken the money of millions of
people and concentrated its management and control into relatively few hands
and modern developments of banking and credit have concentrated the control
of all the materials and factories and mills into still fewer hands.

Do we not see this process going on even in our own country at
the cost of the millions who are being bled white in order to support
huge industries thousands of miles away from their cottages? Mr.
Gregg says :
Probably the real, ultimate control of industry in Europe, America and most of
Asia and Africa is concentrated in the hands of not over 1,500 men, perhaps
fewer still.
Such tremendous power is a temptation which human nature cannot
withstand. It involves tyranny, vanity, pride, greed, selfishness, ruthless
competition on the one side, loss of liberty, insecurity, fears, loss of selfreliance and of independence, degradation, poverty, loss of dignity and selfrespect on the other.
Deaths, maiming and crippling by industrial accidents far exceed
corresponding injuries by war. Diseases and physical deterioration caused
directly and indirectly by modern industry are appalling. For, it is industry
that has caused the development of large cities with their smoke, dirt, noise,
bad air, lack of sunshine and out-door life, slums, disease, prostitution, and
1

Dictated on 11-4-1926; vide “Letter to Richard B. Gregg”, 11-4-1926.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

71

unnatural living.

The waste in advertisements is truly “appalling”.
The President of the British Incorporated Society of Advertisement
Consultants recently estimated that the annual expenditure on advertisements
for the British Isles alone is £ 175, 000, 000. ! ! !

Another striking feature is “parasitism”
Man is made to obey the machine. The wealthy and middle classes
become helpless and parasitic upon the working classes. And the latter
become so specialized that they also become helpless. The ordinary city
dweller cannot make his own clothing or produce or prepare his own food. The
cities become parasitic upon the country. Industrial nations upon agricultural
nations. Those who live in temperate climates are increasingly parasitic upon
tropical peoples. Governments upon the peoples they govern. Armies upon
civilians. People even become parasitic and passive in regard to their
recreation and
amusements. They want to be amused, insted of amusing
themselves. They throng the cinemas and theatres and music halls. They watch
others play cricket, etc.
Along with this parasitism has come widespread irresponsibility. The
industrial “magnate” or banker issues an order in Europe which affects vitally
the lives of Negroes in Central Africa.

The consumers, too, fare no better. They too cease to feel the
responsibility. Mr. Gregg exclaims :
When I, seated in a restaurant in France, put some pepper in my soup, do I stop
to think what poor coolie in Java, perchance, endured the hard-ship of
gathering it, while subject to a fever, and perhaps to the indignities and
brutality of harsh plantation supervision?

I must however resist the temptation to quote more from this
instructive letter. I must ask the reader to see the original if the
samples I have put before him have whetted his appetite for more. The
reader must not think that Mr. Gregg is against all machinery. He is
against its uncontrolled multiplication. He would regulate and restrain
its use as we regulate or ought to regulate and curb our passions. That
use of machinery is lawful which subserves the interests of all.

HOW TO HELP?
An Indian correspondent living in London writes :
Every person asks me how people who live in America, Germany,
France, Italy, as well as England can help the Indian cause? What can they do

72

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to help us in our fight for swaraj? They ask further what can India teach the
world? Has she any message to the people who are fighting? And, if so, what
can she contribute towards creating world peace?

The first question is easily answered. If even God only helps
those who help themselves, how would people, imperfect as they are,
help one another unless they are prepared to help themselves? But
after all there is something in creating a sane world opinion. There is
no doubt that that opinion is daily growing in influence. The chapters,
which I am reproducing 1 in a somewhat condensed form from Mr.
Page’s pamphlet, show clearly how people were led into error by miseducation. They were fed during the War on diabolical lies by their
respective governments. I have therefore suggested to every European
friend who has been good enough to visit the Ashram to study our
movement, not from newspaper reports, which are ill-informed where
they are not interested, but from original writings. It grieves me to
have to say that the British Government agency, both public and
secret, is spreading a wholly incorrect view of the situation. No Indian
patriotic agency can possibly overtake the lies spread by this highly
organized and lavishly paid secret service from whose attention even
the great Poet2 of Asia, indeed of the world, has not been free. It is
only impartial and sober representatives of the respective European
countries and America who can, if at all, controvert the statements that
are being braoadcast on behalf of the British Government.
The second question is more difficult to answer.
If the question had been, what has India taught to the world, I
could have referred the questioner to Max Muller’s book What Can
India Teach Us?. But the question here put is not in terms of the past
of India but in terms of her present. I must then frankly confess that
at the present moment India can teach the world little. She is trying to
develop ability to vindicate her liberty by means strictly non-violent
and truthful. Some of us who are in movement have an undying faith
in those means, but it is not possible in an instant to transmit that faith
to people outside India. It is not possible to say that that faith is even
the common property of educated India. But there is no doubt that if
India succeeds in regaining her liberty through non-violent means,
she would have delivered her message to the others who are fighting
1
2

Vide “Notes”, 26-11-1925.
Rabindranath Tagore

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

73

for it, and what is perhaps more, she would have made the largest
contribution yet known to world peace.

MONTHLY KHADI RETURNS
The following1 are the figures for production and sale, so far as
available, of khadi during the month of January. I do hope that the
other provinces or institutions which have not yet sent in their returns
will do so without delay, so as to make the figures up to date.
The figures of Andhra are incomplete, only 25 out of 61
organi-zations having sent their reports to the provincial office.
Bombay figures include only the sales of the Princess Street Khadi
Bhandar, and the Charkha Sangh Bhandar, 14, Dadi Seth Agyari
Lane, Kalba- devi Road, and of the Rashtriya Stree Sabha. The
figures for the Sandhurst Road Khadi Bhandar are not available. The
Bengal figures include those of the Khadi Pratishthan and of the
Abhoy Ashram. The Tamilnad figures are complete and the sale
figures have been corrected so as to avoid duplication due to sales to
branch depots and the like. U.P. figures represent only those of the
Gandhi Ashram, Banaras, and Cawnpore Bhandar. The Allahabad
Bhandar figures are not available but its average sales amount to about
Rs. 700 per month. In Delhi only the figures of Sjt. Chiranjilal
Pyarelal, Hapur, are given, the figures of the Swaraj Ashram and the
Khadi Bhandar of Sjt. Bishambhar Dayal being not yet available.
Young India, 15-4-1926

110. LETTER TO K. VENKATESAN
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 15, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. Sorry, it is not possible to let you have Young
India free of charge. But if you will send half the subscription, i.e.,
1

Rs. 2 2 , I shall ask the Manager to send your Society a copy.
I am afraid none of my books has been printed in English at the
Navajivan Press. They have all been published by different publishers.
1

74

Not reproduced here
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I shall therefore suggest your writing to them for free copies or at
advantageous rates.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. K. VENKATESAN
HONORARY S ECRETARY
ANDHRA DRAMATIC AND LITERARY S OCIETY
QUARTER NO. 9 M. R OAD
P. O. J AMSHEDPUR
(VIA) TATANAGAR, B. N. RY.
From a microfilm : S. N. 19457

111. LETTER TO S. NAGASUNDARAM
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 15, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. You may make what use you like of my previous letter1 to
you.

M. K. GANDHI
S JT. S. N AGASUNDARAM
LAKSHMINIVAS BUILDING
MATUNGA
From the original : S. Nagasundaram Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

112. LETTER TO DHAN GOPAL MUKERJEE2
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 16, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I wrote to you at the address that was given by
you. You are right in surmising that I do not encourage your coming
1

Dated April 11, 1926 vide “Letter to S. Nagasundaram”, 11-4-1926.
In reply to the addressee’s letter in which he wrote : “About three weeks ago I
got your cablegram saying ‘Await Letter’. I have not had any word from you since . . .
I am afraid it brings me the word that I am not to see you—at lease not yet. . . why
have they stopped sending me the paper ? . . . Will you kindly ask the manager to
write me regarding my subscription? Let him send me your memoir from the first
issue.” (S. N. 12465)
2

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

75

specially for the purpose of gathering materials for writing the
proposed biography.
I am writing to the Manager, Young India, to give him your
instructions. Thank you. I am quite well. And the rest from constant
travelling that I am giving myself is doing me a great deal of good.
Yours sincerely,

DHAN G. M UKERJEE
1904, T IMES BUILDING
TIMES S QUARE
NEW YORK C ITY
From a photostat : S. N. 12465

113. LETTER TO GIR RAJ KISHORE
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 16, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I congratulate you on your decision not to remarry.
I do not know that you will be happy here. This is a place
where hard toil is required of every inmate. One has to commence
with cleaning night-soil buckets, agricultural labour, etc., and end with
becoming an expert carder, spinner and weaver. Of my own personal
guidance you can have but little. If such life would suit you, it will be
possible to take you as soon as the pressure which is great here at
present is removed.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. G IR R AJ KISHORE
C/ O S JT. A NANDILALJI
S TATION MASTER
MORAK, B. B. AND C. I. R Y.
From a microfilm : S. N. 19459

114. LETTER TO G. K. DEVADHAR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 16, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your two letters. I explained the contents to Manorama.
She says she will wait for a reply from Mrs. Devadhar to whom at
your instance she has written. She seems to be somewhat unwilling to
move out. But if you or Mrs. Devadhar write to her probably she
76

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

would go to the Seva Sadan.
I know that she will never be able by remaining here to earn as
much as she can by finishing the course there and I have told her so
too. But probably being just now comfortable here she does not want
to move out unless she has something definite from you for as soon as
I mentioned your letters to her, she said she had not heard anything
from you directly and that she was waiting for a reply from Mrs.
Devadhar, who I hope is quite all right and who, you should tell her, is
free to come to the Ashram as her own home whenever she feels
inclined.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S. N. 19460

115. LETTER TO DR. SURESH CHANDRA BANNERJEE
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 16, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

The notice of the Abhoy Ashram prices had led to
correspondence like the enclosed. Do you want to cater for orders
from outside? If so, please correspond with the writer and let me know
so that others who have written may be informed accordingly.
I hope that you were able to get the money in Bombay without
any difficult.
Yours sincerely,

DR. S URESH C HANDRA BANNERJEE
ABHOY ASHRAM
C OMILLA
From a microfilm : S. N. 19461

116. LETTER TO PYARELAL NAYYAR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 16, 1926
MY DEAR PYARELAL,

I have your letter. All things considered, unless Dr. Mehta sends
peremptory instructions perhaps it will be as well for Mathuradas to
remain in Deolali. But if he himself has the wish and the energy, I
know that Sinhgarh is an ideal place during May. He can have
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

77

absolutely separate accommodation there. He need not see anybody.
There is perfect quiet, no dust and it is very cool there. The water is
soft. Kaka has gained much by his having gone there. But the matter
is purely for Mathuradas to decide.
Devdas is here now. He is quite alright. He has been taking milk.
He looks very pale and weak but now that he is taking milk, he should
be soon strong and fit. Motilalji will probably be here next week. I
have gained one pound in weight during the week.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S. N. 19462

117. LETTER TO M. R. JAYAKAR
S ABARMATI,

April 16, 1926
DEAR MR. JAYAKAR,

I have your telegram in reply to mine. I have accordingly
telegraphed to Messrs Kelkar, Moonje and Aney. I add that I know
nothing more of this proposed conference beyond a telegram
received yesterday from Motilalji saying that he wanted this
conference, that I should choose the dates and wire them to you which
I did. Assuming that you knew all about it except for the dates. In
accordance with your telegrams I have sent wires to the three friends
giving Tuesday and Wednesday next. I am supposed to leave for
Mussoorie on the 22nd. If these dates are not suitable and my
presence is regarded necessary at the conference seeing that there will
be but a few invited, perhaps it can take place at Mussoorie.

M. K. G ANDHI
From a photostat : S. N. 19463

118. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Friday, April 16, 1926
BHAISHRI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I have your letter and the cheque for Rs. 26,000. I shall answer
your questions regarding the Hindu-Muslim riots, but the replies are
not for the Press. I have told you that I have no influence at all now
78

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

over the Hindus, at any rate over that class among them which interests
itself in these disturbances. My views, therefore, are misunderstood.
Hence I believe that it is best for me to say nothing.
If the Government has banned processions and it is necessary to take out one on some religious occasion, I would think it right
to do so despite the Government ban. But before starting the
procession, I would apologize to the Muslims. If they do not respond
even to such a courteous gesture, I should go ahead with the
procession and submit to any violence on their part. If I do not have
the strength for such non-violence, I should provide myself with
means for fighting before taking out the procession.
I would not dismiss grooms and other Muslim servants merely
because they are Muslims. But I would not retain a Muslim who was
not sincere in his work or behaved rudely to me. I do not believe that
the Muslims are more markedly ungrateful than members of any
other community, but I have observed that they lose temper more
quickly. It seems to me altogether wrong not to have a Muslim simply
because he is a Muslim.
Those Hindus who do not approve of the non-violent way or are
not equipped to follow it should acquire the strength to fight it out
physically.
If the Government takes sides with the Muslims, Hindus need
not worry on that account. They should not care for the Government.
They should fend for themselves, relying on their own strength
without seeking its favour. When the Hindus have cultivated sufficient
courage for this, the Government will on its own maintain an impartial
attitude, and the Muslims will not then look for its support. In seeking
the Government’s help, we neither serve our dharma nor give evidence of manhood. I would advise you to look at the matter dispassionately and go on with your work. That is in the best interests of
the Hindus, the only way of serving Hinduism, as I can say from my
long experience of not less than thiry-five years. I was very pleased
with your calm and brave attitude during the riots. You should keep
up that attitude and do what you think the situation calls for. If there
is anything in my reply which is not clear to you, please do write to
me again.
I propose to accept a part of the loan you have promised for the
All-India Spinners’ Association against the stocks in Bombay. The
Association has two godowns in Bombay. If you wish, you may take
possession of one of them and acquire sufficient stocks to cover the
loan to be kept there. If you agree, we should like you to keep even
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

79

more so that we may be saved rent on one godown. In that case, it
should be so arranged that we can draw from those stocks whenever
we want to. There will be frequent additions to or withdrawal from the
stocks which the Spinners’ Association will maintain besides what is
required by way of security, so that you will have to permit easy
access to them.
Yours,
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original : C. W. 6125. Courtesy : G. D. Birla

119. LETTER TO MANILAL DOCTOR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Friday, April 16, 1926
BHAISHRI MANILAL,

I have your letter. I had certainly thought that I would succeed
in persuading Jeki to give over custody of the children, but I realized
later that I had over-estimated my influence. I can carry out only that
arrangement on which both of you agree. My present effort,
therefore, is limited to getting some help. I do not agree with your
analysis at all. My experience is just to the contrary. Human failings
and weaknesses are to be found everywhere. Some of the weaknesses
of our people which you point out are the result of our slavery. And
this slavery has not been our lot for only a generation or so. However,
we need not enter into a discussion about that. You hold strong views
on the subject and I know it is beyond me to change them. I only
want that you should recover your equanimity and live in peace. I
know that you have suffered much in your life.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S. N. 10888-A

120. LETTER TO JAYAKUNWAR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Friday, April 16, 1926
CHI. JEKI,

I have your letter. I think I did what was necessary as soon as I
received the letter from the Ceylonese friends. I did send the papers to
Doctor, but I have not yet received his reply. I am writing again. I will
80

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

not fail to do my best. I am keeping well.
From a microfilm of the Gujrati : S. N. 10888-B

121. LETTER TO PRANJIVAN MEHTA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Friday, April 16, 1926
BHAISHRI PRANJIVAN,

I hope you got my earlier letter regarding Jeki. Herewith
another. I have also had a letter from Shri Manilal to the same effect.
Please decide soon about this matter. I have been awaiting your letter
for a long time. I got detailed reports about your health. I will most
probably leave for Mussoorie on the 22nd.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S. N. 19464

122. LETTER TO DAYALJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Friday, April 16, 1926
BHAISHRI DAYALJI,

I see from your letter that a meeting is soon to be held of all
those who contribute funds for the Vinay Mandir at Surat. Kindly
give them the following message on my behalf.
The Mandir’s [Managing] Committee has resolved to entrust its
administration to me for its better working and for the implementation
of the principles on which it was intended to run. I too, have agreed to
take over the administration, and am making arrangements to get a
special committee formed for the purpose in consultation with
Vallabhbhai. Everyone knows that I am not in a position personally to
look after the running of the Mandir. It is, therefore, necessary to have
some such agency as a committee. I have written to Shri Narahari to
accept its principalship till some other arrangement can be made. I am
discussing with the President, Shri Nrisimhaprasad what to do next. I
hope that our friends will continue to pay the contributions as
resolved by them in the year [19]20. I need not say that arrangements
will be made to maintain full accounts of the administration of the
school.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S. N. 19465

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

81

123. LETTER TO R. S. IYER
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 17, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter as also the yarn packet. The manager of the
Weaving Department tells me that it will take about one month before
the yarn can be woven. This department always remains crowded and
orders received from outside have to take their turn.
The charge of weaving cloth of 50" width is annas 612 per yard.
After receipt of your reply the order will be put in turn.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. R. S. I YER
C/ O “THE TIMES OF INDIA”
BOMBAY
From a microflim : S. N. 19471

124. LETTER TO KRISHNADAS
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 17, 1926
MY DEAR KRISHNADAS,

I was wondering why you were silent all these days. Now I
know. Nothing exciting to report from here. Devdas was suffering
from jaundice; therefore, he has come here and Pyarelal has gone to
take his place at Deolali. Prabhudas has returned from Lonavala. He
still needs careful attention. Devdas is much better now but he is very
much pulled down. Jamna Behn has just come in today with Eshwant
Prasad. Mira is getting on quite well. She is doing her Hindi regularly
with Surendra. I hope you are getting Young India and Navajivan
regularly.
Yours,

S JT. K RISHNADAS
DARBHANGA
From a microfilm : S. N. 19472

82

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

125. LETTER TO N. C. KELKAR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 17, 1926
DEAR MR. KELKAR,

I have your wire in reply to which I have sent the following:
“Do come. Man proposes God disposes.”
I had no idea of this informal conference. Panditji telegraphed
to me saying I should fix dates convenient for me before leaving for
Mussoorie and inform him and Mr. Jayakar of the dates. I wired
accordingly to both of them and Mr. Jayakar of the dates. I wired
accordingly to both of them and Mr. Jayakar wired to me saying he
would come but that I should send my own wires to you, Dr. Moonje,
and Mr. Aney which I did. Whether the conference will be fruitful or
not will depend on the mode that guides us all when we meet. I have
not heard from Panditji as to what he proposes to do or what he
expects, or on what basis he has decided this informal conference.
I have just now received wires from Dr. Moonje and Mr. Aney
that they will attend. Mr. Aney’s says that friends in Bengal and
elsewhere should also be invited. But I presume Panditji has issued
invitations himself.
Hoping to have the pleasure of meeting you on Tuesday.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. N. C. K ELKAR
“KESARI” OFFICE
P OONA
From a photostat : S. N. 19474

126. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA MUKERJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 17, 1926
DEAR SATIS BABU,

I was so delighted to receive your long letter and another from
Krishna. I shall read the pamphlet you have sent me and let you have
my opinion on it.
I hope that this visit to Darbhanga will restore you completely.
Yes, the Hindu-Muslim question has to solve itself. God’s ways are
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

83

inscrutable and I believe in complete non-interference where there is
no definite light from within.
I expect to leave for Mussoorie on the 22nd instant.
Yours sincerely,
From microfilm : S. N. 19475

127. LETTER TO GOVINDJI PITAMBER
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, April 17, 1926
BHAI GOVINDJI PITAMBER,

I have your letter. All the steps in the ceremony besides
Saptapadi, from the installation of Ganesh to the Vedic sacrifice, were
performed in the Ashram precincts, in fact on the Ashram lawns. I
think it will be difficult to send Shastriji from here. See if you can
make arrangements at Morvi. If you don’t succeed, you may write to
me. I shall then try my best. I do not have with me a printed copy of
all the ritual [verses] which formed part of the ceremony performed
here. I propose to get them printed. But that will take some time.
Please explain this patiently to the visitors from Maliya. I shall be able
to send you the verses used in the ceremony here, in case any
Brahmin there comes forward to officiate.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S. N. 10889

128. LETTER TO NAJUKLAL N. CHOKSI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, April 17, 1926
BHAI NAJUKLAL,

Please treat this letter as meant for you both. I was, and am still,
so busy that I am surprised I could dictate even a couple of lines.1 But
I remembered the saying “Rather than have no uncle at all, it is better
to have someone whom one may call uncle.” I contented myself with
two lines. That apart, when I think of Moti’s nature and the line and
a half she has written, surely I must regard my two lines more than
sufficient ! And you gave her a new name, more pompous than the
1

84

Vide “Letter to Motibehn Choksi”, 11-4-1926.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

one she boasted. When Sukanya 1 wrote letters, even grown-up and
experienced men and women must have found something to learn
from them. When may I expect similar letters from this Sukanya ?
Well, you two may think over this and let me know. Does your
recovery mean you are restored to perfect health? See that you always
remain as fit as you are now. It seems we shall be leaving for
Mussoorie on the 22nd. Lakshmidas is touring Kathiawar. He will be
here on the 20th and most probably will accompany me. Moti seems
to be doing rather well at her English. I guess this from her
handwriting. But tell her that her Gujarati handwriting is still far from
being as neat as well-strung pearls2 .
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S. N. 12126

129. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, April 17, 1926
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,

Read the enclosed letter. If you need any hand there, take up
Vallabhji. I have known him a little and perhaps you also know him. I
think Ramdas knows him. You need not take him up just to employ
him. You may engage him only if you need a hand and find Vallabhji
suitable. If you decide to appoint him, please write to him directly and
also drop a line to me.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S. N. 19466

130. LETTER TO MANU
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, April 17, 1926
CHI. MANU 3 ,

I learnt that you were very ill. Since then I have been keeping
1
2
3

A young princess who volunteered to marry the old and infirm rishi Chyavan
Literally, “Moti” means a pearl.
Son of Prof. Trivedi; vide “Its Meaning”, 27-5-1926

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

85

myself informed about your health through visitors. I was recently
told by Swami Anand that you are now almost normal, and have learnt
it again today from Shri Chandrakant’s letter. I have not forgotten
your many services to me when I was in hospital nor your majestic
gait, nor your ever-smiling face. May God restore you to complete
health and grant you a long life dedicated to the service of the
country.
From the microfilm of the Gujarati : S. N. 19468

131. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANT
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, April 17, 1926
BHAISHRI CHANDRAKANT,

I got your letter, as also the cheque for Rs. 500. I was glad to
hear that my argument had appealed to mother. I shall utilize the
amount only to help victims of famine who can do a little work. I had
learnt that Chi. Manu was better now. I inquire after him every time I
have visitors from that side. Since you have specially written about
him, I enclose a letter for him. Please pass it on to him.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S. N. 19467

132. LETTER TO PRABHALAKSHMI
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
Saturday, April 17, 1926
CHI. PRABHALAKSHMI,

I got your letter giving the story of your life. I could read it to
the end only yesterday. I got your second letter today. Your story is
distressing. I shall use the information on suitable occasions, leaving
out the names of places and persons. I think we should keep ourselves
within the limits of the four varnas, except when there are reasons to
the contrary. There will be no possibility of love springing up between
a man and a woman if from the very beginning their emotions are so
trained that they learn to regard such love as forbidden, as, for
instance, brother and sister. We may think of God as either a Being or
as Formless Essence. I think we may meditate upon the Formless
86

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Essence as satchidanand1 . Phalannahar 2 would be a rather difficult
and pretentious phrase. The best way is to take cooked grain to
include fruit. I should like you to be perfectly self-composed.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19469

133. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, April 17, 1926
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. You will need time to recover enough
strength. It will be some time before you are able to lift Dilip and yet
feel no strain. We have decided to go to Mussoorie by the metregauge
line. I think I must resist for the time being my desire to see you. Not
only will it take more time to go via Bombay, but there would be
other difficulties too. If I stay with you, I would not leave in a day. On
my way back, I am think- ing of returning to the Ashram via Deolali,
if you are there then. After my talk with Devdas, I have concluded that
you will stay on at Deolali. I would certainly be happy if you took
courage and came to Mussoorie. I know it would be rather difficult to
have Taramati with you there. But I will write to you again after I
reach Mussoorie and see how things there are. If, however, you can
consider going to Mussoorie independently of me, you will be very
welcome, and in that case it is not at all necessary for you to wait for
my decision. Jamnalalji comes here tomorrow. I intend to discuss this
matter with him too. In case you decide to come, there is no need for
you to bring along your cook and other servants. You need not be
scared of the hospital at Juhu. The decision to leave this place on the
22nd stands for the present. Motilalji, Jayakar and others are holding
their discussions here on Tuesday and Wednesday. I cannot tell if this
will delay my departure.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S. N. 19470

1
2

Absolute existence, consciousness and bliss
Diet of fruit and grain

VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

87

134. MY “KAMADHENU” 1
I know that I have been ridiculed by some people for calling the
spinning-wheel a gateway to my salvation. But even so may, a person
who makes himself a little ball of clay, gives to it the imposing name
of Parthiweshwar Chintamani and concentrates on it all the faculties of
his being in the hope of “seeing God face to face” by that means, be
sneered at those who do not share his faith in the life-giving power of
his image. But would he, madly bent as he is on attaining selfrealization, give up his worship on this account? No. On the contrary
he will strive on without flagging till success crowns his efforts, as in
the end it must, while his detractors will only be the worse off for their
gibes. Similarly, if my conception of the spinning-wheel comes from
a pure heart, it will become to me the means of my salvation. A
faithful Hindu’s ears will automatically turn to the direction where
Ramanama is being repeated, and for the time being all the evil
passions will subside in him. What does it matter if the repetition of
that divine name fails to produce any impression on others? A Hindu
may not be in the least affected by the cry of Allah-o-Akbar, but a
Mussalman is roused by it. Similarly, a pious Englishman, the moment
he is reminded of the presence within him of God, will be able to
restrain his passions and compose him- self for the time being. As is
the spirit behind worship, so is the fruit thereof.
It follows then that even if the spinning-wheel be in itself
nothing, and the virtues that I have attributed to it exist only in my
imagination, it will still prove at least to me my Kamadhenu, i.e., Cow
of Plenty. I think of the poor of India every time that I draw a thread
on the wheel. The poor of India today have lost faith in God, more so
in the middle classes or the rich. For a person suffering from the
pangs of hunger, and desiring nothing but to fill his belly, his belly is
his God. To him anyone who gives him bread is his Master. Through
him he may even see God. To give alms to such persons, who are
sound in all their limbs, is to debase oneself and them. What they need
is some kind of occupation, and the occupation that will give
employment to millions can only be hand-spinning. But I can instill
my faith in the potency of hand-spinning in the minds of the toilers
of India not by making speeches but only by spinning myself.
Therefore, I have described my spinning as a penance or sacrament.
1

The Gujarati original of this appeared in Navajivan, 18-4-1926. This is an
translation by Mahadev Desai.

88

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

And, since I believe that where there is pure and active love for the
poor there is God also, I see God in every thread that I draw on the
spinning-wheel.

W HY SHOULD YOU SPIN?
So much for my conception of the spinning-wheel. If you can
accept my viewpoint, then nothing more remains to be desired. But it
is likely that it may not be acceptable to you. Even then there is a host
of reasons why you should spin. I give below only a few of them :
1. You can make others spin only if you spin yourself.
2. You can, by yourself spinning and giving your yarn to the
All-India Spinners’ Association, in the end help to make possible a
reduction in the prices of khadi.
3. By learning to spin, you can now or at any future time,
whenever you may wish, help the propaganda of spinning. Experience
has shown that those who are ignorant even of the alpha and omega of
the art of spinning are of no use for such work.
4. If you will yourself spin, the quality of spinning will
improve. Those who spin for wages must naturally be impatient. They
will continue to spin the count that they are accustomed to. The task
of imroving the count of yarn essentially belongs to the research
worker, the lover of spinning. This has been proved by experience. If
there had not arisen a class of spinners, including both men and
women, who spin purely out of a spirit of service the amazing
progress that has been achieved in the quality of yarn would not have
been possible.
5. If you spin, your talents can be utilized in effecting
improvements in the mechanism of the spinning-wheel. All the
improvements that have been made in the mechanism of the spinningwheel and the speed of spinning up till now are solely due to the
efforts of those devoted workers who spin for sacrifice.
6. The ancient art of India is today gradually suffering
extinction. Its revival to a very large extent depends on the revival of
hand-spinning. That there is art in spinning, those who have practised
it as a sacrament know well enough. During the Satyagraha Week, the
spinners would not tire of spinning at all. Of course, one of the
reasons why they did not feel any weariness was certainly the spirit in
which they had undertaken it. But, if there were no art in spinning, if
there were no music in it, it would have become impossible for those
young men who span for twenty-two and a half hours out of twentyVOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

89

four. It should be borne in mind in this connection that these spinners
were not induced to the effort by hope of gaining any prize. The
spinning was its own reward.
7. In our country manual labour is regarded as a low
occupation. Our poets have gone so far as to describe the happy rich
as never having to touch mother earth at all, so much so that hair
begins to grow on the soles of their feet! Thus the highest function
(body labour) to which a man is born and with which, the sages tell us,
Brahma created him, we have in fact looked down upon as something
mean and degrading. We should spin therefore if only to guard
against the pernicious tendency of regarding the toilers as being low
in the social scale. Spinning is therefore as obligatory on the prince as
on the peasant.

TO THE JUVENILES
All the foregoing reasons apply to you irrespective of the sex to
which you belong. But there are some additional reasons why you in
particular should spin. It is to these that I now want to draw your
attention :
1. How nice it would be for you to labour for the poor from
your childhood : spinning will nourish your sense of philanthropy in
the right way.
2. If you do your spinning at a fixed time every day you will
develop in you the sense of regularity. For, if you are regu- lar in
spinning, you will try to be regular in other things also, and it is the
universal experience that a boy with regular habits does twice the
amount of work that a boy does who works irregu- larly.
3. It will develop your sense of tidiness; for, without tidiness,
good yarn cannot be spun at all. You will have to keep your slivers
clean, your hands likewise clean and free from perspiration. You will
have to see also that the place around you is free from dust, etc. After
spinning you will have to wind your yarn tidily on the winding frame,
then carefully spray it and finally make it into a neat fine hank.
4. It will enable you to learn how to effect repairs in a simple
machine. Ordinarily boys and girls of India are not given this
training. If you are lazy and get your servant or some older relative to
clean your wheel for you, you will miss this training; but I have taken
it for granted that every child who sends or will send his yarn to the
All-India Spinners’ Association is fond of his wheel. Besides, a boy
who does his spinning with interest will master all the details about the
90

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

various parts of his spinning-wheel. A carpenter always cleans his own
tools. And, just as a carpenter who does not know how to clean his
own tools can hardly be ranked as a carpenter, similarly, a boy who
cannot prepare his own mal (winding string), make his own sari
(composition applied to the spindle where the mal touches it) or
prepare his spindle-holders, can hardly be called a spinner; he is only
the travesty of a spinner.
Young India, 20-5-1926

135. NOTES
“ P RANA-PRATISHTHA” INTO THE BHILS
Shri Amritlal proposes once again to hold a fair for the Bhils 1
on the forthcoming Rama-navami2 day. On that occasion a temple to
Ramachandra is to be declared open, that is, there will be pranapratishtha3 into the idol of Rama. Why may we not call it pranapratishtha into the Bhils? Shri Amritlal has shown us our duty towards
them. We hardly ever accept them as human beings. The Government
has also classified them as a scheduled tribe. Thus neither society nor
the Government takes interest in them. These so-called uncivilized
communities are bound to attract the attention of the missionaries, for
it is the latter’s duty to get recruits for the Christian Army. I do not
regard such proselytization as a real service to dharma. But how can
we blame the missionaries, if the Hindus take no interest in the Bhils?
For to them anyone who is brought into the Chris-tian fold, no matter
how, has become a Christian, has entered a new life and become
civilized. If, as a result of such conversion, the converts rise spiritually
or morally, I personally would have nothing to say against their
conversion. But I do not think that this is what happens. I, there-fore,
say that the prana-pratishtha into the idol in this temple will in fact be
prana-pratishtha into the Bhils themselves, for I suppose that they will
from that time onwards understand the holy power of the name Rama,
will feel God’s presence and resolve to give up eating meat and
drinking and be filled with new life. The building of the temple,
however, is but the beginning of our service to them, not its end.
There are many things we can do to serve them; but workers are few,
1
2
3

A tribe in Western and Central India
Birth-anniversary of Rama
Invocation of life

VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

91

and that is our misfortune.
HARDSHIP SUFFERED BY A WORKER SERVING “ ANTYAJAS”
A worker serving Antayajas writes :1
This is no ordinary problem for him. We cannot compliment the
young man enough for his determination. If he remains firm in his
decision and exercises self-control, God Himself will help him in his
difficulty. Only if we emerge successful from such ordeals do we
prove our sincerity in practising dharma and preserving it.
The correspondent seems to belong to the Vaisya class. It is our
good fortune that workers serving the cause of Antyajas come mostly
from the higher castes. Varnashrama is a part of dharma, but not so
the hundreds of sub-divisions of communities which exist today. They
are merely a matter of custom, and the custom has proved harmful in
many ways. Custom can be, ought to be, reformed. If the
correspondent does in fact belong to the Vaisya class, and if he shows
courage enough to look for a partner outside the particular sub-caste
to which he belongs, he will have a large field to choose from. It is
very necessary that people should follow a new custom and enter into
marriage alliances among the sub-divisions of the major castes of
Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras. That is, marriages should
be permitted in cricles among which, under the rules of Varnashrama
inter-dining is permitted. This worker should acquaint the mahajan 2
his sub-caste with his story and his abilities. If he receives no help
from that quarter, he should not give way to despair or get angry but
should narrate the same facts to the mahajan of all Vaisya
communities in Gujarat and seek their help. If he has any worth in
him, I am confident that he will not be forced to violate any
reasonable social restriction but will get the help he needs.
This and all other public workers in a similar predicament
should be very careful that, if they are engaged in the service of
Antyajas or in any other service in a purely religious spirit, no matter
what they have to put up with, they should never resort to untruth or
get angry, that is, commit violence. If they adhere to truth and observe
such limited non-violence, they will win credit for themselves and
bring glory to their dharma and their country, and will be able to
1
The letter is not translated here. The correspondent had described his
difficulty in finding a life partner for him because he was working among Antayajas.
2
Traditional representative body looking after the affairs of a community or a
professional or business group.

92

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

solve the problem at the cost of minimum of suffering. This worker,
therefore, should publish the facts of his case without any
exaggeration.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 18-4-1926

136. ASSORTED QUESTIONS[—I]1
MAY A VOW BE VIOLATED?
A gentleman writes :2
A vow can always be taken in regard to a good thing. There can
never be a pledge to do an evil act. If anyone takes such a vow
through ignorance, it becomes his duty to break it. For example, if a
man takes a vow to act immorally, his awakening and his purification
lie in his renouncing such a pledge. It is a sin to observe it.

TO REMEARRY OR PARTICIPATE IN NATIONAL SERVICE
A perplexed gentleman writes :3
There are some ailments for which time itself provides remedies.
In the meantime, we should be at peace with ourselves. If your
decision is unalterable and if you are determined not to marry until
you have chosen your field of work and made arrangements for
earning your living, you should politely and firmly inform your
elders of your decision. They will be pleased. If your mind is not
made up to that extent and deep within you there is a desire to get
married, it is good to listen to your elders. There is no doubt that it is
difficult for a widower of a wealthy family to avoid remarriage. He
alone can avoid it to whom remarriage is like a blow on the head.
Hence my advice is that you should sit in a solitary place and
1

These appeared in five instalments in Navajivan on March 21 and 28 and
April 4, 11 and 18, and have been placed together under the date of the last
instalment. In his introductory note, Mahadev Desai writes : “The questions have
been taken from Gandhiji’s mail. The gist of the questions is given in my words, the
replies in Gandhiji’s own words.”
2
The correspondent had asked whether it would be proper to violate a pledge
which one had taken in a moment of mental weakness or if he discovered after a few
days of observing it that he had committed a mistake in taking it.
3
The correspondent had asked for advice whether he should remarry in
accordance with the wishes of his elders or engage himself in national service.
VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

93

think with a calm mind, and thereafter act in accordance with the
response you get from your heart. I can merely point out the way.
When taking a decision, you should fearlessly follow the dictates of
your conscience regardless of the advice given by me or by others.

SHOULD THE NOSE AND EARS BE PIERCED?
I regard it as barbarous to pierce any part of a young girl’s
body.

W HO SHOULD BE GIVEN A REPLY?
A gentleman writes:1
I have gone through the handbill. There is no doubt that it is
highly obnoxious. However, my advice is that no thought whatever
should given to it. Such matters receive some importance if they are
replied to. And such statements are made merely in order to gain
publicity. If I consider it proper to clarify anything, I shall do so when
an occasion arises.
TO A LAWYER2

I have received your letter. Many remedies can be sug- gested to
you if only you forget the fact that you have become a lawyer. But
can you be asked to undertake mannual labour? You your-self can
spin, make others spin, card and make others earn; will you be
interested in such activities? Will you be satisfied with earning a living
in the same way as a labourer? All my remedies are as simple as they
are difficult. However, write to me if you can live the life of a
labourer.

TO A PATIENT3
It is difficult to advise you without seeing you. But I can, at any
rate, make the following suggestions, many of which you will be able
to put into practice :
As far as possible, try to remain in fresh air. Take the lightest
possible diet, just enough to keep the body functioning but not
enough to stuff your stomach. Give up all spices. If you do have to
take any dal, eat a very small quantity of it. Give up altogether all
1
The correspondent had sent a handbill in which certain statements made by
Gandhiji had been misinterpreted and had said that someone would be considerably
harmed if Gandhiji did not reply to it.
2
A qualified lawyer had become ill, could not earn his living, felt helpless
and asked Gandhiji to guide him.
3
The correspondent, a student, had ruined his health through bad habits, and
asked for Gandhiji’s advice.

94

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

fatty, fried and indigestible food. Take a little regular light exercise
every morning and evening.
Keep good company only. By good company I mean the
company of noble men and good books and by good books I mean
clean books.
If you have not become physically very weak, you should bathe
in cold water every day.
Keep your mind and body engaged in good work during all
waking hours.
Go to bed early and leave your bed at four o’clock every
morning. At this hour, read and reflect upon the Bhagavad Gita or
the Ramayana or any such book in which you have unwavering faith.
Do this much and completely give up the idea of marriage. It is
totally erroneous to believe that marriage is essential for the purpose
of leading a pure life.

YARN BY W AY OF SUBSCRIPTION
Your suggestion that yarn spun by you should be accepted as
subscription for Young India is indeed novel. No rule has been laid
down in this matter and there are no arrangements in the office of
Young India to receive yarn by way of subscription. How- ever, if you
send me 50,000 yards of well-twisted yarn of twenty counts, I shall
request the manager of Young India to accept it in place of
subscription, that is, the Ashram will purchase it and remit the amount
to the office of Young India. The rate of 50,000 yards is more than
the price and not less, but it is not possible to decide upon taking yarn
worth exactly five rupees.
The yarn has to be examined and tested, only then can it be
accepted. If you decide to send yarn, please send it in hanks of 500
yards each, because if there is any difficulty in counting and testing it,
it will not be accepted in lieu of subscription, but if you so desire, it
will be returned to you at your own expense.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 21-3-1926

VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

95

137. ASSORTED QUESTIONS[—II]
USE QUININE REGULARLY!1
I do not take quinine now. Have you had it proved that a man
has got rid of malaria permanently through quinine or do you know
of any such instance? During fever, I had taken quinine in small doses
for three or four days. Now of course the fever has left me. The
doctor gave a few injections too. I did not know to what extent they
would benefit me. But instead of having a long argument, I took
them.

W HY DID I TAKE QUININE?2
The bad effects of quinine that you have enumerated result
from large doses taken over a long time. As a matter of fact, I had
taken it only in doses of five grains each and never more than ten
grains a day. This too I took dissolved in lemon juice, soda and water.
I certainly did not take more than thirty grains in the course of five
days. On four days I took only five grains a day. After taking this
much of quinine, I experienced no bad effects and, what is more, I was
able to please many friends and doctors who urged me to take doses
of fifteen grains.
Moreover, one should not thus blindly oppose quinine, as its
usefulness as a means of saving oneself from malaria even for a short
spell is obvious. If the people save themselves for the time being from
the terrible effects of malaria they do not bother about the evil effects
which may make their appearance later. Hence the attack must be
direct and it must be established that there is no benefit at all from
quinine.
I took quinine for the same reasons for which I had undergone
an operation3 while I was in jail. I had to undergo the operation under
pressure of the jail authorities. Then imagine what must have been the
extent of the pressure exerted by friends’ love while taking quinine.
But this much is true that had I not been convinced that my
consenting to the operation was the result of my weakness, I would not
have had even the operation. But that weakness has resulted from an
1

A friend had advised Gandhiji to keep on taking quinine regularly even after
his illness was over as the germs of malaria could be killed that way alone.
2
Another friend, a champion of nature cure, felt deeply hurt that Gandhiji had
taken quinine.
3
Vide “Interview to V. S. Srinivasa Sastri”, 12-1-1924.

96

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

imperfect faith in what you call nature cure. Moreover, the method of
that treatment has certainly not been perfected. If you have anything
in mind besides nature cure, it is faith in God and hence the feeling
that whatever happens should be witnessed and borne. I have not yet
reached that state. One can go in that direction only through effort.
We cannot attain this thing like clothes which we can put on when we
wish, nor can we have the assurance through argument that the
Protector of the world always protects us. It can only be had through
darshan.

ANOTHER CLARIFICATION1
Please tell the friend from Burma that though I had taken
injections of iron and arsenic, I still wish to stick to my views indicated
in my article on medicines and doctors. It is one thing to have an ideal
and another to be able to observe it. Today my friends say that I have
no authority over my body at all, that it belongs to the nation, that
they and the others have as much right as I have to take interest in its
well-being, and convince me by their beautiful argument that I am
merely a trustee for the protection of my body, and that I have a right
to cherish it. Therefore, if friends like the one from Burma see a
contradiction between my ideal and my conduct, you should tell them
that until they become mahatmas like me, they should firmly stick to
the resolve not to touch medicines and to call in doctors. And if they
stick to that straight and difficult path, they will ensure their welfare.
Tell them in private even this that though I have acceded to my
friends’ plea, I have taken only thirty grains of quinine in five days
and only five injections in five weeks.

YOU LIKE A BLOUSE BUT NOT A SARI2
Your letter to hand. Since you like blouses made of khadi, will
you not now pass on to saris? Why do native people develop a
fascination for foreign clothes? If our country is dear to us, we ought
to like its products. Can one who does not like cloth woven and spun
by the hands of the poor people of India be regarded as the offspring
of India?
1

This was in reply to yet another friend.
A young lady had written that she liked wearing a blouse made of khadi, but
not a sari of the same material.
2

VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

97

W HERE SHOULD A KHADI BHAVAN BE BUILT?1
Your letter to hand as also the appeal. You say that no work is
being done in your district, that the workers regard themselves as allknowing and act foolishly. What is the use of constructing a building
in these circumstances? How can I consent to it? Will people be less
foolish after the construction of a building? Or will they acquire the
urge for service? A Bhavan must be constructed where the number of
workers is increasing, all the rules are being observed, all the workers
enjoy the confidence of the people, there is mutual trust among all,
and all live unitedly. My clear advice to you is that until efficient
workers join together, you do not even think of having a Bhavan.

GOING TO PURI FOR A CHANGE OF AIR2
If it is only going to the seaside for a change of air, why should
I go to Puri? Shall I not go to a small hamlet which is near my birthplace? In Puri the bungalows frown on the one hand and, on the other
hand, the famine-stricken people swarm the temple for a handful of
dirty rice from the pilgrims. How can Puri give me the peace and the
benefit of rural life which I get nearer home? It is not only that Puri
reminds me of our terrible degradation today as well as sacred events
of former times, but is has now become the health resort of soldiers
who are paid by us to suppress our freedom. All these thoughts make
me sad. When I was there, though my friends had placed me in an
attractive spot on the seashore and had overwhlemed me with love, I
was not at home there. How could they devise a remedy for the mental
affliction which I suffered from thoughts of the soldiers’ barracks
there, and of those Oriyas dying of hunger amid the hard-hearted rich
of that place?
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 28-3-1926

138. ASSORTED QUESTIONS[—III]
A LAWYER’S DILEMMA
There is nothing wrong in living happily by taking the name of
Rama. If one cannot earn wealth, it is nothing to grieve over. You
alone can know whether you are able to practise your dharma or not.
What you have said about the camel forcing its way in while you are
1

While complaining of the slow progress of khadi, the secretary of a district
committee had asked Gandhiji to get Rs. 5,000 from the Khadi Board for a Khadi
Bhavan building for his district.
2
This is in reply to a sister who had invited Gandhiji to Jagannathpuri for a
change of air.

98

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

trying to drive away the goat is not applicable here. It is a grave error
to suppose that nocturnal dischagres are more enfeebling than the
sexual act. Both of these lead to loss of vigour; very often the sexual
act causes greater debility. But through force of tradition we are not
able to recognize the enjoyment of sex and nocturnal discharge gives
us a mental shock. Hence we believe that we have become more
enfeebled than we actually have been. Perhaps it has not escaped your
attention that such involuntary discharges can take place even while
one continues to indulge in the sexual act. Therefore, if you accept
the value of celibacy and cherish the desire to practise it, you should
continue its practice without worrying about the discharges which take
place despite continuous effort to check them. It is difficult to say
when you will gain control over your mind after putting
brahmacharya into actual practice for a length of time, as there is no
uniform time limit for all persons. A longer or shorter period of time
must elapse according to the capacity of each individual. Some
persons cannot gain this control throughout their lives; nevertheless
they certainly reap the invaluable fruit of brahmacharya which they
have practised in their conduct and they become masters in future of
bodies which are able to control their minds.
In my opinion, it is not necessary for a husband to seek his
wife’s consent for the practice of brahmacharya, nor is it vice versa. It
is desirable that the two should assist each other in this matter. It is
proper to attempt to get this co-operation. But regardless of whether
this consent is obtained or not, the one who desires it should practise it
and both would reap its benefits. Consent may not be necessary for
eschewing union, but consent of both is necessary for union. The man
who indulges in the sexual act without his wife’s consent is guilty of
the sin of using force. He violates the laws of both God and the world.

PIERCING NOSE AND EARS A RITE ENJOINED BY SHASTRAS!
I have not not heard of the Vedic ritual of having the nose and
the ears pierced. But even if it is proved that it is a Vedic rite, I would
say that this should not be done, just as human sacrifices cannot be
offered today. I know of many men who suffered from hydrocele
although their ears had been pierced. Innumerable men who had [not]
had their noses or ears pierced have remained free from this
complaint. This is a well-known fact. Further I also know that
hydrocele has been cured without resorting to the piercing of ears.
The sentence that you have quoted from a doctor states that it seems
that this practice had been recently introduced. When we have faith in
three individuals, and when they differ in their views, we should either
VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

99

exercise our own judgment or follow the one in whom we have the
greatest faith.

BIRTH IN LOWER SPECIES
It is indeed my belief that the soul after having been born in the
human form can so degrade itself as to be born even in the form of an
animal or plant.
LOVE OR DHARMA?1

You alone can resolve the dilemma which faces you. If you feel
that renouncing a meat diet is the dharma for you, you should firmly
refuse to yield to your mother’s love. If doing so is merely a kind of
experiment, hurting your mother’s feelings will be regarded as a sin.
LOVERS’ P ROBLEM2

Where there is pure love, there is no room for impatience. Such
love cannot be physical but only spiritual. Physical love is nothing but
lust. Restrictions of caste are more important than this. Spiritual love
will brook no barriers. But that love involves tapascharya and so great
is the patience required, that it does not matter even if the separation
lasts until death. Your first task is to put your problem before your
elders and listen to them and think over what they say. Finally, your
dharma is to listen to the dictates of your own conscience after
purifying it through the observance of self-control.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 4-4-1926

139. ASSORTED QUESTIONS[—IV]
” S HRADDHA” AND L IBERATION
I maintain an attitude of neutrality towards shraddha. If it does
have any spiritual utility, I do not know it. I do not understand too
how a departed person is benefited through shraddha. A sort of
religious sentiment may grow by immersing the ashes of the dead in
the Ganga, but if there is any other advantage in doing so, I am
ignorant of that too.
In my opinion, the story of king Sagar is an allegory, it is not a
1

The correspondent, a Muslim youth, abhorred meat but did not wish to
displease his mother who wanted him to take it.
2
The correspondents—a young man and a woman belonging to different
castes—were in love and wished to get married, but without displeasing their
elders.

100

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

historical tale. What I said in regard to repeating the name of
Narayana is said with the intention of increasing one’s faith. I cannot
be convinced of the truth of the story that a person who repeats that
mantra without understanding its meaning, simply because his son’s
name happens to be Narayana, would attain liberation; but if anyone
in whose heart Narayana dwells repeats this mantra, he will certainly
attain moksha because of it.

DHARMA OF MARRIED PEOPLE1
The couple who you say overindulge in the gratification of their
desires do not practise the dharma of husband and wife. I have not the
slightest hesitation in saying that such persons are even worse than
animals. A girl of twelve or thirteen is incapable of observing the
dharma of a wife. He who maintains sexual intercourse with her is
guilty of a grave sin.
I did not know the fact that you have mentioned about a woman
who is in her menses. I cannot accept the dharma that after four days
she must have intercourse with a man. So long as the menstrual flow
continues, I regard her touch as some- thing that a husband must
renounce. After it has ceased, I do not see any harm in their union if
both of them desire to have children.

A WOMAN DURING HER MENSTRUAL PERIOD AND ONE W HO HAS JUST
DELIVERED A CHILD
The menstrual period is a monthly ailment for women. During
this, the patient requires a great deal of peace, and association with a
lustful man is dangerous to her.
The same rule applies to a woman who has just delivered a child
and she is given rest for at least twenty days. I believe that this is a
very good practice. But it is going too far when even female relatives
are not allowed to come into physical contact with her.

A TEACHER’S QUESTIONS2
1.

You can teach best by identifying yourself with your

1

The correspondent had written about the absence of self-control among
married people and asked Gandhiji to remove the false belief that the sexual act was a
duty.
2
Briefly, they were: 1. How to teach in the best possible manner? 2. What
should be read for one’s ultimate good? 3. What is the best diet? 4. Tea used to give
me headache, so I gave it up and started missing one meal. Why is it that whereas I
feel hungry in the evening, I feel heavy in the morning? 5. What are the ways of
attaining concentration? 6. If you have not been able to hear the inner voice, how
then can I hear it? 7. How does one get a glimpse of God? 8. Can one find peace
through activity?
VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

101

students. In order to do so, the teacher must prepare himself fully in
the subject he has to teach.
2. If you read the Gita and the Ramayana and reflect on
them, you will get all you need.
3. Wheat, milk and green vegetables should suffice mostly as
diet. It is essential to give up spices and oil.
4. You should drink a little milk in the evening if you feel
very hungry and, in case you cannot digest it, take an orange, grapes
or some such raw fruit. You should vigorously walk as much as
possible in the open air, morning and evening.
5. In order to purify one’s heart and attain concentration, it is
very helpful to read and reflect upon the above books and to repeat
the name of Rama when one is not engaged in any good work.
6. We should continue to make efforts and have faith that
these efforts must produce results.
7. The total destruction of passions and emotions is the only
way to catch a glimpse of the Self.
8. The highest degree of peace can certainly be attained
through noble activity.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 11-4-1926

140. ASSORTED QUESTIONS[–V]
W HAT THEN SHALL W E DO? 1
Shri Manilal Kothari gave me your message. How nice it would
be if I could give something inspiring and definite and working at
lightning speed! But in the conditions of today I have nothing of that
kind to offer. There have been many meetings, resolutions and
motions opposing such imprisonments in the Legislative Assembly.
Now we must do something in which we can feel our strength.
Therefore nothing else than boycott of foreign cloth occurs to me and
1

Sarat Chandra Bose, brother of Subhas Chandra Bose, who was held in
Mandalay Prison, though innocent, had asked whether they could do nothing to get
him released, as all constitutional methods had failed to secure freedom for such
prisoners. Gandhiji sent him this message.

102

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

that boycott is impossible of achievement without khadi.
In effect, nothing but the spinning-wheel strikes me as a remedy
against all our ills like imprisonment, etc. But how can I convince the
people that it is an unfailing remedy? I must say that my faith in it is
immutable, it increases with every passing day. Hence we plied the
spinning-wheel day and night for seven days during the National
Week and did so with the confidence that some day we shall derive
such strength from the spinning-wheel that through it we shall be able
some day to realize our heart’s desire.
Of course, apart from the spinning-wheel, there is another way
and that is the way of violence. But I am not capable of it and, what is
more, I have no faith in it. Moreover, since I am a man of practical
sense, I know that our violence will be nothing compared to the
violence of the Government. Hence I have given up all other remedies
and have put out to sea trusting to the boat of my spinning-wheel. I
invite all those who like you feel confused to come and sit with me in
my boat. Have firm faith in my assurance that this boat will definitely
take us to the other shore, but it will need all our strength,
organizational power and discipline to row it across.

JALLIANWALA BAGH1
The site was purchased out of the money collected for the
Jallianwala Bagh. The ground has been cleared. A garden has been
laid out. No temple has been built as conditions in India are
unfavourable at present. When we are destroying the foundation for
our freedom, how can we erect a grand temple upon it? I believe the
trustees hesitate to build any temple at all because of thoughts like
these.
A careful account is maintained of the money left after the
purchase of the land and the details of the account are being regularly
sent to the trustees from time to time through the secretary and are
also published.

NON-VIOLENCE2
Have I not seen such violence being committed? Very often I
1

A correspondent had asked Gandhiji what had been done with the funds
collected for the Jallianwala Bagh Memorial.
2
A correspondent observed that he often saw small creatures swallowing
one another, a lizard catching insects and a cat catching birds, and had asked
whether he could be just a passive witness or kill the potential killer and prevent
violence.
VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

103

have seen a lizard hunting a cockroach and the latter hunting other
insects. But I have never considered it my duty to oppose the law of
the animal world—“An insect sustains an insect’s life” 1 . I do not
profess to unravel the dark mysteries of God, but seeing such violence
often, I feel that the law of animals and of the lower orders of creation
is not the law of man. Man has to make a determined effort to
conquer and kill the animal within him and thus keep alive his soul.
We have to learn the great magical formula of non-violence out of the
conflagration of violence raging around us. Therefore, if man realizes
his own dignity and understands his life-work, he should himself
refrain from participating in violence and prevent inferior creatures as
also animals under his control from tormenting one another. He can
maintain that ideal only as far as he himself is concerned and if
nothing else is possible, he can at any rate refrain from tormenting his
brethren who are weaker than himself. And even to maintain that ideal
fully, he will certainly have to keep up his endeavours day and night
unceasingly. Then will he be able some day to reach it. Full success
will only come when man attains moksha and wins release from all the
limitations to which the body is heir.

PRINCIPLES AND VOWS2
Even if I am not able fully to implement the ideas expressed in
Hind Swaraj, I think there is nothing wrong in claiming that those
ideas are correct. The maxim you quote can certainly not be applied
to me because I do not excuse myself but wholly acknowledge my
fault.
Where a distinction is made between making a resolve and
taking a vow, only taking a vow is worth while. A resolve which can be
broken cannot be regarded as a resolve. It has no value at all.

CONCENTRATION3
Concentration of mind can be brought about by practice. One
can practise concentration by losing oneself in good and desirable
activity. As for example, with single-minded devotion, someone serves
1

A Sanskrit saying
A correspondent had asked that since Gandhiji himself was not able to
observe the principles laid down by him in his book, Hind Swaraj, in regard to
railways, milk and medicines, why he should insist on sticking to them. Further, he
had also asked if it was not enough if one made a resolve to do something; was it
necessary to take a vow?
3
A correspondent had asked for some ways of achieving concentration of
mind.
2

104

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

a patient, someone serves the Antyajas, another plies the spinningwheel and yet another propagates khadi. One can achieve cocentration
of mind by repeating Ramanama with faith.

MONOPOLY OF REFORM1
You have of course floored me. I have undertaken the
monopoly only of improving one person and that is myself. And I
know how difficult it is to improve that person. Now need I answer
your questions?
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 18-4-1926

141. STATEMENT ON POSTPONEMENT OF MUSSOORIE
VISIT
AHMEDABAD,

April 18, 1926
Jamnalalji and friends who were interested in sending me to a
hill station, having observed the progress I have made in regaining my
old strength since my last illness and knowing also my own intentions,
have decided not to press me to go to Mussoorie as has been
announced already, unless there is any danger of a relapse.
The Bombay Chronicle, 19-4-1926

142. LETTER TO GANDHI ASHRAM, BANARAS
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 19, 1926
DEAR FRIENDS,

I had hoped to be able to disengage Kripalaniji from the
Vidyapith work and restore him wholly to you. But we have all felt
helpless. It is not possible to spare him for the time being. It may be
impossible to free him for two years. In our national life, two years is
a long time whilst we are all impatient, quite naturally, to regain our
1

A Muslim had argued that since Gandhiji had said somewhere that a man’s
soul might go into an animal’s womb; would they not be worshipping a sinner by
worshipping a cow since his soul might have gone into her womb? He had requested
Gandhiji for a reply as in his opinion the latter had taken up the monopoly of
improving the universe.
VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

105

freedom. I give you my assurance that if an opportunity occurs to
free Kripalaniji earlier, I shall do so with all my heart, for, I know how
valuable your work is and how necessary it is for him to be
continually in your midst if your labours are to bear much ampler
fruit than hitherto. I hope therefore you will make the path far smooth
for Kripalaniji in order to enable him to organize the work here.
Yours sincerely,

GANDHI ASHRAM
BENARES
From a photostat : S.N. 19476

143. LETTER TO WILLIAM DOULL
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 19, 1926
DEAR MR. DOULL,

Sorabji has seen me regarding his difficulties. As you know he
is heavily in debt. He wants assistance from his father’s estates by way
of loan without interest but with full security. The security he will
describe himself. Sorabji tells me and I believe him that his father
would have discharged his debt if he was alive and if Sorabji had
decided to marry. He tells me that Mr. Rustomjee actually made that
promise some time before his death, so anxious he was for him to be
married. Sorabji has been now engaged and he has wisely deferred the
marriage till he is free from his debts.
I observe that under a section of the trust deed, the trustees are
empowered to remit to me such sums as they may deem necessary to
be utilized by me as I choose. I have not studied the deed carefully
nor do I regard myself competent to judge whether I can legally make
use of the funds placed at my disposal under the trust and as
proposed. But if in your opinion I can legally do so and majority of
the trustees would approve of it, I would not only be prepared but
would like to accommodate Sorabji, for I know his father would like
me to do so if he was alive.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S.N. 19477

106

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

144. LETTER TO A TRUSTEE FOR PARSI RUSTOMJEE
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 19, 1926
You rerely write to me but as I also do likewise I suppose I must
not complain. I was happy to hear personally from Sorabji all the
good news about you and your business.
This is written to tell you that I would like to help Sorabji in the
manner proposed by him if it is at all possible. You will see from a
copy of my letter to Mr. Doull what is proposed. Please see if the
thing can be at all done.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S.N. 19477

145. LETTER TO DEVCHAND PAREKH
[April 19, 1926] 1
SHRI DEVCHANDBHAI,

I hear from Shri Fulchand that your elder2 brother passed away.
Need I offer condolences? We naturally desire our near and dear ones
to be with us for ever. But are our wishes ever fulfilled? Besides, if
only we can leave off being selfish we would see that we have no
reason to grieve over death, which is inevitable and also life-giving. I
know you do not need to be taught this truth. But I think I may
remind you of it at this hour.
There has been no reply from Porbandar.
I have given up the idea of going to Mussoorie.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 5709

1
2

From a postmark
Not the elder but the younger brother, Hemchand

VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

107

146. LETTER TO SIR HENRY LAWRENCE1
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,
AHMEDABAD,

April 20, 1926
DEAR SIR HENRY LAWRENCE,

I am much obliged to you for your letter of the 16th instant. If
there is no hurry about our meeting, I would wait on you when the
season is over and you have normally returned to Poona or Bombay.
But in no case could I think of troubling you to come down to Poona,
especially for a talk. If therefore you think that we should meet early,
I should leave here on the 6th May and reach there as early as the
railway and the motor service will bring me. Having never been to
Mahabaleshwar, I do not know the time-table.
I need hardly add that I could not in any way be identified
with the Royal Commission on Agriculture. Apart from my strong
views about the system of Government, I lost my faith in Commissions
long ago.
I remain,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Halifax Papers. Courtesy : India Office Records

147. LETTER TO D. V. RAMASWAMI
ASHRAM S ABARMATI,

April 20, 1926
MY DEAR RAMASWAMI,

I have your notes on Hanumantharao’s life. They are interesting
but they must not be published and in no case can I write a preface to
a thing which contains a criticism of or an attack against the Servants
of India Society. My advice to you is not to publish anything at all
unless you can bring out something readable about Hanumantharao
without introducing any controversial matters. It would be better not
1

This is an enclosure to a letter, dated 22-4-1926, from Sir Henry Lawrence,
Governor of Bombay, to the Viceroy, Lord Irwin. Sir Henry had invited Royal
Commission on Agriculture, and offered to come to Poona if this suited Gandhiji
better.

108

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to publish anything at all or be satisfied with a newspaper article. If
you wish the copy you have sent me to be returned, you shall kindly
ask for it and I shall kindly return the same.
Yours sincerely

S JT. D. V. R AMASWAMI
VIZAGAPATAM
From a microfilm : S.N. 19478

148. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 20, 1926
DEAR SATIS BABU,

I have your two letters. I note what you say about Utkal. I am
now going through the papers Niranjan Babu has sent me.
Your Patna visit I regard as quite a success. Even from the point
of view of collections, it is the small collections which will be our
mainstary in the long run. Hundred rupees therefore is a good
beginning.
I never mentioned to you that I got your impromptu bow made
in the train with which you carded your cotton for the takli. It is a
good contrivance. The beauty of hand-spinning lies in our ability to
use trifles as our instruments. That is more suited to the genius of our
nation. The art in them is in the brain and in the hand, never in the
instrument.
How is Hemaprabhadevi? Is she keeping well? Does she ever
think of the Ashram? My visit to Mussoorie is cancelled. Jamnalalji
was not sure that he was quite right in taking me away. I myself never
[felt] the need. On the contrary [I] felt that my running to Mussoorie
was not in keeping with my life-view. And as nobody could say
profitably what was the correct thing, toss was decided upon. The
result was against Mussoorie. So it stands finally cancelled, unless a
crisis overtakes me, though my view would still remain unchanged that
I must mend my body in Sabarmati or if God wills otherwise then end
it here.
Yours,
From a photostat : S.N. 19479

VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

109

149. LETTER TO S. V. PHADNIS
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 20, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I shall do what I can in connection with your letter. Though I do
not wish to enter into any newspaper controversy, I do not at all
subscribe to the charge that I have stood in the way of compromise.
Regarding khadi my own personal opinion is that the khadi obligation
should on no account be waived but there too mine is only one vote.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S. V. P HADNIS
423, W ALKESHWAR R OAD
BOMBAY-6
From a microfilm : S.N. 19480

150. LETTER TO MITHUBEHN PETIT
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Tuesday, Chaitra Sud 8 [April 20, 1926] 1
DEAR SISTER,

I have your letter. I had offered to send you khadi at a loss, if
necessary. If, therefore, you felt that Bombay khadi was rather costly I
would have paid part of the bill. Enclosed is another bill for the khadi
sent to you from the Ashram. Have you any complaint against that
khadi? You may always take it that if any article received from the
Ashram does not answer to your requirement or is costly, it can most
certainly be returned. Even if you have accepted it, you should let me
know in case you notice any defect in it.
You must have seen in the papers that my trip to Mussoorie as
been cancelled. The National Council of Women must obtain a first
class testimonial. Neither you nor I can be satisfied with a second
class. Please send no honey for the present. Perhaps I myself may
have to go to Mahabaleshwar for two or three days. I shall let you
know if this is decided. Kindly mention it to no one now. Yes, you are
right, strawberries cannot arrive here safely all this distance. You
should improve your health to very much better than it is now.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 10890
1

110

The year is inferred from the mention of cancellation of trip to Mussoorie.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

151. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Tuesday, Chaitra Sud 8 [April 20, 1926]
BHAISHRI KAKA,

I got one-half of your letter, that is the one giving news of your
health; the other half, I believe, is to follow. Since I have not written to
you for quite a few days, I think I should dictate something just now.
If the doctor has specially recommended olive oil I do not wish
to argue against it; otherwise I think it would be best to give it up. The
olive oil which I get locally did not agree with me at all. I don’t mean
olive oil produced in India; the country does not produce any. That
which we get here is imported from Italy or Spain and it is rarely
fresh. Besides, it is also found that oil and ghee do not require the
same length of time for digestion and also that the processes through
which they are digested are different from each other. It may,
therefore, be better to discontinue olive oil. Indeed, what you say
about a vaid’s drugs is true. It is a kind of quick remedy. It seems you
use the language of Sidney Smith when you say that Dr. Talwalkar
has not received respect “from us”. By “us” you mean both the
writer and the person addressed, don’t you? Or do you mean “you”?
If all you mean is that he has not received due respect from me, you
have needlessly dragged in Sidney Smith. Well, I plead guilty to the
charge, my reason being that I have great respect for Dr. Talwalkar
himself, but not for his knowledge. I have, therefore, called Kanuga
every time. Between the two I would place my life in Kanuga’s, hands.
Dr. Talwalkar has gone crazy over “tubercle”, as I have over the
spinning-wheel. He sees tuberculosis in everyone. And I do not know
why, but I simply cannot put faith in his injections. He has read
extensively in medical science but I always felt that he has not
digested what he has read. What should I do in these circumstances?
He was here about ten days ago, when I expressed to him my lack of
faith in his approach. He promises to convert me if I give him
sufficient time. But how can I spare all that time? So maybe, I ought
to give up my scepticism. But the truth is that I have little faith in
doctors as such, i.e., in the medical profession itself, and my distrust is
daily increasing. They fail to discover the right remedies because they
hunt for the laws of the body without any reference to the soul.
My trip to Mussoorie had to be cancelled. We drew lots the day
before yesterday. Jamnalalji was not enthusiastic about taking me
VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

111

there. So we had to draw lots. Personally, I never believed that it was
necessary for me to go to Mussoorie. How would I, then, decide on
my own to go? And Jamnalalji was not prepared to take the
responsibility. And I have always welcomed the idea that, in matters
which do not involve a question of principle and when we cannot
decide one way or the other, we may throw lots to know God’s will.
Nanabhai has decided that Shankar should leave for Bhavnagar,
latest on June 1. Swami is thinking about Bal. Chandrashankar just
spoke to me about your letter to Bal. We can, therefore, decide only
after discussing the matter with Swami.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
As regards cow’s milk, I want to write not a letter but a book for
you.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 19481

152. LETTER TO DEVCHAND PAREKH
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Tuesday, April 20, 1926
BHAISHRI DEVCHANDBHAI,

Here is the letter from Diwan Saheb. It is now for him to decide
when he will come. I suggest that you should yourself go over to
Porbandar. You may tell him that you have read the accompanying
letter. And since you will see him personally, I do not write to
acknowledge the enclosed letter. Your going there in person will be as
good as my doing so.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19482

153. LETTER TO PROFULLA CHANDRA MITRA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 21, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. It is a fact that in Dacca against a foreign
mosquito-net I have no knowledge that a khaddar mosquito-net was
rejected by any of my companions. I personally do not object to a
112

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

foreign mosquito-net because I do not regard it as an article of
clothing even as I do not object to a foreign umbrella though I should
try to dispense with both and procure home-made articles. But the
discarding of anything but foreign cloth is not a matter of religion
with me. And I regard discarding of foreign cloth as a matter of
religion because in my opinion foreign cloth is the supreme sign of
our bondage. It is totally wrong to suggest that my companions do
not allow poor people to see me, because I know myself that I was
constantly surrounded by poor people all the time I was in Dacca.
I still believe as firmly as ever in all the boycotts of 1920 and
1921. The Congress has relaxed them as the Congress has a perfect
right to do. Everyone who non-co-operated did so because he
believed in its utility. Sacrifice is an indispensable condition of nonco-operation.
I am aware that many students, many lawyers and many others
have suffered. That sufering has done them and the nation much
good. Every non-co-operating student has plenty of scope for
national service if he will but do it. A right use of charkha will
certainly give him all his wants but he who does not believe in charkha
may take up any other national service that commends itself to him.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. P ROFULLA C HANDRA MITRA
NATIONAL MEDICAL INSTITUTE
DACCA
From a photostat : SN. 19483

154. LETTER TO S. MEHTAH
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 21, 1926
DEAR SIR,

You have enquired of me whether your brother Sheikh Amir
Khan was a fellow passenger with me in 1896 on board s. s. Courland
when I returned from India to Natal during that year. I have to state in
VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

113

reply that your said brother was a fellow passenger with me during
that year.
Yours truly,

S. M EHTAH, E SQ.
222, G REY S TREET
DURBAN
From a microfilm : S.N. 19484

155. LETTER TO B. SUBBA RAO
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 21, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. Will you please answer the following
questions? Are you married? If so, have you children? Do you want to
live here alone? Can you do bodily labour? Are you keeping good
health? Apart from your medical diploma, do you regard yourself as
an all-round good physician? What is the meaning of describing
yourself as ‘Ophthalmic Surgeon’? Have you special qualifications in
that direction?
Yours sincerely,

S JT. B. SUBBA R AO
OPHTHALMIC S URGEON
86, PILLAYER KOIL S T
TRIPLICANE, M ADRAS
From a microfilm : S.N. 19485

156. WARNING TO YARN COLLECTORS
Much of the yarn that is delivered to the All-India Spinners’
Association as subscription is collected by local volunteer collectors.
Thereby much time, energy and expense are saved. But the collectors
should be good spinners themselves. They must be able to distinguish
good yarn from bad and know the different counts. For the value of
the yarn can be immediately increased if the collectors know how to
judge yarn and take the trouble of examining it before accepting it
from subscribers. They have to take only such yarn as is evenly spun
and made into standard strands, i.e., 4 ft. in length. The greater the
114

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

attention paid to these details, the greater the chance of producing
stronger khadi at cheaper rates. The spinners should bear in mind that
the better they spin, the larger is their subscription to the Association.
That is the beauty of having subscriptions in yarn. If collectors and
subscribing spinners do their work carefully, they can double the
value of subscription whilst it will mean no more work for the
collectors or the spinners and certainly no more expense. Whereas, if
the yarn is spun anyhow or packed anyhow, it throws a useless burden
upon the Spinners’ Association and means avoidable waste of national
energy and capital.
Young India, 22-4-1926

157. WHAT TO DO
Sjt. Sarat Chandra Bose sent me a message through Sjt. Manilal
Kothari asking me to give some guidance as to what should be done
or what Bengal in particular should do to secure the freedom of those
who, without trial, without even being informed of the wrong they are
supposed to have done, are kept under detention and treated as felons.
It is not the freedom of our countrymen that Sjt. Bose wants, so much
as a tangible and effective demonstration of the nation’s sympathy for
them. To him, rightly, the honour of Bengal, if not of India, is at stake
so long as these brave patriots are kept under duress. I had no better
reply to send him than the following. 1 I publish it because Sjt. Bose
desired its publication.
Young India, 22-4-1926

158. DRUGS, DRINK AND DEVIL
Drugs and drink are the two arms of the devil with which he
strikes his helpless slaves into stupefaction and intoxication. And
according to an illuminating article2 in The Survey on the two Opium
Conferences at Geneva, opium, the chief among the drugs, “won”.
The writer says :
Out of all the marching and counter-marching, the drawing of swords and
putting up them again, the rumours of defeats and famous victories, the traffic
1

Vide “Letter to Sarat Chandra Bose”, 9-4-1926 and “Assorted Questions
[—V]”, 18-4-1926, sub-title, “What then Shall We Do?”.
2
Of which only excerpts are reproduced here
VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

115

in opium and other narcotic drugs has gained a new lease of life.

In the midst of confusion and chaos caused by the bewildering reports
on behalf of the different nations, the writer says :
The only people concerned who knew precisely what they wanted and did not
want, and who were quite clear about and content with what they got, were
those who in one way or another make profit out of the traffic in narcotics.

The writer adds :
Especially during the World War, the campaign has been going almost by
default. . . . Indeed, the War itself materially aggravated the evil. The
widespread use of morphine and cocaine in the armies as anodynes against
human agony, and to some extent as a means of mental relief from the deadly
despairs and fears, disgusts and monotonies of war, turned loose at the end in
many countries a considerable army of uncured and more or less incurable
addicts to continue and spread their addiction. For, one of the awful
concomitants of this vice is a kind of perverted missionary impulse to
propagate itself by making new addicts.

This is one of the most deadly by-products of the late War. If it
has destroyed millions of lives, it has also hastened the soul-deadening
process. But Mr. Gavit, the writer, shows that during the thirteen years
since the international agreement was registered in the Hague
Convention “the character of the problem has changed greatly”. Mr.
Gavit can only speak from the European standpoint. Therefore, he
says :
The evil is no longer an exotic affair of the Far East, of the eating, drinking
and smoking of the raw and prepared opium after the time-entrenched fashions
of India, China and other oriental regions.

It has now resolved itself into the use
of the more concentrated and far more injurious forms in the highpower drugs,
manufactured in the expensively-equipped and scientifically-operated
pharmaceutical laboratories of the lands which call themselves “civilized”.
Whereas in the former time the opium and the opium-habits of the Far East
were creeping out into the West, now the flow is the other way. And that is not
all : These drugs are equally deadly, and spreading ominously, in the countries
where they are made, and across their borders to their neighbours. . . . The
threat is against the welfare of all mankind. To this devil a white addict is as
useful as a black or yellow; . . . His is a domain upon which the sun never sets.

The writer then touches “the heart of the evil” which is in “the
excess of production” beyond the very legitimate needs of medicine
and science. . . .
116

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Thus the world’s production of narcotics is more than ten times the most
extravagant estimate of the world’s legitimate needs.

The writer shows that none of the great powers including
America and Great Britain has seriously tackled the problem. He
charges them with having broken the promise made under Article 9 of
the Hague Convention—“to limit the manufacture of these substances
to the bona fide needs of medicine and science.” He deplores that
these civilized nations have failed not merely to check the overproduction of raw and prepared opium but have failed to check even
the manufacture of the deadly drugs in the huge laboratories which
are subject to licence and inspection and whose control is the easiest
thing possible if there is only the will.
The readers who have studied the Assam Opium Report
prepared at the instance of the Congress by Mr. Andrews’ labours
know the evil wrought by the opium-habit. They also know how the
Government has failed egregiously to deal with the growing evil and
how they have thwarted the efforts of reformers who tried to deal with
it. It therefore did one’s soul good to find that during the National
Week, speakers at public meetings insisted upon the total prohibition
of intoxicating drinks and drugs. It is a reform that is overdue. And, if
it is at all worth going to the Councils, this total prohibition must be
made a prominent plank in the electroral compaign. Every member
must be pledged not merely to support but to initiate and pursue the
total prohibition campaign, the only way to bring about total
prohibition being to cut out from the military expenditure a portion
equivalent to the revenue derived from this immoral source. The
demand therefore for total prohibition must go hand in hand with the
demand for reduction in the military expenditure. Nor must the
solution be delayed by plans of taking referendums. In India there
can be no reason for any referendum because drink and drug-habits
are universally recognized as a vice. Drink is not a fashion in India as
it is in the West. To talk therefore of a referendum in India is to trifle
with the problem.
Young India, 22-4-1926

159. NOTES
JALLIANWALA BAGH
A Karachi correspondent writes :
VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

117

You collected lacs for Jallianwala Bagh Memorial years ago. I was told
that there would be a school building erected there. Can you now tell me what
has happened to the fund? Has that site been bought at all? When will the
temple of freedom be built there?

I was not prepared for the exhibition of ignorance which the
foregoing questions betray. The writer should have known that the site
where the massacre of the 13th April, 1919 took place was bought
immediately after sufficient funds were collected. The site has been
cleaned of all the rubbish heaps, levelled and there is to be seen a
beautiful lawn there. A care-taker is in charge of it. The balance is
deposited in trustworthy banks and interest accumulates year by year.
It has not been possible to build anything upon it for the simple
reason that there can be no temple of freedom built of bricks and
mortar whilst we, Hindus and Mussalmans, are trying to cut each
others’ throats and undermining the very foundations of freedom.
Monument, when it is erected, has to be a monument to commemorate
the unity of all races and religions represented in India. It will be,
when it comes, a demonstration of the people of India to vindicate
their liberty and honour in the face of all odds. At the present
moment if an attempt was made to erect a building, I doubt not that it
will be an additional ground for cleavage instead of being used by all
for binding us firmer together.

FEBRUARY RETURNS
The returns of production and sale of khadi for the month of
February in several provinces are as follows :1
The figures of Andhra are as usual incomlete, only 16
organizations having sent their report to the Provincial Office. The
Bengal figures are those of the Pratishthan only, the figures of the
Abhoy Ashram not having been received. Bombay is complete except
for the Sandhurst Road Bhandar. In Delhi only the Hapur figures are
given. Punjab and Tamil Nadu are complete and their sale figures
have been corrected so as to avoid duplication. In Northern
Maharashtra only the figures of the Jalgaon and Wardha Bhandar are
given; and in Central Maharashtra only that of the Poona Bhandar.
The position in Februray is very much the same both, as regards
production and sale as in the previous month except in the case of
Bombay which shows a large decrease in sales from Rs. 41,448 to Rs.
26,029. As compared with the figure for the corresponding month of
1

118

Not reproduced here
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the previous year, this year shows a notable increase especially in
production. The production figures of some of the important
provinces are as under:1
In sales, while Punjab and Utkal figures are very nearly the same
as in the previous year, Bombay shows a decrease; but in Bengal,
Bihar and Tamil Nadu the figures disclose remarkable progress. The
figures are given below :2
I reiterate the hope that those centres that have not yet begun to
send their returns regularly will do so without delay so as to enable the
All-India Spinners’ Association to publish as accurate returns as
possible.
The growing decrease in the sales in Bombay compared to the
increase in the other provinces requires careful study. There was a
time when Bombay was the largest feeder for all khadi produced in
India. It still retains an honourable position and second only to Tamil
Nadu. The figures for Bombay are nothing compared to previous
years—Rs. 44,220 against Rs. 26,029 during the February of this year,
whereas Tamil Nadu shows Rs. 53,512 this year against Rs. 34,825 last
year.

ORGANIZING KHADDAR SALES
It is astonishing the way the khaddar propaganda is evok- ing
the faculties of the workers in all directions. Merely production is not
enough. The quality must progressively increase. The cost of
production has to be regulated and the sales must keep pace with
production. Khadi Pratishthan is showing the way. I have already
remarked3 upon the manner in which Bengal is trying to use up its
own production locally. From January to 17th March, the Pratishthan
workers sold by hawking Rs. 25,000 worth of khadi in 41 places in 14
districts. The workers have mapped out an all-Bengal tour which they
hope to be able to finish within a few months. There will, therefore, be
presently no over-production but an under-production. And, it will be
possible to say that if more capital can be invested, more khaddar can
be produced and sold. It will be an ideal condition when not only our
sales are effected locally but financial help too is likewise raised. And
it is bound to come, for sales must familiarize a large number of
middleclass people with khadi; and when they begin to take a lively
1

Not reproduced here
ibid
3
Vide “Notes”, 1-4-1926, sub-title, “Bengal’s Worthy Example”.
2

VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

119

interest in it, they will naturally find the necessary capital without any
difficulty.
Young India, 22-4-1926

160. FOR AND AGAINST KHADI
AGAINST KHADI
A correspondent writes a Gujarati letter of which the following is
a free rendering :
I am a stenographer. I applied in reply to an advertisement
by a well-known European firm for the post of a stenographer
at its office and I received a reply asking me to report myself at
their office. As soon as I was ushered into the presence of the
manager, he scanned my dress and seeing that it was all pure
khadi said, ‘You are no use. Don’t you know that those who
wear khadi dress need not expect any employment in European
firms?’ And with this he dismissed me leaving me to wonder
what connection my dress had with my ability to take down
correct notes. I returned home feeling thankful that I had the
courage to withstand the temptation of giving up my khadi dress
for the sake of a comfortable employment. I hope that God will
sustain that courage and that even when I am sorely tried, I shall
not give up khadi which I know binds me to the poor of the
land. I send you this information in order that it may serve as a
warning to others against relying upon getting employment in
European firms except on humiliating terms.
I congratulate the young stenographer upon his selfsacrifice and join my hope with his that God will sustain his courage
even though he might have a series of disappointments when he tries
to get employed as a stenographer.

FOR KHADI
But all European employers are not cast in the same mould.
When I was in Calcutta last year, I came in touch with many European
mer-chants and some of the leading ones amongst them not only had
no ob-jection to their employees wearing khadi dress but they avowed
sympathy with the khadi movement and appreciated the sentiment that
requires Indians and, indeed, those who make fortunes in India, to use
cloth spun and woven by the toiling millions. Here is a letter from an
Indian employee which the readers of Young India will read with
120

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

pleasure :1
I congratulate the European firm upon their breadth of vision
for it was no doubt something for them not to be carried away by
prejudice when Non-co-operation was at its height and when khadi
dress was mixed up by so many Europeans with violent intentions.
Young India, 22-4-1926

161. LETTER TO NAJUKLAL N. CHOKSI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Thursday, Second Chaitra Sud 10 [April 22, 1926] 2
BHAISHRI NAJUKLAL,

I have your letter. I will not let Moti disappoint me. I will shake
her lethargy out of her. If she does not respond to my persuasion, I
will leave her to you, a teacher, to do what you can, I shall then have to
put a cane in your hand. If it does not work, I know of the spiked
goads they use in your own district when driving bullocks. I will
present some of these to you. Moti must be made to shake off her
slackness and improve her handwriting. Her handwriting in her letter
to Lakshmi looked very much like the crawling of a fly. Is this the
example an elder sister should set to her younger one? How can we let
her do that? Well, I close that chapter here.
Now that I am not going to Mussoorie, Velanbehn has for the
time being discontinued her frequent tours. Anandi, too, has fallen ill.
That is another reason why I cannot leave. Lakshmidas arrived only
the day before yesterday. If possible, therefore, you should both come
here; alternatively, if you can do without Moti, send her just now and
you may come later. Or you may come when you are free. Do what
suits you best. It was welcome news to me that you had recovered. So
much for the present. This letter is for both of you.
With blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of Gujarati : S.N. 12127

1

Not reproduced here. The correspondent, a stenographer, stated that despite
his wearing khadi, his European employers had not only not objected to his dress but
had given him increments and promotions.
2
Year inferred from the reference to the cancellation of Mussoorie visit
VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

121

162. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Chaitra Sud 10 [April 22, 1926] 1
CHI. MATHURADAS,

There has been no letter from you recently. I had instructed
Mahadev to inform you that my visit to Mussoorie had been
cancelled. In case I go to Mahabaleshwar, I hope to spend a couple of
days with you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

163. INTERVIEW ON AGRICULTURAL COMMISSION
AHMEDABAD,

April 22, 1926
Interviewed by a Press representative in connection with the invitation sent to
him to meet His Excellency the Governor, Mr. Gandhi said :

I have not much to say, because I have not studied the scope of
the Royal Commission, nor have I interested myself in it. Being a
confirmed Non-co-operator, I naturally take little or no interest in the
doings of the many Commissions and Committees appointed by the
Government. In agriculture itself, I am certainly interested, so much so
that I delight in calling myself a farmer without knowing much of
farming; and, if His Excellency the Acting Governor invites me to an
informal discussion on matters agricultural, I shall certainly place my
views before him.
The Hindu, 23-4-1926

1

The postmark bears the date April 24, 1926. Chaitra Sud 10 (intercalated)
corresponds to April 22.

122

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

164. LETTER TO FRED CAMPBELL
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 23, 1926
MY DEAR YOUNG FRIEND,

I have your letter. Much as I would like to accommodate you,
you have asked me to do almost the impossible. I cannot get a sixteen
year lad to write to you in English for the simple reason that his
mother tongue would be an Indian language. Spanish is out of
question. No doubt there are some Anglicized Indian families where
English is taught from infancy. But in order to get one such boy I
shall have to hawk your letter about from place to place which I am
sure you would not want or expect me to do. But if you want to open
correspondence with a grown-up person who can write with the
freshness of youth, I might succeed.
With all good wishes,
Yours sincerely,

F RED C AMPBELL, E SQ.
7701 M AIN S T.
KANSAS C ITY, M O., U.S.A.
From a photostat : S.N. 12444

165. LETTER TO ROMAIN ROLLAND
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 23, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

This is to introduce to you one of my dearest co-workers and
friends Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru who has gone there with his wife. She
is suffering from tuberculosis. Naturally my friend would like to
make your acquaintance and pay his respects to you. I know that you
will befriend him and his wife.
Mirabai, as we call Miss Slade here, is getting on very well and is
quite happy. We often think of you and talk about you and the
possibility of your visiting India at the end of the year. I wonder if
VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

123

your health can bear the strain of the visit.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
MONSIEUR R OMAIN R OLLAND
VILLA OLGA
VILLENGUVE
(VAND)
S WITZERLAND
From a photostat : S.N. 12467

166. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 23, 1926
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I have been thinking of writing to you every week and every
week I have failed. I must not let this week, however, pass by. I have
had the latest news about you from Father while he was here with the
Responsivists. You will have seen the agreement1 that has been arrived
at.
Hindus and Muslims are going more and more away from each
other. But this thing does not disturb me. Somehow or other, I feel
that the separation is growing in order only to bring them all closer
later on.
I do hope Kamala is benefiting.
Yours,

BAPU
A Bunch of Old Letters, p. 46

167. CIRCULAR LETTER
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 23, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

Time has arrived to work the Hindi Prachar Office in the
Southern presidency as a matter of trust and, after consulting with
1

124

Vide Appendix “The Sabarmati Pact”, April and May, 1926.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Pandit Harihara Sharma, I have come to the conclusion that the
trustees should include some lovers of Hindi in that Presidency also.
The following are the names I propose :
Sjt. S. Srinivasa Iyengar
,, Konda Venkatappayya Garu
,, C. Rajagapalachariar
Seth Jamnalal Bajaj
Sjt. Harihara Sharma
,, Hrishikesha Sharma
,, Satyanarayana
and a nominee of the Sahitya Sammelan if they desire a name to be
added. I hope that you have no objection to your name being
included in the trust.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S.N. 19490

168. LETTER TO GENERAL SECRETARY, HINDI SAHITYA
SAMMELAN
S ABARMATI,

April 23, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I did get your telegram, and had also sent a reply. I had hoped
that someone would come over on behalf of the Sammelan. Pandit
Harihara Sharma is here since a couple of days ago. Afte discussing
the matter with him I have come to the conclusion that we should
form a trust for propagating Hindi in the South and hand over the
organizational control of the work entirely to it. This will end the
present state of indecision and inspire the workers to more energetic
effort. I have addressed a letter 1 proposing this, a copy of which is
enclosed for you. I want your opinion on what I have proposed. If it
is necessary to discuss the matter with me, either come over yourself
or send somebody. My trip to Mussoorie has been abandoned.
Yours,

GENERAL S ECRETARY
HINDI S AHITYA S AMMELAN
P RAYAG
From a microfilm of the Hindi : S.N. 19492
1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

125

169. LETTER TO G. A. NATESAN
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 23, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

Here is an article by Miss Rasengren. She has sent it to me for
Young India. I am disinclined to publish it and rake up an old
controversy1 about which almost every Indian has made up his mind.
The writer says that if I would not take it, I should send it to you for
publication in Indian Review. Probably you know the writer.
I had a typed copy made of it which I am sending you.
Yours sincerely,

Encl. 3 sheets
S JT. G. A. NATESAN
EDITOR
“INDIAN R EVIEW”
G. T. MADRAS
From a microfilm : S.N. 19486

170. LETTER TO ADA RASENGREN
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 23, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I must not publish the article you have sent
me. Almost every Indian believes that England was in the wrong and
responsible for the calamitous War. I do not now wish to rake up an
old controversy without any occasion for it.
As desired I have sent a copy of your essay to Mr. Natesan,
Madras. I have given your card to the Manager of Young India.
Yours sincerely,

MISS ADA R ASENGREN
R O, L IDINGO VILLASTAD
From a photostat : S.N. 12466

1

126

Vide the succeeding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

171. LETTER TO MAULANA SHAUKAT ALI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 23, 1926
DEAR FRIEND AND BROTHER,

I do hope you will forgive me for not having come to Delhi. But
I felt and both Panditji and Mrs. Naidu agreed that I should not be
made to leave Ahmedabad contrary to the resolution of Cawnpore.
You have seen my letter to Hakimji. That was the best advice I
could give. I hope everything has gone well.
Your charkha was repaired. It went yesterday with Yeshwant
Prasad to Bombay and will be delivered to you.
Yours,

MAULANA S HAUKAT ALI
DELHI
From a photostat : S.N. 19488

172. LETTER TO N. S. VARADACHARI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 23, 1926
MY DEAR VARADACHARI,

I had your letter. I enclose herewith a copy of a letter written to
Ganesan. You may apply your mind separately to the proposal. Of
course the proposal is useless if you cannot be in Madras. I have made
the proposal so as to enable you to be nearest to your centre of
activity. I do not want to drag you all the way here if it is at all
possible.
Yours sincerely,

Encl. 1
S JT. N. S. V ARADACHARI
ERODE
From a microfilm : S.N. 19489

VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

127

173. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
S ABARMATI,

April 23, 1926
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. We know of course that your lungs will mend
only gradually. In one way this enforced rest is welcome. You are
making good use of it. No programme has been fixed for Devdas. But
I do not wish to send him there till he is fully restored to health. I
hope Pyarelal is suitable company for you. Let me know if there is
any inconvenience. I was planning to visit Deolali if I had to go to
Mahabaleshwar. But now that cannot be because I am not going to
Mahabaleshwar. The Governor has written to say that it will be all
right if I meet him when he comes down in June.
You would be seeing the telegram about Finland in the
newspapers. 1 I have not received any letter so far. I do not at all feel
inclined to go. I do not like to leave the Ashram even for an hour. For
the last three or four days I have been wanting to go to Ambalalbhai’s
place to inquire about Saralabehn’s health. But the important question
is where to find the time outside of what is reserved for walks. I shall
be going there no doubt, but only as a matter of duty.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

174. LETTER TO JACOB HIEBLE
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 23, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. If it is a question of publication of My
Experiments with Truth in a magazine, there is no difficulty. But if it is
a matter of publication in book form, Mr. Roniger2 in already in
1

It had been mooted that Gandhiji should visit Finland to attend the World
Conference of the Young Men’s Christian Association which was to be held in
August. 1926 in Helsingfors; vide “Letter to Lajpat Rai”, 20-3-1926 and “Letter to K.
T. Paul”, 13-4-1926.
2
Emil Roniger

128

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

correspondence with me in the matter. And in any case it will take
some time before the story is completed.
I am deeply interested in the German youth movement for I
expect a great deal from the enterprising, brave and self-sacrificing
young men and young women of Germany.
Yours sincerely,

JACOB HIEBLE, E SQ.
549 W. N ORTH AVE.
AP, F, C HICAGO
U.S.A.
From a copy : S.N. 32248

175. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
S ABARMATI,

April 23, 1926
CHI. JAMNALAL,

Anna1 has come here, and is leaving again today. The dis- pute
with the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan is going on. I have now decided
that we should have a trust for this purpose too. I have addressed a
letter 2 about this, a copy of which will be handed over to you by
Anna. You can make any suggestions about trustees which you may
like to. I have proposed that the trustees will include, besides others,
three workers actively engaged in propagating Hindi; I think that
will be necessary. They will be persons who have dedicated their lives
to the cause, and it will be proper, therefore, to include them among
the trustees. Please decide in consultation with Anna in what
instalments you will pay the sum which you assured him that you
would pay. That will make things easy for him, and you, too, will
have the matter off your mind. He will get the amounts regularly on
the dates fixed. You may ask him about the accounts if you wish to. I
will not myself be looking into them. Anna will place before you his
scheme for getting the accounts audited. I am still thinking about the
bigger trust. I also think it absolutely necessary that we should
regularly publish the accounts of all funds being managed by us. Till
now I did not insist on this being done out of my anxiety to
1
2

Harihara Sharma
Vide “Circular letter”, 23-4-1926

VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

129

economize expenses. I know that, in spite of the practice of publishing
accounts, there can be malpractices and, therefore, we place our trust
entirely on the integrity of our workers. All the same, we should avail
ourselves of the advantage of safety which the practice of publishing
accounts offers. There are a number of small trusts, the names of all
of which I, too, do not remember. I always feel that it would have been
very much better if all these things had been published at the right
time. But now at any rate we shall publish them.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19491

176. STATEMENT ON SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN
PROBLEM
AHMEDABAD,

April 24, 1926
Mr. Gandhi has issued the following statement to the Associated Press on the
latest announcement regarding acceptance by the Union Government of the offer of
the Government of India for a conference to arrive at an amicable solution of the
Indian Problem :

The news from South Africa is certainly welcome. It enables
Indian settlers to have a breathing time and upon this happy result all
parties, the Union Government, the Government of India and the
settlers, may congratulate themselves. In my opinion the real credit
belongs to Mr. C.F. Andrews without whose incessant energy,
prayerful watchfulness and detailed study of the situation, combined
with rare faith in the cause he was espousing, this happy result could
not have been obtained.
If the Union Government’s proviso is honestly meant, its acceptance by the Government of India does not much matter. The
Union Government is undoubtedly entitled to safeguard what they call
Western standard of life by just and legitimate means and the only just
and legitimate means that can be accepted are sanitary and economic
laws. Thus, for instance, Indian lawyers must compete with European
lawyers on equal terms and so far as I am aware no Indian lawyer does
otherwise. But I have discovered that there is discrimination used even
against them. I believe the Paddison Deputation, which, in spite of my
non-co-operation I am free to confess, has deserved well, made the
discovery that even in the Supreme Court clerks who appear before
the Registrar on business must not be wearers of any but white skin. If
130

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

that is called safeguarding Western standards of life by just and
legitimate means the proviso is dangerous. But I am an optimist. I
shall take the proviso at its face value and if the Government of India
will insist upon its being strictly interpreted all will be well. I hope that
neither the Government of India nor the public will relax their
watchfulness if a final and honourable settlement is to be secured.
Now that there is to be a conference, India has the right to hope
that all questions that arise out of the Bill will be examined and dealt
with in a just manner. The Indian settlers have nothing to fear from a
most searching enquiry into the question and I make bold to say that
at the end of the enquiry it will be found that the only crime that can
be proved against them is that they are Asiatics and have a skin which
has all shades of colour.
The economic question was laid at rest when in 1914 all fear of
unrestricted emigration from India to South Africa was absolutely laid
at rest. The figures produced before the Select Committee have
conclusively proved that the numerical strength of Indian settlers is on
the decrease whereas that of the white settlers is on the increase. There
is no comparison between the insignificant value of Indian holdings
and the extraordinary increase in the value of European holdings.
Indian trade licences every-where are also dwindling.
If only South African statesmen will face facts squarely it will be
found that there is no case against the Indian settlers. But at the
present moment I want neither to anticipate nor to criticize. I have
nothing but a feeling of relief and thankfulness. I tender my
congratulations to General Hertzog and Dr. Malan upon their having
risen to the occasion.
Forward, 25-4-1926

177. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 24, 1926
1

MY DEAR BHRRR ,

I have your letter. Though life there seems to be dead, you have
gone with the soul of a youth to resurrect the dead, and your
optimism will infect Ramdas. I do not care how much you sell. I
1

This was a form of greeting used by Gandhiji and the addressee for each

other.
VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

131

simply marvel at the manner in which you have responded and in
which you are toiling there in midsummer. May God bless you and
your effort. The proposed visit to Mussoorie was cancelled in answer
to the chit that was drawn. When there is no principle at stake and
when it is difficult to decide, I find God’s answer through drawing
chits and it has proved for me a most valuable time and trouble-saver.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
ABBAS TYABJI, E SQ.
R ASHTRIYA S HALA
WADHWAN C ITY
From a photostat : S.N. 9553

178. LETTER TO AKSEL F. KNUDSEN
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 24, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I remember your visit. If you want to
translate The Story of My Experiments with Truth for a maga- zine,
you may do so without any difficulty but if you wish to bring out
the same in book-form it is a matter somewhat diffi- cult because the
MacMillan Company is negotiating for the full copyright and, in any
case, there is no hurry about it for it will take some time before the
story can be finished.
Yours sincerely,

AKSEL F. K NUDSEN, E SQ.
S HANTI GEHA
KODAIKANAL
MADRAS DISTRICT
From a microfilm : S.N. 19495

179. LETTER TO C. V. KRISHNA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 24, 1926
MY DEAR KRISHNA,

I had your previous letters. And as you told me in one of them
that you would write again, I did not acknowledge them.
132

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I had the letter in answer to my letter to the late Hanumantharao
regarding the tuberculosis patient. As he was not ready to go, I did not
consider it necessary to write to you merely to tell you that much.
I understand your programme. In my opinion, you are too few
workers to warrant the ambitious programme you have drawn up. I
therefore advice you to move cautiously. How many workers are you
there now? What about the Rs. 3,000 you say you have from
Rustomjee’s funds? Can you not use them? In any case, I would like
you to put yourself in communication with the agent of the All-India
Spinners’ Association. Let him visit your place and you may send
your application through the agent if he will back it. It will be then
perhaps easy for me to get the money you require.
Give in that application the fullest details, your requirements,
your prospects and the number of workers you have, etc. Meanwhile
push further your collection of ten thousand, for, if you make
progress in that direction, it would enable me the better to get the
extra help you want. Am I now clear?
You tell me, the diet of the inmates cost Rs. 6 per month. Please
send me the diet scale with the ruling prices. By the scale, I mean how
much and what is allowed to each inmate.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. C. V. K RISHNA
NELLORE
From a microfilm : S.N. 19496

180. LETTER TO G. STANLEY JONES
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 24, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter and one copy, not two, of your paper.
Is it a weekly or a monthly? I do not find the information in the
copy before me. I shall send you something as soon as I have a little
leisure but after I have heard from you in reply to this.
I was going to Mussoorie but the friends who were interested in
sending me there have relaxed the pressure and let me stay at the
Ashram. I shall await your arrival at the Ashram and look forward to
your stay in our midst be it ever so short. Did you not tell me you had
lived at the Ashram before for a day or two? If, for any reason
VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

133

whatesover, I am away from the Ashram in July, I hope you will still
come. There is just a slight probability of my going to Finland for the
World Students’ Conference. I say only a slight probability because
the matter has not progressed beyond the conversation stage.
Yours sincerely,

G. S TANLEY JONES, E SQ.
S ITAPUR, U.P.
From a microfilm : S.N. 19497

181. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA MUKERJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 24, 1926
DEAR SATIS BABU,

I have now read the pamphlet signed by Miss Edger and other
friends. It is quite unexceptionable. But I doubt the utility of an
organization for the education of public opinion by various kinds of
propaganda “for eradicating war”. That propaganda has really no
meaning in our country at the present moment.
I have had repeated letters from America from the Fellowship
of Reonciliation. I am in correspondence with them still but I have
not joined them as it seems to me to be a mockery for me to join.
May a mouse with any propriety join the organization run by cats for
the purpose of stopping war on mice? It is therefore enough for us to
realize our status and “pray in secret” for peace on earth.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S.N. 19498

182. LETTER TO K. T. MATHEW
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 24, 1926
MY DEAR FRIEND,

I have your interesting letter. I am quite sure that you cannot
amend your resolution in the manner suggested by the president
because it is the Devaswom roads which you want to throw open to all
castes and creeds without let or hindrance. Can you not move a
resolution for removing or amending the prohibitory rule itself? If the
134

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

resolution cannot be moved and if you can get other supporters you
may resign in a body by way of protest and seek re-election educating
public opinion all the while. You should promote also a petition to the
Government for throwing open the roads. And, if you have some
brave and self-sacrificing men who do not belong to the so-called
untouchable group, they should escort the latter through the roads
and face the consequence. That you should do only if the opinion of
caste Hindus is overwhelmingly in your favour. If it is not in your
favour, and if you have men who will delight in endless suffering, you
may still offer satyagraha. If that measure of self-sacrifice is not
possible or if non-violence on the part of reformers cannot be
ensured, you should be satisfied with quiet work amongst the
untouchables and raising their status by helping to raise the level of
character amongst them.
Yours sincerely,

K. T. MATHEW, E SQ.
MEMBER, L EGISLATIVE C OUNCIL
C OCHIN S TATE
C OCHIN
From a microfilm : S.N. 19499

183. LETTER TO SHANKARAN NAMBUDRIPAD
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 24, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

There is a serious complaint against you that at a meeting the
other day regarding the removal of untouchability, you made a
speech at Trivandrum where you incited to violence and said that
nothing but violence would teach the opponents of reforms. I have in
my possession extracts from your speech which I under-stand has
been taken down verbatim. I shall thank you to let me know whether
there is any truth in this report.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S HANKARAN NAMBUDRIPAD
KOPRATTU ILLAM
KOTTAYAM
NORTH TRAVANCORE
From a microfilm : S.N. 19500
VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

135

184. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 24, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter about Prem Maha Vidyalaya. I had a chat with
Prof. A. T. Gidwani whom I suppose you know well. He will require
Rs. 250 per month. If you want him, of course, details will have to be
fixed. You will let me know at an early date whether Professor
Gidwani will suit.
Yours sincerely,

LALA S HANKERLAL
DELHI
From a microfilm : S.N. 19501

185. LETTER TO RAM DATTA CHOPRA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 24, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I am myself totally against vaccination. But
this is a matter in which everybody must decide for himself and not
merely copy the views of others; for, after all it may sometimes
become a question of life and death. It is impossible to assert
positively that no one has been saved from an attack of small pox or
worse by being vaccinated. He, therefore, who refrains from
vannination, does so with the full knowledge that he runs the risk of
himself and his children being disfigured by small pox and even
meeting death. At the same time, this is true that vaccination does not
afford an absolute gurantee against small pox. Therefore those only
will not be vaccinated who hold the body subservient to the soul and
have an inner conviction that vaccination is hurtful for the soul.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. R AM DATTA C HOPRA
HEAD MASTER
D. B. SCHOOL, J ANAURI
DT. H OSHIARPUR (PUNJAB)
From a photostat : S.N. 19502

136

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

186. LETTER TO ZAFARULMULK
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 24, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your lucid letter. The question you have put is really
difficult to answer. But this is one of those questions which everyone must answer for himself. So far as the Congress is concerned you
have absolute liberty of action. But with those with whom non-cooperation has almost become a creed, there is no guidance but that of
the inner voice. If you ask me what I would do myself, I can only say
that I could not work in a body in which the Governor is ex-officio
patron and in which the Chairman and the Secretary are also officials
as such.
Yours sincerely,

ZAFARULMULK, E SQ.
LUCKNOW
From a photostat: S. N. 19503

187. LETTER TO AMULYA CHANDRA SEN
ASHRAM S ABARMATI,

April 24, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter and thank you for your good wishes.
The way you have put my position very nearly takes my breath
away. For, you say, “it is quite clear you have never changed from
untruth to truth.” The statment is both true and untrue. There was no
occasion for me to make a consious effort to speak the truth or to be
able to appreciate truth. But interpreting truth in its broadest sense, I
must confess that I am still filled with untruth and am ever striving to
rid myself of it. Therefore, I can fully endorse the latter portion of the
sentence from which I have quoted; for, I see truth every day clearer
and clerer. The process through which the soul has been passing is an
effort of the heart. The intellect has been hooked to its service by
prayer, meditation and constant watchfulness which are essentially
matters of the heart and which have been the predominant factors that
have contributed to the growing revelation of truth. I have never felt
that whatever knowledge has been gained was imposed from without
VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

137

but that it has come from within. It has been an unfolding, drawing
out or perhaps better still removing the hard and ugly crusts that
overlay the truth that is within us. In other words, the process has been
one of self-purification.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. A MULYA C HANDRA S EN
LANGUAGE S CHOOL
QUEEN’S HILL
DARJEELING
From a photostat: S. N. 19504

188. LETTER TO SOMNATH
ASHRAM,

April 24, 1926
BHAI SOMNATH,

I have your letter. You have asked enough questions. May I
now request you to restrain yourself? Questions relating to the
Ramayana, the Mahabharata, idolatry, etc., are occasionally discussed
in Navajivan. If you read those articles carefully, you will find your
questions answered.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S. N. 19903

189. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM M. SHETH
April 24, 1926
BHAISHRI PURUSHOTTAM,

The present state of Hindu society makes one feel sad, but,
being an optimist, I have hopes for the future. The easiest way to
effect a reform in this matter is that the parents of a child-widow
should themselves arrange her remarriage. Meanwhile, social
reformers should carry on necessary propaganda through speeches,
writings and such other means, observing certain limits. I do not look
upon the second marriage of a child-widow as remarriage. Childmarriage could not be sanctioned by scriptures, and a marriage not so
sanctioned cannot be regarded as a duly solemnized marriage. I have
no doubt that marriage would improve the condition of child-widows.
It certainly cannot lead to immorality. Immorality is increasing
138

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

because such girls are forced to remain widows. In order to encourage
ideal marriages, we should refuse to associate ourselves with
uncivilized marriages and offer our help whenever marriages of the
former kind are celebrated. If the bride and the groom are both 20
years old or the groom is 30, I would not regard it as an ill-matched
union. The ideal education for a woman would be that which, besides
giving her a knowledge of the letters, made her a better wife and in
case she became a widow, would enable her to support herself. I do
not approve of marriages outside varnashrama. There can be only
four castes. I would not encourage the remarriage of a woman who
becomes a widow after she has grown up in years.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
S HRI P URUSHOTTAM MULJI S HETH
VOKALA P HALIYA, B HUJ
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19904

190. LETTER TO AMRITLAL BAHECHARDAS
April 24, 1926
BHAISHRI AMRITLAL,

I had got my life insured in the year 1902, I let it lapse in the
year 1903 or 1904, forfeiting the premia already paid up.
(2) It is my belief that getting one’s life insured betrays a
measure of lack of faith in God.
MOHANDAS GANDHI
S HRI AMRITLAL BAHECHARDAS
KELAPEETH BAZAAR
BROACH
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19905

191. LETTER TO DUNGARSEY KACHARA
ASHRAM,

April 24, 1926
BHAISHRI DUNGARSEY KACHARA,

I have your letter.
I think you should not mind if your parents suffer, nor should
VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

139

you give up your resolve or forsake your dharma while trying to win
them over through persuasion. Your parents’ grief which is due solely
to ignorance will subside in course of time but the guilt of betraying
one’s pledge can never be undone. You should make your life pure
day by day to bring peace to your parents, and serve them in all
possible ways. They will soon realize then that you do the work which
you have undertaken because you regard it as your dharma.
(2) Borodada’s assertion may be true. There is no reason why
we cannot win liberation from the body during this very existence. If
there were, it would prove that the power of the atman had limits to it.
At the most we can say that liberation while yet alive and in this body
is so difficult as to be almost impossible.
(3) It is altogether wrong that cattle should be allowed to
consume night-soil. The milk of a cow which consumes excreta
cannot be good. If people think and follow dharma, they would stop
easing themselves in the streets. All night-soil must be used for
preparing manure.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
S HRI DUNGARSEY KACHARA
BAMBHDAI, P.O. K UTCH BADA
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19906

192. LETTER TO AMRITLAL THAKKAR
ASHRAM,

April 24, 1926
BHAISHRI AMRITLAL,

Since you spoke to me I have been thinking over the subject.
The more I think, the more I feel convinced that you should not take
up that work. I see in the idea excessive attachment to work on your
part. I should not like you to take it up even if you are thinking of
doing it in the manner suggested by me. Even if you have the energy
to apply your mind to new problems, and you are bound to have it
since you regard yourself as a young man, you should utilize it in
giving more thought to the two missions of your life, the service of
Antyajas and Bhils; you will even then be short of time. These two
tasks can do with the life-long services not of yourself alone but of
140

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

many like you. There is and I think there ought to be, a limit to the
desire to do good. If we go looking for suffering in the world, we
shall find that there is no end to it. We shall discover something to
reform at every step. But surely God has not laid on us the burden of
ending all that suffering. If he has, then he has also taught us the
secret of carrying it; and it is that from out of the great heap of
suffering we should pick up one clod of earth. If we resolve to do all
we can to end that suffering and firmly refuse to take up any other
task, we shall have carried the load of the entire hill. If I have
succeeded in impressing this very simple truth upon your mind, I
would ask you to promise me that you will not take up any other work
besides your two missions even for the kingdom of the earth. And
then if you ever feel that those two tasks do not absorb all your time,
please come to me. I promise to show to you then that there was in
those very fields much that you had omitted to do.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS GANDHI
BHIL S EVA MANDAL,
DOHAD
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19907

193. LETTER TO RAMU THAKKAR
ASHRAM,

April 24, 1926
BHAISHRI RAMU,

I have your letter. You have described me as the creator of a
new age and asked my advice. But after describing me thus you have
immediately proceeded to demolish that image; while seeking my
advice, you yourself have given me some. A person who goes to a
medical man who has but one remedy for all diseases, and asks for
one other than that, can only be said to be pulling his leg. Don’t you
think you have done something like that? Moreover, this is your
estimate of the achievement of the creator of an age : “In your
unfruitful effort to win swaraj, you have wasted many years and much
money and energy.” Tell me now, what sort of peace of mind do you
hope to learn from a creator of an age such as this? You may dislike
the charkha, but why malign Ramanama? If you only keep repeating
that name, all the girls and women who haunt your imagination will
VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

141

win their freedom. You seem to think that Ramanama is for the
passionless; what has such a person to do with Ramanama? It was a
person troubled by lustful thoughts who discovered the power of that
name, and it was because I used it to quench the fire of passion in me
and found it effective that I have been recommending it to men and
women who are troubled in the same way.
There are not as many unhappy women and girls as you think
there are. The unhappy ones can, if they choose, take the help of the
law. Yes, it is certainly true that these women are not conscious of their
rights, and those who are do not have the strength to assert them. The
remedy is simply the spread of true education. True education means
building of character, and that is not possible without Ramanama.
Moreover, such unhappy women are generally without any means
and, if they wish to preserve their virtue, the charkha is the only means
for them. These are some of the reasons why for me learning begins
with these two, [Ramanama and charkha]. But how can I expect you
to approve of my ideas? So you will have to look elsewhere for a
remedy for the suffering which you think exists. If you fail in your
search, you may come to me. My faith and patience are inexhaustible,
and I will, therefore, wait for you quietly.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS GANDHI
S HRI R AMU P ARMANAND THAKKAR
S HAMALDAS C OLLEGE
BHAVNAGAR
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19908

194. PREJUDICE AGAINST KHADI
I complient this patriotic youth 1 on his determination and
sacrifice, and hope that he will keep up his attitude, will not, in future
too, be tempted by higher salary or go back on his pledge or change
his dress. If even at this hour khadi can be insulted, more than the
British, we are to blame. British firms get any number of young men
1

His letter, not translated here, describes how he had sacrificed his education
for the national cause and always wore khadi. He was afterwards selected for
appointment as shorthand typist in a British firm but, on his presenting himself
for duty, was turned away because of his khadi dress. Vide “For and against Khadi”,
22-4-1926.

142

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

who are ready to serve them on their terms, and those people are not
worried and can afford to behave as they like. If everyone understood
the value of khadi and was ready to make some little sacrifice for the
sake of the country, the prejudice against khadi would disappear
immediately.

HOW A “ S ANATANI” MAY ACT
A learned and orthodox Hindu, who subscribes himself as “A
Santani Hindu”, writes :1
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 25-4-1926

195. ABOLISH MARRIAGE !2
A correspondent, whom I know well, raises an issue, I take it, for
purely academic interest, because I know the views he has set out are
not his. ‘Is not our present-day morality unnatural?’ he asks. If it
was natural it should have been the same everywhere in all ages, but
every race and community seems to have its own peculiar marriage
laws and in enforcing them men have made themselves worse than
beasts. For diseases which are unknown amongst animals are quite
common amongst men; infanticide, abortions, child-marriages, which
are impossible in the brute creation, are the curse of the society that
holds up marriage as a sacrament, and no end of evil results have
sprung from what we uphold as laws of morality. And the miserable
condition of Hindu widows—what is it due to, but to the existing
marriage laws? Why not go back to nature, and take a leaf out of the
book of the brute creation?
I do not know whether the advocates of free love in the West
resort to the argument summarized above or have any stronger
reasons to put forth, but I am sure that the tendency to regard the
marriage bond as barbarous is distinctly Western. If the argument is
also borrowed from the West, there is no difficulty about meeting it.
1

The letter is not translated here. The correspondent had quoted, in
connection with the temple-entry movement in the South, a Sanskrit stanza which
said that one need not take a bath after touching a Chandala waiting outside a temple
to have a glimpse of the deity’s image.
2
The Gujarati original of this appeared in Navajivan, 25-4-1926. This is a
condensed translation by Mahadev Desai.
VOL.35 : 2 April, 1926 - 7 July, 1926

143

It is a mistake to institute a comparison between man and the
brute and it is this comparison that vitiates the whole argument. For
man is higher than the brute in his moral instincts and moral
institutions. The law of nature as applied to the one is different from
the law of nature as applied to the other. Man has reason,
discrimination, and free will such as it is. The brute has no such thing.
It is not a free agent, and knows no distinction between virtue and vice,
good and evil. Man, being a free agent, knows these distinctions, and
when he follows his higher nature shows himself far superior to the
brute, but when he folows his baser nature, can show himself lower
than the brute. Even the races regarded as the most uncivilized on
earth accept some restriction on sexual relations. If it be said that the
restriction is itself barbarous, then freedom from all restraints should
be the law of man. If all men were to act according to this lawless law,
there would be perfect chaos within twenty-four hours. Man being by
nature more passionate than the brute, the moment all restraint is
withdrawn, the lava of unbridled passion would overspread the whole
earth and destroy mankind. Man is superior to the brute inasmuch as
he is capable of self-restraint and sacrifice, of which the brute is
incapable.
Some of the diseases that are so common at the present day are
the result of infringement of marriage laws. I should like to know a
single instance of a man strictly observing the restraint of the marriage
bond having suffered from the diseases the correspondent has in
mind. Infanticide, child-marriage and the like are also the result of the
breach of marriage laws. For the law lays down that a man or woman
shall choose a mate only when he or she has come of age, is healthy,
and capable of restraint, and desires to have progeny. Those who
strictly obey this law, and regard the marriage bond as a sacrament,
have never an occasion to be unhappy or miserable. Where marriage
is a sacrament, the union is not the union of bodies but the union of
souls indissoluble even by the death of either party. Where there is a
true union of souls, the remarriage of a widow or widower is
unthinkable, improper and wrong. Marriages, where the true law of
marriage is ignored, do not deserve the name. If we have very few true
marriages nowadays, it is not the institution of marriage that is to
blame, but the prevailing form of it, which should be reformed.
The correspondent contends that marriage is no moral or
religious bond but a custom, and a custom which is opposed to
religion and mora-lity, and hence deserves to be abolished. I submit
144

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

that marriage is a fence that protects religion. If the fence were to be
destroyed religion would go to pieces. The foundation of religion is
restraint and marriage is nothing but restraint. The man who knows no
restraint has no hope of self-realization. I confess it may be dificult to
prove the necessity of restraint to an atheist or a materialist. But he
who knows the perishable nature of flesh from the imperishable
nature of the spirit instinctively knows that self-realization is
impossible without self-discipline and self-restraint. The body may
either be a play-ground of passion or a temple of self-realization. If it
is the latter, there is no room there for liberatinism. The spirit needs
must curb the flesh every moment.
Woman will be the apple of discord where the marriage bond is
loose, where there is no observance of the law of restraint. If men were
as unrestrained as the brutes they would straightway take the road to
destruction. I am firmly of opinion that all the evils that the
correspondent complains of can be eradicated not by abolishing
marriage but by a systematic understanding and observance of the law
of marriage.
I agree that whereas amongst some communities marriage is
permitted amongst very near relations, it is prohibited among other
communities, that whereas some communities forbid polygamy some
permit it. Whilst one would wish that there was a uniform moral law
accepted by all communities, the diversity does not point to the
necessity of abolishing all restraint. As we grow wise in experience our
morality will gain in uniformity. Even today the moral sense of the
world holds up monogamy as the highest ideal and no religion makes
polygamy obligatory. The ideal remains unaffected by the relaxation
of practice according to time and place.
I need not reiterate my views regarding remarriage of widows, as
I consider remarriage of virgin widows not only desirable but the
bounden duty of all parents who happen to have such widowed
daughters.
Young India, 3-6-1926

196. LETTER TO AHMED MIYAN
April 25, 1926
BHAI AHMED MIYAN,

I have your letter.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

145

1-2. In my opnion, my efforts for Hindu-Muslim unity have not
been fruitless. However much the two communities may be estranged
at present, I think ultimately they will have to [come together]1 .
3. Unity is certainly essential for the solution of the country’s
problems.
4. Money can be spent only for the cause for which it was
collected.
5. I have not been able to discover the reasons for the painful
incidents at Calcutta. I put little trust in newspaper reports. The Arya
Samaj, I believe, used to take out processions formerly too.
6. I think it would be betraying lack of faith in God even to
speculate whether or not the results would have been better if I had
adopted some other way.
7. It is, I know, for God to worry who will take my place, why
then should I worry about it?
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19909

197. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
ASHRAM,

April 25, 1926
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I have your letter. The Governor has replied that it is not
necessary for me to go there at present. It will do if I see him in June
after he comes down; so we are free from the bother of having to go
to Mahabaleshwar.
I did make some mention to Lalaji about his grievance but he
refused to admit to me that he had any. Since we know the trouble, we
will certainly apply the remedy when he is here.
I will speak to Motilalji when there is an opportunity to do so. I
am sure there will be no difficulty in regard to that matter.
I do not feel like sending away Devdas from here just now. It
would be better if he leaves only after he has completely recovered his
health. Moreover, if I am required to go to Europe I shall have to
1

146

‘ Fight it out’ in the source
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

think what I should do and whom I should take with me. My present
intention is that Mahadev and Devdas should accompany me. For this
reason, too, it is better that Devdas should stay here for the present. If
at all we decide to go, we shall be leaving at the beginning of July. I
have received no reply as yet.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 2861

198. LETTER TO NAGINDAS
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Sunday, April 25, 1926
BHAISHRI NAGINDAS,

Read the enclosed postcard and let me know what you wrote to
him. If this gentleman had ordered books as per the announcement in
Navajivan, I think you should have sent them. . . . Let me also know
how many orders you have received to date on cash payment.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19506

199. LETTER TO GULABDAS LALJI 1
ASHRAM,

April 25, 1926
BHAISHRI GULABDAS,

1. There cannot be any difficulty in studying at home any of
the subjects2 you have mentioned.
2. It is for the person concerned to see that his work in the
profession does not kill his better feelings. I certainly rate these
professions3 inferior to agriculture and other manual work.
3. For the practice of brahmacharya, one’s diet should be
simple and light; spices and stimulating foods should be avoided.
4. There is certainly some meaning in the distinction which is
made, from the point of view of non-violence, between greens and
pulses. At the present time, however, dharma is restricted to making
1
2
3

This was in response to two sets of questions by the addressee.
Engineering, medicine and homoeopathy
ibid.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

147

such distinctions and, therefore, this one has become unprofitable.
5. So long as women are, and believe that they are, dependent,
people see nothing wrong in their having to submit to more
restrictions than men.
1. I do not think that dharma requires a wife to do everything
her husband does.
2. A husband may not force his wife to wear khadi, but may
persuade her to do so only with the power of his love.
3. Both the son and his wife should insist on wearing khadi,
but so long as the father requires their services they should not leave
his house.
4. To me it seems altogether wrong that a man should take a
second wife, with or without the first wife’s consent. In my opinion, a
man may not marry again even if his wife has borne him no children.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19910

200. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
April 26, 1926
I do not feel like going there at all. I do not like to leave the
Ashram even for an hour.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi p. 87

201. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
ASHRAM,

Monday, April 26, 1926
BHAISHRI KAKA,

I have your letters. I shall certainly answer your question about
cow’s milk, but not today.
When asked about the new almanac Swami said that he did not
understand the problem. I at any rate do not. Explain it to us after
you get well and revise the almanac. Can we, however, introduce any
changes without first discussing them at length in Navajivan? I have
not yet been able to understand the significance of the proposed
changes. Shri Harihar is expected here in a few days; I shall try to
148

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

understand it from him . . . . 1
My Mussoorie trip is off for ever. The meeting with the
Governor will also take place either in Poona or Bombay, in June. At
present the air is thick with talk about a trip to Fin- land. I have not
yet received the final reply. I still think that they will not agree to my
condition regarding my dress. If the journey is finally decided upon,
I shall be away for not less than three months.
More in my next.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S. N. 19911

202. LETTER TO CHANDRASHANKAR PANDYA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Monday, April 26, 1926
BHAISHRI CHANDRASHANKAR,

I was glad to have your letter.
Who gave you the right to fall ill again? How if you return it to
the person who gave it to you? Or is it that, in this age of freedom, we
may not give up any rights which we have once secured?
Believe me I am making my humble efforts as you desire. I
believe in every word of the last line in the verse quoted by you.
“Though outwardly following different paths, may we be one in
heart.”
Motilalji is also working towards the same end, but how can we
have unity when the hearts are divided? Difference in ideology may
also keep the hearts divided. It would be good to have only two
parties, the Government and the people; but I do not think this
possible at present. When our hearts feel in that way, nothing more
remains to be done. It should be our ceaseless efforts to bring about
what is lacking now.
If you come to Ahmedabad and stay here for a couple of days,
1

As in the source

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

149

we shall discuss this at length.
Vandemataran from

MOHANDAS GANDHI
S HRI C HANDRASHANKAR P ANDYA
HIGH C OURT P LEADER
C HINA BAGH, G IRGAON
BOMBAY
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S. N. 19912

203. LETTER TO S. GANESAN
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 27, 1926
MY DEAR GANESAN,

I have your telegram. I send you a copy of the essay1 so far as it
has been typed. It will cover in all 100 pages. This ought to enable
you to give me your exact quotation. The original intention was to
publish through the Navajivan office. As Varadachari is in Madras
and as I learn that probably the essay can be printed cheaper in
Madras, I thought I would first have the quotation from you before
deciding to give it to Navajivan.
The required paper has alreday been bought for the book. If
therefore you are to print the essay the paper will have to be
transferred to you. So you may give me your quotation without the
cost of the the paper for 2,000 copies. And you will give me the exact
date of delivery of copies after the thing is put into your hands.
It will be necessary for me to consult also Varadachari whether
he can stay in Madras and do it on his own responsibility. In order to
expedite matters you will perhaps see or correspond with Varadachari
also.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S.N. 19507

1

Hand-spinning and Hand-weaving—An Essay by S. V. Puntambekar and N.
S. Varadachari

150

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

204. LETTER TO S. SRINIVASA IYENGAR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 27, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I had your telegram. I saw your interview only yesterday. I
expect you in Sabarmati at the time of the A.I.C.C. meeting.
I fully appreciate your position and difficulty. The only part
that I played then and should play now is to act as a peacemaker. I am
not interested in the Councils at all. I may be regarded as a
disinterested party. That is about all that can be said of myself.
The more I study the Councils’ work, the effect of entry into the
Councils upon public life, its repercussion upon the Hindu-Muslim
question, the more convinced I become not only of the futility but of
the inadvisability of Council-entry. I would welcome the day when at
least a few of the comrades of 1920 leave the Councils to their fate
and work if they like at the charkha programme or any other thing
they wish. I have not a shadow of doubt that they will be the reserve
force ready for mobilization when the time for battle comes. However,
that is my view. For the present, I bottle it up and keep it to myself
except when I share it with friends like you. The time for its public
ventilation is not yet come. I should simply add one more to the
already existing disturbing factors without doing the slightest good.
This, therefore, is only for your eyes. More when we meet.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S. S RINIVASA IYENGAR
AMJAD BAGH
MYLAPORE, M ADRAS
From a photostat: S. N. 19508

205. LETTER TO DR. MANEKBAI BAHADURAJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 27, 1926
DEAR MANEKBAI,

I have your welcome letter. I was delighted to receive it. I would
certainly have stayed with you had I gone to Mahabaleshwar, even if it
was for only a day but I am not called upon now to go to
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

151

Mahabaleshwar. I had asked the Governor to postpone the interview
till he came down from the hills after the season and he has agreed. It
means for me a saving of a few days though at the same time a
deprivation of the pleasure of meeting you and Mr. Bahadurji.
I had a reminder from him that he was not a doctor but as I
knew you before I knew him, evidently in the hurry of dictating I
forgot the distinction. I do not tender my apologies, for, I see no harm
in the husband of a doctress also being called a doctor by way of
courtesy.
Do you remember the singlets you sent me? And, do you also
remember that you owe me more? I shan’t call upon you to fulfil the
promise as I cannot need them in this boiling heat. But I send the
reminder so that I can fall back upon your promise whenever I need
them.
With regards to you all,
Yours sincerely,

DR. M ANEKBAI BAHADURJI
C OMRA HALL
P ANCHGANI
From a photostat : S.N. 19509

206. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Chaitra Poornima [April 27, 1926]
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I have your letter. I enclose for your knowledge the receipt
received from Jamnalalji’s office for that part of the amount of your
cheque which was intended as your contribution to the All-India
Deshbandhu Memorial Fund. I learn for the first time that receipts are
issued after deducting draft charges.
What more may I say about the Hindu-Muslim fighting? I fully
understand what is best for us, but I also know that anything I say at
present will just be a cry in the wilderness. Who can drive away a fly
sitting on honey? Who can stop the moth from circling round the
flame?
I have been reaping a great many benefits from the decision not
to go to Mussoorie. Why did you send a telegram from Delhi asking
152

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

me to go when you had already given your opinion here? But who
can destroy him whom God protects?
I do not know my own mind in regard to the visit to Finland. I
have sound reasons both for and against going there, and because I
could not decide either way, I told those who had invited me that I
would accept their invitation on certain conditions; if they agree to
have me on those conditions, I would conclude that it was necessary
that I should go.
We shall see what happens at the All-India Congress Committee
meeting.
I want Shri Jugalkishore’s consent in regard to the Chinese
student, since he takes special interest in such matters. I wrote to him
remembering what he had said to me. In matters which lie outside my
own sphere, I act only if I get the help of friends who would know. I
do not want to add unnecessarily to the burdens you shoulder for my
sake. As long as you brothers have separate accounts, I too shall deal
with each of you individually. Kindly therefore, let me know what
Shri Jugalkishore would like me to do.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From the Hindi original : C.W. 6125a. Courtesy : G. D. Birla

207. LETTER TO JUGALKISHORE BIRLA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Wednesday, April 28, 1926
BHAI JUGALKISHOREJI,

I got your letter today. I will send the money for the girl. At
present the Chinese student seems to possess all fine qualities of
character. At his own request, he has been given an Indian name. We
call him Shanti.
Though the present strife between Hindus and Muslims is
painful, I see a ray of peace shining through it. I always pray to God
that we may not forget our dharma.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From the Hindi ogirinal : C.W. 6126. Courtesy : G. D. Birla

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

153

208. LETTER TO DEVCHAND PAREKH
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Wednesday [April 28, 1926] 1
BHAISHRI DEVCHANDBHAI,

I have your letter. What you have written to the Dewan Saheb2 is
all right. I shall let you know if [it] does not arrive in about eight
days.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 5706

209. LETTER TO NAJUKLAL N. CHOKSI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Wednesday, April 28, 1926
BHAISHRI NAJUKLAL,

This letter too, though addressed to you, is meant for both of
you. Husband and wife both have the right to use, if necessary, a goad
or a stick against the other partner; only, the goad should be of the
satyagrahi type, like that satyagrahi abuse. As for Moti, I warn her that
I will use nothing but the goad to drive out her laziness and improve
her handwriting. She is welcome to leave the Ashram in fear at the
prospect. And when she leaves where else but to you will she go?
There is certainly some resemblance between the jealous and the
godfearing. The actions of either are amusing, and both pin their faith
in the unknown. He must be a proud man or a fool who wastes the
divine gift of time in thinking over matters on which no one can come
to a definite conclusion or which do not involve any issue of
principle. I am not a fool nor a proud man; I am godfearing, so I
saved time by drawing lots to avoid argument among friends. What
difference would it make if I went to Mussoorie? Or, if I did not go?
To live in India and to hanker after cool places all the year round is as
silly as to live in a river and make the crocodile your enemy.
Blessings from
BAPU

S JT. N AJUKLAL NANDLAL C HOKSI
R ASHTRIYA KELAVANI MANDAL
BROACH
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 12127-A
1
2

154

From the postmark
ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

210. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Wednesday [April 28, 1926] 1
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. Now you have got to leave Deolali. Since so
many doctors have given the same advice, it is best to leave. Sinhgadh
is far better than Matheran. It is best for you to go there. You can stay
there till the first week of June. In June even Deolali will be cool. But
by then, there will be no difficulty about getting the bungalow at
Panchgani. So you will be able to stay wherever youwish. But the best
thing is to decide quickly and go to Sinhgadh. Pyarelal is silent for
the present.
Blessings from

BAPU
MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
WINDY HALL
NASIK R OAD
DEOLALI (G.I.P)
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

211. SOUTH AFRICA
The Government of India has every reason to congratulate itself
upon the diplomatic victory it has gained in South Africa. I have
shown elsewhere 2 that nothing could have been done in South Africa
but for the extraordinary faith and labours of C. F. Andrews.
Nevertheless had the Government of India been at all remiss in its
prosecution of the Indian claim, the Areas Reservation Bill would
certainly have been passed by the Union Parliament. It is a great gain
that the Bill has been postponed and a conference agreed upon.
But there is a fly in the ointment. The Union Government’s
condition and its acceptance by the Government of India that the
resolution must “safeguard Western standards of life by just and
legitimate means” may make an equitable solution impossible. What
1
2

From the postmark
Vide “Statement on South African Indian Problem”, 24-4-1926.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

155

is the meaning of “safeguarding Western standards of life” or of
“just and legitimate means”? The safeguard may mean, for instance,
that the indentured Indian working on the plantations and getting
perhaps 30 shillings per month should live like the European artisan
in a five-roomed brick-built cottage and wear the European costume
from top to toe and eat European food; and “just and legitimate
means” may be compulsory deportation of those indentured Indians
who do not conform to the impossible safeguard; or “safeguarding
by just and legitimate means” may mean reasonable sanitary and
economic laws of common applicability ensuring on the part of all a
standard of life in keeping with sanitary and hygienic requirements
and regulation of all business in conformity to the European standard.
Indians would have and should have no objection to the latter
interpretation. Never have objections been raised to general sanitary
or economic requirements.
But the correspondence just published enables me to understand what the Union Government will want. That Government wants
repatriation, not reformation. It would not be party to the holding of a
conference if the Government of India would not consent to that
question being favourably considered at the Con- ference. Lord
Reading cleverly got out of the difficulty by saying he had no
objection to voluntary repatriation as limited by the Indian Relief Act
being discussed. The Union Government could not very well insist
upon the precise terms of repatriation being previously accepted.
They therefore discovered the new formula of conformity to
“Western standards of life”. On the face of it, the condition is
harmless enough. But it can be made to cover, as I have shown,
impossibilities. Much will therefore depend upon what mentalities
both parties bring to the Conference and what strength the
Government of India shows. Hitherto it has surrendered the Indian
claim every time there has been a tussle and has claimed it as a virtue
that it has not yielded all the Union Government has aimed at. This is
as much as to say that the judge in a cause did not permit the thief to
retain all he had stolen. It must never be forgotten that every time the
South African Government has admittedly without just cause sought
to deprive the Indian settler of his just rights as a peaceful citizen of
South Africa. The Government of India to be true to its trust should
therefore have been able to show a record at each tussle of recovery of
lost ground. The fact however is that had not the settlers in 1907 taken
the law, as it were, into their own hands, they would have lost all, the
156

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Government of India being privy to it. For the Indian and the
Imperial Governments had already consented in 1907 to the brutal
Asiatic Act—the same that was in 1906 vetoed by Lord Elgin, the then
Secretary of State for the Colonies. Though, therefore, the
postponement of the Bill and the Conference is a tremendous step
gained in the present campaign, if the Government of India weaken in
the final heat, the present advantage will be counted as a wasted effort.
The public has thus as great need to be watchful as ever if the
advantage is not to be lost. The breathing time must be fully utilized
for a close study of the problem and for elucidating the fact that the
only crime provable against the Indian settler is his Asiatic birth and
the possession of a coloured pigment. It is statutory crime. For, the
South African constitution in effect says : “There shall be no equality
between whites on the one hand, and coloured and asiatic races on the
other.” South Africa believes as much in hereditary caste as we do in
India.
Lastly, I must not omit to reiterate the opinion given in these
columns that the salvation of the settlers lies finally in their own
hands. The Government of India, public opinion, and even the Union
Government and the white people of South Africa will help them if
they will help themselves. Let them remove the slightest cause of
complaint against them whether on grounds of hygience or
economics. In all things not immoral let them do “in Rome as
Romans do”. Let them be and remain absolutely united. And above
all let them be resolute in suffering for the common good.
Young India, 29-4-1926

212. MARCH FIGURES
The returns of production and sale of khadi for the month of
March in several provinces are as follows :1
The figures of Karnatak are incomplete. There is no noticeable
change in the position from February except in the sales of S.
Maharashtra, Bombay and Utkal which show an increase over the
February figures. The comparatively large sales in S. Maharashtra are
due to the fact that the figure includes the sales effected in the khadi
exhibitions that are being organized by Mr. Patwardhan.
1

Not reproduced here

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

157

As compared with the figures for the corresponding month last
year wherever figures for comparison are available there is a general
increase both in production and sales. The comparative figures are
given below :1
The Tamilnad sale figure for the month of March 1925 is
exceptional, owing to Mr. Bharucha’s hawking tour.
Young India, 29-4-1926

213. NOT QUANTITY BUT QUALITY
Times without number have I been asked : “What can be done
if we are so few. See how few spinners we have in the Spinners’
Association? how few civil resisters? How few pucka non-cooperators? How few prohibitionists?” All this is, alas, too true. But
when we come to think of it, what is there in numbers? The more
relevant question is, how many true spinners, true civil resisters, true
non-co-operators, true prohibitionists are there in the country? It is
character, determination, and courage that will count in the end. And I
wish I could say that we have 4,000 true spinners. What is a true
spinner? A true spinner is not one who merely spins. In that case we
have not four thousand but probably four hundred thousand spinners.
It is not enough to spin. It is necessary to spin even a strong yarn
regularly for the sake of India’s paupers. Spinning, therefore, must
not be a task but it must be a pleasure. It is not enough to belong to
the Association but it is necessary to invite others to do likewise. And
a true spinner revolutionizes his life. He therefore understands the
gospel of simplicity, appreciates the dignity of body-labour,
recognizes that the greatest need of India is self-reliance and therefore
work for the millions in their own homes which they can do with the
simplest tools.
One is told that the revolution in Japan was brought about not
through thousands of men but at the head of it were only 12 men who
fired the zeal of fifty-five. And, probably, amongst these 12 was only
one man who was the author of the whole plan. If a true beginning is
made the rest is simple. We therefore arrive at the astonishing
conclusion, which is none the less true, that one true man is enough
for any reform no matter how impossible it may appear in the
beginning. Ridicule, contempt and death may be and often is the
1

158

Not reproduced here
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

reward of such a man. But though he may die, the reforms survive and
prosper. He ensures their stability with his blood. I wish, therefore, that
workers will think less of numbers irrespective of strength but more of
the strength of the few. It is depth more than the width that is wanted.
If we lay a stable foundation, posterity will be able to erect a solid
structure upon it, whereas, if the foundation is built of sand, there will
be no work for posterity except to dig out the sand to lay the
foundation anew.
Young India, 29-4-1926

214. NOTES
THE GOOD SAMARITAN
I received the following cablegram from the Secretary, South
African Indian Congress, Durban, before the decision of the South
African Government was known :
Congress meeting assembled tender you grateful thanks for sending Mr.
Andrews to South Africa, who nobly and strenuously worked bringing great
change feeling both communities. May he enjoy long life, continue his noble
work cause of humanity.

I have withheld from the public similar cablegrams received
during Mr. Andrews’ strenuous tour in South Africa but I felt I could
no longer withhold the foregoing especially in view of the results
attained. I am aware that the services of this selfless Englishman have
not been always properly understood. He is no diplomat and therefore
he sends cablegrams faithfully recording opinion and feelings from
day to day. He is therefore at times despondent, at times optimistic,
but if one were patiently to collect all the cablegrams that he has been
sending during the past few months, one would trace in them all a
never-to-be-missed ring of hope when to the sceptic there was no
ground for hope. His last cable to me on the eve of his departure from
South Africa told me not to lose hope because he was hopeful. If he
had faith in the righteousness of the Indian cause, he had faith also in
the South African statesmen. Andrews is a humanitarian, pure and
simple, and therefore he trusts everybody. The whole world is free to
deceive him and he would still say “Humanity! With all thy faults I
love thee still”. And this love of his enables him to surmount all
barriers and cut his way straight to the hearts of people. He made
himself heard in South Africa where, perhaps, others would have been
hissed. He paved the way for the Paddison deputation.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

159

The mention of the Paddison deputation enables me to add the
testimony I have received from South Africa to the one that Sjt. C
Rajagopalachariar gave in favour of Mr. Paddison when the
deputation left. This is what a correspondent has written from South
Africa :
He is an Englishman by birth and an Indian in outlook. In fact, I see no
difference between him and Mr. Andrews. It is a surprise that man of his talents
should have risen no higher than the Labour Commissionership of Madras.
Whether his strong Indian sympathies are responsible for this is more than I
know at present.

All accounts received by me show that the members of the deputation
discharged their trust faithfully and well. But even this deputation
could not have done half as well as they did, without the spade work
that was done by Andrews and the incessant toil put by him into it.

IN THE GRIP OF UNTOUCHABILITY
We have heard
much
about
untouchability
and
unapproachability of Travancore because there was satyagraha there.
The lamp of suffering brought the Travancore dirt to light but it
seems that there is much more of it in Cochin than in Tranvancore.
There the repeated attempts to bring even a resolution before the
Cochin Legislative Assembly asking the Cochin state to remove the
ban on the use of public roads by untouchables was disallowed.
An assiduous member enquired in the Cochin Legislative
Assembly : “How many tanks and wells maintained by Government
or Municipal funds were closed to untouchables?” The reply was that
61 tanks and 123 wells were so closed. It would have been interesting
if a supplementary question had been asked to elicit how many wells
and tanks were accessible to untouchables.
Another question asked was : “On what ground was the use of
certain roads constructed and maintained by the Public Works
Department prohibited to untouchables,” euphemistically called by
the questioner “non-Hindus”? Reasons given without any sense of
shame on behalf of the Cochin Government were : “The roads are in
close proximity to temples and palace. There cannot be a sudden
break with the past. Long-standing customs have to be respected”.
The reader must note the word “palace”. One may suppose,
therefore, that the Panchama has no right of personal petition, for, he
cannot traverse roads near the palace, much less can he enter them.
The officials who gave the heartless answer are able, educated and
160

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

cultured men, in other walks of life even liberal minded; but they
justify a cruel, heartless and irreligious custom on the grounds of
antiquity.
One learns in law books that crimes and immoralities do not
enjoy the benefit of prescription. Their antiquity cannot make them
respectable. But it is evidently otherwise in the Cochin State. Who can
deny that the custom of untouchability is immoral, barbarous and
cruel? Thus the laws of Chohin State are in a way much worse than
those of South Africa. The common law of South Africa refuses to
admit equality between white and Coloured races. The common law of
Cochin bases inequality on birth in a particular group. But the
incidence of inequality in Cochin is infinitely more inhuman than in
South Africa for, an untouchable in Cochin is deprived of more
human rights than the Coloured man in South Africa. There is no
such thing as unapproachability or invisibility in South Africa. I have
no desire to single out Cochin for its disgraceful treatment of
untouchables; for, it is still unfortunately common to Hindus all over
India more or less. But, in Cochin, besides the so-called sanction of
religion, untouchability has the sanction of the State. Mere levelling
up of public opinion, therefore, can be of no avail in Cochin unless it
becomes so strong as to compel the state to abolish the barbarous
custom.

ROOM FOR IMPROVEMENT
The Manager of the Technical Department of the All-India
Spinners’ Association has handed me the following names 1 of
spinners who have sent in their yarn regularly, whose counts are over
25 and whose strands are well and neatly made :
It will be observed that in this list the first place is given to the
spinner who has spun 46 counts. The highest count comes last but
one. Aparna Devi who at a time occupied the first place stands 19th
on the list in spite of her 113 counts. This is the note that accompanies
the list :
These yarns have been singled out for neatness and evenness. But even
the best does not come up to the mill yarn standard.

It is therefore not without difficulty that these fine counts can be
woven. The foregoing list therefore has been published more for the
encouragement of these very spinners than as an example for others
1

Not reproduced here

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

161

to copy. As these spinners have been sending in their quota more
regularly and have shown considerable industry they are urged to put
greater art into their work so that they may draw stronger threads than
they have done hitherto.
Experiments are now being made by Sjt. Laxmidas Purshottam
to demonstrate that given good cotton and good carding, it is possible
to draw fine thread that would beat the strongest mill yarn of the same
count. I hope to publish the results of his experiments at an early date.
Meanwhile let the 27 spinners make their own experiments and send
stronger yarn than they have been sending. I hope they realize that
the twist should be given as they draw the yarn and not at the end of
every draw and that the yarn should be sprayed and allowed to absorb
the moisture before it is taken off the winder.

TOTAL PROHIBITION
A correspondent writes :1
I congratulate the villagers on the closing of their liquor shops.
But if there had been a referendum probably very few, as in the
Punjab, would have taken the trouble of registering their votes unless
there had been personal canvassing.
Young India, 29-4-1926

215. THE BENGAL RELIEF COMMITTEE
A correspondent sends me a cutting from Welfare commenting
upon the operations of the Bengal Relief Committee. The article
reviews the report of the Committee. The correspondent says :
As it seriously questions the utility of khaddar organizations as relief
measures, I would beg you to request Sir P. C. Ray or the Khadi Pratishthan to
offer their explanation with facts and figures. I might add that I am a habitual
wearer of khadi though I am sorry I am not a self-spinner; some of the ladies of
my family are. I mention this to assure you that I am not prejudiced against
khaddar.

But the explanation was unnecessary. Anything mentioned in
Sjt. Ramananda Chatterjee’s magazine would naturally command
weight and deserve attention. I therefore immediately passed the
cutting and the letter on to Sjt. Satis Chandra Das Gupta and he has
1

The letter, not reproduced here, stated that the closure of drink shops in
villages—Illur Kallamadi, Tarimela—had led to rejoicings by the villagers.

162

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

promptly sent the following1 signed by Dr. Ray and himself. I need
not reproduce the Welfare article as the crux of the Welfare objections
is summarized in Dr. Ray’s reply.
Young India, 29-4-1926

216. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 30, 1926
MY DEAR YOUNG FRIEND BHRRR,

I have your letter full of youthful zeal. Some people grow older
with years. You are reversing the process. I envy you and I shall now
have to tell the people the whiter your beard the younger you are
becoming. May the process continue for a long time to come.
By way of change and in order to compare notes, if you feel
like it by all means come for the All-India Congress Committee seeing
that you are so near. You may suspend your tour for two or three
days.
I hope what you say about Ramdas is really true. I know that he
is a fine nurse and has a faculty for serving elderly, I beg your
pardon, in your case, young people like yourself.
The hot weather has now commenced here in right earnest.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat : S. N. 9554

217. LETTER TO PYARELAL NAYYAR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 30, 1926
MY DEAR PYARELAL,

I have not heard from you at all. You must not keep me in
suspense. How is your health and how do you pass your time?
Regarding the spinning essay, I am in correspondence with
Varadachari and Ganesan. Hence I have not sent the thing to you. But
I will, after the fully copy is made. Subbiah is now at it.
1

Not reproduced here

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

163

I have heard from Mathuradas. Between Sinhgarh and
Matheran, I prefer Sinhgarh. In any case, Mr. Ambalal is not here. If
necessary I could certainly find out his address and telegraph to see
whether his bungalow is available. If, therefore, Dr. Mehta advises
Matheran and if Mr. Ambalal’s bungalow is required you will consult
Mathuradas and telegraph to me.
Yours,
From a microfilm : S. N. 19510

218. LETTER TO URMILA DEVI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 30, 1926
MY DEAR SISTER,

I have your letter. You need not worry about my health. I
gained one pound during the last week. The heat does not trouble me
though at the present moment we are certainly boiling.
I am delighted with your description of your hospital. I was a
little uneasy over the delay. When you meet Dr. Bidhan 1 do please
give him my regards and congratulations. I am glad you are taking so
much interest in it. It would be a fine thing if you can attach yourself
to the hospital. It is worth doing. When many things will have been
forgotten this memorial will be remembered. The memory of him will
grow if the institution becomes a living force in the life of Calcutta.
I would not tempt you to come to Sabarmati for the A.I.C.C.
meeting. I hardly think you could bear the dry heat of this place but it
will be perfect during the Puja holidays when the rains will be in full
swing; you could then stay as long as you like and if your presence is
not required there you could stay till it is time to go to Assam.
Yours,
From a photostat : S. N. 19511

219. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 30, 1926
DEAR SATIS BABU,

I have your letter as also the book on Buddhism with the pages
marked with exceptional care and neatness which are all your own. I
1

164

Dr. B. C. Roy
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

read these pages through the very day I received the book, if only in
appreciation of the exact manner in which you had tied the pages for
me.
You have not yet told me anything about Hemaprabhadevi. I
wonder.
Yours,
From a microfilm : S. N. 19512

220. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 30, 1926
MY DEAR CHILD,

I have your letter. I do feel disturbed about your health. You
must regain your original freshness and strength. When do you expect
your sickness ?
I am sorry to hear about the disorganization of Miss Peterson’s school. I have not received any yarn yet from the girls referred to by you. You can have as much khaddar rags as you want and
soft used khaddar.1 If you tell me what length you require I shall see
to it being sent. It is difficult to fix any price for used khaddar. You
will therefore either send what you can or not at all. You will not stint
yourself in anything for the sake of paying for the khaddar that you
may order nor will you on this account hesitate to ask for the exact
quantity you want.
I am glad that Menon is helping poor patients in the way he is
do-ing. What does it matter so long as you make both ends meet and
it need not matter even if one cannot make both ends meet in acts of
service.
Andrews reaches Bombay tomorrow.
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat : Courtesy : National Archives of India; also My Dear Child,
p. 80
1

For nappies for the baby

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

165

221. LETTER TO G. K. DEVADHAR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 30, 1926
MY DEAR DEVADHAR,

I hope Manorama reached the Seva Sadan in safety. She left
here on Sunday last. She was given Rs. 10 for her fare by the
Manager who did not know that she has received already her fare up
to Bombay from Jamnalalji. You will please therefore find out from
her what she did with the Rs. 6 odd she received from Seth Jamnalalji
for her fare up to Bombay when she contemplated returning there.
The money should be recovered from her if she still has the amount
and may be kept by you for the Seva Sadan.
I would certainly love to discuss with you the co-operative
movement and understand its real usefulness. I discussed it with the
Registrar or Assistant Registrar in Bihar and with several other friends
connected with the co-operative movement but find its usefulness up
to a certain limit. Beyond that they have not been able to convince me
of its national value as it is being conducted today.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat : S. N. 19513

222. LETTER TO BHUKANSHARAN
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Friday, April 30, 1926
BHAI BHUKANSHARANJI,

I have your letter and the hundred rupee currency note sent with
it. I intend to utilize the amount on charkha and khadi work, for by
that means we can serve the largest number of the poor.
From a microfilm of the Hindi : S. N. 19515

166

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

223. LETTER TO NAGARDAS LALLUBHAI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

April 30, 1926
BHAISHRI NAGARDAS,

I had your letter. In Wadhwan we offer far higher rates than those
prevailing in Kathiawar and Gariyadhar. This makes the khadi
expensive. From your report and from my talk with Fulchand, I see
that the women who have been spinning are not without any means of
living or without occupation. Perhaps they spin in response to our
appeal and because they realize that it is for the good of the country.
The charkha movement was not conceived with such people in view.
The assumption underlying it was that in India millions of men and
women are half-starved and, though able-bodied, are idle for want of
work. The central idea of the spinning movement is to get such people
to spin and then sell the khadi made from the yarn produced by them.
The khadi produced in Wadhwan does not serve this aim. That is what
I feel. If I am right, I think we should stop our work in Wadhwan. In
case we have to do this the khadi that is stocked there can be disposed
of. We may continue it provided we get women who will spin for a
little amount at the end of the day, carders who will do the carding at
the rate of two and a half rupees and weavers who will accept wages at
rates prevailing elsewhere. Otherwise we should stop it. Discuss this
suggestion with other workers and let me know what you think.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S. N. 10879

224. LETTER TO HASAM HIRJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Friday, April 30, 1926
BHAISHRI HASAM HIRJI,

Now I have another letter from you before I could reply to your
first. I will answer the main question in your first letter through
Navajivan when I get time. I will reply to your second letter here.
Aparigraha is an ideal condition. It can be said that an ideal is
never realized perfectly. But we should not lower our ideal on this
account. No one has ever been able to draw the ideal straight line of
geometry but we may not, for that reason, change its definition. If we
draw a straight line, keeping the ideal one in our view, we shall
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

167

succeed in drawing a line which will serve our purpose. But if we
modify the definition, we will be like a boat without the rudder. There
is nothing wrong with money as a piece of metal; evil comes through
its use. Keeping this in mind, we should sincerely try to realize the
ideal of aparigraha as best as we can. Let us now examine the
instances which you have imagined. The world will lose nothing if the
rich give up their wealth voluntarily; on the contrary, it will benefit by
their action, because a new and powerful force is generated as a result
of a sincere act of aparigraha. No one can act in such matters
mechanically. He alone who feels a spontaneous urge in his heart will
act, and will deserve credit for his action. There is no danger or
possibility of the entire world acting upon the ideal of aparigraha.
But assuming that it does, I have no doubt that it will find no difficulty
in maintaining itself. There are people in this world who do not stock
anything to meet their needs even for one day. You need not believe
that such persons would starve if there were not in the world other
people whe stored things.
Just as in the law enforced by governments a crime does not
cease to be a crime for being committed unintentionally, so also a
violation of divine law committted in ignorance does not cease to be a
violation. Adultery committed under the influence of alcohol is none
the less the same. “To ask for forgiveness” and “to receive
forgiveness” are beautiful ideas. I act on both the principles. But I
have always believed that forgiveness in this sense does not mean what
is commonly understood by it. A sincere desire to be forgiven
increases our humility; we are able to see our weakness, and this
knowledge gives us the strength to be good. Hindus, Muslims,
Christians, and others have employed innumerable epithets to describe
God but they are all products of our own imagination. God is without
attributes and beyond all qualification. But again I am speaking about
the ideal; if, however, we do not understand the ideal and seriously
believe that God is subject to all the epithets with which we describe
Him, He would be like us, an embodiment of errors. We should,
therefore, know Him as stainless and without form, and then we may
heap on Him as many epithets as we choose, for that is the only
language which He has given us. Apart from this, we cannot escape
the fruits of our action. This is the universal law and therein lies His
mercy. This world would not endure even for one moment if He were
to keep amending His laws and commandments, as we do either to
favour some or correct an error which might have been noticed. The
168

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Reality which we call God is a mysterious, indescribable and unique
power. If we cannot comprehend Him with our mind, how can our
poor speech describe Him ?
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S. N. 10902

225. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Friday, April 30, 1926
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,

I have your letter. I am sending Chi. Maganlal’s criticism for
your information. I see that Abbas Saheb is doing fine work. What
shall I write to Ramjibhai about the car? I understand from what you
say in your letter that for the present you want him to keep the car as
it is.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S. N. 19516

226. LETTER TO NAGINDAS
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Friday, April 30, 1926
BHAISHRI NAGINDAS,

I had sent your letter to Bhai Darshansingh. I am sending his
reply for your information along with the stamps received with it. I
have advised him that, if he thinks the books are useful, he should
order them and remit the money for them.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S. N. 19517

227. LETTER TO NIRMALA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Friday, April 30, 1926
CHI. NIRMALA,

I have your letter. I am keeping well. I dictate my letters to save
time and because my handwriting is bad. I have been gaining weight.
Yesterday was the day for taking my weight. It was 105. Aunt has no
reason at all to feel embarrassed. Since you desire, I will not read this
letter to Kaku, though I would very much love to. I have put a limit
for rent, at Rs. 10.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

169

I am writing to Jamnadas about takli and charkha. He will send
you slivers and you should return to him the yarn produced, as he has
to keep an account of all the cotton. You need not dispose of the
mount for your machine because it is broken; it can be repaired at a
little cost. Rami, Kanti and others are all doing very well. Rasik has
gone to Abu. Mathuradas is all right, more or less. Devdas is here at
present.
From a copy of the Gujarati : S. N. 19518

228. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Friday, [April 30, 1926] 1
CHI. VASUMATI,

I have curtailed even the little writing I used to do with my own
hand and, as far as possible, I dictate. So this, too, I am dictating. I see
from Jaisukhlal’s2 letter that both you and Kusum were laid down with
illness. I suggest that both of you now come here. I have written to
Jaisukhlal too, suggesting this. I am well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C. W. 599. Courtest : Vasumati Pandit

229. MESSAGE FOR “FREEDOM”
May 1, 1926
‘Freedom’ is an attractive name to give to a newspaper. But it is
a much abused term. When a slave-holder talks of freedom, we know
that it means freedom to use his slave as he chooses without let or
hindrance. A drunkard’s freedom means ability to drink on till he is
bereft of his sense and a long time after. Whose and what freedom will
this paper stand for is a relevant question. The fact that it is Pandit
Motilalji’s creation itself is one assurance that freedom means the
freedom of the masses. And freedom of the masses means their ability
to cope and do away with the condition of semi-starvation in which
millions of them are living. This aspect of freedom appeals to me the
most at the present moment; because freedom of the masses
1
2

170

From the contents; vide “Letter to Vasumati Pandit”, 9-5-1926.
Jaisukhlal Gandhi
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

automatically involves freedom of the untouchables and freedom of
people belonging to different religions to follow out their religious
convictions without let or hindrance from anybody. And, freedom of
the masses in the manner I have explained is an utter impossibility
without the revival of hand-spinning and therefore intensive khaddar
propaganda as a central fact.
Let me hope that Freedom will in season and out of season
impress upon its readers the national importance of this central fact of
the life of the masses with whom, if we want swaraj, we must identify
ourselves.
M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm : S.N. 19523

230. LETTER TO SRI PRAKASA
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 1, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have not been able to reach your letter till now. Here is my
article 1 if it may be so called for Freedom.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S RI P RAKASA
S EVASHRAMA
BENARES C ANTT.
From a microfilm : S.N. 19523

231. MESSAGE ON ANDREWS’S RETURN FROM SOUTH
AFRICA
[May 1, 1926] 2
The best welcome that we can give to Mr. Andrews and the one
he will appreciate most is to make a fixed determination to vindicate
India’s honour by insisting on and securing the just rights of the
settlers. This can only be done if we emulate Mr. Andrews’s immense
1
2

Vide the preceding item.
C. F. Andrews arrived in Bombay on this date.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

171

energy, studiousness, indomitable courage, unfaltering hope and
living faith in God and his humanity.
M. K. GANDHI

The Bombay Chronicle, 1-5-1926

232. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 1, 1926
DEAR SATIS BABU,

Chhotalalji is coming to you. His nerves are high strung through
excessive work and he has made drastic experiments in reducing food
to its simplest and most economic terms. The result is that his health is
much impaired. He is in love with you. He wants to study your
organization and wants to do some easy work which can almost be
termed recreation. He has an idea that he will be more useful for my
personal service if he learns shorthand and typewriting. I have told
him I do not think so especially now that I have Subbiah with me. I
would not think of using Chhotalalji as a shorthand reporter and typist
when I know that he is a khadi expert in many of its branches. But he
is an absolutely free agent. To learn shorthand is no sin and if he
wants to learn it and typing, he shall do so.
You will therefore discuss with him freely the manner in which
he should pass two or three months there and do the needful. You
know that he is a silent bird. Therefore you will have to draw him out
and cheer him up. The act of cheering him up will have its reaction
upon you which I would like.
Give me your impressions of this horrible rioting in Calcutta.
Yours,
From a microfilm : S.N. 19521

233. DRAFT AGREEMENT FOR LOANS FROM ALL-INDIA
SPINNERS’ ASSOCIATION
[May 1, 1926] 1
I, in my capacity as the sole proprietor of the Pravartak Sangh in
Chandranagar and elsewhere in accordance with the schedule hereto
1

172

Vide the succeeding two items.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

annexed, hereby acknowledge having received from the All-India
Spinners’ Association, Ahmedabad, the sum of Rs. 6000/- (Rupees six
thousand only) in cash as a loan pay- able in five years after the date
hereof at the office of the Khadi Pratishthan, 170, Bow Bazaar Road,
Calcutta, or any other place that may be appointed by you from time
to time.
The loan shall bear interest at one per cent per annum payable
quarterly at the above office or any other office that may be
appointed by you from time to time.
The receipt of the principal or the interest by your agent, Sjt.
Satis Chandra Das Gupta of the said Khadi Pratishthan, or any other
person appointed by you in writing from time to time shall be
sufficient proof of payment of principal or interest.
The conditions of the said loan are :
(1) That the money received shall be used for the production
of hand-spun and hand-woven khaddar in Bengal.
(2) The selling prices of khaddar shall be not more than the
cost price up to weaving plus 612 % for the expenses of management.
(3) The Pravartak Sangh shall not directly or indirectly deal in
what is known as half-khadi, that is, cloth in which mill spun yarn has
been used or which is machine-woven or cloth manufactured in
Indian or foreign mills.
(4) The Pravartak Sangh shall not raise any other loan on
mortgage of the scheduled property without the previous written
consent of the Association.
(5) The Pravartak Sangh shall keep a proper account of all the
hand-spinning and khaddar transactions and its central and branch
depots in connection with khaddar production shall be open to
inspection by the nominee or nominees of the Association during
office hours and the Pravartak Sangh shall render to the Secretary,
All-India Spinners’ Association, Ahmedabad, quarterly accounts of all
its khaddar transactions.
(6) In the event of a breach by the Pravartak Sangh of any of
the foregoing conditions, it shall be open to the All-India Association
to declare the loan payable on demand. The Association shall be the
sole judge of the breach of the said conditions.
From a microfilm : S.N. 11174

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

173

234. LETTER TO MOTILAL ROY
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 1, 1926
DEAR MOTIBABU,

I have your letter. There has been some delay as Mr. Banker is
not in Sabarmati.
Here is a document1 to be signed by you. The document should
be signed by you in the presence of two witnesses and it should be
witnessed also by a Magistrate in Chandranagar. If you will kindly
send the document duly executed so Sjt. Satis Chandra Das Gupta, he
has instructions to pay you Rs. 6,000/- against delivery of the
document. Instructions are being sent to the Treasurer to send him the
money by the same post that will carry this letter.
I need hardly tell you that the conditions that have been
incorporated in the accompanying document are the conditons to be
found in all the documents held by the Association. What is more,
some definite security has also been taken from the other
organizations to which loans have been given. The last condition has
been waived in your case because yours is a big organization and the
loan is comparatively small.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S.N. 11173

235. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 1, 1926
DEAR SATIS BABU,

Shankerlal is not here at the present moment. Pravartak Sangh’s
affair has been hanging fire for some time and they are naturally
pressing for the loan. I have therefore concocted a document of which
I send you a copy herewith as also a copy of my letter to Moti Babu2 .
Rs. 6,000/- is being sent to you. Please pay the amount upon
delivery of the document duly signed by Moti Babu.
Encs. 2
Yours,
From a microfilm : S.N. 11174
1
2

174

Vide the preceding item.
Motilal Roy
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

236. LETTER TO KONDA VENKATAPPAYYA GARU
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 1, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I had your letters including the one under reply with reference
to the complaint from the ladies of Bombay regarding the prices of
fine Andhra khaddar. I forwarded the whole of the correspondence to
these sisters. They now understand the position. I wanted to give them
an authoritative information from you so as to enable them to take
such action as they may choose.
I share your misgivings about the compromise and the present
situation generally. But I have full faith that sooner or later things will
right themselves. In the compromise I have simply acted as peacemaker. I cannot reconcile myself to Council-entry. As time passes I
feel more and more convinced that some of our troubles are due to
the Council-entry. So long as non-co-operators refrained from going
to the Councils it was possible to keep the mass from that pernicious
influence but now that non-co-operators have tasted the forbidden
fruit, they are naturally taking a portion of the mass within the zone of
that influence. We may not grumble at all these things. They are a
result of the process of purification. It would be enough if the few
who are still out remain so not out of fashion but out of conviction.
I hope you are keeping good health. Are you taking any active
part in the constructive portion of the Congress programme?
Yours sincerely,

S JT. K ONDA VENKATAPPAYYA GARU
S ESHAMMA’S C HOULTRY
BENGALORE C ITY
From a microfilm : S.N. 19524

237. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS PODDAR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday [May 1, 1926] 1
BHAI RAMESHWARJI,

I have your letter. I will get the Rs. 50. It is difficult to cure your
1

From the postmark

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

175

physical ailment till your mental illness is cured. You might possibly
benefit by living in a quiet place for some time. And of course there is
Ramanama.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 163

238. LETTER TO DEVCHAND PAREKH
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday [May 1, 1926] 1
BHAISHRI DEVCHANDBHAI,

I have your letter. Do get a plan of the building 2 prepared and
write to Thakore Saheb3 . If we get his permission we can at least have
the foundation laid. May we not use on this the funds collected for the
Mansukhlal memorial?
BAPU

[PS.]
There is no news yet from Porbandar. It would be good if you
make a trip there.4
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 5707

239. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKER PATTANI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, May 1, 1926
LEARNED FRIEND,

I was very happy to read your letter. I had not thought that your
hand had become steady and that you could write. Yesterday I had the
telegram as requested by me and today I get a letter in your own
hand. I hope I shall continue to get a letter or a postcard daily for
some days. The diet is excellent. I hope the milk is not boiled thick;
after a fast, one should never take such milk. The use of soda helps. I
am eager to see you when you are well enough to move about to hear
1
2
3
4

176

From the postmark
Of a National School
Lakhajiraj, Prince of Rajkot
The postcript is in Gandhiji’s hand.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

from you this story of atonement.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19519

240. LETTER TO KISHORELAL MASHRUWALA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, Chaitra Vad 4 [May 1, 1926] 1
CHI. KISHORELAL,

I have your letter. You unnecessarily reporach yourself. I do not
give my reasons, but tell you my decision that you should not go
elsewhere, but come straight here along with Shri . . .’s2 daughter and
all the children. It is all right if Gomati is responding to the vaid’s
treatment there; otherwise my own wish is that you should give up the
idea of going for a change of air, stop even the vaid’s treatment and
live here, whatever the climate. I had given up all thought of medicine for Gomati when we tried fasting. We have tried the best remedy.
Now we should, I feel, leave the matter entirely to God. However, if
you feel inclined to stay for a month in Dumas, you may certainly go.
In your present circumstances, I think it would be best for you to
accept Balubhai as your cook for whatever he is worth. But he should
be given to understand that after entrusting the children to you he
must not disturb the arrangement. A “curator bonis” will have to be
appointed for the two brothers. I think we may appoint Jamnalalji.
You must have heard in detail why the trip to Mussoorie was
cancelled. I knew that the decision would please Nath. This is the
position about Finland : There students from the whole world. . . .3
From a copy of the Gujarati : S.N. 19520

241. LETTER TO NARGIS CAPTAIN
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 1, 1926
I have your letter. You have learnt now all about my
cancellation of the Mussoorie visit and not going to Mahab[a]leshwar.
I wrote to the Governor that it will be more convenient for me to meet
1

From the reference to the cancellation of Gandhiji’s trip to Mussoorie and
the talk about one to Finland
2
Omission as in the source
3
As in the source
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

177

him at Poona or Bomaby. He has therefore postponed the meeting till
he comes down from the hills. I am glad of the saving of time and
trouble, but I am certainly sorry that I shall not see you and
Mithubehn for some time now. I would also [have] loved to have met
Manekbai and Mr. Bahadurji. I beg his pardon for calling him doctor
which I did absent-mindedly.
Mithubehn tells me you are not still looking as well as you
should. I wish you could still go to Kashmir.
Up to very recently the weather here has been delightfully cool
and we were all getting anxious because such cool weather was no
preparation for the rains. We are now having real hot weather and
therefore everybody is glad. For, if this hot spell continues, one may
look forward to early rains in June.
PS.
The foregoing was dictated yesterday. Today I have a letter
from Mathuradas, who is you are aware in Deolali, saying that Dr.
Mehta wants him to go to Panchgani. He thinks Deolali too hot in
May and part of June till the rains set in. He rejects the idea of
Matheran or Sinhgarh. I tried to get for him Sir Prabhashanker
Pattani’s house but it is not available till June. Can you yourself or
through your friend find out whether it is possible to secure
something for Mathuradas for a month or five or six weeks? He must
shift to Panchgani if it is possible at the earliest opportunity. Of
course, Mathuradas will pay the rent. If you have anything in view,
please telegraph to Mathuradas, Windy Hall, Deolali, and write to me.
Yours,
From a microfilm : S.N. 19522

242. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday [May 1, 1926] 1
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. You must now go only to Panchgani. I am
having the matter arranged through Nargisbehn.2 You must stay there
for a month even if you have to pay rent. Later you can shift to
1
2

178

From the postmark
Nargis Captain; vide “Letter to Nargis Captain”, 1-5-1926.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Pattani Saheb’s bungalow. The bungalow will definitely be available
in June. As your substitute Devdas left for Bombay last night to
receive Andrews. 1 He will be back on Monday. He asked my
permission to pay you a flying visit but I refused. He is still physically
very weak. His eyes are not clear. It is better that he moves about after
he has regained strength.
Blessings from

BAPU
S JT. M ATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
WINDY HALL
NASIK R OAD
DEOLALI (G.I.P.)
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

243. LETTER TO RAMKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday [May 1, 1926] 2
BHAI RAMKRISHNAJI 3 ,

Brijkrishna gave me news of the passing of your elder
daughter. I was grieved. May God grant you and your mother peace.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
S HRI R AMKRISHNAJI
C/ O S HRI BRIJKRISHNA
KATRA KHUSHALRAI
S HRI NIVAS
DELHI
From the Hindi original: Brijkrishna Chandiwala Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

1

For Gandhiji’s message on C. F. Andrew’s return from South Africa on May
1, 1926, vide “Message on Andrews’ Return from South Africa”, 1-5-1926.
2
From the postmark
3
Brother of Brijkrishna Chandiwala
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

179

244. NOTES
ONCE BITTEN TWICE SHY
The public have had such bitter experience of the bureaucracy
that if they hear of anyone, who has shown a spirit of independence
till now, calling on any member of the bureaucracy, they fear the
worst or feel suspicious about him. Ever since it appeared in the
papers that the Governor of Bombay intended to invite me for a
discussion about the Agriculture Commission which has been
appointed, I have been flooded with letters of all kinds, including
letters of warning. One correspondent asks what I hoped to gain by
meeting the Governor, and cautions me saying that the latter would try
to throw dust into my eyes, would lay a trap for me and deceive me.
If, however, we aspire to win swaraj, it will not help to be afraid or be
suspicious in this manner. We are perfectly right in refusing to accept
any favours from an official, to be obliged by any of them or to
accept service under them. That is part of non-co-operation. But it
would not be right to be afraid of meeting any of them. Why should a
man who knows his duty be afraid of anything? Again, what reason
for fear has one who seeks no personal gain, who has, in other words,
unshakable faith in non-co-operation? Moreover, anyone who wishes
to achieve his end through non-violence would never miss any
opportunity of meeting an official in an open and proper manner. My
non-co-operation is not with individuals, it is with their actions. The
way of non-violence means the way of love. If I wish to follow it, I
should welcome every opportunity of meeting my opponent, for it is
my duty to change his manner of acting, and that too not through
force but by persuasion, by pleading with him or by self-suffering,
that is, by resorting to satyagraha. Should, therefore, His Excellency
invite me, I would regard it as my duty to meet him and, being quite
clear about my principles and knowing my duty, I would have no fear
of yielding to any temptation or walking into a trap. Even at the time
when I met Lord Reading, some friends had expressed the same fear
that my correspon- dent has done on this occasion. But I believe that I
did right to meet him, and that my meeting did no harm to the
national cause. To me, personally, it brought nothing but gain since I
could form a correct estimate of him, and can now say that I let go no
real opportunity, through pride or weakness, of arriving at a
settlement. On this occasion, too, I expect nothing but gain from a
meeting with the Governor. I shall be able to place my views before
180

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

him, will see and correct any error there may be in my line of
reasoning and will know his views about agriculture. His Excellency
certainly knows that I am a non-co-operator, that I have no faith in
commissions and can take no part in their work. All this is public
knowledge. If, therefore, I am invited to meet the Governor, no one
need have any fears on my account.

TO W ORKERS IN THE CAUSE OF COW-PROTECTION
As there are some who entertain fears about the possible
consequences of my meeting the Governor, there are others, too, who
hanker after some gain from it. I have received a letter and a telegram
suggesting that I should tell the Governor about the loss to agriculture
through the export and slaughter of cattle. I wish to tell those workers
in the cause of cow-protection that, even if I had an opportunity to
discuss this subject with the Governor, I would most certainly not do
what they wish me to do. I see one great weakness in these workers,
namely, that they do not make a patient and scientific study of this
problem. Shri Valji Desai has undertaken a careful study of the
reasons for the destruction of the cattle-wealth of the country. His
articles on the subject have been appearing regularly in Young India
and Navajivan. One will understand the causes of the miserable
condition of the cattle even from these articles. Though I believe that
the Government can do a great deal in this field, there is much which
the people, too, can do. And so long as the people have not become
alive to their responsibility in this matter and public opinion has not
been educated, the cattle-wealth cannot be saved from destruction, no
matter what laws the Government makes. The problem involves
difficult economic and ethical issues. But one would think that we
could spare no time to reflect even for a moment on what economics
and ethics have to tell us about cattle, such is our pathetic condition.
Thanks to fanaticism, we have lost the true sense of dharma and we are
too lethargic to study economics. Merely telling beads to the name of
Mother Cow will help us to serve neither her nor Mother India. We
can serve her and her progeny and, by protecting her, serve ourselves
only by understanding the meaning of cow-worship and taking
measures accordingly. I suggest to my correspondents to reflect over
the articles on this subject which appear in this paper from time to
time. They may point out any error of logic or facts, which they may
see; if they see none, they should follow the suggestions made in
them.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

181

SURAT VINAY MANDIR
A friend has written to me making some complaints against the
Rashtriya Vinay Mandir1 , at Surat, the reason for writing to me being
that he has heard a rumour to the effect that the control and
management of the Mandir are to be handed over to me. Instead of
discussing the complaints, let me state the existing position. I have
known Shri Dayalji and Shri Kalyanji for the past ten years. When
they told me on behalf of the Committee that the only way to bring
order in the affairs of the Mandir was to hand over control to me, I
thought it necessary that I should accept the responsibility. My
correspondent suggests that control has been handed over to me at a
time when the Mandir is on its last legs, so that the responsibility for
its death may be mine. Even if that be so, how can I refuse to share,
wherever I can, the responsibility of co-workers? When agreeing to
take over control of the Mandir, I made it plain that I shall do nothing
without Vallabhbhai’s advice and take no step which would not be
subject to the general supervision of the Vidyapith. This condition was
accepted by the two friends, Dayalji and Kalyanji. I now intend to
discuss with Vallabhbhai the question of seeting up a Trust for the
Mandir. Meanwhile, with the consent of Shri Nrisinhprasad,
Kulanayaka of the Mandir, I have provisionally appointed Shri
Narahari Parikh as its Acharya, and given him the authority to
introduce any changes in the running of the institution which he may
find necessary and increase or reduce the teaching staff. The Mandir
which was run in the Patidar Ashram has been merged with the school
in Gopipura. This step, it is hoped, will enable the authorities to
retrench six posts of teachers. Any changes in the curriculum which
are found necessary will also be introduced. When the Mandir reopens
after the holidays, Shri Nrisinhprasad intends to visit it and observe the
conditions. Moreover, though it is true that control has been handed
over to me, this does not mean that Shri Dayalji and Shri Kalyanji will
cease to take further interest in the Mandir. Not only will they not do
this, but on the contrary they will be my hands and feet in the task
entrusted to me. I, therefore, hope that the merchants who have been
contri- buting towards the expenses of the school will continue their
1

182

National Primary School
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

contributions according to their promise. The accounts of the school
will be published regularly with the necessary audit reports.

TO N. A. P.
To me your question itself seems to spring from morbidity. The
instances from British life which I mentioned had no connection with
the point whether or not the people there live a luxurious life; it is all a
matter of custom. When a person living in a hot country goes to a
cold country, he has to exercise greater care to protect himself against
the cold than the residents of the country need do; in the same way I
believe it very necessary for Indian youths to exercise special care
[when they go to England]. It was not my intention to suggest that all
or most young men in England remain perfectly pure; all that I
wished to suggest was that some of the freedom which people take in
England may be harmless. If we take that freedom, we would sully our
purity. The moral laxity which we find among the young in England
is the effect, not of the limited freedom which I have described, but of
other factors which are easy to appreciate. A person who keeps away
from drinks because he understands the evil of drinking is not a
coward but a wise man, that is, a man of discrimination. Evil desires
spring from inner darkness, from lack of discrimination and
ignorance of the true end of human life. The suggestions which I have
made for being able to observe brahmacharya are not copy-book
maxims or the result of ingenious guesswork; they represent my own
experience, and that of others too, over a long period of time. I would,
therefore, advise you not to dismiss Chapter XIX of An
Autobiography without trying to understand it properly. I know
lustful persons who are vegetarians on principle, who wear only a
khadi shirt and cap and live an outwardly simple life but dwell in their
minds on pleasures and luxuries, and I also know real brahmacharis
who, following the practice in their country, eat meat and have always
dressed themselves in coat and trousers. The main thing is to be
simple in one’s thoughts. If a man harbours the violence of meateating in his thoughts and his mind dwells on the pleasures of a grand
palace, do not believe, merely because his body lives on fruits and is
covered merely with a bit of blanket, that he lives or can live a
blameless life. Anyone who wants to live a life untroubled by impure
desires or to acquire such purity must always remain vigilant.
You seem to confuse the caution of a vigilant person with
cowardice. If so, you are in the grip of a terrible error. Please wake
up.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

183

A CAUTION
A newspaper correspondent informs me from Aden that a
woman known by the name of Benibai has arrived there and has been
cheating credulous people by posing as my daughter. A similar thing
had happened in Rangoon and Mombasa, and it seems this same
woman had gone to those places. I cautioned people some time ago
that I have no daughter, and that I have not authorized anyone to
collect money in my name.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 2-5-1926

245. KHADI IN KATHIAWAR
The reader will find in this issue nearly the whole of the Report
sent in by Shri Lakshmidas after inspecting the work of the three
khadi centres in Kathiawar.
The Khadi Karyalaya in Amreli has been taken over by the
Kathiawar Political Conference. I intend to publish its accounts shortly
in Navajivan. Just now I only wish to draw attention to Shri
Lakshmidas’s Report.
The reader will observe that it is only in place where famine
conditions prevail that khadi is produced by paying spinners. We shall
not discuss at the moment whether the khadi so produced turns out to
be cheaper or dearer [than that manufactured from yarn spun by
amateurs]. It will suffice to admit at present that, though the quality of
khadi is very much better than what it used to be, it will not prove as
strong as mill khadi of the same count. Even so, no one should feel
any doubt, after reading this Report that residents of Kathiawar should
always prefer khadi produced in Kathiawar. If what is stated in the
Report is true, people who wear such khadi are helping victims of
famine. It is very much better to make them self-supporting than to
help them with free doles. There can be no argument about this.
Moreover, everyone cannot afford to contribute money for free doles,
but certainly every person of ordinary means can afford to help by
purchasing khadi, which costs more than other cloth, and making up
for the loss by economizing in other matters.
I, therefore, hope that the people of Kathiawar will welcome the
present sale-tour of Abbas Saheb among them. From a report which I
have received from Wadhwan, I see that he was enthusiastically
welcomed by the residents of the place, and that there was no one who
did not show him due respect. I hope that, as his tour progresses, he
184

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

will get more and more encouragement.
The suggestion to khadi workers in Lakshmidas’s Report
deserves attention. Water flows into the public trough only in
proportion to the quantity in the well. Workers will be able to inspire
faith in others only in the measure that they themselves have it, and
the strength which they lack in themselves they will not be able to
draw from others. If the women who spin also learn carding, they will
earn twice as much and the public will get better yarn. They can earn
money by carding, which they do not at present. As long as the
workers themselves are not proficient in carding, they cannot inspire
enthusiasm for carding among the women who spin, let alone being
able to teach them the art.
The suggestion about testing the strength of yarn deserves the
same attention as that about carding. This is necessary to ensure the
strength of the yarn. If the quality of yarn is carefully maintained,
khadi will become cheaper. That is, with the same rates of payment as
at present, there will be improvement in regard to quality and price. In
big factories, they are able to increase the profits, without raising the
prices of the products, merely by skilful management. In our
innumerable factories—for every hut is a spinning-mill—let the
workers increase their earnings through improved efficiency and also
reduce the burden on the people. In those big factories, what with the
innumerable financial manipulations and changes in the exchangerate which they resort to and which result in crores of rupees changing
hands, the workers are always exploited. In our factories, improved
efficiency will not mean large sums changing hands in this manner
but will generate, rather, a spirit of equality and promote the welfare
of the workers in corresponding measure. These happy results depend
on the spirit of self-sacrifice, efficiency, perseverance, humility and
energy which khadi workers may be able to display.
Let nobody draw the conclusion from my observations or Shri
Lakshmidas’s Report that the work done so far has been wasted or
that it was not done properly. What we both mean is that our work is
so well organized now that we are in a position to take a step forward.
It is our duty to see that, with experience, our work goes on
improving. There is no doubt that, relatively speaking, khadi has made
excellent progress. Now the consumers need to satisfy themselves only
whether
1
khadi workers are honest and hard-working;
2
the money which they pay for khadi goes into the pockets
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

185

of the poor;
the women who spin are really helped;
it is a fact that they would not be able to make both ends meet if
they did not get spinning-work; and
5
it is a fact that they have no other more remunerative work.
If the replies to these questions are in the affirmative, the people
of Kathiawar should, without considering whether khadi is cheap or
costly, see that the khadi produced in Kathiawar does not remain
unsold.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 2-5-1926
3
4

246. ABOUT MILL-WORKERS
The movement among the mill-workers in Ahmedabad against
the drink-evil is proceeding very well at present. All people may not
know that in America, where only a few years ago every worker used
to drink, they have stopped drinking for some years now. Their paper
has published the following information.
Millions of rail-road workers have, in their Union meetings,
welcomed prohibition and recounted their experience that drinking
turns good citizens and workers into bad ones and good husbands
into cruel ones. They have also declared that, had the workers
continued to drink, the hundreds of workers’ banks which have been
formed and in which millions of their dollars are deposited would
never have come into existence. The Secretary of their Union has
stated that during the last four years Labour Unions in America have
been rapidly throwing up honest and able leaders.
If the mill-workers in Ahmedabad also realize the sin of
drinking and understand that liquor is a poison and give it up, one can
easily imagine the improvement in their condition which will follow.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 2-5-1926

247. LETTER TO ROMAIN ROLLAND
May 22, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have before me a translation by Mira of your kind and
186

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

touching letter of 17th February last. I have been anticipating your
permission to make cautious use of portions of that letter without
mentioning your name.
I am glad you think with me that the proper course for me was
not to come to Europe this year.
With reference to India being heard in Europe, I hold the view
that India will not be heard in Europe or the West Until she has
suffered more, and on a more extensive scale than hitherto. Hers will
be a voice in the wilderness at the present moment. And I feel even the
hired, and in some cases bribed, journalists of Europe will shudder to
take as gospel truth all the manifest and one-sided exaggerations and
falsehoods circulated by the B.G.1 if India is not represented. I feel
too that this non-violent battle does not need the same kind of
propaganda that a battle based on violence would. Thirdly there is the
practical difficulty that you mention of finding one who can be at all
heard. The only person I have in view for the moment is Andrews,
since the Poet2 is unavailable. Andrews will certainly be heard in the
quarters that matter.
I hope you are keeping well and that God will permit you to
hold out till the battle is fairly over in India.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Gleanings, pp. 6-7

248. A LETTER
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 3, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have had your letter for a long time with me. But I have not
been able to reach your letter earlier.
Your letter of the 29th ultimo puts me in mind that I must now
hasten to reply to you. I am afraid that the Ashram life will not suit
you. It is all hard work commencing with cleaning closet buckets and
ending with agriculture, cooking, etc. There is little time left for
literary pursuits. From all I can understand of your life, it appears to
1
2

British Government
Rabindranath Tagore

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

187

me that you would hardly be able to stand the life and atmosphere at
the Ashram. I therefore suggest to you that if you still feel that you
should come and stay at the Ashram, you may pay a preliminary visit
to see things for yourself and then decide.
There is another difficulty also. At the present moment the
Ashram is over-crowded. I have no room, therefore, to spare. I could
not therefore give you even the privacy that you perhaps want and I
would like to proivde. If in spite of. . . .1
From a microfilm : S.N. 19525

249. LETTER TO D. VENKATA RAO
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 3, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter as also Krishnabai’s. I understand the position
and appreciate it. I quite agree with you and Krishnabai that her talent
for painting should be developed. I therefore quite understand her
desire to stay with you and go on with her painting work. I would like
to have some photographic specimens of her work.
I am not writing to her separately. Do please keep me informed
of her progress from time to time.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. D. VENKATA R AO
DAMERLA HOUSE
R AJAHMUNDRY
From a microfilm : S.N. 19526

250. LETTER TO S. SADANAND
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 3, 1926
MY DEAR SADANAND,

So you have got your agency after all. Let your correspondent
come like the Associated Press Correspondent and pick up what information he can. As there is so little for me to communicate, what can
poor Mahadev or Subbiah or Pyarelal give you? I could certainly
send you wires about khaddar from day to day but that will be just the
1

188

Incomplete in the source
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

thing to kill your agency and you will soon ask me to stop sending
those wires. Happily the khaddar movement does not depend so much
on dissemination of news about it as on organized distribution of
spinning-wheels and collection of yarn and manufacture and sale of
khaddar.
I do not know what difficulties there are in the way of your
correspondent receiving copies of Young India on Wednesday
evening. There should be no difficulty. However, I shall see Swami
and let you know.
I hope that in your office everybody is clad in khaddar.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S. S ADANAND
From a microfilm : S.N. 19527

251. LETTER TO R. D. SUBRAMANIAM
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 3, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your postcard. It is not the quantity of time that you will
give to the spinning that counts. It is the feeling behind that you
would get your Young India by your labour that appealed to me. I
therefore propose to send you Young India as soon as you have
furnished 50,000 yards.
The yarn would still be national property because it was my
intention to give the yarn to the Spinners’ Association or the
Satyagraha Ashram and take from them subscription on your behalf
for Young India. There is no occasion for you, therefore, to feel
conscience pricks because you will be getting after so many hours of
labour Young India for one year.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. R. D. S UBRAMANIAM
WEST S RIRANGAPATANAM R OAD
EXTENSION, S ALEM
From a microfilm : S.N. 19528

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

189

252. LETTER TO UDIT MISHRA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Tuesday, May 4, 1926
BHAI UDIT MISHRAJI,

I got your letter several months ago, but I could not reply to it
immediately. We may not despise in our heart persons whom we
regard as bad men, but we need not seek their acquaintance either,
unless there is some reason. That is, we may have contact with them
only if we get an opportunity to do them good. It is more difficult to
become a guardian of children than of grown-up students. When a
father leaves his children to our care, we assume a great responsibility.
It is, therefore, necessary that we love the children as much as their
father does. But a father’s love is apt to be unthinking attachment,
whereas a guardian’s should be completely unselfish and pure.
Moreover, since children are quick to imitate what others do, we
should show in our conduct all those virtues which we want them to
cultivate. From this point of view, a guardian should particularly
observe brahmacharya, follow truth and non-violence and display
fearlessness, courage, magnanimity, humility and so on.
From a microfilm of the Hindi : S.N. 19529

253. THE CONGRESS RESOLUTION ON SOUTH AFRICA
May 5, 1926
The All-India Congress Committee met at Ahmedabad on 5th May and passed
the following resolution prepared by Mr. Gandhi on the South African situation :

The All-India Congress Committee congratulates the
Government of India and the Union Government upon the
postponement of the Class Areas Reservation Bill pending the
deliberations of a Conference between the two Governments.
The All-India Congress Committee further congratulates the
South African Indian Deputation and the Indian settlers on the happy
result of their efforts.
The All-India Congress Committee tenders its respectful thanks
to Mr. C. F. Andrews for his great sacrifices and for his energy and
undying hope and faith, without which the result, so far achieved,
would have been impossible.
The All-India Congress Committee, while noting the results of
190

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the Government of India’s negotiations so far, warns the public
against slackening the efforts on behalf of the Indian settlers of South
Africa, and hope that they will not rest until the position of the settlers
is placed on an honourable and satisfactory basis.
The President is authorized to send the message of
congratulation to the Union Government.
The Indian Review, May 1926, p. 340

254. LETTER TO PARAMANAND K. KAPADIA
Wednesday [May 5, 1926] 1
BHAISHREE PARAMANAND,

I have read all your letters carefully. I shall try to deal with
some of your questions in Navajivan. I want to write much more but I
have to control myself.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS GANDHI
BHAISHREE P ARAMANAND KUNVERJI
BHAVNAGAR
From the Gujarati original: G.N. 11586

255. NOTES
PROHIBITION AND MADRAS GOVERNMENT
Sjt. C. Rajagopalachari has unearthed a Government order
which is simplicity itself but which conveys a world of meaning. In a
note accompanying a copy of the order Sjt. Rajagopalachari writes to
the press :
Among the many post-Reform additions to our recurring charges are the
new Health Officers and their staff. They are expected to educate the people
about cholera, malaria, etc.

Some of the members of the staff seem to have enquired
whether they should carry on propaganda against the drink habit also
and the laconic reply received was :
The Government consider that the Public Health staff should not carry
on anti-drink propaganda.
1

From the postmark

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

191

It is to be noted here that there is no reason assigned for the ban
on anti-drink propaganda. On the contrary, one would expect explicit
instructions to these conservators of health to instruct the people about
the evil effects of drink on the body under a popular Government.
They would be required to tell the people how deadly the effect of
alcohol is upon the human body and show by magic lantern slides in
a graphic manner the ruin that alcohol brings wherever it finds a
place. But it is madness to expect the existing Government to do any
such thing. One may as well expect the keeper of a public house to
warn its visitors against running into the death-trap. Is not the
Government the keeper of all the public houses of India? It is the 25
crores revenue that enables us to give University education to our
children. It enables the Government to impose pax Britannica upon
us. Not till the people realize their duty and develop strength to resist
the Government in its pro-drink policy will it be possible to have a dry
India.

PROHIBITION IN AMERICA
One hears so much about prohibition being a failure in America
that it is refreshing to find references which prove the contrary. The
cuttings that a correspondent has sent show that delegates to the
Middle-West Students’ Conference representing 1,23,000 college
students in the South-East and Middle-West of America passed
resolutions opposing liquor drinking by students.
The February issue of the journal of the Locomotive Engineers
contains the following :1
The railorad brotherhoods as well as hundreds of thousands of sober,
industrious working men in the American Federation of Labour are opposed to
drink because they know it never made any man a better citizen, a better
worker, or a better husband or father. We do not believe the remarkable growth
of labour co-operative banks in this country would have been possible if the
working men were still putting their savings over the bar. We are further
convinced that the progress of the American labour movement depends upon
leaders with clear, cool heads and not upon those whose brains are addled by
alcohol. Perhaps it is worth noting that the leaders of British labour, who
have made much substantial progress economically, and politically, since the
War, are overwhelmingly dry. . . .

It is not my purpose to make the reader believe that
1

192

Only excerpts are reproduced here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

prohibition in America has been wholly successful. I have read
enough literature on the gigantic experiment to know that there is
another side to the picture. But allowing for all the exaggerations on
either side, there is little doubt that prohibition has been a great boon
to that wonderful people. It is yet too early to state results with
certainty. The problem is much simpler in India, if only we have all
the bars and distilleries closed.

CHARKHA IN ANDHRA SCHOOLS
Here is an extract1 from the report prepared by the Bhumavaram
Taluk Board, West Godavari District :
A report 2 from Tirupati Municipal Council shows figures of
spinning in its schools.
I would like to draw the attention of the teachers and organizers
of spinning in schools that it is in every way better to introduce taklis
instead of the spinning-wheels. For co-operative spinning in schools
takli will be found to be more efficacious, more economical and more
productive in the end.
Young India, 6-5-1926

256. FROM FAR-OFF AMERICA
Some time ago I answered some questions3 put by a
correspondent in America. He now returns to the charge and puts
several further questions, the first being :
What good is that brave and fearless mentality when it cannot save the
things you love? You may not be afraid to die, but what is it that will keep a
band of robbers from taking away from you what you cherish if you are going
to remain non-violent to the end. If the victims of a robber do not offer
violent resistance it is so much easrie for the robber to loot them. Robbery
has been going on and it will go on in the world till the victims are easy. The
strong will rob the weak, resistance or no resistance. To be weak is a sin. Not
to prepare by all means to get rid of this wekness is a crime.

The writer forgets that retaliation does not always succeed. The
robber is likely, if stronger, to defeat the protector and vent his wrath,
kindled by the resistance received, on the unfortunate victim whose
1
2
3

Not reproduced here
ibid.
Vide “A Student’s Questions”, 25-2-1926.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

193

plight would therefore be the worse for the resistance offered on her
behalf. It is true that the protector will have the satisfaction of having
done his best for his charge. But the same satisfaction will be available
to the non-violent protector. For, he too will die in the attempt to
rescue the victim. What is more, he will have the additional satisfaction
of having tried to soften the heart of the robber by his pleading. The
writer’s difficulty arises from the fact of his having assumed that the
non-violent protector is to be a mere passive helpless spectator of the
robbery. As a matter of fact, however, in my scheme, love is presumed
to be a more active and potent force than brute force. He who has not
the love and remains passive is a coward. He is neither man nor brute.
He has proved himself unfit to protect.
The writer obviously cannot realize, as I have done, the
tremendous power that non-violent resistance has over one’s
adversary. Non-violent resistance is the resistance of one will against
another. That resistance is possible only when it is freed from reliance
on brute force. Reliance on brute force as a rule presupposes
surrender when that force is exhausted. Does the writer know that a
woman with a determined will can successfully resist her ravisher
however powerful he may be?
I admit that the strong will rob the weak and that it is sin to be
weak. But this is said of the soul in man, not of the body. If it be said
of the body, we could never be free from the sin of weakness. But the
strength of soul can defy a whole world in arms against it. This
strength is open to the weakest in body. A weak-willed Zulu, though
strong as a giant in body, surrenders to a little white child. Who has
not seen strong- bodied bullies surrendering helplessly to their frail
mothers? Love con-quers the brute in the son. The law that subsists
between mother and son is universal in its application. Nor need love
be reciprocal. It is its own reward. Many a mother has tamed by her
love her erring defiant children. Let us all prepare to get rid of the
weakness of love. There is chance of success there. For rivalry in
loving is conductive to health. The world has been trying all these
ages to become strong in the wielding of brute force and it has
miserably failed. Rivarly in generating brute force is race suicide.
The writer adds :
The British rulers seem to have as much soul-force as you have, but they
have military force and practical knowledge of human nature besides. The
result is obvious.

194

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Military force is inconsistent with soul-force. Frightfulness,
exploitation of the weak, immoral gains, insatiable pursuit after
enjoyments of the flesh are utterly inconsistent with soul-force. The
soul-force that the British rulers have is therefore subservient to the
brute force if it is not asleep altogether.
The writer then puts the eternal conundrum:
There are certain greedy persons in the world and they are doing
mischief. They have power in their hands. They may be mad, but they are
doing harm nevertheless. It will not do for us to stand by with folded hands and
let them go on with their devilish work. We must take the power away from
them even at the cost of non-violence, so that they may not do any more
harm.

History teaches one that those who have, no doubt with honest
motives, ousted the greedy by using brute force against them have in
their turn become a prey to the disease of the conquered. If it be
better to be slaves than slave-drivers, if this is no mere copybook
maxim, we can easily afford to let the slave-drivers do their worst,
whilst, being weary of the brutal tug of war, so unbefitting our human
nature, we try to explore the possibilities of matching the brute force
of the greedy exploiters and the like with soul-force.
But the writer is met with this difficulty at the threshold of the
experiment :
Mahatmaji, you admit that the people of India have not followed your
creed. You do not seem to realize the cause of it. The truth is that the average
person is not a Mahatma. History proves this fact beyond doubt. There have
been a few Mahatmas in India and elsewhere. These are exceptions. And the
exceptions only prove the rule. You must not base your actions on the
exceptions.

It is curious how we delude ourselves. We fancy that one can
make the perishable body impregnable and we think it impossible to
evoke the hidden powers of the soul. Well, I am engaged in trying to
show, if I have any of these powers, that I am as frail a mortal as any
of us and that I never had anything extraordinary about me nor have
any now. I claim to be a simple individual liable to err like any other
fellow mortal. I own, however, that I have humility enough in me to
confess my effors and to retrace my steps. I own that I have an
immovable faith in God and His goodness and unconsumable passion
for truth and love. But is that not what every person has latent in him?
If we are to make progress, we must not repeat history but make new
history. We must add to the inheritance left by our ancestors. If we
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

195

may make new discoveries and inventions in phenomenal world, must
we declare out Bankruptcy in the spititual domain? Is it impossible to
multiply the exceptions so as to make them the rule? Must man always
be brute first and man after, if at all?
Young India, 6-5-1926

257. LETTER TO RADHAKRISHNA BAJAJ
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
Thursday, May 6, 1926
CHI. RADHAKRISHNA,

I read your letter to me and the one to Shankarrao. I am sure
your rule about eating salt-free food is not for all time. Its
significance lies in that it reduces the keenness of the palate. This is
the main point to bear in mind, and, therefore, as a guest at someone’s
place you may accept whatever simple food is offered. You may leave
aside any item on the menu, with or without salt, which is not
acceptable to you. But the three items—milk, boiled rice and
chapatties—can be had anywhere. You may leave aside curry or
vegetables which contain chillies and spices. Where hand- ground
flour is not available, you may use mill-ground flour without any
hesitation. When the road surface is very hot and in a place strewn
with thorns, you should certainly use shoes, which in fact are called
kantarakhan1 or pagarakhan 2 . You should not hesitate to write to me
whenever you are faced with such conflicts of duties. Take very good
care of your health.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 19532

258. LETTER TO CHHOTALAL
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
Thursday, May 6, 1926
CHI. CHHOTALAL,

I got your letter written from Jaipur. I had earlier letter too. I
intended to write to you after you had reached Calcutta, but your
letter from Jaipur impels me to write today. I do not at all like your
1
2

196

Protection against thorns
Protection for feet
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

manner of counting the cost of the thing. We must be very careful but
we should not overdo it. If you go to some place for a cure of your
mental or physical illness, you can certainly charge the expense to the
Ashram’s account. Why do you at all keep any money as yours?
Which is better, that you should surrender your all or that you should
retain a little of “I”and “mine”? And just as the Ashram should bear
the expenses when you go out elsewhere, similarly it should pay for
the lessons you take in shorthand. Satis Babu will certainly pay you
for any work you do, but it is better that you should work without
expecting payment and also learn shorthand without paying. Rather
than raise such fine issues, it is more necessary that you learn to
determine with the utmost care what your duty is and then have no
doubts and hesitations about it in your mind. Anyone who goes too
deep into things, as you do, gets lost in mazes and is unable to see his
plain duty which stands before him as unmistakable as a hill. Write to
me regularly. You left for Prayag, and Bhuvarji came here.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19533

259. LETTER TO MADANMOHAN SHARMA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Friday, May 7, 1926
DEAR SIR,

Your letter. The Tilak Fund came to about a crore of rupees.
Its accounts appeared in all the papers. Its report has also been
published in book form and is available at the Congress office. A
major portion of the sum has already been spent, chiefly on national
schools, removal of untouchability and khadi work.
(2) In my opinion, a leader should not travel first or second
class if his health can stand the strain of third class travel.
(3) I certainly believe that Hindu-Muslim unity is possible, for
unity is in human nature. Even if neither Hindus nor Muslims make
efforts to bring it about, time does its work.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

197

(4) Those whose economic condition is not good may adopt still
greater simplicity in their lives and consume less khadi; in this manner a
non-co-operator should, in the present circumstances, put up with
hardships but be faithful to his chosen dharma.
From a photostat of the Hindi : S.N. 10899

260. LETTER TO FULCHAND
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Friday, May 7, 1926
BHAISHRI FULCHAND,

I got your postcard. I don’t think it was a virtue in Bhai Shivlal
that he should be suffering from piles and yet not give so much as a
hint to anyone. I would rather blame him for not doing so. He cannot
now carry on his work of service. No one can say how long he will be
in bed; besides, the illness will mean expenditure which could have been
avoided. But who can make Shivlal see reason? You should now
immediately take whatever measures are necessary to get him cured.
I follow what you say regarding the Wadhwan Udyogalaya1 . Your
letter seems to suggest that I have been unfair in forming my opinion
about Wadhwan and that I am partial to the Amreli Centre in supporting
it, and that too is a form of injustice. How can I convince you that I am
neither partial towards the one nor hostile to the other? I am partial
only to khadi. After inspecting the Amreli Centre personally and also
through others’ eyes I came to the conclusion that it did not deserve to
be closed. I had not examined the Wadhwan centre, nor did I think it
necessary to look into its working, as I had confidence in your ability
and used to get regular reports about it from Devchandbhai. I thought
about the Centre only when the problem of selling khadi arose. And
when you showed me the accounts in the course of my inquiry, I was
startled. If it is a fact that in Wadhwan you offer higher rates for
spinning, weaving and carding, is it [worthwhile] to continue to run the
Centre?
I apply one ccriterion to khadi activity at all places. Are the
women who will be spinning starving for want of employment? If so,
and if, to our good fortune, they agree to spin, we may start khadi work
in that place. Provided workers were available in sufficient number, I
1

198

Industrial Centre
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

would try to maintain all those centres in Kathiawar which satisfied this
principle. Write to me if you have anything to say after this
explanation, and try to convince me. I yearn for testimonials from my
co-workers certifying to my impartiality. I regard you as one such coworker. I, too, will not give up the effort to convince you.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 19534

261. LETTER TO RAM DATTA CHOPRA
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 8, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I do not think that the vaccine is obtained by
killing cows. But I believe that it requires torturing them.
The rules of the Ashram1 are appended to Mr. Natesan’s
publication. All the copies have been distributed. A new edition is
contemplated but it would be some time before it is published.
I am afraid I would not be able to take charge of your daughter
as I have no arrangements for receiving girls who are not accompanied
by their parents. And your son is in any event too young to be
admitted.
With reference to the construction of cobbler’s huts I would ask
you to approach the President of the Provincial Congress Committee.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S.N. 19540

262. LETTER TO MAULANA ABUL KALAM AZAD
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 8, 1926
DEAR MAULANA SAHEB,

I have your telegram. It was received after the All-India Congress
Committee session was over. But do you think that any purpose can be
served by calling a special session of the Congress? It can be of use
only when there is a policy or programme that requires confirmation by
it. But unfortunately we have neither policy nor programme. On the
1

Vide “Draft Constitution for the Ashram”, before 20-5-1915.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

199

contrary, the tallest among us distrust one another and even where there
is no distrust there is no agreement as to facts or opinion.
In the circumstances a Congress session can only accentuate the
existing depression. It seems to me that time alone can solve the
difficulty which seems to baffle us.
I wish that it was possible for us at least to devise means of
ascertaining the causes and of defining the results of each riot. But it
seems that we have become incapacitated even for this very simple work.
Yours sincerely,

MAULANA ABUL KALAM AZAD
C ALCUTTA
From a photostat : S.N. 19541

263. LETTER TO KUSUM AND DHIRU
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 8, 1926
CHI. KUSUM AND DHIRU,

I have your letter. I do not want to apportion blame for what has
happened. I only wish that you should now take full advantage of the
free time you will get there, and in this manner you should make your
influence felt in the neighbourhood by being more regular in your
daily work of spinning, etc., and strengthen your resolves. Keep writing
to me. I see your handwriting still needs much improvement. Dhiru’s
especially is extremely poor. I shall forget my grief over Dhiru’s going
away to Bombay if he religiously follows there all his vows. Tell
Bhanumati that, if she starts spinning regularly and forms the habit of
getting up at four, I will think that letting both of you go to Bombay has
been of great value. Devdas is there; he is to be operated upon, and is
along with Ba and Mahadev. You must have heard about all this.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19535

264. LETTER TO JAYA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, May 8, 1926
CHI. JAYA,

One benefit has certainly followed from Kusum and Dhiru going
200

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

there; I have had a letter from you. I did not know that your
handwriting was so laboured; it can certainly be improved. Please see
that the children keep all the rules. I shall then forget my grief over
their going from here. Please let me know how Dr. Prabhudas is
keeping. You will know the rest from the letter to Kusum and Dhiru.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19536

265. LETTER TO MITHUBEHN PETIT
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, May 8, 1926
DEAR SISTER,

I have your letter; also the honey. It looks that after all I shall
have to go to Mahabaleshwar. There is a letter today from Sir Chunilal
Mehta. It seems to have been written at the instance of the Governor
himself. He has invited me in his letter to stay with him. I think I
should accept the invitation. Most probably I shall start from here as
early as next Thursday. Personally, I would have liked to stay either
with you or with Nargisbehn, but every time we must consider what our
duty requires of us.
MITHUBEHN
F OUNTAIN HOUSE
MAHABALESHWAR
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 19537

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

201

266. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday [May 8, 1926] 1
CHI. JAMNALAL,

It seems at last that I shall have to go to Mahabaleshwar. There is
a letter today from Sir Chunilal Mehta. He has written it at the instance
of the Governor himself, and suggests that I should meet the Governor
in Mahabaleshwar itself. He has also invited me to stay with him while
there, and pressed me to accept the invitation. I intend, therefore, to
start from here on Thursday. Devdas’s operation will have been over
by then. I expect a telegram today. Now we shall not have to arrange
for a bunga-low for our stay in Mahabaleshwar. Think over and decide
what arrange-ments we should make for a car and whether you will
accompany me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 2862

267. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, Chaitra Vad 11, May 8, 1926
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,

One of your questions remains to be answered. You wanted to
know whether you could spend anything for helping the poor women
who spin. You can spend about Rs. 100 for the purpose. Please let me
know how you intend to utilize the amount. Within this limit, write to
the Ashram for the amount which you spend.
I send with this the results of the tests carried out by Shri
Lakshmidas as to the quality of the yarn. You will see from them that it
is very necessary to pay attention to improving it. In Shri Lakshmidas’s
view, the strength ought not to be below 50%. Why could they not
supply moistened yarn if they keep it with them for eight days? In this
weather, moistened yarn dries up within two or three hours.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19538

1

202

Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

268. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, May 8, 1926
BHAI KAKA,

I have to further postpone the writing of the book for you,
because, if I do not write a letter to you under the excuse that I am to
write a book for you, I am afraid I may write neither. I had thought that
I would write out the book soon so that I need not write the letter. But
the Congress Committee took up practically my three full days, with the
result that the Girnar of work has now become the Himalayas. On top
of this, I see from today’s mail that I shall have to go to Mahabaleshwar.
Nothing is likely to come out of the visit, but courtesy requires that I
should go; let the outcome be what it will.
I have never felt that the inmates of the Ashram are indifferent to
Dr. Talwalkar, but it may be that my indifference, if it can be called so,
has been reflected in their attitude.
If you have been using olive oil as a substitute for cod-liver oil,
[by all means] go on with it. Some regard it as superior to cod-liver oil.
Shri Bhansali had used this same thing in jail.
My habit of drawing lots has absolutely no relation with your
“examination as of a bride’s qualities”. The poor little piece of paper
cannot bear all that burden. There is no attempt in it to win over the
gods; on the contrary, there is a sort of indifference about lots. In cases
in which we need not tax our reason, in which we are indifferent to
either of the alternative courses and yet must adopt one of them, and
none of our good friends is prepared to take a decision for us, I think it
is an excellent practice to seek the good offices our friend, the lot. This
saves time and also spares us the burden on our mind. In matters of
principle, drawing lots is an immoral solution.
You cannot draw lots whether or not you should steal. But is it
not better to draw lots rather than go on debating whether or not to go
out for a walk with A, citing reasons from Vedas and other holy books
for and against? If we try to consult the inner voice in such matters, the
latter would lose all its value; a child like Rasik might excuse
himself from doing any work by pleading his inner voice! Have we not
known instances of such abuse of the plea of inner voice during the
non-co-operation movement? Suppose tandaljo and methi are both
permissible items of diet, both are easily available but only one of them
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

203

is to be purchased, and suppose further that we cannot make up our
mind immediately, would it not, in such circumstances, be better to draw
lots and be indifferent to the result, rather than make it a matter of
conscience?
I shall see about Shri Harihar when he comes here. Shri Narahari
had thought of getting Harihar to open a nursery school in Surat. If the
people of Surat are ready to have such a school and collect a big
amount they are certainly welcome to start it, but we cannot try the
experiment on behalf of the Vidyapith. I remember having been told
by Shri. . . 1 as early as when I was in jail that Shri . . .2 had gone
romantic. He had shown me an indecent poem signed . . . 3 , when I
asked who this . . .4 was, I think he said it was . . .5 of the Ashram. But
may be, I am mistaken. It may not have been . . . 6 but someone else
who told me this. We shall have to think about the matter when . . .7 is
here.
Nothing has yet been decided about [my visit to] Europe. Yes,
Swami too had expressed to me his disagreement. The Ame- rican
tour would have only meant addressing thousands of people; going to
Finland means attending a convention of student-delegates from all over
the world. There is a great difference between the two propositions.
Moreover, in America I was supposed to give to the people India’s
message; though there was no message to give. In this case the idea is
that I should establish a spiritual bond with students. There is no
question of delivering a message. These are the reasons why the idea of
going to Finland is tempting me, though, of course, there are some
misgivings in my mind. That is why I have thrown on K. T. Paul the
responsibility of arranging my visit after telling them of my conditions.
He, too, instead of accepting the responsibility, has passed on my letter
to Geneva. If they will keep the invitation open, can we say it is God’s
wish that I should go? Personally I will certainly believe so.
I am convinced that Uttamchand will have nowhere else the
facilities which he enjoys here. And now we have started a course of
injections by Dr. Talwalkar. He is keeping well enough.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 19539

1

204

to names omitted
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

269. SERVICE OF THE CITY
To everyone who wishes to serve his city I would recommend a
perusal of Dr. Hariprasad’s account1 of the seven-month-long efforts to
keep the city of Ahmedabad clean and bright. Those who do not know
how to serve their own city can never serve their country. The good
work done in these seven months by people who believed that selfless
service is its own reward could not have been done by the municipality
of the city even at a cost of thousands of rupees. This effort to keep
the city clean is an example of co-operation between a municipality and
the citizens, and if the rich do not co-operate, what has been already
achieved is likely to be wasted. It is possible to raise the necessary
funds to make Ahmedabad a model of cleanliness. Most of
the
suggestions made by Dr. Hariprasad cannot be carried out without the
help of the wealthy citizens. The money given for this work will bring a
handsome return, for if the city has a sufficient number
of open
gounds with trees in them, if the old ruins and dirty sights are removed
and stinking lavatories are seen no more, the health of the citizens will
improve considerably and the price of the land will also appreciate.
The citizens can insist that the expenditure should be incurred under
their own supervision. Hence the money given for this work will not be
a gift but will be an instance of economic foresight.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 9-5-1926

270. NOTES
R EFORMS AMONG “PATANWADIAS”2

The reforms introduced among Patanwadias show how much
work can be done if we cultivate close contacts with the countless people
in the country who are looked upon as poor and backward, and they
also make clear to us what kind of preparation is necessary
to
enable us to do such solid service. We can see from the work done by
Bhai Ravishankar that for this purpose a love for the people, a well
trained body and fearlessness are far more necessary than knowledge of
1

An article, ‘Cleaning the City’, by Hariprasad Vrajraj Desai in Navajivan,

9-

5-1926
2

This note is a comment on a report by Mohanlal Pandya of work among
Patanwadias, a backward community in Gujarat.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

205

letters, proficiency in English or a university degree.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 9-5-1926

271. LETTER TO A. A. PAUL1
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 9, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. It is a most difficult thing for me to make fixed
appointments one year in advance. I can only therefore say that I
would be prepared tentatively to accept the invitation. It may be
necessary to shorten the programme and it may be also that I may be so
absorbed in Indian affairs at the time that I might not be able to move
out of India. I wonder if with the uncertainty attaching to my
acceptance the associations concerned will care to send me the
invitation.
Please also tell the friends that if I go out at all, I shall be
accompanied by two companions.
Your colleague Mr. Maccune will be welcome at the Ashram in
the beginning of June.
Yours sincerely,
2

A. A. P AUL, E SQ.
7, M ILLER R OAD
KILPAUK, M ADRAS

From a photostat : S.N. 11370

1

In reply to his letter dated 4-5-1926 wherein he wrote : “. . . I have got a reply
from Mr. T. Z. Koo of China describing the purpose, programme, dates and scope of the
visit that they are anxious to have from you . . . .”
2
General Secretary’, Students’ Christian Association of India, Burma and Ceylon
(S.N. 11369)

206

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

272. LETTER TO MOTILAL ROY
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 9, 1926
DEAR MOTIBABU,

I hope you received my letter with reference to the loan. Please
make the followingcorrections in the agreement1 to be signed by you :
The interest should not be one per cent per annum but one per
thousand per annum.
The interest is intended to be purely nominal. And, where the
following sentence occurs—“the selling price of khadi . . . up to
weaving plus 614 % for the expenses of management”—please say “the
sale price of khaddar shall not be above the rates fixed by the
Association from time to time”.
This improvement is intended to make the position of the khadi
organizations more elastic than it2 otherwise would be. These are the
conditions embodied in the loan agreements. When I prepared the draft
for you Mr. Banker was away and I had not the Association model
before me. On his return he drew my attention to these discrepancies.
Kindly excuse me.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S.N. 19542

273. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS PODDAR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Sunday [May 9, 1926] 3
BHAI RAMESHWARJI,

I have your letter. When I advise you to live in “solitude” I mean
that you should live away from your wife. It would do you good to go
to Nasik and retire to a secluded spot.
After winter sets in,
1

Vide “Draft Agreement for Loans from All-India Spinners’ Association”,

1-

5-1926.
2
3

The source has “they”.
From the postmark

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

207

you can stay even in the Ashram.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 163-A

274. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Sunday [May 9, 1926] 1
CHI. VASUMATI,

I have your letter. This time your handwriting can be described as
good. When you are here, I will certainly put you up, if not in your old
room, in the room adjoining Mirabai’s. I shall have to go to
Mahabaleshwar for two or three days. Devdas is suffering from
appendicitis, and so I have sent him to Bombay for an operation. It
must have been over today. Ba and Mahadev have gone with him. The
report in the Press which you read, that I was to leave for
Mahabaleshwar on the 6th, was not correct. Ramdas must be in Mahuva
just now.
Blessings from

BAPU
S MT. V ASUMATIBEHN DHIMATRAI NAVALRAM
KELAPEETH
From the Gujarati original : C.W. 470. Courtesy : Vasumati Pandit

275. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Sunday, May 9, 1926
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I have your letter. I expect a telegram from you this evening. I
am not at all worried. Tell Ba that Rami’s daughter is quite all right. I
had got Ba’s message. Manibehn and the younger Kashi do the
cooking. Kumibehn, Rami’s aunt, arrived here today. Kanti and Manu
had been to the station to receive her. Ba should not worry on our
account.
1

208

From the reference to Devdas’s illness and Gandhiji’s trip to Mussoorie
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Rameshwarprasad, his mother and others arrived yesterday, and
are leaving for that side today. You must have got my letter in which I
told you about my going to Mahabaleshwar. I take it that Mahadev will
remain there for the time being. He should write to me if he wants me
to fetch anything for him from here. I think we shall have to take with
us some extra covering for nights. It seems that we shall have to stay in
Mahabaleshwar for three days, viz., Saturday, Sunday and Monday. I
have also been thinking that, leaving there on Tuesday morning, we
should look up Kaka in Sinhgarh and, if possible, make a trip to Deolali
as well. This may take up two more days. If we start on Tuesday
morning we can reach Sinhgarh at about 10 or 11, and I am thinking
that we may then go to Deolali if we can come down the same evening.
But I may even drop the visit to Deolali if Mahadev thinks that it is not
very necessary to go, because I also feel there is no point in going to
Deolali unless we can stay there for a couple of days. Just now I shall
write nothing about this to Mathuradas. I have decided to be guided by
Mahadev’s advice. Will you yourself arrange for a car from Poona? A
train for Poona leaves [Bombay] at 10-30 a.m. If that is so, I think it
will be best to catch that train, after seeing Devdas, and reach
Mahabaleshwar the same night. I think it would be better to arrange for
two cars from Poona.
I had just now a trunk-call from Vallabhbhai about the operation.
God be praised for His mercy!
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 2683

276. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Sunday, May 9, 1926
CHI. DEVDAS,

I got today all your letters, all the three. I do not understand how
this has happened. By the time you get this letter it will be more than
twenty-four hours since the operation, and you will be chatting happily
with friends. I do not now feel worried at any time. I have never felt
frightened by an operation, though I once witnessed an operation
which resulted in the patient’s death. But I could see that it was all
due to the doctor’s absolute incompetence. This happened in
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

209

Johannesburg. Kumi has come here today. She was certain that Ba
would be here. Panditji has arrived today, and so the Ashram is again
becoming full. I am not giving other news in this letter to you; I am
writing about it to Jamnalalji. I advise you to employ this enforced
leisure for looking within. I shall see him most probably on Friday.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 19543

277. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
Monday, May 10, 1926
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I have your letter and Mahadev’s. I am not at all worried, nor was
I before. There is always some risk in chloroform, but then such risk is
present in every operation. Tell Devdas not to be nervous if the pain
continues; some patients feel it, but only for a couple of days. By the
time you get this letter, the pain must have disappeared completely.
I got the translation sent by Mahadev. With this and with the
translation from Valji, I have by now (half past two) matter for
seventeen columns ready. So I have sat down to write this letter. I do
not think you need postpone your Indore visit. Nothing will be
accomplished at Mahabaleshwar, whereas there is much to do at Indore.
I have not decided whom I should ask here to accompany me. There
will be one person, and most probably it will be Subbiah.
I shall arrive there in the first train. Take me to Revashankarbhai’s. If Devdas is better, I shall go to see him after I have had my
bath and lunch; otherwise I will go directly from the station. We must
leave for Poona the same day. That will be no trouble to me. I intend
to reach Mahabaleshwar the same evening, i.e., at nine on Friday. Please
inform Revashankarbhai.
It is all right that you know Mehta, but it would have been better if
you had not written to him for a car. It will not look well if he makes
any arrangements on behalf of the Government. But please do not alter
the arrangements.
You will see that, if we reach Mahabaleshwar on Friday, we shall
have only two days to meet the Governor. We must leave the place on
Tuesday morning.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 2864

210

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

278. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
[May 10, 1926] 1
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. Mahadev also wrote after meeting you. My
programme of going to Mahabaleshwar stands. Most probably I shall
start from here on Thursday. As for paying or not paying you a visit, I
propose to go by what Mahadev says. It takes a day to reach there. Now
that Mahadev has seen you, I do not have to visit you merely for the
sake of courtesy. Let me know your own inmost desire. I shall get the
reply only at Bombay. Write at Jamnalalji’s address. Of course I shall be
putting up at Revashankarbhai’s house. Ask Pyarelal to write to me. At
Mahabaleshwar address letters to Sir Chunilal Mehta’s place. As for
Devdas, I shall send him where the doctor advises.
Blessings from

B APU
S JT. M ATHURADAS
WINDY HALL
NASIK R OAD
DEOLALI
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

279. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
Silence Day [May 10, 1926] 2
CHI. ANASUABEHN,

I have your letter. You worry about me needlessly. Were it
necessary for me to go I would never have posted the letter. There is
nothing wrong with my health. I rest a great deal and do not like to
leave the Ashram. So the Ashram appears to suit me very well. You
should not worry on my account. It was necessary for you to go. You
will surely admit that your health is more delicate than mine. So do not
brood over why I did not go and you went instead.
I am leaving for Mahabaleshwar on Thursday as the Governor
1
2

From the postmark
From the reference to Devdas who was operated upon for appendicitis on May

9, 1926
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

211

has again asked that I should go there. I shall stay for three days. While
returning I may perhaps spend a day calling on Kaka and Mathuradas. I
have not decided yet. Dalal diagnosed that Devdas had appendicitis and
advised operation for which I gave my consent. The operation was
successfully performed yesterday. Ba and Mahadev have gone there.
Jamnalal was already there.
It is quite hot here. Nothing has been decided about Finland so
far.1 I will let you know as soon as I receive confirmed intimation. There
is certainly no likelihood of my going before July.
Is sister-in-law fully recovered?
Did you have a darshan of Dhaulagiri?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32784

280. LETTER TO K. SANTANAM
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 11, 1926
MY DEAR SANTANAM,

Rajagopalachari discussed with me your difficulties when he was
at the Ashram. I sympathize with you. But it is difficult to conform to
an absolute rule of conduct. Whilst it is proper to exact the uttermost
from oneself, to refuse to serve till one had attained the ideal height
would be to cut off the possibility of reaching that height. We rise only
by actual service and by taking the risk of making mistakes whilst we
are serving. Not one of us is perfect. Not one of us is able to realize the
whole of our spiritual ambition. All the same, in the humblest manner
possible we have to continue to serve and hope that through that service
we may some day realize that ambition. If we all refuse to serve, until
we attain perfection, there will be no service. The fact is that perfection
is attained through service. If you were to say we must not take or
accept power till we are perfect, I should entirely agree with you. And,
therefore, it is best never to take any power, and, when it is thrust upon
us to use it for service only. I hope therefore that, in spite of the
weaknesses that you may detect in yourself, you will not refuse to
render khadi service so long as the weaknesses do not interfere with that
1

212

Gandhiji finally declined the invitation.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

service. Thus a man who has the weakness of dishonesty or drunknesses
or the like is naturally unfit for that service. But a man who in spite of
strenuous effort is unable (say) to regulate himself with his wife as if he
was her brother is not unfit for service. I hope I have made myself quite
clear and that you will return to the khadi work you love and do so well.
Yours sincerely

S JT. K. S ANTANAM
KUMMUTTI THIDAL
TANJORE DT.
From a microfilm : S.N. 19545

281. LETTER TO SARADINDU B. BANERJI
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 11, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. It is not clear to me what you really desire. Do
you want to stay with me for a little time? And, if so, what do you want
to do? Mine as you know is an extremely busy life. I have hardly time
to talk to people. And I rarely do so except for purposes of my own.
If, therefore, one comes to me he is immediately put upon some useful
work and he commences with the cleansing of water-closets, etc., and
spinning as a matter of course.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S ARADINDU B. BANERJI
13, EDMONSTONE R OAD
ALLAHABAD
From a microfilm : S.N. 19546

282. LETTER TO C. V. KRISHNA
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 11, 1926
MY DEAR KRISHNA,

I have your letter. Even for the Rustomjee Bhavan, let the
recommendation come through the agency of A.I.S.A.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

213

Your diet scale is good if you get sufficient butter-milk during the
month. Who gives it to you free? Is it customary in Andhra Desh for
butter-milk to be given freely? Do you have to beg for it? Or is it sent
to you? Please describe to me more fully the fruits you get for one
rupee per month. Your scale should be scientifically drawn. And a
scientific scale gives both the weight and price of all the foodstuffs
taken. You cannot be always taking one rupee and four annas worth of
rice even when the price of rice has doubled, as it sometimes is. Of the
staples you have to take the same quantity irrespective of price.
Therefore, I would like you to give me the exact quantity taken
including those things which come to you free of charge and you
should put down the prices of such things also as you get free.
I want to publish the scale of diet taken in the various institutions
so as to guide workers. And let there be no et ceteras. You have “salt,
etc.”. Instead of that you should say salt, turmeric, ginger or whatever
spices, if any, you are taking.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S.N. 19547

283. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARIAR
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 11, 1926
I have your two letters. I enclose herewith Kelappan’s letter. What
you have done is quite right. He must render an account of his work to
you from time to time.
I am writing to Santanam. Herewith a copy of my letter1 to him.
About Ramanathan, I shall discuss with Shankerlal. I do not apprehend
any difficulty.
Can’t very well draw lots about Finland. And, even if I do, it is
too late now. But I share your misgivings. I have prescribed my terms
and if they have me in spite of them there may be something in the visit.
You will be ready in June, won’t you, for touring even if you
have to have somebody from here temporarily. How would Chhotalal
suit you? He cannot be there for a long time. But it would be
possible to induce him to come there willingly for two or three months
if he can be of any assistance and give you some relief.
1

214

Vide “Letter to K. Santanam”, 11-5-1926.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I have now seen Shankerlal. He thinks that if Ramanathan’s salary
is raised to Rs. 150 there is bound to be pressure from others for raising
their salary. It is a risky thing for a public and universal body like the
Charkha Sangh to depart from fixed rules. At the same time, I see your
or rather Ramanathan’s difficulty. My suggestion, therefore, is that so
long as it is absolutely necessary, you should pay Ramanathan from the
Seva Sangh. For this, perhaps, Jamnalalji will have to be consulted which
you should do or if you want me to I will. If the thing can be postponed
you should come here at the time of commencing your tour and discuss
with Shankerlal. I take it that Ramanathan will not insist upon the
increase coming from the A.I.S.A.
Yours,

S JT. C. R AJAGOPALACHARIAR
GANDHI ASHRAM
TIRUCHENGODU
From a photostat : S.N. 19548

284. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Tuesday, May 11, 1926
BHAISHRI KAKA,

I got your second letter about mother goat. If, now, I myself
come to Sinhgarh, instead of sending you a book there, I will make
nothing but speeches. We need not now leave this place on Thursday
and reach Mahabaleshwar on Friday, because the next week suits the
Governor better. When I shall be able to leave, I can say only after
some time. Even apart from the visit to Mahabaleshwar, Devdas has
been operated upon and I must see him. Since Bombay is on the way, I
may even start earlier for his sake. That will depend upon Devdas’s
wishes.
I agree with every word of what you say about books worth translating. My inquiry was only in connection with Jamnadas Memorial
Series. Neither Shankerlal nor Swami has the list which you prepared.
Of course we should get the translation done only by competent men.
The books too should be such as would meet some immediate needs of
the people and should be easy to follow. In your letter you have
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

215

explored a whole ocean of books. But all we have to consider at present
is what books we should select for this series. Please, therefore, think
about that.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 19531

285. LETTER TO HORACE GREEN
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 12, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter of the 13th April last. I believe I had a prepaid
cable from Paris to which I sent a reply. I cannot recall any prepaid
cable from you from New York.
I would have gladly lent you a copy of my autobiography if I
had it. But chapters are written from week to week. What has been
written has already been published. If you do not subscribe to Young
India you can get a loan of it from Dr. Holmes.
What should be done when the whole of the Autobiography is
written for its publication in book form has not yet been decided. Dr.
Holmes, I understand, is in correspondence with the Macmillans.
Yours sincerely,

HORACE GREEN, E SQ.
P RESIDENT
DUFFIELD & C OMPANY
211 E AST 19TH S TREET
NEW YORK
From a copy: S.N. 32239

286. LETTER TO HELENE ALPERS HAHN
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 12, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter of the 19th April last1 . I have not yet
1

In which the addressee had sought Gandhiji’s permission for translating his
Autobiography into German and to have it printed in Germany

216

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

decided what is to be done to the Autobiography for its publication in
book form in European languages after its completion. At the present
moment it is being published in several magazines for which I have
given free permission. But beyond that I am unable to go at present.
Yours sincerely,

HELENE ALPERS HAHN
HEILBRONN AM NECKAR
GERMANY
From a copy: S.N. 32250

287. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
ASHRAM,

Wednesday [May 12, 1926] 1
CHI. MAHADEV,

I have your letter. I also got a telegram from Jamnalalji. A
telegram from Sir Chunilal has just been received. The Governor will
see us on Tuesday. I am, therefore, sending a wire that I shall start
tomorrow. I will take the first train. We shall fix up the rest of the
programme after I reach there. I would prefer that we leave for Deolali
on Friday itself in the evening and return to Bombay on Sunday
morning. We may then spend Sunday and Monday in Bombay and
finish the work for Young India and Navajivan till the usual period of
my vow of silence on Monday is over. I should break my silence on
Monday evening and leave for Poona, from where I can immediately
take the train to Mahabaleshwar. We can have our wash and lunch in
Mahabaleshwar itself. This will impose the least strain on us. But you
should, all of you, consult among yourselves about any changes which
may seem necessary in this programme; we will alter it accordingly after
I arrive there. We should stay in Mahabaleshwar on Tuesday and
Wednesday and leave there on Thursday morning. On our way we
should cover Sinhgarh; we should start descending immediately
after sunset and take the train from Poona so as to reach Bombay
the following morning, and Ahmedabad on Saturday morning. As
far as I can see, we cannot save a single day from this programme.
We must reserve two days for Mahabaleshwar. We can, if we wish,
spend Monday in Mahabaleshwar. But it seems best that we should
1

From the reference to Gandhiji’s visit to Mahabaleshwar and to Devdas

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

217

spend Sunday and Monday with Devdas. Or, we can spare one day more
for Mathuradas. In any case, we should spend Monday in Bombay.
I think I have nothing to add. Oh yes, I forgot one thing. I have
yielded to Kumi’s repeated requests and Kanti, Rasik and Minu are
leaving for Rajkot tomorrow. My conditon is that they too should be
sent back on Friday. On asking the children, I could see that they
wished to go and so I thought it best to let them go.
Ramniklal has started a ten-day fast from today, the reason merely
being his own several years old, strong wish to do so. So now Bhansali
has a companion during the last days of his fast. The latter is going on
very well with his fast. Today is the twelfth day, but he does not show in
any way that he has been fasting. There is no observable effect even on
his face. He sleeps quite soundly. He takes enemas, and that ensures
bowel movement. Drinks plenty of water. He himself reads for an hour
every day, and also gets others to read a little from religious books.
Since Devdas is all right, . . .1 can now come away. Rami, being
alone, is likely to feel a little, though of course Mani, Radha and others
look after her with great care. I propose to bring Subbiah along with
me.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 19494

288. LETTER TO THE SECRETARY, A.I.S.A.
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 12, 1926
THE S ECRETARY
A.I.S.A.
AHMEDABAD
DEAR SIR,

Ref. Your No. 2743 of the 8th instant
With reference to the application of the Abhoy Ashram authorities for permission to borrow on personal security up to Rs. 20,000/- I
am of opinion that this permission should be granted provided that the
money is to be used for advancing the object of the Ashram.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S.N. 11177

1

218

As in the source
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

289. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 12, 1926
DEAR SATIS BABU,

I want an accurate reading of the Calcutta riots from your pen. I
wonder if Chhotalal gave you my letter and how he is doing? Any way,
I am delighted that you have changed your food and are taking more
nourshing things. Do please continue. It will be criminal if you weaken
your body or become ill. A few rupees spent in getting proper
nourishment will be well spent. I know that you are not the man to eat
for pleasure, but when things are required to sustain life they must be
procured.
Hemaprabha Devi wrote to me a laconic letter from which I could
understand nothing. Tell her it will not do. She must tell me fully
about all her mental struggles, hopes and fears, likes and dislikes.
Yours,

BAPU
From a microfilm : S.N. 19550

290. LETTER TO LUCIEN JACQUIN 1
May 12 [1926]
I would suggest to you to make a careful study of my writings
before you take any step whatsoever.
From a photostat : S.N. 12416

291. LETTER TO J. LYLE TELFORD2
May 12 [1926]
If you will kindly send me your magazine I shall see whether I
can send you anything to fit in with it.
From a photostat : S.N. 12432

1

This is handwritten draft on a letter dated 6-4-1926 from the addressee in
French. (S.N. 12416)
2
In reply to the addressee’s letter dated 25-2-1926 requesting for an article for
The International Forum, a monthly magzine for the promotion of social progress

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

219

292. LETTER TO E. H. JAMES
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 12, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. It is difficult for me at the present moment to
find time to read literature with which friends overwhelm me.
You ask me to differentiate between Advaitism and Dwaitism. The
former derived evidence from God who alone exists and therefore,
contemplates identity between God and His creation. The latter attempts
to show that the two can be never one.
Yours sincerely,

E. H. J AMES, E SQ.
C ONCORD MASS, U.S.A.
From a photostat : S.N. 12434

293. LETTER TO KRISHNADAS
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 12, 1926
MY DEAR KRISHNADAS,

I had your telegram. Till it was received, we did not know that it
was on father’s account that Hardayal Babu had started fasting. He had
written to me and asked me for blessing. I had not the heart to refuse it.
But after receipt of your telegram, I was watchful. I have now received a
telegram saying that the fast is broken, some people of Chandpur
having guaranteed the expenses of the school building.
I have been waiting for your letter which has not yet arrived. How
is Guruji getting on and how are you faring? Did I tell you that
Pyarelal was with Mathuradas? Devdas is suffering from jaundice.
Having been brought back, he underwent an operation on Sunday for
appendicitis. Ba and Mahadev are there in Bombay. Devdas is doing
quite all right. I am likely to see him on my way to Mahabaleshwar
where I am going to meet the Governor to discuss agricultural matters at
his instance.
Yours,
From a microfilm : S.N. 19549

220

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

294. LETTER TO SEWA RAM
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 12, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

Fearlessness comes out of a living faith in the existence of the soul
apart from the body and its persistence after the dissolution of the body.
And this is attained by a continuous realization of the futility of all
worldly ambition.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S EWA R AM
22, JAIL R OAD
LAHORE
From a photostat : S. N. 19551

295. LETTER TO CHHOTELAL
ASHRAM,

Wednesday, May 12, 1926
CHI. CHHOTELAL,

I have your letter. Remember your promise to me, that during
your retirement into the country you will build up very good health,
and you cannot do that unless you cheer up. You must unhesitatingly
and in good quantity take milk, curds or any other articles which agree
with you. For the present, you should pay attention to building up fine
health, and may at the same time do what work you can. I know that
you would have felt happier if Vinoba could have been with you at this
time. But now you should carry on Vinoba’s work “as well as you
can”. How much happier I would be if I did not have to qualify the
statement with “as well as you can”! It is up to you to make that
possible. I am writing to Rajaji. He will certainly have you. He is
certain to come here by the 15th of June. It is not so very far off from
now, and so I believe he will decide only after he arrives here. Just the
same I shall see what he says. You should always let me have a
complete picture of the state of your mind.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19553

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

221

296. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Wednesday [May 12, 1926] 1
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. There is no need at all to send Pyarelal to
Bombay. Devdas is much better now. Even otherwise, such changes
cannot be allowed. I am leaving here tomorrow, that is, on Thursday. On
Friday I shall spend the day in Bombay and board the night train for
Nasik, arriving at Deolali in the morning. I shall let you know if there is
any change in the programme after going to Bombay. I shall spend the
whole day at Deolali and return to Bombay by train the same night.
After spending Sunday and Monday in Bombay I shall leave for
Mahabaleshwar on Monday night and reach there on Tuesday morning.
The rest at Mahabaleshwar.
Blessings from

BAPU
S JT. M ATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
WINDY HALL
NASIK R OAD
DEOLALI (G.I.P.)
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

297. A DIEHARD
Prejudices die hard. Though the atrocious injustice done by the
Hindus to the suppressed classes is admitted generally by even the
orthodox Hindu society, there are men, otherwise liberal-minded, so
blinded by prejudice that they see no injustice in the treatment meted
out to our suppressed countrymen. Thus a correspondent writes :2
. . . I do not agree with people who say that the untouchables are oppressed
and suppressed. . . . I am afraid that your mission to elevate them, to
place
them on an equal footing with other communities of the country, is doomed to
failure. Personally, though I feel that much should be done to elevate them
1
2

222

From the postmark
Only excerpts are reproduced here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

socially, it cannot be done as if by magic in a single day. Millions of money
will have to be spent to educate them, to free them from economic distress, to
persuade them to abandon the vices of drinking and killing cows and eating dead
animals. . . .

Degradation lies in not touching the “untouchable”. What
though a man drinks, kills cows and eats carrion? He is no doubt an
evil-doer, though no greater than the one who commits secret and more
deadly sins. But he is not to be treated as an untouchable even as
society does not treat the secret sinner as one. Sinners are not to be
despised, but pitied and helped to rid themselves of their sinfulness.
The existence of untouchability among Hindus is a denial of the
doctrine of ahimsa on which we pride ourselves. We are responsible for
the evils among the “untouchables”, of which the writer complains.
What have we done to wean them from their ways? Do we not spend a
fortune to reform members of our own families? Are the untouchables
not members of the great Hindu family ? Indeed, Hinduism teaches us
to regard the whole of humanity as one indivisible and undivided family
and holds each one of us responsible for the misdeeds of all. But if it is
not possible to act up to the grand doctrine for its vastness, let us at least
understand the unity of the “untouchables” with us since we regard
them as Hindus.
And what is worse, eating carrion or thinking carrion? We daily
create, harbour and nourish millions of untouchable thoughts. Let us
shed them, for they are the true untouchables deserving to be hated
and cast out. And let us do penance for our past in- justice towards the
“untouchable” brothers by lovingly embracing
them.
The
correspondent does not question the duty of serving the untouchables.
How are we to serve them if their very sight offends and pollutes us?
Young India, 13-5-1926

298. FURTHER MARCH FIGURES
Here are the figures 1 of production and sale of khadi for the
month of March from some centres. I hope that all those who are not
yet regularly sending their returns would begin to do so.
The Andhra figures are as usual incomplete. Bengal figures
included those of the Khadi Pratishthan, Abhoy Ashram, and Arambagh
1

Not reproduced here

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

223

Khadi Kendra.
C OMPARATIVE F IGURES

The Abhoy Ashram authorities have sent the following
comparative figures1 of khadi production and sales under its aegis :
Thus it will be seen that in 1925-26, the quarterly production in
the Abhoy Ashram was 25 times as much as during the corresponding
period in 1923-24. This is a remarkable rise. I would ask all the chief
khadi organizations in India to favour me with similar comparative
statistics. If they show a rise at all like the Abhoy Ashram, they will be a
complete answer to those who tell us that khadi has progressively gone
down instead of rising during the past five years. Progressive figures
like those of the Abhoy Ashram should hearten khadi workers for
greater effort. For the work before them is not to manufacture khadi
worth lacs. They have to manufacture crores of rupees worth of khadi.
Young India, 13-5-1926

299. THE CATTLE PROBLEM
Some months ago the Collector of Ganjam Mr. A. Galletti sent
me a sheet, being a reprint of his notes contibuted to The Statesman, in
which he gave his opinion based on his Italian expe- riences, (1) that
the agriculture of India depended upon good cattle, (2) that the cattle
of India were ill-kept and therefore worse than elsewhere, (3) that they
could be improved only by India growing cattle crop instead of merely
depending on common pastures, and (4) that by the system of rotation
cattle crop could be grown side by side with food grains without
diminishing the returns of the latter.
I had difficulty in applying the Italian conditions to the Indian
inasmuch as we have small holidings even as little as two acres and
sometimes even less. To my objection which I conveyed to him, Mr.
Galletti sent me the following reply2 :
Many thanks for yours of the 26th February, received today in my camp in my
Agency hills. I will reply3 to your objection from experience.

The appeal of the crores of India’s cattle lies not to me alone, but
to every Indian who can think for himself, more especially perhaps to
1
2
3

224

Not reproduced here
Only an extract is reproduced here.
Not reproduced here
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

every Hindu who prides himself on being the special protector of the
cow. I hope that the readers have been perusing the carefully prepared
notes by Sjt. V. G. Desai on the slaughter of India’s cattle. They give a
graphic description of the condition of the cattle in the cities of India.
Mr. Galletti paints the condition of farm cattle and prescribes in detail
the remedy for improving them. The question of improving the breed
of cattle and preserving them is a question as well of first rate economics
as of religion. How far Mr. Galletti’s remedy is applicable to Indian
conditions, I do not know. Practical farmers alone can give an
authoritative opinion. But one difficulty is obvious. Millions of
farmers are too ignorant to adopt new and revolutionary methods.
Assuming the truth of Mr. Galletti’s prescription, its application
depends upon the agricultural education of the large mass of Indian
humanity. But those who know anything of agriculture and who have a
patch of land under cultivation should try Mr. Galletti’s remedy and
publish results. For such, I give below the relevant extracts1 from the
sheet sent by Mr. Galletti :
Young India, 13-5-1926

300. NOTES
KHADI DURING NATIONAL WEEK

The All-India Spinners’ Association has received certain re- ports
of khadi work during the National Week according to which
in
Banaras Babu Shiva Prasad Gupta who organized volun- teers for the
sale of khadi, in Banaras sold nerely Rs. 2,000 worth of khadi : at
Allahabad, over Rs. 1,200; at Ghazipur, over Rs. 160; and at Banda
nearly Rs. 1,000 worth of khadi was sold. The result was that there was
hardly any local khadi left in the U.P. In the Punjab, great enthusiasm
was shown. Rs. 11,000 worth of khadi was disposed of. Many leaders
went about hawking khadi. In Tamilnad, the sales in all depots
amounted to Rs. 18,622-11-11.
I wish that the other khadi centres throughout India would send
their reports. There is nothing starling about these figures, but they
show that if only leading men and women will work in their own centres
steadilly, all the khadi that can be produced can be disposed of
without the slightest difficulty in the province of production and that
1

Not reproduced here

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

225

there need be no check put upon the manufacture of good khadi for
want of custom. Manufacture requires skill and sustained effort. Sale
requires prestige and pushfulness. Sales therefore can be best effected
by volunteers of recognized status giving a portion of their time during
certain months in the year.
TO S. L. R.

I wish, instead of filling eight sides of a thin notepaper, you had
written on one side of your notepaper so as to make your writing
legible. You could have condensed your statement to a fourth of its
size.
I suggest to you that remembrance of a bad deed does not mean
hatred of the evil-doer. I do not forget “the atrocities” committed by
many of my friends and relatives, but I am not aware of the slightest
hatred against them. On the contrary, I love them in spite of their
“atrocities”. But it would be wrong for me to support evil-doing
friends or relatives. Similarly would it be wrong for the nation to
support a servant who has been guilty of atrocities such as General Dyer
was. Absence of hatred does not and must not mean the screening of
the guilty.
You infer without any authority that my severe
condemnation of the sin of Jallianwala includes condemnation of the
whole of the British race. I must ask you to search the file of Young
India and you will discover that I have done the opposite of what you
attribute to me.
Young India, 13-5-1926

301. I. L. P. AND INDIA
The report of the Indian Advisory Committee of the Independent
Labour Party on the condition of India is an ably written document. It
is a severe condemnation of the British Administration. It has among
others paragraphs on the so-called reforms, on the power of the Civil
Service, on communal favouritism, on the judiciary and the so-called
Indian navy.
The paragraph on education bears reproduction :1
Of the general poverty the report says :2
From the paragraphs on the agricultural conditions, I cull the
1
2

226

Not reproduced here
ibid.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

following:1
There are interesting paragraphs in the section devoted to
industrial conditions. But I must refer the reader for the rest of the
interesting information to the report itself which is issued by the I.L.P.
for 6d. at 14, Great George Street, London, S.W.
Young India, 13-5-1926

302. LETTER TO CHHOTALAL
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Thursday, May 13, 1926
CHI. CHHOTALAL,

I have your letter. You too must have received my telegram. It is best
that at present you stay there and study everything carefully; in any
case, now that you are there I think you should spend some time
acquainting yourself with the position. . . .2 of affairs there. The ideas
which have recently occurred to you will also mature while you are
there. The Ashram needs everyone but is dependent on none. That
should be the attitude of the inmates, too, towards the Ashram. They
must feel the need to remain in the Ashram, but at the same time they
ought to be fearless. The inmates must certainly want to remain in the
Ashram as long as it encourages the spirit of self-confidence in them,
but should leave it the moment they feel that it obstructs their spiritual development. Thus, in retaining you in the Ashram I think I am
serving both you and the Ashram. So you need not at all think that I
want to keep you in the Ashram solely for your good, irrespective of
whether your presence serves or harms the Ashram. I request you once
again to stop thinking too much. I hope you got my last letter. Reflect
over it and stop worrying.
You must have learnt that Devdas has been operated upon for
appendicitis. The operation was performed on Sunday. I learn from
his letter today that he is quite well. He will soon be discharged from
the hospital. Ba, Mahadev and Jamnalalji are with him. I am leaving for
Mahabaleshwar today to see the Governor there. I shall certainly see
Devdas on my way.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S. N. 19505

1
2

Not reproduced here
As in the source

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

227

303. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Thursday, Vaishakh Sud 2 [May 13, 1926] 1
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,

I have written an article 2 on the Centre for the next issue of
Navajivan; please go through it and let me know if I have omitted
anything. These days I find in your letters a mixture of sadness,
impatience and despair. I also see that you did not like Shri
Lakshmidas’s criticism. But there is no reason for you to feel sad or
give way to despair. And one must not be impatient of criticism. It is
not always that a critic can do well what he criticizes in others. It is your
duty to accept and use as much from the criticism as you can. You
should let Lakshmidas know and have a discussion with him about what
you cannot. If you do this, you may learn something. The present
widespread demand for khadi is the result of a sentiment. It is your duty
to nurse and strengthen this sentiment. If you work from there in a spirit
of self-sacrifice, you will be able to get more work done and also
improve the quality of yarn and khadi. It is only by improving their
quality that you can nurse and strengthen the love for khadi. You ask
for some person to examine the quality of khadi produced by families
which had kept back some cotton from their crop. Where can I find
such a person? I explained to you, when you were here, that you should
cut out a strip three to four inches wide, from every piece woven and
send the strips here, so that every roll can be examined. Both the rolls
and the strips should be numbered, so that whenever a strip is rejected
the corresponding roll can be promptly identified. This will consume
some time; but I think that is inevitable. If people get a return for their
money, why should they lose faith in khadi? If you cannot do this, I
can only tell you that you may pay only for such khadi about the
quality of which you feel sure. There should be no difficulty in doing
this if the payment is to be made at one place. When payments are to be
made at several places, inspection of the material should be carried out
at one place; otherwise this arrangement will not work. You may do
1

From the reference to Gandhiji’s trip to Mahabaleshwar and Devdas’
hospitalization
2
Vide “My Notes”, 16-5-1926

228

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

whatever you think best in the circumstances there. I am leaving for
Mahabaleshwar today. I expect to return here on Saturday the 22nd. I
shall receive lettes in Bombay up to Monday. Perhaps you know that
Devdas is in a hospital. Kusum and Dhiru, too, are in Bombay. They
wanted to be with Jaya during the time [that Devdas was in hospital].
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S. N. 19554

304. STATEMENT ON COLOUR BAR BILL
May 14, 1926
Mahatma Gandhi who arrived in Bombay on Friday morning was met on
the train by an Associated Press representative who showed him a message from
Cape Town that the Colour Bar Bill has been passed. Gandhiji received the news
with pain [and said]:

I am sorry to learn the news that the Bill has been passed by the
joint session of the two Houses of the Union Parliament. I had hoped
with Mr. Andrews that better counsels would prevail and that the Bill
would be rejected. Theoretically speaking, this Colour Bar Bill is worse
than the Class Areas Reservation Bill over which there is to be a round
table conference. One had wished that the spirrit of justice that actuated
the Union Government to postpone the passing of one bill would
induce them not to force the passage of the other. The acrimonious
debate that took place over the passage of the Colour Bar Bill makes
one suspicious as to the fate of Class Areas Reservation Bill. The duty of
the Governor General of South Africa, in my opinion, is quite clear.
His assent to this cruel Bill should be refused especially in view of the
fact that General Smuts backed, as he was, by many other South
African leaders put up such a strong opposition against it. The Colour
Bar Bill, if it becomes a law of the Union, will set up the whole of the
native population of South Africa against the white settlers. I regard it
as an act of suicide on their part.
The Bombay Chronicle, 15-5-1926

305. MESSAGE TO BHAVNAGAR STATE PEOPLE’S
CONFERENCE
[Before May 15, 1926] 1
The Conference has honoured itself in getting Mr. Amritlal
1

Read at the Conference on May 15

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

229

Thakkar, the champion of the Bhils and the Antyajas, as its president. I
hope that khaddar will have its proper place in such a conference,
khaddar whereby thousands of untouchables earn their honest
livelihood and by which innumerable hungry sisters earn an honest
anna protecting their womanhood. I also hope that the curse of
untouchability which has crept into Hindu soceity would be removed.
The Bombay Chronicle, 17-5-1926

306. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Saturday [May 15, 1926] 1
I am writing this at Deolali. The programme is materially altered.
I hope Krishnadas told you.
Mahabaleshwar—Sunday, Monday and Tuesday. Hope to leave
M. Wednesday, reach Bombay on Thursday and Ashram on Friday.
But may not reach till Saturday. Hope you are at peace with yourself.
The weather at Deolali is quite good.
With love,
BAPU

[PS.]
Krishnadas will tell you where to address letters.
BAPU
From the original : C. W. 5184. Courtesy : Mirabehn

307. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
DEOLALI,

May 15, 1926
CHI. MIRA,

I wrote a p.c. today in time for the post. This I am writing to post
at Bombay for which I am leaving presently.
Your Hindi letter is very well written. Not hasptal2 se3
chhodega 4 but chhutega5 . Chhodega is transitive and so you drop the
1
2
3
4
5

230

From the postmark
Hospital
From
Will leave
Will be discharged
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

case ending “se” but keep it before chhutega which is intransitive.
I knew you were feeling the separation. You will get over it
because it has got to be got over. The few days’ separation is a
preparation for the longer that death brings. In fact the separation is
only superficial. Death brings us nearer. Is not the body a bar—if it is
also an introduction?
Devdas was quite well and cheerful. Mathuradas too is much
better. I am to try to find out a place for him at Panchagani.
With love,
Yours,

BAPU

[PS.]
The chapter of Autobiography will be posted at the same time as
this. You will correct it as you like and give to Swami. The typed copy
contains my corrections. I shall try to send you the original too.
BAPU
From the original : C. W. 5185. Courtesy : Mirabehn

308. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
DEOLALI,

May 15, 1926
CHI. MANI,

I could persuade Ba [to go]. However, she refuses to go there
before Tuesday and will reach there on Wednesday. Tell Surajbehn
about it. I hope your wards give you satisfaction. Learn to be a good
mixer. Do try to bring Nandubehn to the Ashram. Krishnadas must
have told you about the change in the programme.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—4 : Manibehn Patelne, p. 37

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

231

309. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKER PATTANI
Saturday [May 15, 1926] 1
DEAR FRIEND,

I got your letter at Deolali. I am here to see Chi. Mathuradas on
my way to Mahabaleshwar. It seems to me that you are not gaining
strength fast enough. I am anxious to know your weight. You can have
only cow’s or goat’s milk, and that again after heating it with half an
ounce of water. It must not be boiled for any length of time. I hope to
return to the Ashram from Mahabaleshwar on Saturday. I shall reach
there tomorrow.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original : C. W. 3199. Courtesy : Mahesh A. Pattani

310. COBWEBS OF IGNORANCE2
An English writer has observed that in vindicating truth there is far
more labour in disentangling the knots of ignorance than in
propounding the truth itself. Truth is by nature self-evident. As soon
as you remove the cobwebs of ignorance that surround it, it shines clear.
That is just the sort of handicap under which the simple and straight
movement of the spinning-wheel is labouring today. It is expected to
fulfil conditions which no one ever claimed it to fulfil, and when it fails
to do so, the blame is laid at its door rather than at the critic’s! A capital
illustration of this is afforded by some paragraphs sent by a lover of
khadi, the substance of which is :
(1) Now that you have begun to claim the spinning-wheel as a
universal provider, it has simply filled us with disgust. And, so,
today, we, the intelligentsia, repudiate you and your spinningwheel alike.
(2) It may be possible to introduce hand-spinning in small
villages and if you confined yourself simply to that, nobody
would criticize you and you might even get some sympathy.
(3) But when you try to make out that even spiritual salvation
1

From the reference to Gandhiji’s visit to Mahabaleshwar
The Gujarati original of this appeared in Navajivan, 16-5-1926. This is a
translation by Pyarelal.
2

232

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

can come through the spinning-wheel you make yourself
ridiculous. But you being a ‘great’ man, it is just possible that
some simple-minded people may swallow whatever you say. The
educated are not going to stand your nonsense any more; because
you have now cast all moderation to the winds, and particularly
since your voluntary retirement, you have not hesitated to
prescribe the spinning-wheel to everybody and for every
conceivable object under heaven. Does one want to observe
brahmacharya ? Let him take to the spinning-wheel. Do you
want to secure the release of the innocent Bengal patriots who are
in jail ?—Ply the wheel. Do you want to ameliorate the economic
condition of India? Why then,—the wheel again ! Not only this,
you have even offered the spinning-wheel to veteran soldiers fit to
wield the sword and the spear.
The wonder is that you do not
perceive the utter madness of all this.
(4) What would it matter to Britain if India ceased to
purchase sixty crore rupees worth of cloth from her? Do you
suppose that would make her abdicate her political power in
India? See, how woefully mistaken you are in declaring that there
is no political programme more valuable than hand-spinning.
(5) You have yet to prove that the spinning-wheel can solve
even the bread problem for the masses. The harm that has
resulted from it, on the other hand, is quite apparent. Just think of
the khadi shops that have come to grief already!
(6) You even seem to suggest that other industrial activities
should be dropped for the sake of hand-spinning.
I have condensed the objections in my own words. I do not think
that I have thereby done the writer any injustice. On the contrary, I
have erred, if at all, in removing or toning down the bitterness of his
writing. An embittered patriot has a right to employ harsh language
towards a person who has come to be dubbed a ‘Mahatma’. For it
enables him to mollify, to some extent at least, his rising anger over the
spectacle of destitution that his country presents on the one hand and its
utter helplessness to remedy it on the other. My duty is not to advertise
his anger but to try, if it is at all possible, to remove the confusion
engendered by that anger.
To proceed now to the examination of the six points of the
correspondent :
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

233

(1) A UNIVERSAL P ROVIDER ?—I have never tried to make
anyone regard the spinning-wheel as his kamadhenu 1 or universal
provider; I have certainly regarded it as my kamadhenu and in this I
have done nothing more than what crores of Hindus in India are today
doing, when they take up a little bit of clay, mould it into a small oval
ball, mentally invest it with the Divine presenece and make it their
kamadhenu by offering up their entire being to it. They do not ask
their neigh- bours to worship it; on the contrary after their worship is
over, they consign that sacred ball of clay to the waters. Why should
then the intelligentsia feel disgusted if, with crores of my fellows, I lose
my head and make the spinning-wheel my kamadhenu ? May I not
expect a measure of toleration from them ? But as a matter of fact the
intelligentsia as a body have not given me the go-by yet. To believe or
give others to believe, therefore, that all the intelligentsia are disgusted
because a few are, is hardly proper. But supposing, for the time being,
that all of them do actually abandon me altogether, then, if my faith is
inviolate, as all true faith must be, it will simply blaze forth and burn all
the brighter for that reason. When in 1908 2 , on board the Kildonan
Castle, I declared my faith in the spinning-wheel in the pages of the
Hind Swaraj (Indian Home Rule), I stood absolutely alone. Will, then,
my God who guided my pen into making that declaration of faith at
that time, abandon me, when it is put on its trial?
(2) S PIN FOR S ACRIFICE—It is in the villages only that the
spinning-wheel is largely meant to be introduced, and it is just there that
it is at present going on. And if today I beg for sympathy and support,
it is for its revival in our villages. Again it is just for this that I have to
canvass the sympathy of the educated class. For, just as if we want to
teach our villagers who are ignorant how to protect themselves against
the ravages of malaria and such other diseases, some people from the
educated and middle class will first have to become adepts in the
knowledge of the sanitary measures necessary to extirpate these diseases
and to observe the rules themselves, similarly it is only when some of us
learn spinning and practise it ceaselessly ourselves that we shall be able
to teach it to our villagers and overcome their apathy by our personal
example. And it goes without saying that unless we use the khadi that
they produce the spinning-wheel cannot live. My appeal to the people
who live in the cities, therefore, is to spin for sacrifice, while their
1
2

234

A mythical cow that gave whatever one asked for
Actually 1909; Vide “Hind Swaraj”, after 25-12-1909.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

brethren in the villages do it for reward. The thing is simplicity itself.
If only we get at the heart of it, we will find that it hardly affords any
room for criticism.
(3) I SPEAK FROM EXPERIENCE—I do regard the spinning-wheel
as a gateway to my spiritual salvation, but I recommend it to others only
as a powerful weapon for the attainment of swaraj and the amelioration
of the economic condition of the country. To those also who aspire to
observe brahmacharya, I do present the spinning-wheel. It is not a
thing to be despised, for it is experience here that speaks. A person who
wants to subdue his passions has need to be calm. All commotion within
him ought to cease; and so quiet and gentle is the motion of the
spinning-wheel, that it has been known to still the passions of those who
have turned it in the fulness of faith. I have been able to compose my
anger by turning it, and I can adduce similar testimony of several other
brahmacharis. Of course it would be quite easy to laugh down all such
persons as fools and nincompoops, but it would not be found to be
cheap in the end. For the scoffer in a fit of anger loses a beautiful
means wherewith to compose his passions and attain vigour and
strength. I therefore particularly recommend to every young man and
young woman who reads these lines to give the spinning-wheel a trial.
They will find that shortly after they sit down to spin, their passions
begin to subside. I do not mean to say that they would remain calm for
all the rest of the day even after the spinning is discontinued; for,
human passions are fleeter even than the wind and to subdue them
completely requires no end of patience. All that I claim is that in the
spinning-wheel they will find a powerful means of cultivating steadiness.
But then, someone will ask, why do not I recommend the far more
poetical rosary, if that is the purpose which it is intended to subserve?
My reply to this is that the spinning-wheel possesses some virtues in
addition to those it has in common with the rosary. I have not
prescribed it for a recluse living in a state of nature in a cave of the
Himalayas and subsisting on the herbs and roots of the forest. I have
placed it only before such countless persons like myself who, while
living in the work-a-day world, are anxious to serve the country and to
practise brahmacharya simultaneously.
And as for ridiculing my suggestion to ply the spinning-wheel
for securing the release of the Bengal prisoners, it only comes to this

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

235

that we are not prepared to stir ourselves a single inch to secure their
release. For the spinning-wheel here means the boycott of all foreign
cloth. And what a compelling force that has and how we are at present
unable to develop any other kind of force, we shall presently see as we
proceed with our examination of the other points that follow. My
presenting the spinning-wheel even to veteran soldiers fit to wield the
lance and the sword, therefore, is not a sign of madness but a hall-mark
of knowledge—a knowledge not derived merely from book-learning
but from the plenitude of experience.
(4) WHY IT IS THE ONLY P OLITICAL P ROGRAMME—The question
as to what loss would the British suffer if India stopped purchasing her
sixty crore rupees worth of cloth from them is quite out of place. Our
duty is simply to see whether and if so, how far it would profit us. The
stopping of the purchase of sixty crores worth of foreign cloth would,
in the first place, mean the saving of so much money to the crores of
Indian homes. In ohter words it would mean so much addition to their
income. Then, it would spell the creation of so much fresh industry, the
organization of crores into a joint co-operative effort, the conservation
and utilization of the energy of the millions and the dedication of crores
of lives to the service of the motherland. The carrying out of such a
gigantic task would, further, give us a realization of our own strength. It
would mean our acquiring a thorough mastery of the details and
innumerable knotty problems which it presents, e.g., learning to keep
account of every pie, learning to live in the villages in sanitary and
healthy conditions, remov-ing the difficulties that block the way and so
on. For, unless we learn all this, we would not be able to accomplish this
task. The spinning-wheel, then, provides us with a means for generating
this capacity in us. So long, therefore, as one has not grasped the inner
meaning of the wheel, one may ridicule it, but when once the grand
meaning is understood it would become simply impossible to tear
oneself away from it.
Again, the British are an intelligent people. The officials are a
wise and shrewd lot. I know this. That is why I present the spinningwheel to my people. We cannot overreach the British by the glibness of
our tongue or by the power of our pen. Our threats they have grown
quite accustomed to, while as for our physical prowess it can avail us but
little against their bombs rained down from the aeroplanes. But these
people understand and respect patience, perseverance, determination
and capacity for organization. Cloth represents the biggest item of their
trade. The accomplishment of its boycott by us would awaken them to
236

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

a sense of our strength. They are not holding India merely to feed their
pride; nor is it by mere force of arms, but it is by tact and cunning that
their rule over us is maintained. When their trade is made to rest on our
untramelled free will, their rule also will undergo a similar
transformation. Today both are being imposed on us against our will.
If we succeed in shaping one of them according to our will, the other
will automatically follow suit. But it is easy enough to understand that
while their trade relations with us remain unchanged, no change in the
political relationship is possible.
I may repeat that I would today discard the spinning-wheel if
someone shows a better and more universal political programme than
hand-spinning. But up to this time I have found none, I have been
shown none. I am anxious to know if there is any.
(5) HOW IT S OLVES THE BREAD P ROBLEM—That the spinningwheel can solve our bread problem hardly needs to be proved to a
reader of the Navajivan. The figures published about various khadi
organizations would show that thousands of poor women are today
eking out their living by spinning. Nobody has yet denied that the
spinning-wheel can bring the spinner at least an anna a day. And there
are crores of people in India who hardly earn even a pice a day. So
long as things stand thus, it is hardly necessary to point out the close
relation that exists between the spinning-wheel and the bread problem.
As for the charge that the spinning-wheel has done harm to the
country it is up to those who level it to prove it. This activity is by its
very nature such that there can be no waste of effort in it. Nothing can
interrupt its continuity and even a little exercise of it saves one from
mighty evils. What does it matter if some khadi shops came to an end?
That phenomenon is common to every trade. The money invested in
them has at least remained in the country, while the experi-ence gained
through it has enabled us to make further progress. Besi-des, if some of
the shops had to close down, instances can be cited of many more, better
organized shops that have grown up in their place.
(6) S UPPLEMENTS, D OES NOT REPLACE—I have not contemplated,
much less advised, the abandonment of a single healthy, lifegiving industrial activity for the sake of hand-spinning. The entire
foundation of the spinning-wheel rests on the fact that there are crores
of semi-unemployed people in India. And I should admit that if there
were none s uch there would be no room for the spinning-wheel. But
as a matter of fact everybody who has been to our villages knows that
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

237

they have months of idleness which may prove their ruin. Even my
appeal to the middle class people to spin for sacrifice is with reference
to their spare hours. The spinning-wheel movement is destructive of no
enterprise whatever. It is a life-giving activity. And that is why I have
called it Annapurna 1 or the butter for bread or the replenisher.
Young India, 27-5-1926

311. MY NOTES
AMRELI KHADI C ENTRE

This Centre was started by Shri Chitalia at the very beginning of
the khadi movement. Thereafter Shri Amritlal Thakkar took it over
and expanded its work considerably. As everyone was inex-perienced
at that time, loss was inevitable. The results, however, were beneficial on
the whole for, besides our gaining experience, some poor women got
a little help. Shri Jivanlal and Ramji Hansraj also came to take interest
in its activities. The former invested some money in it, and Ramjibhai
took over as its Manager. He engaged Shri Jaisukhlal’s services. They
made a hand-press for yarn and started preserving it in the form of
bales. They then established branches around Amreli in places where
poverty was rampant and good workers were available, and brought
about improvement in the quality of the yarn and the khadi.
Previsously, yarn of three counts was used for weaving, whereas now
yarn of eight counts is used and this yarn is stronger than three-count
yarn. With the beginning of this year the Centre entered the fourth
stage in its growth, that is, Shri Jivanlal and Shri Ramji asked me to
relieve them of the responsibility of running thus Centre and expressed
their wish that some institution should take over its management. Shri
Ramji pleaded his failing health and Shri Jivanlal wished to be free so
that he might be able to help in his own business. The management of
this Centre, therefore has been taken over on my advice by the
Kathiawar Political Conference, and it will shortly be handed over to
trustees appointed by the Conference so that the Centre may be run
properly. The amount of ten thousand rupees invested by Shri Jivanlal
in this Centre remains with it. Besides this, the amount of five thousand
rupees contributed by him to the purse is also invested in the Centre in
accordance with his wishes. He is also giving a grant of two thousand
rupees annually, and this he will continue for three years. The following
1

238

Provider of food—consort of Siva—worshipped as the giver of plenty
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

plan has been drawn up for the present year.
There was a stock of old cotton and yarn weighing approximately
430 maunds. Cotton weighing 850 maunds has been purchased at the
new, that is, cheaper rate. All the cotton will be spun, but at the end of
the year 350 maunds of yarn will remain on hand, unwoven. For this
programme to be fulfilled the following amounts of money will have to
reach homes of the poor by the end of the year.
Rs. 2,000 for carders
Rs. 1,000 for women preparing slivers
Rs. 8,000 for spinning (distributed among 1,000 women)
Rs. 14,000 for weaving and bleaching
The Centre has four branches : at Chalala, Bagasara, Chittal and
Babara. At the last place, work is done on a commission basis. In all, 17
persons work there, including a cook and a peon. The highest salary
paid is Rs. 70 and next in order are Rs. 50 and Rs. 35. Five persons
get Rs. 30 each. Then there is one man get- ting Rs. 25, two getting Rs.
20 each, two others getting Rs. 18 each, one getting Rs. 15, two others
Rs. 12 each, and one more person getting Rs. 10. The monthly salarybill comes to Rs. 455. Add to this Rs. 70 as rent, Rs. 55 travelling
expenses and Rs. 10 postage, making a total of Rs. 590. The expenses
incurred at the villages of Babara, Gariyadhar and Panch Talavada,
where work is done on commission basis, come to about Rs. 50 a
month.
We shall now examine the costs. The old stock of cotton weighing
430 maunds was purchased at the rate of Rs. 22 per maund and the 850
maunds of new cotton at the rate of Rs. 13 per maund. The cost of
cotton, therefore, comes to about Rs. 16 per maund. Hence :
40 seers of cotton
Cost . . . .
Rs. 16
6 seers loss in carding
Cost of carding it . .
Rs. 3
Less 34 seers of slivers
Rs. 19
Cost . . . .
1
1 seers lost in spinning
Cost of spinning
.
Rs. 7 2
Less 33 seers of yarn
Rs. 1
Cost . . . .
26 2
2 seers lost while weaving Cost of weaving .
Rs. 10
Less 31 seers, balance; cloth
from it, 88 yeds.
Rs. 1
36
2

This comes to

1
62

annas per yard (of unbleached khadi; width 28

inches).
Expenses on management have not been counted in working out
this figure. The payment for carding is not always Rs. 3. It varies betVOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

239

ween Rs. 2 12

and Rs. 3. Payment is at the rate of Rs. 3 only if the

carding is of the highest quality. The rate of payment for spinning is 2
paise per count, and the Rs. 7 12 counted here is for yarn of seven
counts. These rates, therefore, should be considered as approximate.
The price at which the khadi is sold includes half an anna per yard
added to the cost as worked out above, but that is not sufficient to
defray the expenses on manage-ment. Shri Jivanlal’s grant will be
utilized to meet this loss and any other loss which may occur will be met
from the general collections made. But the aim is to see that
management expenses do not exceed one anna per rupee. This ideal,
however, has not been realized any- where in the country. But, as we
gain experience, the workers become more efficient and the quality of
spinning improves, the expenses on management will come down. The
position today is not what it was four years ago. The point which
anyone who buys khadi should note is this, that deducting the half anna
per yard for management expenses, the rest of the price they pay for
1

khadi, i.e., 62 annas per yard, goes into the pockets of the cultivators
and the persons engaged in carding, spinning and weaving. If, even
from this, we deduct the cost of cotton, the wages paid for carding,
spinning and weaving come to one and a quarter times the cost of
cotton. The reason for calling attention to all this is to tell the consumer
who buys khadi that, if indigenous cotton is used in manufacturing all
the cloth we require, not only will the cost of cotton be paid to our
cultivators but the balance of the price paid by him will also go into the
pockets of our workers. On the other hand, those who purchase foreign
cloth send the money outside, and those who purchase mill cloth help to
make the rich richer. The worker gets at the most one pice for every
yard.
The reader will now appreciate Abbas Sahib’s motive in
undertaking a sale-tour of Kathiawar in such a hot season, and the
reason why people should buy all the khadi he has. The women who
are engaged in spinning have no other work or source of income, and
the few pice they earn daily go a long way to help them. The purchaser
of this khadi, therefore, helps these sisters and, along with them, those
poor people who are engaged in weaving and carding, by providing
them work.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 16-5-1926
240

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

312. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU
MAHABALESHWAR,

May 16, 1926
DEAR MOTILALJI,

I had your telegram about Devdas.
Dr. Dalal suspected
appendicitis and advised operation. I had no hesitation in agreeing and
so the operation was performed in the presence of Jamnalalji and
Mahadev. I was not present but I saw him on Thursday on my way to
Mahabaleshwar and Deolali where I went to see Mathuradas who is
ailing. Devdas is doing quite well and expects to be discharged about
the 25th instant. There is no cause for the slightest anxiety. I am
dictating this at Mahabaleshwar which I reached this afternoon at about
5 o’clock. I am to see the Governor on Tuesday1 .
Here is a copy of the letter 2 from Vithalbhai. He came to the
Ashram after writing the letter. I told him about the conver- sation we
had about the Speaker’s salary. He told me that he knew nothing of
any arrangement for giving half or any portion of the salary to the
party funds. I thereupon told him that I must consult you before
accepting the cheque. Will you please tell me what is to be done ?
Sir Chunilal Mehta 3 told me as we were walking that you had
decided not to go to England but to take rest at a hill-side station
leaving the leadership of the party to Mr. Iyengar4 . Are you not going
to England?
Yours sincerely,

P ANDIT MOTILALJI NEHRU
ANAND BHAVAN
ALLAHABAD
From a photostat : S. N. 11312

313. LETTER TO HARIBHAU G. PHATAK
MAHABALESHWAR,

May 17, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I hope to be in Poona Wednesday morning and drive straight to
1
2

May 18, 1926; another meeting was fixed for the 19th.
Vide Appendix “Vithalbhai Patel’s Letter to Gandhiji”, 10-5-1926.

3

Member, Executive Council of Bombay; Gandhiji stayed with him at
Mahabaleshwar.
4
S. Srinivasa Iyengar
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

241

Sinhgarh to see Kaka. I return in the evening and we should meet at
Professor Trivedi’s house where I want to go to see his son. I leave the
same night for Bombay.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S JT. H ARIBHAU GANESH P HATAK
341, SADASHIV P ETH
P OONA C ITY
From the original : C. W. 2800. Courtesy : Haribhau Phatak

314. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL
MAHABALESHWAR,

May 17, 1926
DEAR LALA SHANKERLAL

I had your letter. I am glad Sjt. Gidwani 1 has been appointed
Principal of the Prem Maha Vidyalaya. He has given me a copy of
your letter to him. I shall gladly go through your rules2 and make such
suggestions as I think necessary.
I shall write to Dr. Ray after I know what is really required. It will
be perhaps, better to postpone the matter of writing to Dr. Ray till after
Acharya Gidwani is there and has considered what should be done.
Yours sincerely,

LALA S HANKERLAL
DELHI
[ENCLOSURE]
1.

3.
4.
5.
6.

1
2

242

Spinning-wheel may have as many spindles as can be worked by one person
with or without the help of the feet.
2.It should yield per hour at least 3,000 yards of even well-twisted yarn of
not less than 10 counts from hand-carded slivers.
It should cost not more than £4, i.e., Rs. 60.
It should be portable.
Broken parts should be capable of being easily mended or at least easily
procurable.
In careful hands it should work smoothly at the rate of 8 hours per day for
full one year without requiring repairs.
A. T. Gidwani
Presumably the enclosure found in the source
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

7.

The operator should do with his hands and feet what an ordinary man or
woman may be expected to learn to do inside of a week.
8. No more energy should be required to work the machine than is needed for
working a sewing machine.
From a microfilm : S. N. 19556

315. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
MAHABALESHWAR,

Monday [May 17, 1926] 1
CHI. RAMDAS,

I got your letter here. I read your letter to Devdas in Bombay.
When will you get over your sense of despondency? Devdas is quite
well. Today is Monday. I think I will be able to return by Wednesday.
Have you received all the amount in cash? Let me know how much the
total amount came to. I think the money received on account of khadi
should be credited to the Ashram. The account will be kept more
strictly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy : Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

316. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 18, 1926
CHI. MIRA,

I had your letter. Not Main yeh (iss) 2 vakt ka aisa upayog
karenge but Main iss vakt ka aisa upayog karungi. 3 The verbal ending
must be feminine.
I am writing this at night just before retiring. Therefore I must be
brief. Nargis was here. She is looking better. The place is no doubt
1

Inferred from ‘Mahabaleshwar’and ‘Monday’ in the date-line; Gandhiji was at
Mahabaleshwar from May 16 to 20 in the year 1926 and Monday was on 17. He had
gone there at the request of the Governor of Bombay to discuss with him the question of
the Agricultural Commission appointed by the British Government on March 31 of that
year.
2
Gandhiji corrected “yeh” into “iss”.
3

This is in Devanagri script. It meand : “I shall use this time in this way.”

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

243

cool but not cold.
With love,
BAPU

[PS.]
Please give the accompanying to Manibehn.
From the original : C. W. 5186. Courtesy : Mirabehn

317. PUNJAB COMPARATIVE FIGURES
I am enabled this week to give the following comparative tables1
of production and sale of khadi in the Punjab :
Though the figures do not show the rise as in the Abhoy Ashram,
the figures are nearly twice as much as in 1923-24 or 1924-25 during
the corresponding period. This is no sign of khadi losing ground in the
Punjab.
Young India, 20-5-1926

318. WAR OR PEACE
It was not without purpose that I reproduced the main parts of Mr.
Page’s very able pamphlet on the World War.2 I hope that the reader
followed them with the care and attention the chapters deserved. Mr.
Page has proved conclusively that both the parties were equally to blame
and that both resorted to barbarous and inhuman practices. We did not
need Mr. Page’s help to learn that no war of which history has any
record took so many lives as this did. Moral loss was greater still.
Poisonous forces destructive of the soul (lying and deception) were
brought to perfection as much as the forces destructive of the body.
The moral results have been as terrible as the physical. It is yet too
early to measure the effect on mankind of the collapse of the sexual
morality brought about by the War. Vice has usurped the throne of
virtue. The brute in man has for the time being gained supremacy.
The after-effects are, perhaps, more terrible than the actual and
immediate effects. There is no stability about the government of any
single State of Europe. No class is satisfied with its own condition.
1
2

244

Not reproduced here. These were for 1922-23 to 1925-26.
Vide “Notes”, 26-11-1925.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Each wants to better it at the expense of the rest. War between the States
has now become a war within each State.
India has to make her choice. She may try, if she wishes, the way
of war and sink lower than she has. In the Hindu-Muslim quarrel, she
seems to be taking her first lesson in the art of war. If India can
possibly gain her freedom by war, her state will be no better and will be,
probably, much worse than that of France or England. Paste examples
have become obsolete. Not even Japan’s comparative progress can be
any guide. For,“the science” or war has made much greater
“progress” since the Russo-Japanese war. Its result can only be studied
in the present condition of Europe. We can safely say that if India
throws off the British yoke by the way of war, she must go through the
state Mr. Page has graphically described.
But the way of peace is open to her. Her freedom is assured if
she has patience. That way will be found to be the shortest even though
it may appear to be the longest to our impatient nature. The way of
peace insures internal growth and stability. We reject it because we
fancy that it involves submission to the will of the ruler who has
imposed himself upon us. But the moment we realize that the
imposition is only so-called and that through our unwillingness to suffer
loss of life or property, we are party to the imposition, all we need do is
to change that negative attitude of passive endorsement. The suffering
to be undergone by the change will be nothing compared to the
physical suffering and the moral loss we must incur in trying the way of
war. And the sufferings of war harm both the parties. The sufferings in
following the way of peace must benefit both. They will be like the
pleasurable travail of a new birth.
Let us not be misled by a hasty generalization of the events of
1920-21. Great as the achievement of that brilliant period was, it was
nothing compared to what it might have been, had we been true and had
faith. Violence was in the breasts of many of us whilst with our lips we
paid homage to non-violence. And, though we were thus false to our
creed, so far as we had accepted it, we blamed it and lost faith instead of
blaming and correcting ourselves. Chauri Chaura was a symptom of the
disease that was poisoning us. Ours was claimed to be a peaceful, nonviolent way. We could not sustain the claim in its fulness. The
‘enemy’s’ taunts we need not mind. They saw vilolence within.
The way of peace is the way of truth. Truthfulness is even more
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

245

important than peacefulness. Indeed, lying is the mother of violence. A
truthful man cannot long remain violent. He will perceive in the course
of his search that he has no need to be violent and he will further
discover that so long as there is the slightest trace of violence in him, he
will fail to find the truth he is searching.
There is no half way between truth and non-violence on the one
hand and untruth and violence on the other. We may never be strong
enough to be entirely non-violent in thought, word and deed. But we
must keep non-violence as our goal and make steady progress towards
it. The attainment of freedom, whether for a man, a nation or the world,
must be in exact proportion to the attainment of non-violence as the
only method of achieving real freedom, keep the lamp of non-violence
burning bright in the midst of the present impenetrable gloom. The
truth of a few will count, the untruth of millions will vanish even like
chaff before a whiff of wind.
Young India, 20-5-1926

319. A GOOD EXAMPLE
The Secretary, A.I.S.A.1 , has received the information that the
Allahabad Municipal Board has adopted a resolution removing octroi
duty on hand-spun yarn and khadi. I congratulate the Board on its
patriotic decision which I hope other Municipalities will copy.
Young India, 20-5-1926

320. NOTES
INDIANS IN AUSTRALIA

An Indian settler of Australia says in the course of a letter2 :
The correspondent sends too the original letter received by him in
reply to his mining application from the Registrar, Mines Department,
which I copy below:
With reference to your letter of the 31st ultimo, I would advise you that we
are unable to issue Miners’ Rights to persons of Indian race.
1

All-India Spinners’ Association
Not reproduced here; the correspondent said that a coloured person could get no
employment in Australia, even if he were a very good engineer and could hold a piece of
land, if at all, only in the name of a white trustee.
2

246

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

This letter is an eye-opener. It was thought that in Australia there
was no racial discrimination against those Asiatics who had settled there.
But the correspondent’s letter, fortified as it is with an original letter
from the Mines Department, leaves no room for doubt.
TWO ANGLES OF VISION

The deciding reason why with all the will in the world Europeans
and Indians do not have hearty communion as a class is because we
have different angles of vision. We say that reforms are inadequate, that
the educated classes can best represent the masses and that we are one
nation though differing in language and religion. It is not to the
purpose just now to prove the assertions. It is enough to state that
educated India honestly holds the views set forth above.
But the European view honestly held is set forth in the briefest and
the boldest manner in manifesto1 addressed by the European
Association to every European in India:
How is it possible for the two to meet for common action in frank
and free fellowship when the two stand as poles asunder in thought and
aspirations as the manifesto clearly shows? A mere make-believe
association or co-operation can only debase both, for they meet with
mental reservations and mutual distrust. The situation is tragic; but ture.
To end the tragedy, the first essential is to realize the truth of it. Union
is desirable, it must come, but it will come only when we have begun to
think the same thing. And that will come when we Indians show our
earnestness and prove our belief in a common nationality and capacity
for representing the masses by acting as one nation and suffering for
the masses.
Young India, 20-5-1926

321. KHADI GRAPHS
The following graphs2 showing the comparative progress of khadi
during 1924-25 and 1925-26 during the months October to March in
Tamil Nadu cannot fail to interest the reader.
Young India., 20-5-1926
1

Not reproduced here; it said that the Europeans opposed the MontaguChelmsford Reforms because the Indians were not a nation and the intelligentsia
did not represent the masses which had never demanded representative government.
2
Not reproduced here
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

247

322. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, May 22, 1926
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,

I had been to Mahabaleshwar to see the Governor, from where I
have returned today. I got your letter before I had left Mahabale-shwar.
The Governor and I practically talked about nothing but the spinningwheel movements. Devdas is quite well; he will leave the hospital in a
few days. Kusum and Dhiru are still with Jaya. I met them too. They
will leave Bombay on the 25th. I had also been to Deolali to see
Mathuradas. His health may be described as fairly good. I met there
Prabhudas and Vijaya, too. Prabhudas seems to have improved. He is
under the treatment of some vaid.
Is the fine yarn which you have with you also strong enough? If
it is, can you arrange to get it woven by Wanjas? At Bagasra these
people weave khadi out of very fine yarn. Formerly, they would not
touch mill-yarn at all. Do you know that in the year 1915 we made
special arrangements with them and had khadi woven out of such fine
yarn? The Marwari teacher’s father in Amreli may also weave khadi
out of fine yarn. The first thing to ascertain, therefore, is whether or not
the yarn is strong. I shall think about this matter, whether the weaving
can be done here. I do not know what happened about the
strips of
khadi from Gariyadhar. In any case, I think it will be better if you can
collect such strips. If people hesitate to give them, cannot you convince
them that it is very necessary to have all the samples tested by one
expert to ascertain whether both the warp and the woof in every sample
are hand-spun, and therefore, strips have to be sent [to Ahmedabad]? If,
however, sending strips is impossible, you may get the samples tested
there with the help of any person selected by you and pay everyone as
soon as his material is tested.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S. N. 19555

248

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

323. LETTER TO CHANDULAL
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, Vaisakh Sud 101 , May 22, 1926
BHAISHRI CHANDULAL,

I got your letter. I congratulate you on your decision to marry
Chi. Kamla outside the circle prescribed by your community even in
opposition to the wishes of the latter. I pray that the wedding
celebration may be successful, that the husband and the wife live long
and always lead an ideal life which others might emulate.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S. N. 19557

324. MY NOTES
“ V EGETABLE GHEE”
Nowadays misuse of names has been on the incerease. Only cloth
woven by hand from hand-spun yarn can be called khadi, but the mills
give to the thick cloth produced by them the name of khadi. Again,
some cheat the people by giving the name partial khadi to cloth woven
by hand from mill-spun yarn. The same practice is followed in regard
to ghee. Ghee is in fact a product made from milk; still there is now a
new product called “vegetable ghee”. Coconut oil does not become
ghee by merely calling it “vegetable ghee”, nor can it have the
properties of ghee. Nowadays such synthetic ghee is being improted in
large quantities. It is well packed and appears just like ghee; hence
simple-minded people buy it. Moreover, since fat is sold under the
name of ghee or because it is mixed with ghee, many people use
“vegetable ghee”, being afraid of using ghee.
I shall not only use but even propagate vegetable ghee if a
vegetable produce possessing the same properties as ghee is available. I
find fault with the use of ghee. But I cannot disregard its good
properties. It has not so far been possible to extract a product from
vegetables which will serve as a substitute for ghee. Therefore, the
product which is being sold as vegetable ghee has to be rejected on two
counts : one, it is not ghee and two, it does not contain the properties of
ghee. Thirdly, the harm done is that today we use many foreign
products and we have now unwillingly started using one more foreign
product, much to our detriment. Therefore, everyone using “vegetable
1

The source has 11 which, however, was a Sunday.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

249

ghee” should beware and give up its use.
HIGH OR LOW?

A newspaper correspondent writes :1
This is a difficult question. But from the point of ahimsa, there
can be only one reply and that is that one who inflicts pain on small
creatures for a selfish purpose also becomes low himself. Man is a
mixture of humility and greatness. His greatness lies in his ability to be
humble. If he does not have the capacity to be humble, he cannot be
considered to be great. Then there will be no scope whatever for rising
high. Therefore it is said that one who does not harm other creatures
for achieving his own ends and is ready to suffer pain for the sake of
all living beings is alone fit to attain the vision of the self.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 23-5-1926

325. SOCIETIES FOR COW-PROTECTION
Bhai Jivraj Nenshi writes as follows :2
This is not a new suggestion. The All-India Goraksha Mandal has
been established just for this purpose. But as I get more experience I
realize the difficulties in the way of bringing all such societies together
under one body and a common set of rules. I have asked for full details
from as many societies as have sent their names and addresses. But very
few of them have supplied the information asked for. It is not that they
do not wish to send particulars, but probably lethargy or indifference or
a feeling of shame prevents them from replying. The shame is on the
score of lack of proper management, for I have seen institutions which
were not properly managed and did not maintain proper accounts. At
many places the people who run these institutions are so ill-educated
that they simply cannot furnish the information asked for. It is said that
1

The letter is not translated here. The correspondent had asked how man who
tormented other creatures to achieve his selfish ends could be considered higher than
other creatures.
2
The letter is not translated here. The correspondent had suggested that the
various bodies in the country for the protection of weak and infirm cattle should unite to
form an all-India body and formulate a plan whereby they would maintain healthy cattle,
supply pure milk to the people and from the income so derived look after weak and
infirm cattle.

250

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

there are some 1,500 goshalas is India. If they are all properly
managed and turned into dairies, there is no doubt at all that the
problem of protecting the cows will be then very easy to solve. But what
is the way to bring this about? Who will bell the cat? I will only say
this, that it is necessary to infuse life into all these institutions. It is
difficult to frame rules for them unless they work as model dairies and
leather work-shops. The All-India Goraksha Mandal has not been
indifferent to this task. Efforts are being made to plan a dairy with Sir
Harold Mann’s help; and similarly plans for a leather work-shop are
also being drawn up. Such experiments for the purpose of cowprotection being new, plans for them cannot be prepared immediately.
The articles written by Shri Valji Desai1 and Mr. Galletti show that India
stands lowest in regard to treatment of cattle. How can we, then, get
experts in dairy science and leather work so easily?
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 23-5-1926

326. TELEGRAM TO K. T. PAUL
May 23, 1926
YOUR WIRE. WROTE FULLY SATURDAY. VIEW DIFFICULTIES FINANCIAL OTHERS
MENTIONED YOUR LETTER SUGGEST CANCELLATION INVITATION.

GANDHI
From a photostat : S.N. 11347

327. LETTER TO K. T. PAUL
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 23, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I have not telegraphed to you because your
letter do [es] not lend itself to a brief telegram. From your letter I
gather that this proposed visit of mine is causing you a great deal of
trouble and worry. Please do not worry over this thing. Do not in
any way consider that because you have been the vehicle for
1

Published in Young India from 14-1-1926 to 8-7-1926

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

251

conveying the invitation to me you must make it a certainty. You and I
must look at this thing with complete detachment and undertake the
mission only if the hand of God appears to be in it in the clearest
manner possible. If then there is any question of forcing the pace you
may retrace your step and dimiss the invitation from your mind as if it
had never been sent.
You mention the finance. That must be a consideration for the
Central Council, not for you and me unless you are supposed to find the
wherewithal. I would have gladly begged the necessary funds from a
friend if it was thought necessary. But I hold it to be wrong on
principle, for those who invite me should bear the cost.
Again, as far as I am concerned I could go with just as much
comfort in 3rd class as I would in 1st class. Given cleanliness and
sufficient privacy and protection against bad weather, I would prefer
deck to saloon passage. On my return from South Africa I took a 3rd
class ticket from Cape Town to London and was none the worse for it.
There was no deck passage available. But in the present case I suppose
nothing but the saloon is to be thought of as a matter of show. But if
the Central Committee undertook to carry me as a 3rd class passenger I
should not regard it as an insult in any shape or form but the whole
thing must be done by the Central Council or by those who are
responsible for the invitation without any interference or prompting on
my part.
So far as goat’s milk is concerned I would not think of you or
any of my companions being responsible for milking or keeping goats.
It must be left to the steamship company. The managers must make
what arrangements they choose. It is no easy matter for passengers to
control such things on steamer. What would one do when there is a
storm or if the goats die. Such things are always best left to the
steamship owners. They know how to manage them.
My companions would be two—Mahadev Desai and Devdas
Gandhi, my youngest son. At first I had intended to take only one but I
feel that in the present state of my physical condition and public
engagements which I must carry out whether I am stationary or not
these two assistants are necessary. I should consider it a privilege to
have you also as a helper but I am afraid you could not take the place
of either Mahadev Desai or Devdas. What class they should travel is not
a matter of any moment but if they are to travel by a class lower to mine
there must be an arrangment with steamship owners so as to enable me
252

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to have access to them all the time I want them for my assistance.
Needless to say both are vegetarians.
I suppose you remember what I stated in my first letter to you that
passports and everything else will have to be managed by the inviting
party.
I now conclude as I began and repeat that all things considered it
would be better for you to drop the idea of my visit to Finland.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat : S.N. 11346

328. MESSAGE TO NON-BRAHMINS
S ABARMATI,

May 23, 1926
If non-Brahmins will only think more of the poorest people of the
land and therefore of the charkha and khadi rather than of political
progress through the instrumentaily of the existing Government, they
will better their condition and that of the whole of India to that extent.
From a microfilm : S.N. 19569

329. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 23, 1926
MY DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I knew that you would take the blow—for such
it is from a worldly standpoint—bravely. I do believe that truly
speaking we can say that God had no more work for Shums Tyabji in
the body that is now lying peacefully in the grave and fast being
reduced to dust. If you had no faith in God and no faith in the
persistence of the soul after the dissolution of the body and you refused
to shed tears, you would be considered callous. But as I know that you
have faith in the persistence of the soul and in the Divinity that
permeates the universe your refusal to give way to grief is a sign of
resignation to the will of God and an appreciation of the true nature of
death.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

253

Jamnalalji is still in Bombay and you can see him yourself. I shall
write to him. Do you know that Devdas is in Sir Harikisendas Hospital?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
ABBAS TYABJI, E SQ.
C/ O M. B. TYABJI
F RENCH R OAD, C HAUPATTI
BOMBAY
From a photostat : S.N. 9555

330. LETTER TO A. T. GIDWANI
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 23, 1926
MY DEAR GIDWANI,

I had hour postcard. I cannot understand why you did not receive
my letter sent to you to Abu. It was. . . .1 who took the letter. However
it does not matter much now. I shall be interested to know
what you saw at Kanodar. I know that there is a great deal of weaving
going on there. But it is all from machine-spun yarn whether foreign or
swadeshi.
I arrived from Mahabaleshwar yesterday. I had no talk with
Governor except about the charkha.
Herewith the letter from Lala Shankarlal. There seems to be
enormous scope for improvement and expansion of the Vidyalaya.
When the papers come you and I must put our heads together before
you go away and frame something. I knew that the institution had a
large income. But I never knew that it was so large as is mentioned by
Lala Shankerlal. I shall look to you to make this old institution a
thorough success.
Yours sincerey,

S JT. A. T. G IDWANI
From a microfilm : S. N. 11263

1

254

Blank as in the source
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

331. LETTER TO EDWIN M. STANDING
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 23, 1926
MY DEAR FRIEND,

I have your second letter. I do not say anything about your first
because I had not yet had the time to study it which I propose to find
time to do in a few days. You may depend upon my giving it the
attention the efforts you have made in writing do [wn] your thought
for me deserve.
I thank you for the book and the beautiful photograph you
have sent me. About photographs from me I do not possess any and
I have to hunt for them. I have now even forgotten what photographs
you asked for. May I trouble you to tell me again?
Yes. Motah Bahen is as faithful in her work as ever and her work
is prospering. She puts all her life into it and it is like the leaven that
raises it all and works into [sic]. She is at present at Darjeeling with Mr.
and Mrs. Ambalal. She was disinclined to go but it was necessary for
her.
I am almost inclined to think that I am not going to Finland but I
shall know definitely during the next fortnight. If I do go I shall be
leaving in the beginning of July.
Yours sincerely,

EDWIN M. S TANDING, E SQ.
S EFTON P LACE
ARUNDEL, S USSEX
ENGLAND
From a photostat : S. N. 12474

332. LETTER TO R. B. GREGG
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 23, 1926
MY DEAR GOVIND,

I have your deeply interesting letter for which I am thankful. I
now understand the school and its purpose. Is it Sunderam of
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

255

Coimbatore? If so, please congratulate him and also ascertain from
him how he managed to gravitate there. He must be there with his wife.
If so, what is she doing?
I know that Stokes is doing great and good work and gives his all
to it. How I should love to convince him that he does not need
Government recognition for his school. There must be some method
of enabling the boys to earn their own living without the Government
patronage. The path is not easy but it is the only one that he or shall I
say we must tread. However I must not criticize. He must work by
the light of his own conscience even though to an outsider he may
seem to be erring.
If I go to Finaland at all, I shall bear in mind all your caution and
take with me a wardrobe full of warm clothing and I promise, if I feel
the cold so much, to wrap myself out of recognition. If I go to Finland
I shall see that all the notes that are taken you receive a copy of.
Meanwhile send me all the questions that arose in your mind.
The path of ahimsa, I know, is thorny. At every step the thorns
prick and sometimes bleed one.
I was out for nearely a week passing a few hours with the
Governor at Mahabaleshwar trying to persuade him that the only
recommendation that the Royal Commission on Agriculture can make
is to popularize the charkha and assure the masses that all the yarn that
they can spin will be taken up by the Government and woven for the
people.
With love to you all including the baby with kiss added for it.
I do not know whether it is he or she.
Yours sincerely.

R. B. GREGG, E SQ.
C/ O S. E. S TOKES, E SQ.
KOTAGARH, S IMLA HILLS
From a photostat: S. N. 19561

333. LETTER TO P. N. RAJAMANICKAM CHETTIYAR
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 23, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter and the parcel of khadi for which I thank you.
256

THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

If you persist long enough you will find that you have all the assistance
you need. Your yarn is not as even as it might be nor as strong. You
must attempt to spin better.
Your weaving is also not close enough but all these things are
merely a matter of practice and practice will make you perfect.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. R. N. R AJAMANICKAM C HETTIYAR
BHARATHA KHADDAR P RACHAR S ALA
TIYAGADURGAN (S. A. DIST.)
From a microfilm: S. N. 19562

334. LETTER TO G. K. DEVADHAR
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 23, 1926
MY DEAR DEVADHAR,

I have your letter. It will be pleasure to meet you whenever you
can come. And when you do come of course you will stay at the
Ashram. I know that you are not likely to come here before the rains
have probably set in. At the present moment we are boiling here. I
don’t want you to find yourself in the oven with us.
I hope Mrs. Devadhar is better now. She must come next winter
to the Ashram and pass a few days here.
When you return you will send me a report about Manorama.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. G. K. DEVADHAR
S ERVANTS OF INDIA S OCIETY
BOMBAY
From a microfilm: S. N. 19563

335. LETTER TO S. G. VAZE
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 23, 1926
DEAR VAZE,

I have your letter. I am glad you have been chosen to be the
bearer of Dr. Norman Ley’s beautiful letter to me. There was
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

257

certainly no occasion for any apology whatsover. Where there is
frankness and honesty resentment is impossible. I hope to send a reply
to Dr. Ley by the next mail.
Yours sincerely
From a microfilm: S. N 19564

336. LETTER TO A. L. NAIR
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 23, 1926
DEAR DR. NAIR,

I thank you for your letter of the 19th instant. For the reasons
explained to you I am unable to stay in Bombay up to the 26th instant
for the ceremony. I hope the function will be successful and that the
original intention of the founders will be realized.
Yours sincerely

DR. A. L. NAIR
MESSRS N. P OWELL & C O.
BOMBAY
From a microfilm: S. N. 19565

337. LETTER TO M. R. HAVELIVALLA
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 23, 1926
MY DEAR FREIND,

I have your letter. I send you my autograph in your album. But
I would like to tell you that as a rule I do not give my autograph where
my young friends do not promise to wear khaddar and spin for at least
half an hour per day in the name and for the sake of the poor people
of India. I understand your difficulty about wearing khaddar. Have
you the same difficulty about spinning also?
I am glad that Mr. Morris is the brother to the Secretary to Dr.
Rabindranath Tagore. I congratulate you upon your vegetarianism
and upon your reverence for Dr. Besant. She has worked for India as
very few born Indians have done.
Yours sincerely,

M. R. H AVELIVALLA
GOPIPURA
S URAT
From a photostat: S. N. 19566

258

THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

338. LETTER TO INDRA VIDYALANKAR
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 23, 1926
MY DEAR INDRA,

I have your letter. I am replying to you in English as you have
chosen to write to me in English. But why in English? My promise of
swaraj in 1921 was conditional.1
The condition was absolute
acceptance of non-violent non-co-operation by the people at large. At
Viramgam, Bombay2 and Chauri Chaura3 these conditions were broken
not by the masses but by live Congressmen. If I am silent about what is
called the political aspect of the situation I am silent because through
my silence I am preaching non-violence. I cannot say anything useful
on the many controversial questions that are troubling the country
today. And If I am harping upon the charkha in season and out of
season again it is because the charkha to me represents non-violence in
a concrete shape, for, non-violence is action in the correct sense of the
term whereas violence is bad action or in action.4 If people want swaraj
through non-violence means they can attain it by complete exclusion
of foreign cloth and through the charkha and all it means. During the
year of grace 1921, I had the hope that we should achieve boycott of
foreign cloth by a sudden
and simultaneous manifestation of the
charkha spirit on the part of the people. That was not to be. And
now we have to build the charkha atmosphere among the people. I
do not think it will be so long as you imagine before the charkha
becomes universal. But even
if it does, thinking non-violence I
cannot think of any other instrument or activity.
I see you expect a public reply to your question. Do you really
want a public reply? I am more anxious to convince you of the
soundnes of my position than to discuss with others or in Young India
the question raised by you.
Yours sincerely

S JT. INDRA VIDYALANKAR,
S ARGODA
From a photostat: S. N. 19567

1
2
3
4

Vide “Swaraj in One Year”, 22-9-1920.
Vide “A Deep Stain”, 18-11-1921.
Vide “Letters to Members of Working Committee”, 8-2-1922.
The source has: “violence is or bad action inaction”.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

259

339. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 23, 1926
Here is a letter from Santanam in reply to mine. I shall no longer
strive with him but wish him every success in his struggle. His is a very
good letter.
I saw your letter to Jamnalalji yesterday in Bombay. I hope you
have already got rid of pleurisy. With proper care this is a complaint
that can be brought under subjection without difficulty. Where do you
think your tour should commence? If it is to be in the Southern
Presidency and if you do not propose to come to Ahmedabad before
commencing the tour, Jamnalalji told me he would join you wherever
you want him to. If, however, you consider that the Southern
Presidency should for the time being be left alone, some other province
can be selected. The selection will then be made here. If it will be too
late for your letter to reach here you will telegraph your intentions. In
no case will you think of commencing the tour, if you have not got rid
of your pleurisy entirely, because more travelling is likely to do some
good. Travelling in the monsoon has its danger for a pleurisy patient.
I need not entertain you with a description of my talks with the
Governor. You may know in one sentence that I began the talk and
ended it with the charkha. And for the 2nd interview, like the good
advertising agent I am, I took with me Mithubai’s khaddar saris to
demonstrate to the Governor and his wife the possibilities of Andhra
khadi. The Governor listened to all I had to say about the spinningwheel with great attention but, if you ask me how much he was
impressed I cannot say.
I saw Mathuradas, Kaka, Devdas and Behram Khambhatta. My
rapid wandering was worth while if only to see these precious petients.
Devdas is all right and much healthier looking than he was while he
was admitted to the Hospital. Kaka has made splendid progress but he
must cover still more ground. Mathuradas is better than he was but he
cannot be said to be out of wood entirely. Not that there is any danger
imminent but he has to take extraordinary care of himself. Behram
Khambhatta has some intestinal growth. You may not know him. He
is one of the devoted, selfless and silent workers always deliberately
putting himself in the background. And his wife is equally good, an
incarnation of Sita.
260

THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

If it will serve as any stimulation for you to become stronger I
present you with the information that ten to one I shall not be going to
Finland, for, Paul seems to have put his foot into it. Any way he is at
sea and does no know how to manage me or my travelling. He offers
to milk the she-goat, evidently thinking that it would be the buisness of
my attendants to perform the ceremony from day to day. However the
thing will be finally decided within the next fortnight at the most.
Yours,
From a photostat: S. N. 19568

340. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 23, 1926
DEAR SATIS BABU,

I have your letter. I have a long letter at last from Hema Prabha
Devi. It seems to me that she is living at Sodepur under most trying
circumstances. She must not do it at the sacrifice of her health. If the
climate there is malarial you must find out some other way of building
the workshop than by putting Hema Prabha Devi there and making her
the first victim. Your own body should also be kept up to the mark
which Hema Prabha Devi thinks is not being done.
Nirmal Kumar has done well. I am writing to him. If you can
get something from Lalgola it will be good help. I am told that
Chhotalal has now left you. I do not think he will stop there long.
Yours,

From a microfilm: S. N. 19570

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

261

341. LETTER TO KONDIPARTY PANNIAH
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 23, 1926
DEAR PANNIAH,

I have your letter. You should not have sent your applications to
me directly. It means a great deal of delay. However now that you
have sent it, it will be dealt with in due course.
Where are you staying yourself? Are you now any longer
connected with the Pinakini Ashram? If not, what are you doing? Who
is to take charge of the weaving school? And how do you propose to
teach in one year? What will you do after one year?
Yours sincerely

S JT. K ONDIPARTY P ANNIAH
C/O MADUM VENKAIAH C HETTY GARU
KURNOOL
From a microfilm: S. N. 19571

342. LETTER TO G. M. NALAVADE
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 23, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

Here is my message in reply to your circular letter.
Yours sincerely,

Encl. 1
S JT. G. M. N ALAVADE
“SANGRAM” OFFICE
S HANIWAR P ETH
P OONA C ITY
From a copy : S. N. 19573-R

262

THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

343. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Sunday, May 23, 1926
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I got your letter. I have sent to Jamnalal a copy of your letter
about the loan for khadi work promised by you. I was shocked by the
Sabarmati agreement; I have still not been able to make anything of it.
I fully understand the issue involved in the problem of Hindu-Muslim
unity, but I am helpless. I do not yield to despair because I cannot give
up my faith. Of one thing I am sure, that Hinduism cannot be saved
in the way in which it is sought to save it today. But I have full faith in
the truth of “Nirbalke bal Ram”1 , and so live in complete peace of
mind.
Yours

MOHANDAS
From the Hindi original: C. W. 6126. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

344. LETTER TO HEMA PRABHA DAS GUPTA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Sunday, May 23, 1926
DEAR SISTER ,

Your letter this time made me very happy. You do not say anything about your pleasant or unpleasant experiences at the Ashram. I
know that there is hard work at Sodepur, and I have written to Satis
about that. On no account, however, should you stay there at the cost
of your health. You should not draw a single pice from the amount
kept in the bank. I do know that khadi work cannot be done without
hardship voluntarily suffered, but such hardship should be within one’s
capacity. May God grant both of you peace and strength.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindu: G. N. 1647

1

“Rama is the strength of the helpless”, the first line of a Hindi devotional
song by Surdas.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

263

345. LETTER TO BEHRAMJI KHAMBHATTA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Sunday [May 23, 1926] 1
BHAISHRI BEHRAMJI,

I have your letter. It was my duty to have gone to you. I have
started reading Mrs. Eddy’s book. I will certainly write to you after I
have finished it. But meanwhile I would suggest to you that you
should consult a doctor or a vaid for general advice and use ordinary
medicines, and take the utmost care of your health. There is no sin in
taking proper care of one’s health, but it is a great sin to forsake one’s
dharma for the sake of one’s body. We should treat the body as the
field in which the atman strives and wins its liberation, and take every
innocent measure to preserve it. Please write to me from time to time
and keep me informed about your health. Convey my blessings to
Tehminabehn.
Blessings from

BAPU
S JT. B EHRAMJI KHAMBHATTA
275 H ORNBY R OAD
F ORT, B OMBAY
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 4363. Courtesy: Tehmina Khambhatta

346. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Sunday, May 23, 1926
CHI. JAMNALAL,

Abbas Tyabji writes to me to remind you lest you forget about
his accommodation when you go to Mussoorie. If you are still in
Bombay, please call on him to offer your condolences2 . His addres is
as follows:
C/o M. B. Tyabji
French Road, Chowpatti.

1
2

264

From the postmark
Vide “Letter to Abbas Tyabji”, 23-5-1926.
THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

He has the light of knowledge in him. In reply to my telegram,
he tells me that he was not at all shocked by the death.
The operation on Lalji took very little time, and seems to have
been quit successful. Plesse get the final figure for the Deshbandhu
Fund determined.
Yours

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 2865

347. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Sunday, May 23, 1926
CHI. DEVEDAS,

I have your letter, as also Girdhari’s. I was really very happy
that the operation on Lalji was over in a very short time. I shall expect
a letter tomorrow giving more news about him. I am very glad that he
is in the room next to yours. For one thing, we shall occupy less space
in the hospital; there will be, moreover, less trouble for those people
and the two of you feel cheered by being near each other. All this
should please you. I have returned without anxiety on your account,
but I have realized that, even after having completely recovered, you
will have to take good care of yourself. There will beno danger for
you provided you take the necessary precautions. I am sure I shall
hear from you regularly. Send away Keshu to accompany Kusum and
Dhiru on the 25th. But you may detain him if you still need him.
Kusum and Dhiru may leave if they get some other escort or may stay
on up to 31st. The school reopens on the 1st, at 7 a.m.; it will do if
they are present at that time. Kanti and Rasik have arrived today.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19558

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

265

348. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU
May 24, 1926
DEAR MOTILALJI,

I could never guess the reason you give me for cancelling your
passage. But having known the reason, I don’t regret the cancellation.
Krishna having gone to Jawahar relieves you of all anxiety. I know
that you will get from your chamber practice all you need and more.
I have not yet had your dictated letter. I can wait for it. All I can
report to you about Mahabaleshwar is that I had pleasant three hours
with the Governor. We talked mostly about the spinning-wheel and
somewhat about the cattle of India. If there was anything more behind
this interview, I did not fathom it. Nor did I try to.
Devdas expects to be discharged in a week’s time and is likely to
go to Mussoorie for convalescene.
There is nothing yet decided about Finland. The odds are that I
am not going. I should know in a week’s time.
Yours sincerey,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat : S.N. 19574

349. LETTER TO C. VIJAYARAGHAVACHARIAR
S ABARMATI,

May 24, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your second letter. Thank you. Devdas is quite all right.
He had his father’s fashionable disease—appendicitis. He expects to be
discharged in a few days.
Do please give me your suggestions for a solution of the H.M.
problem. I must own I have despaired for the time being. Hakimji 1
never came here.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

1

266

Vide also “Letter to Hakim Ajmal Khan”, 10-4-1926.
THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[PS.]
Nothing of importance at Mahabaleshwar. Spinning-wheel of
course.
From the original: C. Vijayaraghavachariar Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

350. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Tuesday [May 25, 1926] 1
CHI. DEVDAS ,

I got your two letter together today. Your second letter is rather
disturbing, but such ups and down are nothing unusual and I am not
wor-ried. It seems now that Shri Lalji and you will be discharged at the
same time. Whatever that be, I should continue to get detailed news,
shouldn’t I? There was a telegram today about Finland, saying that the
Geneva Committee have accepted my terms. Even then, pending a
reply to my letter, I will not proceed on the assumption that I am
going though now it does seem to me that I shall be going. Even if I
go, it is best that you spend a few days with Jamnalalji in Mussoorie. I
have already written about Keshu yesterday. [He] should bring along
Kusum and Dhiru too. Ramdas is in Morvi today; and will reach
Rajkot tomorrow. Bhansali’s fast ended today at half past ten. He is so
fit no one would believe that has been fasting for twenty-five days. He
has lost sixteen pounds in weight which I think is not much.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 19493

351. LETTER TO MOOSHANKAR
ASHRAM,

May 26, 1926
BHAISHRI MOOLSHANKAR,

I have your letter.
Would you have anything further to say if the facts are as
reported by the A.I.S.A. in their reply to you?
I shall write to Bhai Kotak, if necessary, after I have your
1

The 12th day of Bhansali’s fast fell on May 12, 1926; vide “Letter to Mahadev
Desai”, 12-5-1926.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

267

reply.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19575

352. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
ASHRAM,

Wednesday, May 26, 1926
CHI. DEVDAS ,

I got your letter, and also Lalji’s. Yesterday I dictated my letter
in a hurry, and so one thing was left out. The faintness that you felt
when you tried to stand up was not weakness, it was the result of your
not having had the practice of standing and walking for some time.
Perhaps you may not remember that, when Colonel Maddock
permitted me to walk to the lavatory during daytime, he warned me that
my legs might tremble and I might feel giddy, but told me not to be
alarmed on that account. After you have walked once or twice with
some support, you will get back the ability to walk. Hence I am not in
the least wor-ried because of your having felt giddy when you tried to
stand up. But I also see that your wound has not completely healed;
this is a common enough experience in such operations. No doctor
can understand all the facts about the condition of the patient’s body,
and, therefore, some complication always develops after an operation,
but it can be easily cured. The only thing is that the period of your
convalescence is becoming a little too long.I have now concluded that
Lalji and you will be discharged at about the same time. This, I think,
sould please you, though what you wanted was that you should get well
but should have the privilege of staying on for Lalji’s sake. It seems
that you will not have that privilege. If,however, all our wishes were
granted, would not the world perish? As against one good wish, based
on regard for truth, entertained by one person, how many wicked
wishes, based on disregard for truth, would there be entertained by
others?
Yesterday I got a telegram from Paul, and there was second one
today. He informs that he has collected Rs. 6,000 and hopes that I will
not think it necessary to cancel the trip. I will wait for a reply to my
letter, but it seems to me that we shall have to go. By not going, we
may perhaps put Mr. Paul in an embarrassing position.
I was glad to read all that you write about Dr. Dalal’s kindness. I
was glad that Abbas Saheb went and saw you; the man’s courage is
268

THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

boundless. Keshu has stayed back, and is bound to be of some help to
you.
It will do if he arrives here on the 29th.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 19552

353. QUARTERLY FIGURES
The All-India Spinners’ Association has received from most
provinces quarterly returns of production and sale of khadi between
January and March 1926. I give the figures1 below :
The Andhra figures give no indication of the extent of the work
that is being done. In spite of several reminders full reports from that
province are not available. The Karnatak figures also are largly
incomplete. The figures2 for comparison with the corresponding
quarter of the last year are available in the case of the following
provinces and it will be seen that all the provinces except Bombay show
larger figures this year.
The higher figure for the Punjab sales last year is only apparent
because the sales this year are given net while the figure of last year
includes inter-sales between branches. Burma and Utkal sales show a
slight decrease.
The figures are an under-statement for every province, more
espe-cially for Andhra Desha. I once more urge the workers in every
province to be prompt in their returns. If the All-India Spinners’
Association is to become an efficient organization covering every
village of India, it must have the disciplined and intelligent cooperation of all its workers.
Young India, 27-5-1926

354. ITS MEANING
On my return from Mahabaleshwar I was waylaid, though by
previous appointment, by fellow non-co-operators. I had limited
myself strictly to visiting patients during this unexpected visit to His
Excellency the Acting Governor at Mahabaleshwar. And so before
reaching Poona station I had arranged just to go to Prof. Trivedi’s
house to see my young friend Manu who among others had been to
1
2

Not reproduced here
ibid.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

269

me at the Sassoon Hospital in Poona in 1924 an angel of mercy. It was
during this visit that I had to divide my time between Manu and the
non-co-operators. The latter had the lion’s share of it. Manu
disengaged me in a few minutes. I envied him as a patient. For though
he has been laid up in bed for over six mon-ths, I found him quite
cheerful and resigned. I had therefore no compunc-tion about leaving
him for a chat with the non-co-operating friends.
“How can you go to the Governor and call yourself a non-cooperator?” was the question with which I was greeted.
“I knew what your ailment was, ” said I. “I shall answer all your
questions fully, but on condition that nothing of what I say is to be
published by you. If I find it advisable I shall deal with the matter in
the pages of Young India.”
“Yes, we won’t publish anything and shall be satisfied if you will
answer our questions in Young India. Not that I have any doub about
the propriety of your action,” added the questioner, “but I represent a
large number of non-co-operators whom you often confound by your
unexpectted acts.”
Well, then, let me have all your question and I shall endea- vour
to answer them though I confess that it will be all a waste of time. For
I feel that time is past for explanations and persuasion. Non-cooperators must instinctively know that I not likely to do
anything contrary to our code. And if I do,—for I admit I am lible to
err,—they must disown me and remain firm in their own convictions.
They may have derived their non-co-operation from me but if they
have assimilated it, their convictions must not depend upon mine. It
must be independent of me and my weaknesses and errors. If I turn
traitor, or to put it mildly, if I alter my opinion, they must be ready to
denounce me and still abide by their own convictions. That is why I
say that our conversation will be a waste of national time.
Convinced non-co-operators know their task. Let them fulfil it. But
let me have your questions. “
It has been suggested in Bombay that you went to the Governor
uninvited, in fact you forced yourself upon his attention. If so, was it
not co-operation even without response? What could you have to do
with the Governor, I wonder?”
My answer is that I am quite capable even of forcing myself
upon the attention of my opponent when I have strength. I did so in
South Africa. I sought interviews after inerviews with General Smuts
270

THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

when I knew that I was ready for battle. I pleaded with him to avoid
the untold hardships that the Indian settlers must suffer, if the great
historic march1 had to be undertaken. It is true that he in his
haughtiness turned a deaf ear; but I lost nothing. I gained added
strength by my humility. So would I do in India when we are strong
enough to put up a real fight for freedom. Remember that ours is a
non-violent struggle. It presupposes humility. It is a truthful struggle
and consiousness of truth should give us firmness. We are not out to
destroy men. We own no enemy. We have no ill-will against a single
soul on earth. We mean to covert by our suffering. I do not despair of
converting the hardest-hearted or the most selfish Englishman. Every
opportunity of meeting him is therefore welcome to me.
Let me distinguish.
Non-violent non-co-operation means
renuncia-tion of the benefits of a system with which we non-cooperate. We therefore renounce the benefits of schools, courts, titles,
legislatures and offices set up under the system. The most extensive
and permanent part of our non-co-operation consists in the
renunciation of foreign cloth which is the foundation for the vicious
system that is crushing us to dust. It is possible to think of other
items of non-co-operation. But owing to our weakness or want of
ability, we have restricted ourselves to these items only. If then I go to
any official for the purpose of seeking the benefits above-named, I cooperate. Whereas if I go to the meanest official for the purpose of
converting him, say to khaddar, or weaning him from his service or
persuading him to withdraw his children from Government schools, I
fulfil my duty as a non-co-operator. I should fail if I did not go to
him with that definite and direct purpose.
Now for the case in point. I went to the Acting Governor at his
instance. He wrote to me not as Governor nor for any purpose
connected with his office as Governor. He invited me to go to
Mahabaleshwar to discuss with him agricultural matters. As I explained
some time ago in the pages of Navajivan, I told him that I could not be
identified with the Royal Commission in any way, that I was still
confirmed in my views on non-co-operation and generally had no faith
in Commisions. I added further that it would suit me to see him when
he descened to the plains. His Excellency therefore wrote saying it
would suit him to meet me in June. But susbequently he changed his
1

On November 6, 1913, against the £3 tax; vide “Telegram to Minister of
Interior”, 7-11-1913.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

271

mind and sent a message that it would suit him better if I could go to
Mahabaleshwar. I had no hesitation in going there. We had two very
pleasant and long talks. And you are entitled to guess (and that
correctly) that our talk revolved round the charkha. That was the
central theme. And I could not discuss agriculture without discussing
the terrific cattle problem!
I have given but a brief summary of the pleasant conversation I
had with the No-change friend. In parts I have amplified my answer in
order to make it more intelligible to the general reader.
There were many other points discussed, of which I must mention
one or two. I was asked to give my opinion on the Sabarmati pact. I
refused to say anything for publication. I must not add to the existing
bitterness into the controversy. I can say nothing that would bring the
parties together. They are all my co-workers. They are all patriots.
The quarrel is purely domestic. It behoves me as a humble servant of
the country to be silent where speech is useless. I prefer therefore to
wait and pray. I was told that I was misrepresented. I must own that I
have studiously avoided reading the literature about the pact. I am
used to misrepresentation all my life. It is the lot of every public
worker. He has to have a tough hide. Life would be burdensome if
every misrepresentation had to be answered and cleared. It is a rule of
life with me never to explain misrepresen-tations except when the
cause requires correction. This rule has saved much time and worry.
“But what should we do when all accept offices and what should
we do at the forthcoming elections?” was the last question. My answer
was:
When the acceeptance of office by all parties becomes a settled
fact I presume those who have conscientious scruples will refrain from
voting altogether. At the forthcoming elections, too, those who have
conscientious objections will refrain. The others will naturally follow
the Congress lead and vote as the Congress directs. I have given my
definition of a Congressman already in these pages. Not every man
who says, “I am a Congressman” is such, but only he who does the
will of the Congress.
Young India, 27-5-1926

355. SPINNING AN ART
A Madras Inspectress of Education has pronounced sentence
272

THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

against the spinning-wheel for Brahmin girls. This judgment of hers
has given rise to criticism against the lady. If the charkha is good
enough for non-Brahmin girls why not, it is argued, for Brahmin girls?
The question is apposite when caste arrogance is being levelled to the
ground. Moreover the Inspectress evidently does not know that the
finest yarn is spun by Brahmin girls and that in many Brahmin families
the tradition of spinning for the sacred thread is still kept up.
But a side question has arisen out of the criticism of the
Inspectress. Is spinning an art? Is it not a humdrum monotonous
process likely to weary the children? Well all the evidence hitherto
collected goes to show that spinning is an elegant art and the process
itself is extremely pleasant. No mechanical pull is enough to draw the
various counts. And those who do spinning as an art know the pleasure
they derive when the fingers and the eyes infallibly guide the required
count. Art to be art must soothe. I reproduced over a year ago the
testimony of Sir Prabhashankar Pattani to show how after the day’s
trying work he went to the charkha for soothing his nerves and giving
him undisturbed sleep. I extract the following passage from the letter
of a friend who found solace for her shattered nerves in spinning:
When . . . .I hastened to my room and then in the dark struggled

with

an anguish which rent me from top to toe, I prayed and strove for some time
and then turned to the spinning-wheel and found in it a magical comfort. The
quiet regular motion of its rhythm immediately steadied me and the thought of
its service brought me nearer to God.

This is not the solitary experience of one or two but many
spinners. It is however no use saying that spinning will be pleasurable
to all because it has been the joy of many. Painting is acknowledged to
be an exquisite art. But it is not everybody who takes to it.
Young India, 27-5-1926

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

273

356. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI 1
Thursday [May 27, 1926]
CHI. DEVDAS,

Once again I have been acting as a tyrant to you as if I could not
tolerate anybody being healthy. I cannot write long letters to you
because I do not get a single minute free.
I have been thinking whom I can send over to you. We may
certainly like that that person should accompany you to the Himalayas,
but have we any right to spend money in that manner? You should
certainly go. I shall send someone to help you there. Leave the
choice to me.
I see that Surendra cannot leave now. You may take Brijkishan
with you if he agrees. You will certainly get some company during the
journey when you start from there.
Your long letters seem too short to me.
I have not yet been able to decide about the trip to Europe. At
present I am waiting for a letter or telegram from Rolland. Raja is of
the view that if I go, I must take you with me. Would you like to go?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 2043

357. LETTER TO RAJARAM
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Thursday, May 27, 1926
BHAI RAJARAM,

I have your letter. Your son will require two years for the
training which you want him to have, provided he is hard-working. In
less time than that, one can learn the elementary principles of spinning
and weaving, but experience has shown that this is not enough. If
persons with inadequate practice settle in villages, they may come to
feel disappointed. The monthly expenses will probably come to Rs.
15. If you wish to send Surendrarai, write either to me or the Manager
so that we may arrange about his board and lodging before asking him
1

274

This forms one of a series of letters to Devdas during his illness.
THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to come over. At present the Ashram is pretty full and it may,
therefore, take some time before he can be admitted.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S. N. 12186

358. LETTER TO DEVA PRASAD SARVADHIKARY
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May, 28, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I was delighted to receive your letter. The deputation certainly
did its part well and it now remains for us here to continue the good
work done by you and your colleagues.
Yes, without Mr. Andrews’ incessant work and undying faith
nothing could have been done. At the present moment I am doing
little more than watching and keeping in touch with all that is going on
here and in South Africa.
My son wrote to me saying that he had the privilege of meeting
you and he expressed his sorrow that you were unable to visit the the
settlement 1 at Phoenix.
Yours sincerely,

S IR DEVA P RASAD S ARVADHIKARY
20, SURI LANE,
C ALCUTTA
From a photostat: S. N. 11958 (a)

359. LETTER TO SYED RAZA ALI
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 28, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I write this to thank you for the letter that you wrote to me from
South Africa enclosing a copy of the Memorandum of your evidence.
I congratulate you and your deputation upon the success that attained
your efforts.
Without mentioning your name I made use of your tribute to Mr.
1

Founded by Gandhiji in South Africa in 1904.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

275

Paddison in my weekly notes in Young India. 1
I hope you enjoyed your South African visit.
Yours sincerely,

HON. S YED R AZA ALI
AT INVERARM
S IMLA
From a microfilm: S. N. 11959

360. LETTER TO DR. NORMAN LEYS
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 28, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter of the 26th ultimo forwarded through Mr.
Vaze. I thank you for that latter. I appreciate it for I know that it is
only by a frank exchange of views that we come nearer one another.
For me the word ‘political’ is inclusive. I do not divide different
activities—political, social, religious, economical—into water-tight
compartments. I look upon them all as one indivisible whole each
running into the rest and affected by the rest. I also believe with you
that our political freedon properly so called will depend upon our
ability to solve many of our domestic problems such as the communal
trouble. In other words, it will depend upon internal reforms. The
outward will be merely therefore a symptom of the inward. I do not at
all hold that this communal problem is insoluble. It seems to defy
human effort for the time being. But I have the fullest faith in our
ability finally to solve it. It may be of course that before we reach a
solution there will be bloody fights between the two. In spite of all
efforts sometimes they become as it were unavoidable.
I would however like to add a word of caution against thinking,
if you did think, that these communal troubles are not due to our
dependence upon the British rule. It is my conviction that rule is based
upon the policy of ‘divide and rule’ which policy sometimes English
officials have been frank enough to admit. If the Government chose, it
can certainly contribute much to a speedy and permanent solution.
2

1
2

276

Vide “Notes”, 29-4-1926, sub-title, “The Good Samaritan”.
Vide “Letter to S. G. Vaze”, 23-5-1926.
THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

But if I mention this I do so not to excuse our inability to solve the
problem without the help of the rulers, but I mention it to explain our
difficulty.
Yours second point is too difficult for me to pronounce an
opinion upon. I am not an attentive student of European politics or
European history to be able to draw the distinction that you do between
the European States where Roman Catholicism is predominant and
where Protestantism is predominant. And, for the reason I would
prefer to hold silence upon the third point which is equally intresting as
the second. There is no doubt that mankind is affected largely by the
way it looks upon God. So far as India is concered the vast majority
think of God as the Monitor within each one of us. Even the illiterate
masses know that God is only one, that He is all-pervading, and,
therefore, is the witness of all our actions.
If you wish to elucidate further the two points of your letter
which at present I understand but partialy and if you can find time, I
shall read your elucidation with all the attention I am able to give to it.
And I know that I shall profit by it.
Yours sincerey,

DR. N ORMAN LEYS
BRAILSFORD
NEAR DERBY
ENGLAND
From a photostat: S. N. 12468

361. LETTER TO S. ARUNACHALAM
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 28, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. It is good that you are sending a small
contribution to the All-India Spinners’ Association. Since you are so
weak there is certainly no occasion for you to spin.
The rules of the Satyagraha Ashram are published as appendix to
Mr. Nateson’s book of my speeches and writings. 1 A new edition will
be prepared shortly.
1

Vide “Draft Constitution for the Ashram”, before 20-5-1915.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

277

I think that unless you are a man of invicible faith in God and his
healing mercy, you should not hesitate to receive the advice of
physicians or take mild treatment.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S. A RUNACHALAM
951, W EAVER S TREET
ALANTHUR, S T. T HOMAS MOUNT
MADRAS
From a microfilm: S. N. 19576

362. LETTER TO DR. MANEKBAI BAHADURJI
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 28, 1926
I was pleased to receive your letter. I shall ask the Khadi
Pratishthan to send you a charkha like mine. Where do you want it
sent, Panchgani or Bombay? I shall write to the Pratishthan after
hearing from you. And if you are in a hurry you will write yourself.
The address of the Khadi Pratishthan is 170, Bow Bazar Street, Calcutta.
When you mention the fruit that will grow in your ground at
Panchgani you make my mouth water. Of course during this visit of
mine I was not able to contempalate all the beautiful views around
Mahabaleshwar and Panchgani. That one can see only when one has
leisure.
With love to you all,
Yours,

DR. M RS. B AHADURJI
OMRA HALL
P ANCHGANI
From a microfilm: S. N. 19577

278

THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

363. LETTER TO G. R. S. RAO
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 28, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

This is my message for your paper:
“I hope that this paper stands for the Spinning Wheel and all the
two things 1 imply.”
As the exchange list of Young India has grown out of all
proportion and as it has only a limited circulation nowdays, it is
difficult to send you Young India in exchange for your paper. Will
you not secure a copy a Young India from some friends in Bangalore
so that I may be saved so much expense.
You need not send your paper if only because the editing of
Young India does not depend upon exchanges, for it is hardly a
newspaper.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. G. R. S. R AO
EDITOR IN C HIEF
“PRAJA MITRA”
KAMALA VILAS
C OTTONPET
BANGALORE
From a microfilm: S. N. 19578

364. LETTER TO KRISHNADAS
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 28, 1926
MY DEAR KRISHNADAS,

I have your two letters. The long statements about Hardayal
Babu followed me to Mahabaleshwar. It was then put among my jacket
which I was not able even to look at in Mahabaleshwar. I reached
these papers only yesterday but I have not yet been able to go through
the statement which I shall do in a day or two. But I think I have told
1

“Two things” stand for Praja Mitra (‘friend of the people’) and the Spinning
Wheel (also ‘friend of the people’).
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

279

you that had I known that the complaint was about your father, I would
not have sent the telegram without first referring the matter to you. I
suppose you want my opinion for your satisfaction which I shall give
gladly. You have sent me two copies of the same letter about yourself.
I am sending you Rs. 100 by insured post today. You will tell
me if you need more. Mahadev was asking me only the other day
whether you were likely to return in the early future. And I told him I
thought that from all the accounts you had sent me about Guruji your
place was more near him than me. And even now you will not leave
him unless you yourself feel absolutely sure that he could be safely
left. If, however, you can come it will be quite handy because at the
present moment both Pyarelal and Devdas are away. But there is
another question to be considered. What if I go at all it will be on the
1st of July that is the day the last steamer that can enable me to reach
Finland in time leaves Bombay docks. The matter will be decided
probably by the end of this week, certainly by the end of next. If I
must go I propose to take Mahadev and Devdas with me. There will be
a lot of work left behind to be done. But whether you would come
down for that work and leave Guruji is a question I feel for separate
consideration. In every case Guruji’s health should have the
paramount consideration with you.
Devdas is going on all right though he is still in the hospital. He
is likely to be discharged inside of a week. Lalji has undergone an
operation and occupies the same room as Devdas. These two patients
are in Sir Harikisendas Hospital. Yeshwant Prasad also has been ailing.
Several minor operations have been performed on him. He had
guinea-worms.
I am sorry to hear that your sister has become widowed. Do
please convey my sympathies to her. I am carefully going through all
the cuttings that Guruji sends me. Some of them are valuable. I had
never seen “Muhamed’s treaty” before. I knew that his successors
had entered into a treaty of that character with the Cristians and the
Jews.
Yours sincerely
From a photostat : S. N. 19579

365. LETTER TO JOHN HAYNES HOLMES
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 28, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your kind letter of the 14th April last. I am surprised at
280

THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

your not receiving my cable which I sent you on the 16th February last
giving you an affirmative reply. I have not assigned copyright to
anybody as yet because I have been in correspondence with you and
because you cabled to me that you were in correspondence with the
Macmillans. If the English-speaking public outside India is sufficiently
interested in these chapters I do not mind selling the copyright though
I have never done it before. The idea of making anything out of my
writings has been always repugnant to me. But your cable tempted me
and I felt that there might be no harm in my getting money for the
copyright and using it for the charkha propaganda or the uplift of the
suppressed classes. And I felt that if the chapters were published by a
house of known standing the message contained in the chapters might
reach a wider public. You may please therefore continue your
negotiations whether for copyright in America or for both America
and Europe. I have several letters from German and other friends for
copyright in their respective states but to all I have sent a reply saying
that they should wait.
Meanwhile as I am receiving repeated applications for back
numbers of Young India containing the chapters, I am arranging to
issue the first part in book form so as to satisfy this demand.
Yours sincerely,

DR. J OHN HAYNES HOLMES
THE C OMMUNITY C HURCH
12 P ARK AVENUE
NEW YORK C ITY
(U.S.A.)
From a copy: S.N. 32220

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

281

366. LETTER TO SARDUL SINGH CAVEESAR
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 29, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have a small sum (Rs. 51) lying with me for some time for the
Akalis. Will you please make what use you like for helping some
deserving Akali?
Yours sincerely,

S IRDAR S ARDUL S INGH C AVESSAR
LODGE LIBERTY
R AMGALI
LAHORE
From a microfilm: S. N. 19582

367. LETTER TO D. V. RAMA RAO
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 29, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I think that you should try to persuade your
parents to let you go to Shantiniketan. But till you have obtained their
permission it will be better for you to remain where you are and retain
your peace. There should be satisfaction in your agreeing to the
wishes of your parents however unpleasant that may be. Disobedience
of parents’ wishes is justified when obedience will be a moral breach.
The same things applies to swimming. You should reason with your
parents and get their permision to learn swimming. If they supervised
your swimming probably they would not be afraid.
It is necessary to declare one’s deceptions to those whom one has
deceived. It is a cleansing process. The shock received by the parents
by confession would be a momentary one. The reason for confession
of sin is precisely the reason that requires us to rub and clean a dirty
surface. What scrubbing and
washing is for removing
282

THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

dirt on a material body, confession is for removing dirt on the spiritual
plane.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. D. V. R AMA R AO
DIGAMARTI HOUSE
BERHAMPORE
GANJAM DT.
From a microfilm: S. N. 19580

368. LETTER TO KRISHNADAS
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 29, 1926
MY DEAR KRISHNADAS,

I have now carefully read your long letter. According to the
facts stated by you, father cannot be held blamed in any shape or form.
Do you want me to write to Hardayal Babu anything about this
unfortunate matter? If you do, I shall gladly write to him.
It appears to me now that the Finland invitation will be cancelled.
I have suggested so to Mr. K. T. Paul because of his own difficulties.1 I
shall hear from him next week.
Yours sincerely

S JT. K RISHNADAS
C/ O S. C. G UHA
DARBHANGA
From a photostat: S. N. 19581

369. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARIAR
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 29, 1926
I am so delighted that you are in “excellent health”. Shankerlal
must have written to you. But, in any case, I expect you to report
yourself at the Ashram on the 15th June. Whilst you are touring
certainly leave Lakshmi here.
Chhotalal is just now travelling here, there and everywhere. He
1

Vide “Letter to K. T. Paul”, 23-5-1926.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

283

has got the blues. He went to Khadi Pratishthan and passed a few days
with Satis Babu. He is now in Wardha. I suggested that he should stay
with you for some months and help you in your work. He was not
inclined to do so because he said he would gladly render personal
service if you need it but otherwise he did not know that he will feel
comfortable. Now, however, he writes asking me if you will have him.
He still harps on personal services. But whatever he does, whether he
helpes you in the khadi work or whether he becomes your cook, waiter
and sanitary attendant or whether he weaves your khadi, I suggest your
having him on his terms. And if you find him moody you may ask
me to withdraw him. If he wishes to tour with you let him do that. But
you know him best. Are you prepared to have him? Or will you rather
discuss the thing when you are here?
Your curse on the Finland visit is likely to bear fruit; for, a letter I
have written to K. T. Paul seems to have put him in a fix. I have told
him that he must look upon this proposed visit with complete
detachment.1 But it appears to me that he has prompted the invitation
and that the World Committee of the Y. M. C. A. is a passive instrument
in his hands. However, I shall know my fate inside of a week now.
We are boiling here at the present moment but I hope you will
send us rain before you come.
Yours,
From a photostat: S. N. 19586

370. DRAFT HOUSING SCHEME FOR MILL-WORKERS2
The additional sums that may be received, if the demand for
increase in wages is conceded, should be utilized for one year to
implement a housing scheme for workers. Under this scheme, it is
intended to build houses for workers, which would meet the health
requirements of the workers, and provide them necessary amenities and
yet not be beyond the means of the ordinary working man.
In every locality with houses built under this scheme, every
provision will be made to meet the common needs of the workers living
1

Vide “Letter to K. T. Paul”, 23-5-1926.
The scheme was formulated to suggest the right manner of utilizing the
additional wages which the workers of Ahmedabad might get if the 15 percent cut
effected in 1923 was restored. Only the chief clauses of the scheme were reproduced in
the source.
2

284

THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

there and provide them other facilities. These will include, funds
permitting, schools, gardens, halls with facilities for playing games,
libraries, shops and dispensaries.
A committee consisting of representative of the Labour Union
and the the Millowners’ Association—the former being in a
majority—will implement this scheme in accordance with the
conditions of the Trust, will look after the properties and manage the
fund. The management of the properties will be with the Labour
Union. All workers employed in the mills during the current year and
entitled to an increase in their wages will be regarded as joint owners of
the funds of the Trust and the property purchased with that money.
The share of each worker in the property will be in proportion to his
contrbution to the fund. Each such worker who is a joint owner of the
property will be given a share certificate. Shareholders will not be
permitted to sell or mortgage their shares to any person or body other
than the Trust except in accordance with the conditions to be laid
down by the Trust. Houses will be allotted to workers on the results of
lots drawn for the purpose. The claims of shareholders will receive
priority. The decision to implement this scheme will be taken after
obtaining in writing the votes of workers in every department and
ascertaining whether there is a two-thirds majority in favour of it.
If it is decided to utilize the increased quantum of wages in this
manner, no demand for a further increase in wages will be made for a
period of one year thereafter, and if, in violation of this condition, any
workers go on strike for increase in wages, such workers will not be
entitled to take benefit of this scheme for a period to be decided by
the Trustees.
[From Gujarati]
Gujarati, 30-5-1926

371. NOTES
P RAGJI DESAI

Shri Pragati Khandubhai Desai, who was sentenced to two years’
imprisonment for his articles in Navayuga, was released from
Sabarmati Jail on the 22nd of this month. Though in the beginning
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

285

he was much harassed by the authorities, he passed the later part of his
term, specially after he had been transferred to Karachi, in great peace
and comfort, with the result that he is now in excellent health. While in
jail, he also got plenty of time to read and think quietly. At present, he
has gone to Surat to meet his wife, and also Shri Kalyanji and other coworkers to consult them on what work he should take up now.
R EQUEST FROM EAST AFRICA

A young man from Nairobi writes:1
I congratulate this team of young men. If their monthly is being
started for the sole purpose of public service, I wish it all success. I
welcome his remark about people who wear khadi. The correspondent
understands my love for khadi, but not the reasoning which inspires
this love. I, therefore, welcome this opportunity to explain that
reasoning. He may be surprised to learn that I do not recommend
khadi for improving the conditions of Indians in East Afria; even if I
did, out of blind attachment for khadi, I would have to use the word
‘khadi’ in an absolutely diffrent and a much wider sense. But I have
no such attachment and, therefore, I can safely say that khadi is
almost useless in fighting the hardships of our people in East Africa. I
would not advise people living near the North Pole to use the spinning
wheel. If our countrymen in East Africa occasion-ally used khadi,
that would certainly be a good thing, for they would show thereby
their appreciation of the circumstances in India. But there is no doubt
that, for improving their own lot, what they need to do is to become
united. That would be only the first step; and it would not be enough.
Indians there are accused of being dirty, and there is a good measure
of truth in the charge. They must give up their dirty habits. There is
some truth in the other charge too, that they are miserely. Miserliness
here means excessive economy in our way of living. In a foreign
country we cannot afford to have the same room to serve us as a shop,
as living room and as kitchen. There we earn more and it is necessary,
therefore, to adopt a higher standard of living. If we do not, we may be
justly charged with unfair competition. The other tradesmen will
certainly not like one who, in disregard of accepted buisness standards,
lives in extreme want and brings down the market prices. We should
not give any such cause for complaint and jealousy.
1

The letter is not translated here. The correspondent had requested Gandhiji for
a message for a monthly which the association of Indian youths there wished to start.

286

THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The Indians in East Afria should also take suitable measures to
spread education in their midst. It is beyond doubt that, if their
children grow up without education, they would not be able to compete
with the British population there. If, moreover, there is any truth in
what I have heard, that the Indians in East Africa, instead of emulating
the virtues of the British, have freely taken to their vices, such as
drinking and immorality, they would do well to keep aloof from
these. Finally, in order to live there with self-respect they should
cultivate strength for satyagraha, that is, for the utmost suffering in the
cause of public welfare. Provided they do this, they would deserve little
blame for not wearing khadi. Without wearing khadi, they will have
done their duty of preserving their self-respect.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 30-5-1926

372. NON-CO-OPERATION AND EDUCATION1
A reader of Navajivan writes as follows:2
Personally, I have not become lukewarm in the slightest degree
about any aspect of
non-co-operation.
My
views
about
education remain what they were in 1920-21, and could I but persuade
the students or their guardians, not a single student would remain in
the Government schools. If I do not discuss this matter in the
Navajivan as frequently as I used to do, it is because the time is past
for delivering speeches or writing articles in order to get the schools
vacated. What we have to do now is to strentgthen the schools which
have held on unflinchingly to the principles of non-co-operation. It
pains me to have to admit that, unlike the khadi movement, that of
national education is not showing progress. Indeed, as far as the
number of schools and that of students are concerned, the movement is
on the ebb. I do not hesitate to comment on this fact when the
1

Vide also “National Education”, 3-6-1926
The letter is not translated here. The correspondent had asked Gandhiji what
truth there was in the general impression that he had become less rigid in his views
about non-co-operation in the field of education, and whether, in view of the
slackening of public interest in national education, it would not be wise to give up
policy of non-co-operation in this field and make the best use of academic talent in
Gujarat by co-operating with the Government in the new university which it proposed
to establish.
2

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

287

occasion demands, but I see no need to do that every day. The fact of
the ebb does not make me lose heart about the future. If we do not
give up faith, this ebb is bound to be followed by a full tide. I am quite
confident that, if the schools which have held fast to non-co-operation
continue to do so sincerely and do not compromise in regard to any of
the basic principles of non-co-operation, the results will be good. I
know that the Proprietary High School is in serious difficulty. Some
of the teachers and a good many students have left it. But why should
that matter? We have to carry on the work of non-co-operation neither
in a spirit of impulsive imitation nor as a “policy” or useful expedient.
Those who have remained faithful to non-co-operation rely on their
own strength and have confidence in themselves. Quite possibly they
may yet have to pass through trying times. If they have to, I hope that
like gold which, when heated, shines brighter still, the non-co-operators
will come out brighter from the test. Those alone will be true non-cooperators who hold out till the end. Whether there is only one such
non-co-operator or there are many, it is he or they who will win swaraj
for the country. What Sardar Sardul Singh said recently in a speech in
the Punjab is true. There can be no co-operation between a tiger and a
lamb. There can be real co-operation only between equals. In the
existing circumstances, to describe any association between the
Government and the people as co-operation is a misuse of the word
“co-operation” When we are strong enough to get our terms
accepted, co-operation will follow as a matter of course and that will be
real co-operation.
But the fact that misunderstandings about non-co-operation
continue to prevail indicates that we still do not know the real nature of
the movement. Our non-co-operation is not satanic or violent, uncivil
or malicious. In peaceful non-co-operation, there is no room for
contempt for anyone. Non-co-operation will in no way be discredited
if Shri Anandashanker’s 1 knowledge and ability are utilized for the
benefit of the Vidyapith.
We have not co-operated with the
Government in any way by making him Chairman of the Commission
for the Vidyapith. On the contrary, the latter has not only honoured
itself by inviting him to be the Chairman, but has demonstrated the true
nature of non-co-operation, for non-violent non-co-operation bears no
ill-will towards individuals. We may certainly take advantage of the
virtue even of a Viceroy as a human being, provided that in doing so
1

288

A. B. Dhruva, Pro-Vice-Chancellor of Benares Hindu University
THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

we do not avail ourselves of his official position; if we refuse to take
such advantage, we would show ourselves stupid non-co-operators.
In running an institution like the Vidyapith, we are not wasting
public money but are putting it to quite good use. We are not here
looking at the matter from the point of view of those who look upon
non-co-operation as sin. Those who contributed money for the
Vidyapith believe in the principles of non-co-operation. Their money
is not wasted if it is used for carrying on this great experiment in the
field of education; it is true, of course, that as the numbers diminish, the
organizers, the teachers and the students should show correspondinlgy
greater strength of character. Only then will public money have been
well used. If the university to be established by the Government draws
away our teachers, I would conclude that they did not have sincere
faith in non-co-operation. The establishment of that university should
have the effect of increasing our devotion to duty. It may well be
attractive from the point of view of money and prestige, but I know it
will not lead us to swaraj. Here, on the other hand, the teachers may
have to put up with poverty and ridicule, but I cannot give up my faith
that through it we are advancing step by step towards our goal of
swaraj.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 30-5-1926

373. THE SPINNING-WHEEL IN GUJARAT
The reader will find elsewhere in this issue some information
collected by Shri Lakshmidas concerning the progress of spinning in
Gujarat. We can see from it that even in big cities like Ahmedabad and
Nadiad spinning has been adotped only by a few isolated individuals.
We must admit that it has a very limited field, but we can see that for
those women who do spinning it is the only work they can take up. No
effort is made to induce a woman to take up spinning if she can earn
more through some other work. The spinning-wheel has a place in
our life which nothing else can fill. It has been conceived only for
those people who have no other honest means of livelihood, but in a
vast and thickly populated country like India spinning is the only work
which crores can take up. If people can be found to ply it for money
even in cities like Ahmedabad and Nadiad, we can easily imagine how
useful it can prove in the villages. If we do not hear the sweet music of
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

289

this annapurna, the spinning-wheel, in the homes of the poor, it is for
lack of sufficient number of dedicated, self-sacrificing and intelligent
workers.
There is, of course, the other equally strong reason for this state
of affairs, namely, that very little khadi is used in Gujarat. It will come
to be universally used, like wheat and ghee, and all the khadi produced
will be sold out, when national consciousness has fully developed in us.
We have not yet entered the homes of the poor in Gujarat, have not
qualified ourselves nor do we feel the desire to do so. When we really
feel a new life in us, large numbers of young men will come forward to
go into villages and serve the people, and they will take pride in living
on the modest return they will get from such service.
[From Guajarati]
Navajivan, 30-5-1926

374. LETTER TO S. G. VAZE
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 30, 1926
MY DEAR VAZE,

I have your circular letter about the Society’s publications. I
have just heard that Sastri is there. But as the matter contained in my
letter to him is urgent lest he might not be there I send you herewith a
copy. And if my offer is at all considered possible of acceptance you
will be at liberty yourself to come and take up your abode in the
Ashram and bring with you as many as you like and edit the paper
from the Ashram till the press is re-established in Poona.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat : S. N. 10912

290

THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

375. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 30, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

As I did not know your whereabouts, being still unrepentant in
spite of your rebuke about my neglect of newspaper reading, I wrote to
Devadhar expressing my distress over the terrible fire which has
reduced to ashes the press owned by the Soceity. I have therein
offered to render such service as I am capable of in connection with
your publications. I have now before me a circular letter from Vaze
asking me to announce the fact that, till new arrangements are made,
The Servant of India and the Dnyan Prakash cannot be published.
I understand you are already in Poona. Though I have not
consulted Swami, I feel certain that we could print for youThe Servant
of India here without much difficulty. Do please make use of this
humble offer if it is practicable. Its acceptance, I need hardly assure
you, will give me the greatest pleasure. For, though technically I am
not one of you, I have ever regarded myself as one of you in spirit and
that in spite of fundamental difference between you and myself on
many matters of importance to the country.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat : S. N. 10913

376. LETTER TO K. T. PAUL 1
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 30, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. Mr. Andrews has been with me for the last
three days. He has read the whole of the correspondence between us
and we have both come to the conclusion that the invitation should be
finally accepted which I do hereby though not without a great deal of
hesitation and reluctance. The hesitation and reluctance proceed from
my diffidence. I did not know that it is worth while undergoing all the
1
This letter was dictaed at 3 p.m. but not sent. According to the secretary’s
note, Gandhiji “revised his decision after praying in solitude” For Gandhiji’s final
reply, vide“ Telegram to K. T. Paul”, 31-5-1926.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

291

expense of taking me and my companions to Finland. But it is not
given to man to know God’s purpose. And I simply derive satisfaction
from the knowledge that I have in no way forced the pace or even
wanted to go to Finland. You will now make what arrangements you
like.
I see you will be taking return passages, and you contemplate the
same between London and Helsingfors. I must, however, say that if I
receive invitations to go to other places in Europe, I want to hold
myself free to accept them. In that event, it might not be advisable to
take a return passage from London to Helsingfors. I am bound in any
case to go to Geneva to see M. Romain Rolland. My return therefore
may not be absolutely by the same route in Europe.
So far as the passport is concerned you will please bear this in
mind and not accept any conditions as to the time or places I might
visit.
You will keep me informed from time to time as to what progress
you are making. Of course, I should be delighted if you could, instead
of going by the 15th June, go with me by the boat that leaves on the 1st
of July.
I do not think that there can be any difficulty about procuring
goat’s milk in Europe. Moreover it can be condensed, evaportated or
sterilized. Evaporated milk is undoubtedly the best to keep. It is
absolutely reduced to powder.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat : S. N. 11352

377. LETTER TO K. T. PAUL 1
May 30, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. Mr. Andrews has been here for the last three
days. He also has read your letter and the rest of the correspondence
between us. After deep and prayerful consideration we have both
come to the conclusion that the invitation should be cancelled or that I
should decide not to go to Finland. It seems to me that the invitation is
in substance from you and from the World’s Committee only in form.
1

292

This letter, dictated at 4 p.m., bears the entry, “Not send/held over.”
THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

And yet if I went, I will be said to be going in response not to your
invitation but to that of the World Committee. I feel that it would be a
wrong thing for both you and me or at any rate for me. I feel that if it
is the World Committee that invites me then, it is that Committee which
should bear the financial burden. Whereas in this case the financial
burden has to be borne by you. It therefore appears to amount to a
forcing of the position. I therefore strongly advise you to forget the
invitation, and drop the matter altogether. I would ask you therefore to
treat this matter as closed unless you find that by my not going you
will be in any way compromised or embarrassed. If you are in any
way embarrassed or compromised I shall gladly reconsider the
position. But if it has to be reconsidered and if it is possible for you to
move out will it not be better for you to come down to the Ashram so
that we might thrash out the whole matter.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat : S. N. 11353

378. LETTER TO A. A. PAUL
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 30, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter enclosing copy of a letter from China. I think I
have already told you that if no local circumstances prevent me, I
would be prepared to visit China next year in accordance with the
desire of the Chinese friends.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat : S. N. 11372

379. LETTER TO A. I. KAJEE
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 30, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter of the 24th April last with all the enclosures
mentioned therein. I have also your cable just received. I have had
long talks with Mr. Andrews who is, even as I am writing this here at the
Ashram, living with me. The victory is great but much work still
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

293

remains to be done, in fact more than has been done already, because,
the work hitherto done was one of necessary destruction; the work of
construction must now begin.
You have raised three points in your cable. So far as I can see
there will be no direct participation by the Congress in the Round
Table Conference. But the Congress must have a hearing. The
Conference itself, I imagine, will be between the representatives of the
two Governments. But Mr. Andrews and others are watching carefully
and whatever can be done will certainly be done. If any step has to be
taken on your side, you will be duly advised.
It is a very good idea to hold the annual Congress in
Johannesburg. Your resolutions must concentrate on fundamental
points to be dealt with by the Conference and should be plain. Your
resolutions should be moderate, firm, brief, telling and to the point.
After the Colour Bar Bill I have expressed myself in the strongest terms. All parties have also taken action. Mr. Andrews has seen
the Viceroy but I very much fear that the Bill itself will receive the
Royal assent. What will happen is that at least for the time being it will
not be applied to Indian settlers and may never be applied at any time
if we are strong, united and moderate.
Yours sincerely,

A. I. KAJEE, E SQ.
HON. G ENERAL S ECRETARY
S OUTH AFRICAN INDIAN C ONGRESS
175, GREY S TREET
DURBAN, S OUTH AFRICA
From a microfilm : S. N. 11960

380. LETTER TO MAHADEO V. PANDLORKAR
May 30, 1926
So far as I know Jiwatma is to Paramatma what a drop is to the
ocean. And even as the properties of a drop are identical with those of
the ocean, the properties of Jiwatma are identical with those of
Paramatma.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat : S. N. 19584

294

THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

381. LETTER TO C. LAKSHMI NARASIMHAN
[May 30, 1926] 1
In my opinion eggs cannot be classed as a vegetarian diet. But
there is certainly not the same himsa in taking eggs as in taking meat.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat : S. N. 19585

382. LETTER TO V. M. TARKUNDE
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 30, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I quite agree with you there would be always
parties so long as there are differences in viewpoints and I also agree
with you that [there should be] no jealousies and no mutual
recrimination but that each should tolerate the rest.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. V. M. T ARKUNDE
S ASVAD
P OONA DT.
From a microfilm : S. N. 19583

383. LETTER TO TEHMINA KHAMBHATTA
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Sunday, [May 30, 1926] 2
DEAR SISTERS,

I have your letter. You are making too much of my having
climbed three flights of stairs to see you. If we do not do this for one
another, we might as well have not lived. I should very much like to
bring peace of mind to Behramji, if any words of mine can give it.
Happiness and suffering are inescapable in this life. We prove our
1

The date is noted on the letter (S. N. 19585) dated 9-5-1926 from the
addressee.
2
Date inferred from the reference to Mrs. Eddy’s book and to the illness of the
addressee’s husband. Vide “Letter to Behramji Khambhatta”, 23-5-1926.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

295

humanity only by enduring our lot in patience. I shall certainly write
and give my opinion after I have read Mrs. Eddy’s book. But I
strongly urge Behramji not to stop using needful medicines meanwhile.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C. W. 4364. Courtesy : Tehmina Khambhatta

384. LETTER TO HARILAL
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Sunday, May 30, 1926
BHAI HARILAL,

It is certainly not possible to reply to your letter through
Navajivan. I am sure that the educational and other reforms which you
advocate will not come about at the present time. All of them may be
indications of an attitude of tolerance, but they cannot create such an
attitude. At present it will be more than enough if though going our
separate ways, we live in peace with each other. I cannot think just
now how inter-marriages will ever become possible. How can we have
a family in which one member is a vegetarian and another a nonvegetarian? In which tradition will the children of such a couple be
brought up? Problem alliances of this kind will raise many other
issues besides these. Any attempt at this time to persuade people to act
upon your suggestions will furnish one more ground for opposition
or make the achievement of political unity impossible. How unwise it
is to imagine a connection between political unity and other issues
where none exists!
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S. N. 19588

385. TELEGRAM TO K. T. PAUL
May 31, 1926
P AUL
THOTTAM
S ALEM
YOUR

296

LETTER

MAKES

CLEAR

INVITATION

THOUGH

FORMALLY

FROM

THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

COMMITTEE
WORLD

REALLY
KNOW

SUGGESTDROPPING
LIKELY

EMBAR-

FROM

YOU.

INVITATION
VISIT.
RASS

DESIRED

SUGGEST

POSSIBLE

FOR

FULL

AM

OR

THINK

FROM

PREPARED

COMPROMISE

YOUR

COMING

IT

WRONG

COMMITTEE.
RECONSIDER
YOU.

IF

SABARMATI

LET

STRONGLY
DECISION

IF

RECONSIDERATION
IF

AT

ALL

DISCUSSION.

GANDHI
From a photostat: S. N. 11354

386. LETTER TO WILHELM WARTENBERG
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

May 31, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I fully appreciate your struggle. But I have
no doubt that if the humiliations you may be suffering purify you,
they may to that extent and only to that extent benefit your fellows.
My non-resistance is activized resistance in a different plane. Nonresistance to evil does not mean absence of any resistance whatsoever
but it means not resisting1 evil with evil but with good. Resistance,
therefore, is transferred to a higher and absolutely effective plane.
Capitalism, therefore, is to be resisted not with the ways open2 to
capitalism but with absolutely new weapons. If only employees will
realize the power within them, they will not, as they do today, merely
change the form but they will radically change the substance. And for
this desirable reform the power comes from within. One does not need
to wait till the rest have made the commencement. One persom making
the beginning will in the end be enough to destroy the system. But I
am free to confess that in the intervening period, one may have to put
up with estrangement and much worse, which, however, is the lot of
almost every reformer.
Yours sincerely,

WILHELM WARTENBERG, E SQ.
HAMBURG 23
BITTERSTR 134 II
GERMANY
From a photostat: S. N. 12471
1
2

The source has “resistance”.
The source has “opened”.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

297

387. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
S ABARMATI ASHRAM,

Thursday [Before June 1,1926] 1
CHI. RAMDAS,

I have your postcard. I never got Manilal’s letter. I do not
know to what address you forwarded it. Do come over here when your
khadi work there is over. Since you have given your address as C/o
Post-Office I have addressed the letter accordingly. It is likely that I
may go to Finland. If I go, I will have to start on July 1. I am thinking
of taking Mahadev and Devdas with me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

388. LETTER TO DINSHA MANCHERJI MUNSHI
ASHRAM,

June 1, 1926
BHAISHRI MUNSHI,

It is not as easy as you suppose to come across a right guru2 . I
am on the look out for such a perfect being. I would not find him
without undertaking rigorous penance and without myself getting
nearer to perfection. A person in search of a guru is vigilant and in
the process acquires merit. So I go along unperturbed. It is by God’s
grace that one is blessed with a guru. Therefore, I shall get a guru at
the time and place that I come to deserve one. In the meanwhile I
always pay my obeisance to the guru I am yet to see.
Vandemataran from

MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S. N. 19913

1

From the reference to the proposed visit to Finland; vide footnote to the
following item. Gandhiji was invited in this year to address the Young Men’s Christian
Association at Finland.
2
Preceptor

298

THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

389. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL A. GANDHI
ASHRAM,

June 1, 1926
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,

I have your letter. It reached me late because Krishnalal is ill.
Noted about the weaving school. Where do you propose to start it?
How much will it cost? I shall think about a programme for the next
year. In connection with the temple do you presume that the Antyajas
can never refuse to serve Brahmins or the [other] higher castes, i.e.,
cannot go on a strike? In the present case you gave them the right
advice. They have not yet acquired the strength to strike work; they
are not yet pure enough to offer satyagraha. But, may be, some day
they will have to do it. Please keep in touch with the temple and take
interest in its progress.
What happened to Umiya1 ? Where is she? It looks as if Devdas
and his companion Lalji would go only to Mussoorie.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S. N. 19914

1

Addressee’s daughter

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

299

390. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
S ABARMATI ASHRAM,

Tuesday [June 1, 1926] 1
CHI. RAMDAS,

Manilal has given me all the information about you. It is his
impression that you have been doing excellent work. I hope you are
keeping quite fit. Do not be lazy and do not forget to write to me. The
visit to Finland may be taken to be as good as cancelled. When do you
intend to come over here?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy : Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

391. LETTER TO M. R. JAYAKAR
THE ASHRAM, S ABARATI

June 2, 1926
DEAR MR. JAYAKAR,

I have your letter2 . I am disinclined even to write as much as I
have about the Pact3 . You won’t find me writing or doing anything
further. I have no desire whatsover to intrevene except to bring about
1
From the reference to Gandhiji’s Finland tour being “as good as cancelled”,
letters written by Gandhiji on June 3, 1926, state that his chances of going to Finland
are “99 to 1”. The tour was finally cancelled on June 6. The letter was obviously
written on a Tuesday prior to this date, i.e., on June 1.
2
Dated 28-5-1926, wherein he wrote: “. . .What makes me write this letter to
you is a remark which you are reported to have made in your interview, asking people
to support Congress candidates, presumably as against their rivals. This, you will
allow me to say, is unjust and unfair to many Responsivists. You know that we
Responsivists have beeen all along Congressmen . . . Any word proceeding from your
lips, calculated to influence the voter, are likely to cause grave harm and deflect the
natural course of the next elections.
“. . . If the two wings in the Congress must fight, as seems to be in evitable. . .
let us decide to make that fight as clean and decent as we can. Don’t you think that,
from this point of view, any remarks of yours of the nature reported in today’s papers,
and calculated to influence the opinion of the voter, are undesirable? . . . If you must
step into the contest at all, please do so only as a peacemaker and not as a partisan. .
.” (S. N. 11314)
3
The Sabarmati Pact between the Swarajists and the Responsive Cooperationists; vide Appendix “The Sabarmati Pact”, April and May, 1926.

300

THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

peace. The whole of this quarrel is so painful to me.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S. N. 11317

392. LETTER TO C. VIJAYARAGHAVACHARIAR
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 2, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter and wire1 . I have now discovered the “Nortan
Conversation”. Devdas not being here there was some delay. I am
now sending it by registered post.
I am also asking the manager, Young India Office, to do the
needful. Back numbers are difficult to supply. Because of the
autobiography they are almost exhausted but I am having the first part
published in book-form. If, therefore, back numbers are missing, I am
afraid you will have to wait for some time. I don’t know what the real
position is at the press.
The Pact2 and the dissolution are things of the past. Let the dead
past bury itself. In any event, I do not worry myself about it.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. C. V IJAYARAGHAVACHARIAR
F AIRY F ALLS VIEW
KODAIKANAL OBSERVATORY
From a photostat: S. N. 12051

393. LETTER TO NAJUKLAL N. CHOKSI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Wednesday, June 2, 1926
BHAISHRI NAJUKLAL,

I have your letter. As soon as I came out after my bath I learnt
that you had come and gone. You did well in not waiting for long. I
am glad that Moti likes to stay with you only and neither this place nor
1
2

Dated 11-5-1926
Vide Appendix “The Sabarmati Pact”, April and May, 1926.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

301

any other would suit her. But that is only on one condition, namely,
since Moti has ceased to be Moti and become Sukanya, she should
become industrious and write letters like pearls. She has already
consented to do this. Have you again started on a course of injections?
You should completely recoup your health; that is my constant prayer.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 12128

394. ALL-INDIA COW-PROTECTION ASSOCIATION
The Secretary acknowledges further receipt of yarn as under:
MEMBERS’ S UBSCRIPTIONS1

Nos.4, 6, 8, 9, 32, and 33 have advanced their totals to 22,000,
24,000, 12,400, 11,000, 24,000, and 24,000 yards respectively.
DONATIONS2

Cash subscriptions and donations amount to Rs. 6, 100-15-0
whereas proceeds of the sale of yarn subscriptions and donations
amount to Rs. 26-6-6. Those who send in hand-spun yarn as their
donations will please not that if they will put more attention and skill
into their work for the same amount of labour spent they will perhaps
double the value of their subscriptions. The yarn received is very
indifferently spun. Some of it is really not capable of bearing any
price in the market because it cannot be woven into khadi. It can only
be used for ropes or at best for carpets. And yarn so indifferently spun
fetches only a nominal price. Therefore those who have been sending
their donations or subscriptions in yarn for the All-India Cow
Protection Association will please bear in mind that any indifference in
spinning means so much less for the cow.
Young India, 3-6-1926

1
2

302

not reproduced here
ibid.
THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

395. THE BAR SINISTER
Lord Birkenhead has spoken on the Colour Bar Bill of South
Africa and he has blessed it. I hold to my opinion that as a piece of
racial legis-lation it is worse than the Class Areas Reservation Bill which
awaits discussion at the forthcoming Conference. It may not be put into
operati-on against Asiatics for the time being or at all. It may not be
enforced ha-rshly against the Native population. But the objection
against that mea-sure is based upon a fundamental principle and upon
the vast possibilities of mischief it contains. It is no wonder, therefore,
that the Indian settlers are agitated and that Mr. Andrews has spoken
strongly upon it. The settlers must continue their agitation against the
Bill with vigour and prepare their case for presentation to the
Conference. No presentation can avoid reference to the Colour Bar
Bill. For the one reflects the policy of the other. The Colour Bar Bill
is an indication of the designs of the Union Government in respect of
Natives and Indian settlers. And the Class Areas Reservation Bill must
be examined in the light of the Government policy on the Colour Bar
Bill. The postponement of the former does not mean any change of
policy. It may well mean only postponement of the agony. It is
therefore necessary for all who are interested in this thorny question
not to relax vigilance. What has been done hitherto was work of
destruction. The more difficult work of construction has now begun.
Much will depend upon the attitude of the Government of India. They
control the situation if the settlers are weak. When the latter are strong
they can mould their own destiny.
But I am sorry to note that the Hon. Syed Raza Ali considers that
there should be no protest in India against the Colour Bar Bill.
Though he commences his statement by saying that it is not a
legislative measure against Indians, ‘he is forced to admit that the
Union Government will under the Bill have the power to extend such
prohibition to our people if it deems it necessary’. Why is he then
surprised at Mr. Andrews’ opposition? The Syed Saheb should also
know that the Indian settlers in South Africa are much agitated over the
Bill. In a cable just received, the Secretary of the South African Indian
Congress says: ‘Trust strong action taken by you on Colour Bar Bill
which has not yet received the Royal assent.’ Mr. Andrews is bound to
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

303

object to this inhuman legislation which is principally aimed at Natives
of South Africa, if he may be expected to raise his voice on behalf of
us Indains. He has merged himself in us as a citizen of the world, not
for any special virtues of our own. But the reason for his intervention is
not the point at issue. The point at issue raised by the Syed Saheb is
whether we here should oppose the Bill or not. Well, we have always
opposed it. The settlers have always opposed it. And there is no
burden on us, now that the Conference is agreed upon not to oppose
the Bill. There was—could be—no tacit understanding not to oppose
it. We may distinguish as we have distinguished between the two
measures. The Colour Bar Bill is not so deadly in its effect against us
as the Class Areas Reservation Bill. And therefore it was that greater
stress was put upon the latter by the Indian deputation and the public.
But the opposition to the former cannot be abated because the latter
has been postponed.
Nor are the honesty and good intentions of General Hertzok
relevant to the discussion. General Hertzog is not the autocrat of
South Africa.
He is no permanent head. He may find himself
tomorrow in the same place1 that General Smuts occupies today. It is
only the written undertaking of the Government that can be taken into
account, though we have found to our cost that even written
undertakings may be thrown on the scrapheap when occasion requires
the performance. The coming Conference cannot be endangered
because we oppose a measure which it is our duty to oppose. In order
to ensure a peaceful atmosphere at the Conference all that is necessary
is for us not to impute motives, not to exaggerate and not to use harsh
language in discussing subjects, however painful they may be. To go
beyond is to surrender the right of free and just criticism and
judgment. To do so would be to pay a price out of all proportion to
the result sought to be achieved.
Young India, 3-6-1926

396. NATIONAL EDUCATION 2
A Gujarati correspondent has raised certain questions about
1
2

304

Among the opposition
Vide also “Non-co-operation and Education”, 30-5-1926.
THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

national education. Some of them are summarized below:
Since some of the staunchest supporters of non-cooperation have lost faith in it and since the numbers attending
national institutions are dwindling, what is the use of holding on
to these tottering schools and colleges and wasting good money
after bad institutions?
My believing eye detects a flaw in this argument. My faith in
non-co-operation remaining as staunch as ever, I can find it possible to
reconcile myself to the existing national institutions even though the
attendance may be reduced to half a dozen. For the half a dozen will
be the makers of swaraj whenever it comes. When virgins are required
to perform certain sacred ceremonies, others are not accepted as
substitute if no virgin is found. And even one virgin if found is
enough to save the situation. So will it be with the planting of the
swaraj flag-post. The flags will be unfurled with the unsullied hands
of those, be they ever so few, who have remained true to their creed.
I do not therefore regard it as waste of money to continue
the national institutions. They are so many oases in the desert.
They give the water of life to the souls thirsting for freedom. In
writing this I cast no reflection upon those who attend or otherwise
support Government schools. They are entitled to hold the view if they
choose that theirs is the only way or also a way to freedom. National
institutions are meant for those whose thirst for freedom is not satisfied
by the ones managed or patronized by the Government. Few as they
are, insignificant though they may appear, they supply a felt want and
contain in them the seeds, as it appears to non-co-operators, of true and
lasting freedom.
The final success of these institutions depends upon the worth of
the teachers. “But they are deserting the national schools and
colleges,” says the critic. So some of them are. It tries the faith of the
survivors. Have they the courage to stand alone? Are there enough
monied men to support the surviving national institutions? On the
correct answer to these questions depends the future of the national
institutions and with them the freedom of the country, and so far as I
can judge, there are teachers enough to stand the severest test and there
are monied men enough to support them. I know no organization that
has died for want of funds. Organizations die always for want of men,
i. e., honesty, efficiency and selfsacrifice. And it is my certain
knowledge that where there are teachers, pupils are not wanting.
But the pupils have perhaps the largest share of responsibility on
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

305

their shoulders. The future depends upon their ability, integrity,
application, and patriotism. The teachers cannot give what the pupils
have not. The teachers can help to ‘draw out’ in the pupils what they
have. If it were otherwise, if the teachers were capable of putting
something into their pupils, all the latter receiving instruction under
them will be alike, whereas we know as a matter of fact that no two
pupils have been yet known to be alike. The pupils must therefore
have initiative. They must cease to be mere imitators. They must learn
to think and act for themselves and yet be thoroughly obedient and
disciplined. The highest form of freedom carries with it the greatest
measure of discipline and humilty. Freedom that comes from
discipline and humility cannot be denied; unbridled licence is a sign of
vulgarity injurious alike to self and one’s neighbours.
Young India, 3-6-1926

397. NOTES
SERVANTS OF INDIA SOCIETY’S LOSS
I have received the following1 from the Servants of India Society
for publication :
I have not the slightest doubt that not only will the subscribers
excuse the unavoidable intrerruption in the publication of the two
journals, but that the Society will have the fullest sympathy of the
subscribers and numerous other friends like myself in the great loss
that the Society, or rather the public, have suffered by the destruction
of the two presses. I hope that the publication of the Servant of
India and the Dnyan Prakash will be soon resumed.

PATRIOTISM v. CAPITALISM
These two “isms” are no doubt contradictory or have been so
hitherto. But capital is totally different from capitalism and the
capitalist from both. Capital is necessary for all enterprise. Labour
itself may be described as a kind of capital. But even in the narrower
sense of money, some capital, be it ever so little, is necessary even for
labour’s enterprise. Therefore there is no contradiction between capital
and patriotism. A capitalist may or may not be patriotic. Khan
Bahadur Mohiuddin Ahmed, Registrar of Co-operative Societies in
Bihar, has pointed out a patriotic way to the capitalist. The Times of
India says :
On the occasion of the opening ceremony of the new building of the Motihari
Central Co-operative Bank, the Khan Bahadur, in his speech, distinguished harmful
from useful capitalism. He suggested that industrial activities should be divided into
two classes, one to be taken up by the capitalists and the other to be taken up on
1

Statement on the fire which had destroyed the two presses where the Society’s
journals were being printed

306

THE COLLECTED WORTKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

co-operative lines for the benefit of 90 per cent of the population in India.
Any industry based on agricultural produce such as cotton, sugar, oil-seeds,
wheat, etc., should be on a co-operative basis so that the producers could
secure the best value for their outturn. All sorts of mining and iron works,
leather and other large-scale industries, which do not exploit the
agriculturists, should be left to the capitalists so that they may also use their
capital for more production of wealth in the country rather than forexploiting
the farmers and thereby sapping the very source of wealth in India.

If the capitalists would follow the Khan Bahadur’s advice and
restrict the use of their capital for purposes beneficial alike to the
masses as also themselves, India’s poverty would soon be a thing of
the past. In the Khan Bahadur’s opinion :
Jute mills, sugar mills, cotton mills are all meant to exploit the agriculturists
and these exploited men are driven into the factories to work like slaves. The
jute millowners of Bengal did not show the least concern for the Bengal jutegrowers during the War when foreign export was closed. . . . The result of this
exploitation was that the jute-growers were reduced to poverty and jute
millowners realized cent per cent dividends.

R ESOURCEFULNESS

The manager of the Satyagraha Ashram tells me that he has
more orders than he can cope with for taklis. It is a healthy sign that
so many people want taklis. But if spinning is, and it is, an art, it must
evoke one’s resourcefulness. It is not possible to supply millions of
taklis in one centre. The virtue of spinning lies in its capacity to be
independent of central help. The aim of the All-India Spinners’
Association is to de-centralize everything at the earliest possible
moment. Taklis are being manufactured at the Ashram for those who
need inducement to make the effort. But it is an insturment that can
be and should be made by every-one for himself. A simple piece of
dried bamboo, a piece of broken slate, a knife, a little hammer, a small
file, and if possible a compass, is all that is necessary to make first
class taklis at one pice each. A bamboo takli can be made inside of
half an hour and gives just as good work as the steel instrument.
Those who will master the art must be resourceful. Let us remember
that spinning is the poor man’s art. It is his solace. The tools also of
that art must be within easy reach of the poorest. Let each boy and
girl be therefore taught to make the takli himself or herself. They will
take pleasure in making their own taklis and greater pleasure than
hitherto in spinning with taklis made by themselves.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

307

GOOD AND BAD

The Vice-Chairman of the Berhampur Municipal Council says
in his letter to the All-India Spinners’ Association :
Only boys’ schools have been supplied with 54 charkhas. Ten tolas of
yarn is being spun per month. Rs. 15 a month is paid to the spinning instructor. One period of 40 minutes is allotted for spinning in each school per day.

This is good in so far that the wheel has found a place in the
boys’ schools under the Berhampur Municipal Council. But it is
bad in that the output of yarn is too poor for the number of the
wheels. A boy can easily spin half a tola of 10 counts per half-hour.
That means 27 tolas per day from 54 wheels. And that would be 675
tolas per month of twenty-five working days. A spinning insturctor
who is satisfied with only 10 tolas per month out of 54 wheels does
not deserve to draw Rs. 15 per month of national money. I hope that
there is some mistake in the figures sent. For ten tolas per month
would be too little even for one wheel. The wheels are not ornamental
furniture. They are wealth-producing machines. And it is up to the
keepers to see that thay are not left idle. Every spinning instructor
should deem it a point of honour to earn his wages by ensuring
production enough to pay them. And this he can do easily when he
has a large class and he does not mind himself carding and making
slivers for the boys. It is the best way of interesting and instructing his
pupils in the art of spinning. Let it be remembered that spinning
includes carding and ginning. And carding and ginning are processes
that fetch more money per day than spinning.
APRIL F IGURES
1

The following are the figures for production and sale of khadi
during the month of April :
The Andhra figures are incomplete and to some extent even the
Karnatak figures. The Bombay figure includes only those of AllIndia Khadi Bhandar, Charkhasangh Bhandar and the Sandhurst Road
Khadi Shop. I do wish we could make the figures complete for all the
provinces.
Young India, 3-6-1926

1

308

Not reproduced here
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

398. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU

1

THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1926
DEAR MOTILALJI,
2

Here is a copy of Vithalbhai’s reply to a copy of your letter
which I sent him.
I hope you are gaining by your stay in Mussoorie.
Yours sincerely,

Encl. 1
P ANDIT MOTILALJI NEHRU
MUSSOORIE
From a photostat : S.N. 11318

399. LETTER TO V. J. PATEL
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1926
DEAR VITTHALBHAI,
3

I have your letter . I am again sending a copy of your letter to
Motilalji. I want to be quite clear as to the course to be adopted
before I announce your gift in the press.
I have told Devdas that he is a free agent. I think that he will be
discharged from the Hospital today and is likely to go to Mussoorie to
join Jamnalalji. I suppose Simla atmosphere is too strong for him.
99 chances to one I am not going to Finland.
More later.
Yours sincerely,

HON. V. J. P ATEL
S UKHDALE
S IMLA
From a photostat : S.N. 11319

1
2
3

In reply to the addressee’s letter dated 22-5-1926 (S.N. 11313)
Dated 1-6-1926 (S.N. 11316)
Dated 1-6-1926 (S.N. 11316)

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

309

400. LETTER TO URMILA DEVI
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1926
MY DEAR SISTER,

You have sent me a doleful letter. I am glad however that
ailing sister has passed away. She must have suffered tortures
during her last months. But you shock me by the news you give me
about the rest of the family. I do wish that Mr. Das will go to
England and have prolonged rest. I am writing to Basanti Devi
as also to Mr. Das. What is the matter with Bhaskar? How is Bhombol
getting on? May God give you the peace of mind that you need so
much at this time of toil and anxiety. Do keep me informed from
time to time.
99 chances to one I am not going to Finland. Perhaps you
know that Devdas underwent an operation for appendicitis. He is
quite all right now. Probably, he is being discharged today. He will
go to Mussoorie for convalescence. Jamnalalji is staying in Mussoorie.
He will join him there. How is the Hospital getting on?
S RIMATI URMILA DEVI
From a photostat : S.N. 19591

401. LETTER TO JUSTICE P. R. DAS
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I was shocked to hear from Urmila Devi that you had very
serious heart trouble. I hope however that the worst is over and that
you are quite yourself again. Urmila Devi tells me you have been
strongly advised to go to England and take some rest there. Whether
you go to England or not, or elsewhere, I do hope you will take rest
for a long time and avoid all anxiety and strain.
Yours sincerely,

JUSTICE P. R. D AS
P ATNA
From a photostat : S.N. 19587

310

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

402. LETTER TO BASANTI DEVI
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1926
MY DEAR SISTER,

Urmila Devi gives me a chapter of sorrows. She tells me that
Justice Das had serious heart trouble, that Mony is ailing and losing
strength and that Bhaskar is dangerously ill. You know that my
sympathies are all with you. What is the matter with Bhaskar? Do
please let me have a line.
How are you yourself keeping? Do tell me everything about
Bhombol. I take it Baby is there and I hope that she is preserving her
philosophic firmness.
From a photostat : S.N. 19589

403. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1926
DEAR SATIS BABU,

Mr. Muhen Hasan Chaman of Kaira, Kutch, tells me that he has
applied to you for some time now for the Pratishthan travelling
charkha to be sent to him by value payable post. He has not received
the same yet. Will you please attend? If you cannot trace his letter
you may regard this as the letter of application and send. No further
address beyond what I have given is necessary.
You will tell me in due course what was the final result of your
effort with Mr. Birla.
Yours,
From a microfilm : S.N. 19590

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

311

404. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I could not trace your previous letter. If you
will kindly write to me again putting the questions that you did in
your previous letters, I shall try to answer your questions.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S JT. A NAND T. H INGORANI
C/ O S JT. G OBINDSING A. I SRANI
NEAR GHAR C ANAL
LARKANA
S IND
From a microf ilm. Courte sy: Nation al Archiv es of India and Anand
T. Hingor ani

405. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Thursday, June 3, 1926
BHAI BRIJKRISHNA,

I have your letter today. I am sorry and surprised. There was a
letter and a telegram from you regarding Devdas. The telegram was
replied to by wire, and I asked Mahadev to inform [you] about
Devdas’s condition. I do not remember any other correspondence
nor am I displeased with anything you did. Surely there ought to be
some reason for displeasure and you have given me none. I have told
you and I repeat that you may come to the Ashram whenever you
please.
Devdas will be discharged from the hospital by tomorrow, and
will straightway proceed to Mussoorie. If you are still there you can
see him on his way to Mussoorie, as he will certainly inform you. You
need not delay coming here just in order to see Devdas. My visit to
Finland is 99 per cent cancelled.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 2352

312

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

406. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Thursday [June 3, 1926]

1

CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have not been able to write to you at all of late. But I have
been doing what needs to be done. Your health will of course improve
there gradually. But it would be best to go to Panchgani. Pattani has
written me a very kind letter saying that I should have no hesitation at
all in using his bungalow in July. Still I feel that we should not use his
bungalow for too long. Hence, I have declined his offer. I have
decided not to go to Finland. I have kept only one option open, that
2
is, I will go if by my not going Mr. Paul , who sent the invitation, is
embarrassed in any way. But I see no reason why he should be.
Therefore, you call take it that I shall not be going. I do wish this to
be my last letter to you at Deolali. Swami is a fast worker and so I do
not think the matter will take too long.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujara ti origin al: Pyarel al Papers . Nehru Memori al Museum and
Librar y. Courte sy: Belade vi Nayyar and Dr. Sushil a Nayyar

407. LETTER TO JAYANTILAL
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Thursday, June 3, 1926
BHAISHRI JAYANTILAL,

I have your letter. I do not know if you interpret a lovemarriage in a way contrary to mine. But I would regard as desirable a
marriage between a man and woman who have maintained pure
relations and wish to be united in wedlock, when the union does not
involve a breach of propriety. I cannot understand how in the case of
a true love-marriage one partner can after the other’s death ever think
at all of remarriage. But I do believe that we should not oppose a
virgin widow desiring to marry. I would regard the intermingling of
1
2

From the postmark
K. T. Paul; vide “Letter to K. T. Paul”, 30-5-1926.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

313

the four varnas as needless and undesirable as also marriages within
the gotra, the principle being that there cannot be too much
circumscription in regard to marriage.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 19592

408. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 4, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. It was certainly very good and generous on
the part of Mr. Kelkar to offer the use of the Kesari and the Mahratta
presses. You will please ask someone to pass on to me any appeal that
you may make for funds and I shall try to do what I can as a matter of
simple duty.
Yours sincerely,

R T. H ON. V. S. S RINIVASA S ASTRI
S ERVANTS OF INDIA S OCIETY
P OONA C ITY
From a photostat : S.N. 12052

409. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 4, 1926
MY DEAR HENRY,

I have your two letters. You have given me a full budget of
family news which I appreciate although the news is all about illnesses.
Of Maud’s illness, I knew all from her own letter and also Matar’s. I
hope they are both now well and strong. With Millie it is her courage
which keeps her up and I know that it will stand her in good stead for
many a year to come. Please tell Waldo not to keep me in suspense
for a long time but make some time if he cannot find it for giving me
a long letter. He must write to me as to an old friend and bed-fellow,
not a stranger whom he knows only by name. The intricacies of his
examinations, I do not understand. But I know that he can give a
good account of himself being your son.
314

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Devdas evidently got jealous of Maud. He too therefore
developed appendicitis, underwent an operation on the other day and
was discharged as cured yesterday. Miss Slade, otherwise Mirabai, is
standing this hot season exceedingly well. She has become a very
good spinner. She cards her own cotton. Andrews has been with us
for the last five or six days. He will probably leave tomorrow for
Kotgarh where he is going to see Stokes. Ramdas is hawking khadi
and seems to like it well.
I was delighted to receive to your copy of the Bhagavad Gita
translations. I note your careful instructions. I am keeping it under
lock and key. You will have the book back sent duly insured as soon
as I have made a copy.
99 to one I am not going to Finland. But if I do go and if I
come to London naturally I shall stay with you unless you wanted me
to stay elsewhere for public or other reasons.
Yours sincerely,

HENRY S. L. P OLAK, E SQ.
42. 47 & 48, DANES INN HOUSE
265, STRAND, L ONDON, W. C. 2.
From a photostat: S. N. 19593

410. LETTER TO S. SHANKER
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 4, 1926,
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. You can simplify your life by reducing your
wants consistently with the retention of your health. You can simplify
your dress. You can cultivate the habit of going to bed earlier, getting
up at four o’clock in the morning, offering prayers just before
retiring to bed and after rising from it. You can spin regularly for at
least half an hour a day. Study Hindi and Sanskrit and read clean
literature. Spinning includeds carding and ginning. You can
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

315

befriend the so-called untouchables.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S. S HANKER
NO. 3 TOP F LOOR
NARAYAN BUILDING
NIAGAM R OAD
DADAR, B OMBAY NO. 14
From a microfilm: S. N. 19594

411. LETTER TO NAMUDURY VENKATRAO
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 4, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I am sorry to hear of your loss. I am quite
clear in my mind that you should not think of remarrying in any
circumstance whatsoever. And, if you remain firm in your resolve,
God will give you strength to resist any temptation that might come
in your way to remarry.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. N AMUDURY VENKATRAO
BHATNAVILLE
AMALAPURAM TALUQ
GODAVARI DT.
From a microfilm: S. N. 19595

412. LETTER TO A MUSLIM LEADER
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 4, 1926
BHAISAHEB,

For many days now I have been thinking of writing to you. I
had no intention of writing in English , and have none now. I wanted
to write at length, and it is hard for me to write such a long letter in
the Urdu script. This I am getting written in the Urdu Script by a
brother of an Ashram inmate. I have your message from Brother
Andrews. I wanted to write to you even before I got the message, in
316

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

fact since the time Alibhai went to Mecca. Regarding the HinduMuslim question I have deliberately refrained form saying anything.
What can I write? To whom can I tell the tale of my woe? I know
very well that I have no influence whatsoever over the quarrelling
elements. Bhai Shaukat Ali and Manzur Ali spoke to me at length
about your grief, and I have also been given to understand that you
were rather pained at my silence. Since I am unable to bring about a
compromise what is the good of my writing? I cannot bring myself to
believe the various Press reports. I am asked to make a public
statement that Malaviyaji and others are enemies of the Muslims, the
Hindus ask me to make a similar statement regarding the Muslim
leaders. How can I write something which I do not believe? I cannot
accept that Malaviyaji and others are enemies of the Muslims; this
does not however mean I approve of everything they do. Nor can I
agree to calling Mahomed Ali an enemy of the Hindus. In his case,
too, I do not approve of all he does. I am asked to state my opinion
1
regarding the Calcutta affair. What opinion can I give out? I have no
occult power by which to know who started the trouble in Calcutta and
whose crime was heavier. But I do know that the parties are both
prejudiced against each other, they look only for each other’s faults
and have lost mutual trust. In the circumstances there is no other way
for a person like me but to keep my peace. I cannot tolerate the
killing of even a single Muslim or Hindu or for that matter of any
human being. Nor can I tolerate the destruction of a mosque or a
temple or a church. It is my belief that the same God that dwells in
the heart of a Hindu is enshrined in the heart of every other person.
And I also believe that a temple belongs to God as much as a mosque.
I can never agree to the rule of blood for blood and temple for a
mosque. But who listens to me? It is my firm belief, however, that
God does not approve of this rule of blood and temple for a mosque.
A day will come when Hindus and Muslims will own their guilt, feel
sorry for their behaviour and unite with each other. This is the
culmination that I wish to witness in my life-time. And I always pray
to God to recall me from this world if I am not to see the light of that
day. My desire to live springs solely from this hope. And I want you
1

here were two outbursts of communal rioting in Calcutta during April and
May 1926.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

317

too to cherish this hope with me and never despair.
Brother Andrews tells me about your proposal that Brother
Stokes and he should invite, on their own, a few Hindus and Muslims
and attempt a reconciliation. I am afraid their efforts cannot achieve
this task. Nor is the time ripe to bring the Hindus and Muslims
together in this way. You alone can bring them together when the
time comes. Those Muslims who are regarded as enemies of the
Hindus as well as those Hindus that are supposed to be Muslim-haters
must also be invited to this conference. What good can mere
discussions bring when there is mutual mistrust and when people
speak one thing and think another in their hearts?
I hope you are in Mussoorie and keeping well.
From a photostat of the Urdu (Devanagari script): S. N. 11069

413. LETTER TO A. S. DAVID
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 5, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I am not going to Finland. You may come
to see me any time you like. But your letter under reply frigh-tens
me a bit. Your desire to accompany me to Finland and to have letters
of introduction do not show an attitude of satisfaction withmere
bread-labour. And what I want this Ashram to stand for is breadlabour. However, you may come whenever you like to see things for
yourself. I would only ask you not to make any final disposals so that
you might not feel depressed if the Ashram proves disappointing for
you because the very first thing you will commence with here would
be the scavenging work and processes connected with cotton.
Yours sincerely,

A. S. DAVID, E SQ.
C IVIL LINES
1
S ITAPUR, O UDH
From a photostat: S. N. 10917

1

318

Now a part of Uttar Pradesh
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

414. LETTER TO PERIN CAPTAIN
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 5, 1926
I have neglected your letter for a few days. Please give me some
1
more particulars about the Him.. School, Matunga. What is the
attendance? How did it come under the protection of the Stree
Sabha? Who is on the committee that is looking after the School?
How many teachers are there? Who is the headmaster? Are there any
girls in the school? And are the children doing any spinning? If so,
what is the monthly output? Do they have the takli or the wheel?
And please Add such other information as you may think necessary.
You may treat the Finland visit as off. Mr. Andrews will be
leaving probably today for Delhi.
Yours.

MRS. P ERIN C APTAIN
ISLAM C LUB BUILDING
C HAUPATI
[BOMBAY]
From a microfilm: S. N. 19596

415. LETTER TO PRANJIVANDAS J. MEHTA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 5, 1926
BHAISHRI PRANJIVAN,
2

Chi. Jeki’s letter is sent with this. I do not understand all she
writes. Whatever may be her faults you must not keep her wihout a
letter. That is what I feel.
My trip to Finland is as good as cancelled. Write to me about
3
your health. I am in excellent health. I had a letter from Ratilal
today, which is also sent herewith. I fear that he might not come
1
2
3

The source has a blank here.
Addressee’s daughter
Addressee’s son

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

319

here. He would feel some kind of restraint here. As he would not
come here, so would he not go to Manilal either. Even then I would
keep on writing to him.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 19597

416. LETTER TO JAYAKUNWAR MANILAL DOCTOR
ASHRAM,

June 5, 1926,
CHI. JEKI,
1

Received your letter. I am sending it to Doctor . I shall write to
you on hearing from him. The money which I have asked to be sent
to you has nothing to do with the school work. I will send that letter
to you, if I have not torn it up. I shall look for it and, if it is there,
shall send it to you. Even now Doctor’s health can’t be considered
good. He stammers a little and can hardly sign his name. A mere
look at his face does not reveal any illness. These are the news. It is
pointless, in my view, for Bhai Manilal to strive to get into the Council.
Nor do I see any gain in going out of India. I consider it right to
settle down here and bear all the hardships that come his way. Why
suppose that hardships will be his lot for ever?
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S. N. 19598

417. LETTER TO AMRITLAL
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 5, 1926,
BHAISHRI AMRITLAL,

Your letter. You should write to your sister’s husband and her
father-in-law saying that you could not send her to them and infrom
them of all the hardships faced by her. Before you do this, you have
to ascertain from her what she really wishes to do, because she may
have run away impulsively and might repent it later or she might
become a victim of passion and do some thing wrong. It would
perhaps be better if she realizes all this and returns to her husband and
submits to all hardships that may befall her. Thus no definite answer
can be given to your question because you alone can take a right
1

320

Addresses’s father
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

decision since you know the temperament of your sister, her husband
and his parents. I can only say that if your sister does not want to go
to her husband’s people you must stand by her. You may not
compel her to return there.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S. N. 19599

418. LETTER TO LAKSHMIDAS PURUSHOTTAM ASAR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 5, 1926,
CHI. LAKSHMIDAS,

It is good that you left immediately. This time you looked so
weak that I could not bear the sight. True economy consists in resting
for a month or two, recouping your health and then plunging into
work. Write to me regularly about your health. Walk as much as
your physique will permit. Only yesterday I heard that M. . . does not
play fair with Gokibehn and has fallen into stealing. I had strongly
disapproved of her staying there. So I advised Velabehn to go to
Bombay at the earliest and bring the girl back. Gokibehn is willing to
send her back.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 19600

419. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 5, 1926
CHI. JAMNALAL,

You must have got the telegram I sent you yesterday.
Lakshmidas must have settled down there. His health would not rally
here. He cannot do without work. I have therefore decided to send
him to you so that he may rest along with Devdas. I have come to the
conclusion that there is no point in keeping Lakshmidas here no
matter how long Devdas stays there. There must be plenty of doctors
in Mussoorie. If you feel that Lakshmidas must consult one, let him
do so.
You must have learnt that Girdhari has been operated on for
fistula. I believe he will get much relief. It is good that he was
operated on in time.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

321

The visit to Finland has almost been called off. It is a different
matter if I have to reconsider this because of the embarrassment it
may cause to Mr. Paul. But the chances of such reconsideration are
one in a hundred. I believe you will arrive by the 22nd at the latest.
If no one there is put to any inconvenience it is good that Lakshmidas
stays there for quite some time. It is absolutely necessary that he
recovers completely.

420. LOSS SUFFERED BY SERVANTS OF INDIA SOCIETY
A terrible fire broke out last week in the historic Kibewada area
in Poona and two printing presses, Dnyan Prakash and Aryabhooshan,
owned by the Servants of India Society, were completely destroyed.
This is a loss to the people as much as to the Society. Dnyan Prakash
was a press as old as eighty years and the names of leaders like
Chiplunkar, Agarkar and Lokmanya Tilak were associated with the
Aryabhooshan Press, through which they had all started their public
work. We may, therefore, say that the fire has destroyed two priceless
memorials. Among other things, many valuable books, manuscripts
of books and some considerable literature collected for a biography
of the late Gokhale were lost in this fire.
The immediate effect of this loss will be that two journals,
Servant of India and Dnyan Prakash will not come out for some time.
We may hope that readers will not mind this, and will also show their
full sympathy for the Society by offering as much help as they can.
We are glad to note in this connection that workers of both the presses
have forgone their claim to bonus amounting to as much as eight
thousand rupees, and that many other presses have come forward to
offer immediate help to the Society.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 6-6-1926

322

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

421. PROBLEM OF NON-VIOLENCE
1

A gentleman writes as follows :
Such questions are frequently raised. They cannot be brushed
aside, either, as being trivial. These problems have been discussed
both in the West and the East in books dealing with the deeper
meaning of life. In my humble view, there is only one solution to
these problems, since they all arise from the same cause. The actions
mentioned above certainly involve violence, for every motion or
action involves it and, therefore, no action is altogether innocent. The
difference between one action and another lies only in the degree of
violence involved in either. The very association of the atman with
the body rests on violence. Every sin is a form of violence, and
complete freedom from sin is possible only with the deliverance of the
atman from the body. A human being, therefore, may keep perfect
non-violence as his or her ideal and strive to follow it as completely as
possible. But no matter how near it he reaches, he will find some
degree of violence unavoidable, in breathing or eating, for instance.
There is life in each grain which we consume. When, therefore, we
adopt a vegetarian diet and abstain from non-vegetarian food we
cannot claim that we completely avoid violence. But we prefer the
former and regard the violence involved in it as inescapable. This is
why eating for pleasure must never be indulged in. We should eat
only in order that we may live, and should live only to realize the self.
If our living for this purpose involves any violence, we may be a party
to it as being unable to escape it. We can now see that if, in spite of
all our precautions, there are germs in the water and bugs [in the
furniture], we may do whatever we find necessary to get rid of them. I
do not believe that it is a divine law that everyone should act in the
same way at certain times and in certain circumstances. Non-violence
is a quality of the heart. Whether there is violence or non-violence in
our actions can be judged only by reference to the spirit behind them.
Everyone, therefore, who regards the observance of non-violence as a
moral duty should guide his actions by the principle stated above. I
know that there is a flaw in this reply. One may commit violence as
much as one chooses and then, deceiving oneself and the world,
justify one’s actions with the plea of their being unvaoidable. This
1
The letter is not translated here. The correspondent had asked for Gandhiji’s
views about the impossibility of observing perfect non-violence in practical life,
since destruction of insects could never be completely avoided.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

323

article is not meant for such persons. It is addressed only to those
who believe in the principle of non-violence and are assailed by moral
doubts from time to time. Such persons will commit even unavoidable
violence most hesitatingly, and limit, not expand, the scope of their
activities, so much so that they will not use any of their powers for selfish ends. They will use all their energies for public service,
dedicating to God everything they do. All the gifts and abilities of a
good man, that is, a non-violent, compassionate man, are for service to
others. There is violence always in the attachment to one’s ego.
When doing anything, one must ask oneself this question : “Is my
action inspired by egoistic attachment?”
If there is no such
attachment, then there is no violence.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 6-6-1926

422. NOTES
A COMPLAINT
1

A gentleman writes as follows :
If the friend who makes this complaint had been reading his
Navajivan carefully, he would not have found it necessary to
complain as he has done. He has requested a reply in the columns of
Navajivan. Young India acknowledges the subscription or
contribution from every member by name, and a summary is
published in Navajivan from time to time. From that everyone can
know the number of members in the Spinners’ Association.
Detailed information about its working is also published occasionally
in Navajivan. Still, I think it necessary to explain some points here.
The Association’s office has not yet received yarn in such quantity
that it can directly help to reduce the price of khadi; but indirectly the
yarn received has had so great an effect that throughout the country
the quality of yarn which the Association gets people to spin for
payment of has improved. The yarn which is received as voluntary
gift from members has proved extremely useful as a means of testing
the other yarn received. The yarn which is received as voluntary gift
from members has proved extremely useful as a means of testing the
1

The letter is not translated here. The correspondent wanted to know full
particulars of the financial position of the Spinners’ Association.

324

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

other yarn received and keeping a check on its quality. But the
quantity of such yarn received as gift by the Spinners’ Association is
so little, relatively speaking, that the khadi made from it will reach a
very small number. That is why the khadi made from it has had to be
mixed with that made from other yarn; not a single piece of it has
been given away to any member of the office staff. The members pay
for the khadi which they require, and some of them get it woven from
yarn spun by themselves. If those who spin voluntarily keep with
themselves the yarn which they have spun, get it woven and gift the
cloth to someone without giving publicity to their act, then the
purpose which can be served by an organized action will suffer or be
defeated altogether, and the effort being made to improve the quality
of yarn will have to be given up. The office expenses of the
Association do not exceed its income. When they do, I myself would
dissolve it or leave it. I must admit, though, that the expenses cannot
be met from the quantity of yarn it receives as gift. The balance is
met from other contributions in cash. If, however, the membership of
the Association increases from the present number of four thousand
to four crores, the expenses of the office can be met from the yarn
contributed by them. Hundreds of young men would then earn their
livelihood by working in the office and the increase in the number
would also have considerable and direct effect on the price of khadi.
IS THIS THE R IGHT METHOD OF C OW-PROTECTION?
1

A worker in the cause of cow-protection writes as follows :
This is a sorry state of affairs. Probably similar conditions
prevail in many other goshals. One thousand five hundred goshalas
is not a small number. If all of them are run well and there is one
common organization for them, they can maintain thousands of
cattle-heads and increase the national wealth to the tune of crores of
rupees, and we would discover the best method of cow-protection.
There ought not to be a loss of Rs. 11,000 in the goshala referred to
by the correspondent. Not a single calf ought to be given away as a
gift. If this same goshala were turned into a model dairy, the people
of the village would get milk and ghee at a low price, and if, at the
1

The letter is not translated here. The correspondent had visited goshala and
described the uneconomic way in which it was run.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

325

same time, a tannery were also started side by side, the people would
get shoes and other needed articles of leather. As things are, in spite
of good money being spent, not a single cow is saved from the
slaughter-house. In this way, the work of goshalas is becoming very
limited in its scope. Running a goshala has come to mean looking
after infirm cattle in a perfunctory manner.
If we wish to start a business, we would engage efficient workers
and pay them. If the business was running at a loss, we would try to
find out the reasons, would effect some improvement every day and
not rest till we had succeeded in stopping the loss. The aim in
running a goshala is not merely to provide a small shed for cattle; it is
to discharge the sacred duty of cow-protection. But we get this work
done mostly through inexperienced men who do it in their spare time.
Such persons deceive themselves and believe that they are doing some
service; those who give the money deceive themselves by believing
that the cause of cow-protection is served, and in this way hundreds of
thousands of rupees are thrown away in the name of religion. If my
correspondent had furnished the following particulars, I would have
made further inquiries concerning the goshala.
(1) The number of infirm cattle.
(2) The number of milch cows and buffaloes.
(3) The daily yield of milk.
(4) The number of calves—male and female.
(5) The number of bullocks and he-buffaloes.
(6) The area of land.
(7) Is the goshala located in the village or away from it?
(8) The number of deaths among the cattle.
(9) Arrangements for disposal of cattle which die.
P ERPETRATING “ADHARMA” IN THE NAME OF DHARMA

Shri Rameshwardas Birla donated Rs. 2,500 for a temple for
Antyajas at Amreli and a beautiful temple was erected. An image of
Lord Lakshminarayana was installed in the temple and it was duly
opened to the public. The report of this event which I have received
contains the following information.
The Brahmins cruelly harassed the priest who officiated at the
326

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

cere-mony, though the gentleman on whose behalf they
performed it did not belong to the untouchable class. At the
time of this ceremony for the opening of a temple for Antyajas,
the latter were made to sit in a separate enclosure. Even the gifts
offered to the priest did not come from Antyajas nor the money
with which the temple was erected. The only reason, therefore,
for punishing the priest was that the temple was for the use of
Antyajas. For this offence, he had to get his moustaches shaved
off and to perform atonement.
I cannot compliment the priest for thus forgetting his selfrespect. If the ceremony of invoking the presence of God in the
image was sacred act, the subsequent atonement was not atonement,
but an act of sin. Even if the priest was afterwards boycotted by his
community, what would he have lost in consequence? No one need
be afraid now of the bogey of expulsion from one’s community.
Those who have courageously let themselves be boycotted have not
only suffered nothing thereby but have actually found themselves free
1
from unnecessary bonds. Says Brahmanand :
Embark not on a venture without knowing;
Having gone to the field of battle, yield not to fear;
He who rushes to the field, courage on his face,
And then flees from battle,
What good his living, carrying his lustreless face among men?
How true are these words in the present case? I had not
expected that the Brahmins of a progressive town like Amreli would
display so much ignorance, such fanaticism.
If some Brahmins of Amreli disgraced Hinduism in this manner,
there were also some who brought credit to it, for at the time of the
installation of the image Hindus from all communities had attended
the function. There were Brahmins, Vanias, Luhars, Sutars, Kanbis
and others. There were some officials too. Other people, besides
Antyajas, are also seen benefiting from this temple built specially for
the latter. Some Brahmins have even agreed to read the Bhagavata
and other holy books in the temple. It remains to be seen what effect
that boycott has on these other Brahmins.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 6-6-1926
1

A Gujarati poet

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

327

423. LETTER TO K. T. PAUL
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 6, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter and the original letters from the Committee of
arrangements. The letters make it clear to me that the idea of
invitation was prompted by you out of your great goodwill towards
me and your exaggerated notion of my influence over people
especially the young mind. But I feel more than ever convinced that
the time is not yet for me to leave India on such pretext as is furnished
by the correspondence before me. The call to go out of India for
service has got to be pressing and overwhelming. The correspondence
is really a response to your desire for my presence at the deliberations
at Helsingfors. But I know my own limitations and recognize the
difficulties in the way of my message going straight home. If there is
any power in my message it would be felt without the physical
contact.
I know that my decision will disappoint you but it has been my
lot in life to disappoint loving friends. But I know that these
disappointments have done good rather than harm. You will please
forgive me for all the trouble that you have been put to on my
account and ask for forgivness from friends at Helsingfors who might
have expected my presence there. Needless to say my prayers will
attend your deliberations and my best wishes accompany you on your
voyage.
I return the original letters.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat : S.N. 11357

328

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

424. LETTER TO V. SUNDARAM
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 6, 1926
MY DEAR SUNDRAM,

It was a joy to receive your letter, for, I have often thought of
you and a greater joy still to find that you were helping Mr. Stokes.
What about the hereditary village wardenship? Who is taking your
place? I hope that your eyes will be completely cured by your stay
on the hills.
Your Hindi writing is very good. It is better than my Tamil
speech but it admits of much improvement. Your own name is not
correctly spelt. The words of the hymn you have copied are
beautiful. I am not writing separately to Savitri. Hers also is a good
effort. But she must do much better.
Devdas is quite all right. He was discharged three days ago
from the Hospital.
Yours,

S JT. V. S UNDARAM
C/ O S. E. S TOKES, E SQ.
KOTGARH
S IMLA HILLS
From a microfilm : S.N. 19602

425. LETTER TO MOTIBEHN CHOKSI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Sunday [June 6, 1926]

1

CHI. MOTI,

I have your letter. The handwriting can this time be said to be
good. If you make it a habit to write something regularly, however
little it may be, your handwriting will improve. To a question similar
to the one you have asked a reply is given in the current issue of
Navajivan. Is there no middle way betwen killing of bugs and
breeding them? We are not bound to do the latter, but we have no
right to kill them. So we may pick them up and leave them at a
1

From the postmark

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

329

distance. I shall hand over your letter itself to Manibehn. I have sent
Laxmidas to Mussoorie as soon as he arrived here. In order to fetch
Mani, Velabehn left for Bombay with Ramdas who was also going
there. On her way back she will stay for a day with you. Manibehn
says that the book sent for her has not reached her yet.
Blessings from

BAPU
S UKANYA NAJUKLAL C HOKSI
R ASHTRIYA KELAVANI MANDAL
BROACH
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 12128-A

426. TELEGRAM TO K. T. PAUL
June 7, 1926
K. T. P AUL
THOTTAM
S ALEM
THANKS LETTER. AFTER CAREFUL PRAYERFUL
FINAL

CONCLUSION

IS

NOT

TO

GO

CONSIDERATION

MY

FINLAND

GANDHI
From a photostat : S.N. 11358

427. LETTER TO DR. B. S. MOONJE
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 7, 1926
DEAR DR. MOONJE,

I have your letter. You have certainly given me a common
ground for action. But the whole conception being yours, how shall I
get it executed by others? If you write something to make the
learning of grammar easy and do not preach there through your
philosophy, and the text is passed by other Sanskritists, I shall
undertake to get it printed and circulated at cost price. Or if you know
anyone who has understood your ideas and will write the grammar but
will require financial assistance, I shall apply to him and try to secure
his services. In any case what little is possible is being done through
the Gujarat Vidyapith. But I own that it is nothing compared to what
330

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

can be accomplished if Sanskrit study can be made demonstrably
easy. Personally I consider it to be easy enough. It would not increase
the tremendous strain put upon our poor nerves by the unnatural
English study. I call the present English study unnatural because it
displaces the vernacular.
Yours sincerely
From a photostat: S. N. 19603

428. INTERVIEW ON COLOUR BAR BILL
AHMEDABAD,

[On or before June 8, 1926]

1

2

Interviewed regarding the recent communique of the Government of India on
the Colour Bar Bill, Mahatma Gandhi said:

The assurance given in the communique in my opinion takes us
no further than we were before it. The Union Government have
indeed repeatedly said that they have no present intention of
extending the scope of the Bill beyond the position that existed prior
to the judgment in Rex v. Hildick Smith. Opponents of the Bill,
however, attack it on the principle that the enabling powers under it go
much beyond the position anterior to the judgment and that it can be
made applicable not merely to the natives of the soil but to Indians
also. Nor is it possible to derive any comfort from the fact that when
the scope of the Regulations to be framed thereunder is extended, all
parties in the Union will be enabled to make representations. The Bill
does not take away the right of petition, and one knows by this time
the fact of the representations by parties without power to enforce
their will. I wonder if this assurance means that the party without the
Union, namely the Government of India, will have no right of
representation.
The Bombay Chronicle, 9-6-1926

1
2

From the correspondent’s date line
Vide “Valueless Assurance”, 10-6-1926.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

331

429. LETTER TO JANAKDHARI PRASAD
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 8, 1926
DEAR JANAKDHARI BABU,

I was delighted to receive your letter after such a prolonged
interval. I note the difficulties the school is going through. Faith has
no limitation of time. That which is limited by time is not faith at all.
If therefore you have bondless faith in your mission, I have not a
shadow of doubt that it will succeed, the cause being right.
With reference to the two difficulties my prescription is the
same. At the present moment, the atmosphere has become so impure
that I cannot advise the formaiton of any new party or group. Those
of us who do not believe in aggressiveness with regard to HinduMuslim unity, and do not believe in Council-entry in any shape or
form must each one remain true to our ideal. We do not need any
organization to keep up our spirits. Those who need that outward
help are wanting in deep conviction and I am anxious that only those
who have deep and abiding conviction should remain out. For, it may
be that there are still greater trials in store for us. Those, therefore,
who have weak faith will then succumb. It will be the indomitable
remnant that will carry the day in the end, because, I see no freedom
expect through non-co-operation. My faith in it is growing with time.
I hope you are keeping excellent health.
Yours sincerely,
GANDHI

M. K.
S JT. J ANAKDHARI P RASAD
S HRI GANDHI VIDYALAYA
P. O. HAJIPUR
DT. M UZAFFARPUR
From a photostat: G. N. 50; also S. N. 19604

430. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 8, 1926
MY DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. Certainly write for The Bombay Chronicle. I
share your view for the most part. But education may not be the only
remedy. If it is the only remedy unity must wait for a long time.
332

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

What is needed is the education of the heart. After all, in my opinion,
the hands that fight may be the hands of the goondas but the brains
behind them are the brains of educated Hindus and Mussalmans. If
that education is to be multiplied, heaven help Hindusthan. But there
can be no harm whatsoever in your writing for the paper. And, there
certainly will be no harm if you do not write at all. You may let
things simmer down a bit. There is no room for the time being for
any solution except that of the cock fight.
Ramdas was here for a day. He went over to Bombay to see
Devdas and threatens to get down at Baroda on his return to see you
and pay his respects.
He says, but for you, he could have done nothing for the sale of
his khadi. A white beard has its charm all its own.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S. N. 9556

431. LETTER TO RUTH S. ALEXANDER
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 8, 1926
DEAR SISTER,

Mr. Andrews has brought me your precious letter. It revives old
1
and sacred memories. Kallenbach has not yet come to me though he
is threatening always. I dare say one fine morning I shall find a cable
from him saying he has started.
Do you ever see Young India? I call it my weekly letter
tofriends. Please remember me to Mr. Alexander. Mr. Andrews has
told me how helpful he was in his mission.
Yours sincerely,

MRS. R UTH S. A LEXANDER
HEILBRON
LEIGHTON R OAD
S T. J AMES, C.P.
From a photostat : S.N. 10766

1

A German architect, devoted friend and co-worker of Gandhiji in South Africa

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

333

432. LETTER TO PYARELAL NAYYAR
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 8, 1926
MY DEAR PYARELAL,

You have been silent of late. I am sending by registered post
one copy of the spinning essay and the notes you have left here. I
want you to go through the copy as quickly as you can, making your
corrections in the body of the essay.
It is finally settled that I am not going to Finland. I hope you
are keeping good health and daily improving as you must. Chhotalal
has returned after his wanderings. He is not yet quite himself.
Yours,
From a microfilm : S.N. 19605

433. LETTER TO H. K. VEERANNA GOWDH
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 8, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

No permission is necessary for dedicating your work to me. But
if you do dedicate it to me please do not say that you have obtained
my permission. I cannot give it without reading the book and if you
send it to me, I should have no time to read it.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. H. K. V EERANNA GOWDH
C HANNAPATNA
From a microfilm : S.N. 19606

434. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Tuesday, June 8, 1926
BHAI GHANSHYAMDASJI,

I have your letter. So far Khadi Pratishthan has been given not
less than Rs. 70,000 through the Charkha Sangh. As far as I
334

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

remember Rs. 25,000 have been given to Abhoy Ashram and Rs.
6,000 to the Pravartak Sangh. Many small sums have also been paid.
All that would approximately amount to Rupees one and a quarter
lakh. Even more would be granted to Bengal. I know the need of
Khadi Pratishthan is great. Satis Babu wants to enlarge his activities
considerably and I would like him to. But there is very little money
with the Charkha Sangh today. So whatever is possible through the
Charkha Sangh will be done, but do give to Satis Babu as much as you
can.
What shall I say about the Councils? There are fundamental
differences between me and Malaviyaji on this subject. I can only say
that if you believe that your entering the Council would benefit the
people you should definitely do so. Opposition to the Swaraj Party
and the temptation of gaining political education are both irrelevant
from the moral angle. If you have a feeling that you have vowed in
my presence not to enter the Council get rid of that impression. No
such restraint was accepted categorically. You should feel free from
any obligation and decide your stand about going to the Council
from a moral standpoint, that is, with public service in view.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From the Hindi original : C.W. 6128. Courtesy : G. D. Birla

435. LETTER TO SHANTIKUMAR MORARJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Tuesday, June 8, 1926
BHAI SHANTIKUMAR,

I have read your letter to Mahadev. When you sent me mangoes
on your birthday, you should have asked for blessings, at any rate,
though as a matter of fact you have them always. Do tell me why you
have given up mangoes for the last seven years. May God grant you a
long life.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C.W. 4702. Courtesy : Shantikumar Morarji

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

335

436. LETTER TO RAI PRABHUDAS BHIKHABHAI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Tuesday, June 8, 1926
BHAI PRABHUDAS,

I have your detailed letter. You did well to write. Your
argument is perfect, but it is my experience and also that of persons
who have tried pranayam and other methods that brahmacharya
cannot be observed merely with the help of pranayam. But I believe
pranayam, etc., help those who have acquired control over their mind.
We come across very few people who have made a deep study of the
yoga from this point of view and have tried yogic methods. If one
takes only one meal a day, I have nothing to say. But if one
consumes at one sitting a quantity of food equal to three meals, that
will not help him in brahmacharya. This is a violation of it and it
damages one’s health. There are two opinions and I have my own
doubts regarding the need of nutritious diet for the observance of
brahmacharya. But I do not want you to change your method if it
greatly helps you in the observance of brahmacharya, if it keeps up
your spiritual progress and all your senses are brought under control.
You should try your own method and effect such changes as your
experience may dictate. And if you succeed so that even your mind is
not disturbed by passions the world will stand to gain by your
experiment. Remember that brahmacharya implies control of all the
senses in respect of thought, speech and action. According to this
definition if you have a lustful eye or an evil thought or there is a
discharge even in dream brahmacharya would be violated.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 12187

336

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

437. LETTER TO PERIN CAPTAIN
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 9, 1926
I take it that you will be in Bombay during the whole of this
month. I think I told you that a German sister was coming to me.
Her name is Helene Haussding. She is expected on the 25th instant
by the Razmak. Will you please meet her and take her home and send
her the same day to Sabarmati, and wire to me by what train she
leaves. You will please tell me if you are not likely to be in Bombay
on that date or if it will be impossible for you to go and meet her on
board.
Have Nurgisbehn and Mithubehn returned? And, if they have,
how are they doing?
Yours,
From a microfilm : S.N. 19610

438. NOTES
S ERVANTS OF INDIA S OCIETY

In the note issued by the Society upon the loss suffered by it
owing to the recent fire nothing so much stirs one as the offer of the
employees of the press. It is evidence of the scrupulous care with
which the Society has dealt by its employees. Unless the latter felt the
loss to be personal, they would not make the self-sacrificing and
handsome offer that they have made of forgoing half the bonus and
offering to work without extra pay for ten instead of eight hours a day
and the printer himself offering to work for six months without any
pay whatsoever. Both the Society and the employees deserve heartiest
congratulations for this spirit of comradeship existing between what
may be called Capital and Labour. This expression of the excellent
spirit is no small compensation for the tremendous losses the Society
has suffered.
The loss of the valuable manuscripts containing Gokhale’s life
and the files of the Dnyan Prakash for the last eighty years is indeed
irreparable. But it is only in this manner that Nature gives us rude
shocks and reminds us that there is nothing permanent, nothing everlasting except God himself; and that therefore ours is but honourably
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

337

and humbly to labour only to do His will irrespective of consequences.
The members of the Society are now manfully striving to restart
without avoidable delay the interrupted activities. The question is how
will the public help. Assurances have been given from many parts of
India. It is to be hoped that the assurances will be translated into
action without delay and without fuss. However much one may differ
from the politics of the Society, there is no denying the honest and
self-sacrificing labours of its members, there is no denying their
patriotism. It stands unique in its great social activities no less
valuable than the political. I hope that the readers of Young India will
show their appreciation of the many services of the Society, and their
toleration where they differ from the Society’s politics, by sending in
their subscriptions in response to its appeal.
S PINNING-WHEEL IN MYSORE
1

In his speech at the District Conference, the Deputy
Commissioner and the President of the District Board of Mysore
presented spinning as a useful subsidiary occupation, and as preeminetly suited in poor families to supplement the family income, and
thus exhorted the local bodies and public-spirited people to take it up
in right earnest :
To secure increased popularity and to ensure its general adoption by the
people . . . it is necessary that the leaders in each village, the Yejmans the
Sahukars, the Budhivantas should take to it. . . . I appeal to all Municipal
Councils, Panchayats, and Village Committees, Co-operative Societies and
other Associations to stock and sell charkha to the local people, and secure at
least one trained weaver for their town or village, provide him with a loom,
and get woven into dupaties and towels all the yarn locally spun by people
who could not drive any other trade or calling owing to age, infirmity,
disease or lack of occupation. . . . The District Board hopes to be able to take
full advantage in the coming year of the recent order of Government promising
to meet half the cost of demonstrations and competitions arranged for weaving
and spinning. . . .

Here at least there is an official recognition of the spinningwheel. The more the possibilities of this simple instrument are known,
the greater will be its hold upon the people.
1

338

Only excerpts reproduced here
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

S PINNING FOR F AMINE R ELIEF

The Kathiawar Rajkiya Parishad is nursing a khadi centre in
Kathiawar in and near Amreli by way of famine relief. Though there
is no actual famine there, for want of sufficient rain the cultivation has
been below par for three successive years, the result being that many
cultivators are living from hand to mouth. It is in this centre that
nearly a thousand farmers’ wives are supplementing their poor
resources with wages earned from hand-spinning. Instead of these
women remaining in idleness and in a state of semi-starvation, they are
earning from anything between one to three rupees per month
according to the time they are able or willing to give to spinning.
Incidentally this work furnishes occupation for carders, weavers and
washermen. The difficulty however had to be confronted of selling
khadi so made. Mr. Abbas Tyabji came to the rescue and he, assisted
by Sjts. Amritlal Seth and Ramdas Gandhi, toured in parts of
Kathiawar for the purpose of hawking the khadi. It was not possible
to sell it as cheap as khadi produced in some parts of India where
carders, weavers, washermen and even spinners do not demand or
receive the same wage as those in Kathiawar. But Mr. Abbas Tyabji
was able successfully to appeal to local patriotism for the disposal of
his khadi. And he tells me that nowhere was he put off by people, but,
as soon as they understood what this khadi meant, they took all that he
had to offer. This khadi, as all other khadi, has had an interesting
history. Its price has gone down in the same proportion as it has risen
in quality. And yet there is plenty of room for improvement in the
quality of khadi and decline of its prices. The decline in prices
and progress in improvement depend upon steady improvement in
carding and spinning upon which increasingly great attention is
being bestowed. But the chief points to be noticed in this connection
are that khadi has been the means of giving work and wages to poor
women who would have been without either but for khadi and that
there is unlimited scope for this work provided demand for khadi can
be kept up.
P ERIPATETIC KHADI EXHIBITION

Khadi workers all the country over are discovering the great
utility of khadi exhibitions in popularizing and demonstrating the
various processes connected with cotton till it becomes khadi on the
weavers’ loom. Recently a peripatetic exhibition was organized in the
district of Ratnagiri. It covered eight villages. In all these places
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

339

demonstrations were given in hand-ginning, carding, spinning on the
wheel as well as the takli, and methods of testing the strength of yarn.
There were exhibited samples of indigenous dyes, yarn spun by
leaders, khadi of various grades and a small assortment of other
swadeshi goods. Whilst the exhibition was on, in the respective villages,
hawking too was resorted to. There was a reading-room improvised
which furnished literature on khadi. There was a magic-lantern
1
demonstration. Singing parties gave songs and bhajans . People were
encouraged and enabled to subscribe to the All-India Deshbandhu
Memorial [Fund] and addresses on khadi were delivered by wellknown speakers. The whole thing was organized in an efficient and
inexpensive manner. The expenses amounted to Rs. 622-9-11. And
these were partly covered by profits made on the khadi sales. There is
no doubt that such exhibitions have a great educative value and
further experience and consequent improvements may make them
self-supporting.
Young India, 10-6-1926

439. KHADI PROGRESS
2

Here is a graph illustrating three years’ production and sale by
the Khadi Pratishthan. The reader can see at a glance the enormous
progress made by the Prathisthan as well in production as in sale.
Young India, 10-6-1926

440. VALUELESS ASSURANCE
The Union Government have, the Government of India tell the
public in a communique, given the assurance that
there is no present intention on the part of the Union Government of
extending the regulations beyond the position as it existed prior to the
judgment of the Transvaal Provincial Division of the Supreme Court in the
case, Rex v. Hildick Smith, when it was held that certain regulations
with reference to miners and works, which have actually been in force in South
Africa since 1911 and in certain provinces for many years before that date,
were not valid under the sections of the Act in terms of which they were
promulgated.
1
2

340

Devotional songs
Not reproduced here
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The communique further states :
that the Government of India have also been assured that should any such
extension of the scope of these regulations be contemplated in future, every
reasonable opportunity will be given to all parties in the Union interested in
the matter to make representations.

I hold these two assurances to be simple camouflage. For the
Union Government, in reply to questions in the Union House of
Assembly, have been repeatedly saying the same thing that they have
now told the Government of India, namely, that they had no present
intention of exceeding the scope of the regulations beyond the
position that existed prior to the judgment in question. The sting of
the new Bill lies in its enabling powers. It is like the sword of
Damocles hanging over the heads of both the Natives of South Africa
and the Indian settlers, for, it can be made applicable to the latter
precisely as the former. The Bill is, therefore, as insulting as it can
possibly be made. Only it does not affect the material interests of the
Indians as much as the Class Areas Bill, not because of any goodwill
on the part of the Union Government, but because Indians as a rule do
not take to labour, skilled or unskilled, of the kind contemplated
under the Colour Bar Bill. They are better touched materially through
their trade and through restriction of residential rights. And this is
sought to be accomplished by the Class Areas Bill which is to be
considered by the Round Table Conference. The Colour Bar Bill
shows the mentality of the Union Government and as The Times of
India correspondent very properly says in effect the acceptance by
the Union Government of the proposal for a Round Table Conference is a mere courteous gesture. It is not to be interpreted to mean a
change in the Union Government’s angle of vision. And this deduction is further strengthened by the later information that in adumbrating his native policy, General Hertzog has made it clear that, whilst
he is prepared to allow limited representation in the Union Parliament to the Natives and to the Coloured people, he will not allow
any whatsoever to the Indian. The result which The Times of India
correspondent rightly deduces is that the Indian, in the estimation of
General Hertzog, stands infinitely lower than the Native. In fact, he is
to be tolerated till he can be effaced from South Africa as a necessary
evil. The Colour Bar Bill therefore cannot be isolated from the
different Acts of the Union Government. It forms part of its settled
policy and furnishes the key to it.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

341

Nor is the second assurance given by the Union Government of
the slightest value. Is it any new right that they have conceded when
they say that when the scope of the regulations is extended every
reasonable opportunity will be given to all parties in the Union,
interested in the matter, to make representations specially when it is
known to them that representations of Indians carry no voting force
behind them? And, if the qualifying phrase in the communique
means that parties outside the Union, that is, the Government of India
or the Imperial Government will not be allowed even to make
representations, surely the assurance is worse than useless, because, it is
a restriction of which the announcement has been made and not a
concession.
Young India, 10-6-1926

441. WHAT IS PRAYER?
A medical graduate asks :
What is the best form of prayer? How much time should be spent at it?
In my opinion to do justice is the best form of prayer and one who is sincere
about doing justice to all does not need to do any more praying. Some people
1
spend a long time over Sandhya and 95% of them do not understand the
meaning of what they say. In my opinion prayer should be said in one’s
mother tongue. It alone can affect the soul best. I should say that a sincere
prayer for one minute is enough. It should suffice to promise God not to sin.

Prayer means asking God for something in a reverent attitude. But
the word is used also to denote any devotional act. Worship is a better
term to use for what the correspondent has in mind. But definition
apart, what is it that millions of Hindus, Mussalmans, Christians and
Jews and others do every day during the time set apart for the
adoration of the Maker? It seems to me that it is a yearning of the
heart to be one with the Maker, an invocation for His blessing. It is in
this case the attitute that matters, not words uttered or muttered. And
often the association of words that have been handed down from
ancient times has an effect which in their rendering into one’s
mother tongue they will lose altogether. Thus the Gayatri translated
and recited in, say, Gujarati, will not have the same effect as the
original. The utterance of the word ‘Rama’ will instantaneoulsy
affect millions of Hindus, when the word ‘God’, although they may
1

342

Ritual prayer to Sun God
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

understand the meaning, will leave them untouched. Words after all
acquire a power by long usage and sacredness associated with their
use. There is much therefore to be said for the retention of the old
Sanskrit formulae for the most prevalent mantras or verses. That the
meaning of them should be properly understood goes without saying.
There can be no fixed rule laid down as to the time these
devotional acts should take. It depends upon individual temperament.
These are precious moments in one’s daily life. The exercises are
intended to sober and humble us and enable us to realize that nothing
happens without His will and that we are but ‘clay in the hands of the
Potter’. These are moments when one reviews one’s immediate past,
confesses one’s weakness, asks for forgiveness and strength to be and
do better. One minute may be enough for some, twenty-four hours
may be too little for others. For those who are filled with the presence
of God in them, to labour is to pray. Their life is one continuous
prayer or act of worship. For us ordinary mortals there must be a
middle path between these two extremes. We are not so exalted as to
be able to say that all our acts are a dedication, nor perhaps are we so
for gone as to be living purely for self. Hence have all religions set
apart times for general devotion. Unfortunately these have nowadays
become merely mechanical and formal, where they are not
hypocritical. What is necessary therefore is the correct attitude to
accompany these devotions.
For definte personal prayer in the sense of asking God for
something, it should certainly be in one’s own tongue. Nothing can
be grander than to ask God to make us act justly towards everything
that lives.
Young India, 10-6-1926

442. CO-OPERATION IN SPINNING
A dear friend asks me to answer the question that has occurred
to him and his other friends.
Is there co-operation in spinning? Does it not rather make people purely
individualistic, self-centred and keep them separate from one another even as
so many pebbles?

The briefest and the most decisive answer I can give is : “Go,

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

343

watch any well-organized spinning centre and test the thing for
yourself. You will then discover that spinning cannot succeed without
co-operation.”
But brief though this answer is, it is, I know, useless for those
(and they are the majority) who cannot or will not make the time for
paying such a visit. I must therefore try to convince by describing
such a centre in the best way I can.
In speaking to a co-operative society in Madras last year, I said
that through hand-spinning I was trying to found the largest cooperative society known to the world. This is not an untrue claim. It
may be ambitious. It is not untrue because hand-spinning cannot
serve the purpose for which it is intended unless millions actually cooperate in it.
The purpose is to drive away enforced idleness and pauperism
which is the result mainly of that idleness in India. This purpose, it
will be admitted, is grand enough. The effort must be correspondinlgy
great.
There must be co-operation from the very commencement. If
spinning makes one self-reliant it also enables one to understand the
necessity of interdependence almost at every step. An ordinary
spinner must find a ready market for her surplus yarn. She cannot
weave it. There can be no market for her yarn without the cooperation of a large number of people. Just as our agriculture is
possible only because there is co-operation, be it ever so little, of
millions in regard to the cultivation and disposal of the produce, so
will spinning be successful only if there is co-operation on an equally
large scale.
Take the working of any typical centre. At the central office is
collected seed cootton for spinners. The cotton is ginned by ginners
perhaps at the centre. It is distributed then among carders who redeliver it in the shape of slivers. These are now ready to be distributed
among the spinners who bring their yarn from week to week and take
away fresh slivers and their wages in return. The yarn thus received is
given to weavers to weave and received back for sale in the shape of
khaddar. This latter must now be sold to the wearers—the general
public. Thus the centre office has to be in constant living human
touch with a very large number of people irrespective of caste, colour
or creed. For the centre has no dividends to make, has no exclusive
344

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

care but the care of the most needy. The centre to be useful must keep
itself clean in every sense of the term. The bond between it and the
component parts of the vast organization is purely spiritual or moral.
A spinning centre therefore is a co-operative society whose members
are ginners, carders, spinners, weavers and buyers—all tied together by
a common bond, mutual goodwill and service. In this society the
course of every piece can be traced almost with certainty as it floats to
and fro. And as these centres grow and draw the youth of the country
who have the fire of patriotism burning brightly in their hearts and
whose purity will stand the strain of all temptation, they will, they
must, become centres for radiating elementary knowledge in hygiene,
sanitation, domestic treatment of simple diseases among the villagers
and education among their children suited to their needs. That time is
not yet. The begin-ning indeed has been made. But the movement
can grow only slowly. It is not possible to show substantial results till
khadi has become a salable article in the bazaar like ghee or, better
still, postage stamp. For the present a vast amount of energy has to be
spent in educating the people to buy khadi in the place of any other
cloth even as a child would eat and bless the rice cooked by its mother
without stopping to think of the quality or the price of the rice so
cooked. If it did, it would find that the rice cooked by the mother was
far too dear for the labour and the love spent upon the working. And
so will it be with khadi one day, when the children of mother Hind
wake from their deep sleep and realize that yarn spun and worked by
the hands of her daughters and sons can never be too dear for her
crores of children. When this simple truth dawns upon us, spinning
centres will multiply a hundredfold, a ray of hope will penetrate the
dark Indian cottages and that hope will be the surest foundation for
the freedom we want but do not know how to achieve.
Young India, 10-6-1926

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

345

443. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Thursday [June 10, 1926]

1

CHI. JAMNALAL,

Your Letter. I wish you could make a long stay there and build
up your body getting away from it all. There must be no more fits of
giddiness. The real remedy for it is, mainly, open air and exercise.
You must take a ten-mile walk daily. I should not think that is at all
too much. The Charkha Sangh committee meets on the 26th; you do
not therefore have to come here till then. It would be better if you
resisted the temptation to stay in Delhi and at the Rampura Ashram
for the present. I want you to spend as much time in Mussoorie as
possible. Ask Lakshmidas to write to me from time to time. He
should improve his health a lot. Velabehn will arrive here this evening
along with Mani.
Blessings from

BAPU
JAMNALAL BAJAJ
NARAYAN NIWAS
MUSSOORIE, U.P.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 2866

444. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS DUPTA
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 11, 1926
DEAR SATIS BABU,

I have your letter. I must not argue with you, for, your
reasoning is perfect. Khadi work requires tapasya. You are bent
upon it. I can therefore say, may God help you.
If Hema Prabha Devi surrenders everything of her own accord
and if she can bask in the sunshine of freedom from all possessions, I
should naturally feel delighted. I have simply uttered a note of
warning as a friend. But you will both do as the spirit guides you.
1

346

From the postmark
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The meeting is postponed to the 26th instant to enable everyone
to be in his place on the 21st instant which is the Id day. I shall
expect you on or before 26th.
You must have received my letter about a travelling charkha for
1
Mr. Muhammad Hassan Chaman of Kera, Cutch. If not, please send
one to him by V.P.P.
Mr. Birla has written to me of what he has done. It is good that
2
you have enlisted his interest. I have written to him at length and
asked him to give all the help he can to the Pratishthan.
Yours,
From a microfilm : S. N. 11182

445. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 11, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your circular letter. You might have noticed a paragraph
in the current number of Young India about the Society’s loss. I am
thinking out to whom I should make the appeal. Is Malaviyaji
approaching anybody to your knowledge? There are monied men
whom both he and I can approach. But, I know that he can approach
them with greater confidence and greater effect. Has anyone
approached Mr. Ambalal Sarabhai? To Jamnalalji I shall be writing.
He is in a somewhat peculiar position just now. He has ceased to
multiply his earnings and has almost ear-marked the profits he is
making. I know that there is still a reserve. I fancy that he will send
something, but nothing like what I would like him or ask him to send
if he was his former self.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat : S. N. 12059

1
2

‘Muhen’ in “Letter to Satis Chandra Das Gupta”, 3-6-1926
Vide “Letter to G. D. Birla”, 8-6-1926

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

347

446. LETTER TO AMIYA CHANDRA CHAKRAVARTI
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 11, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I was simply wondering whether my letter
had miscarried. I now understand the sad reasons for the delay in
acknowledging my letter. You have not yet mentioned to me the
calamity that has befallen you. How can I help you to find peace? It
can only come from within and by waiting upon God and trusting
Him with implicit faith. No man need ever feel lonely who feels the
living presence of God near him and in him. Whatever peace I have
found, has been found by increasing faith in the hand of God being
in everything. Calamities then cease to be calamities. They test our
faith and steadfastness. May you also find your peace in the midst of
seeming strife.
Yours sincerely,

AMIYA C HANDRA C HAKRAVARTI, E SQ.
TIRTHA NIBAS, P URI
From a photostat : S. N. 12060

447. LETTER TO EMIL RONIGER
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 11, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. The idea of making any money out of my
writings even for a charitable purpose is quite foreign to me. Up to
now I have avoided all such temptation. This time the temptation has
come in a double manner. Mr. Holmes was the first tempter and he
suggested that unless some notable publisher had the copyright, it
would not be possible to circulate the Experiments with Truth as much
as it is desirable and he added that the copyright would bring me a
respectable sum for many of my public undertakings. I have therefore
allowed Mr. Holmes to deal with the Macmillans. I have heard nothing
further from him. I have really no terms. I can only give you this
assurance that I shall not close with the Macmillans till I have
corresponded with you. I shall endeavour also at least to give you the
348

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

rights over the German translation. You may let me know what terms it
is possible for you to offer consistently with all your obligations.
Yours sincerely,

EMIL R ONIGER, E SQ.
R HEIN F ELDEN
From a copy: S.N. 32243

448. LETTER TO JETHALAL H. JOSHI
June 11, 1926
If Bhai Nriprasad does not need you and Jamnadas wants you,
then settle down there. Where can I find a better educational field for
you than this? Whatever I teach you is bound to be uninteresting
from the modern viewpoint.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 10922

449. LETTER TO FULCHAND KASTURCHAND SHAH

1

ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Friday, June 11, 1926
BHAI FULCHAND,

Your letter. You may perhaps like to file Jamnadas’s postcard;
hence I am returning it to you. I have written to him that he should
have asked me for money. Because of our difficult [financial]
position you do not have the means to offer the money. Most
probably I have written to you that my going to Finland has been
cancelled. I have also replied to Devchandbhai. Today there is a
letter from the Dewan. I have sent that also to Devchandbhai. In
reply he writes that he would come by the end of the month. I have
received the report and shall go through it. Fixing the date of the
conference has been delayed and that troubles me too. But I am a
bird with my wings clipped; so in every such case my inclination is to
wait. It is perfectly true that Manilal has deposited a sum of Rs.
32,000 with Revashankerbhai, but we are not in a position to use it yet.
1

For other letters to the addressee, vide “Letter to Fulchand”, 25-3-1926 and
7-5-1926.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

349

A letter of authority for Manilal is still to come. He told me on his
return from Rajkot that it would come in a short time. On receiving
this amount, whether my finances allow it or not, I shall definitely pay
off the sums for which I have committed myself. I have talked to
Vallabhbhai about the school at Rajkot. Whenever you need anything,
please do ask for it. I am prepared to provide the cotton for the
training of Antyaja teachers at Rajkot, Jetpur and other places. Bhai
Balwantrai has arrived. I have asked him to keep Rs. 100 for the sale
of khadi. And for making payments to the weavers he may ask for
more as the need arises. I am having a talk about Gariyadhar with
Bhai Shambhushanker who is here today. I have found that he is
getting the work done very economically. It seems to me Gariyadhar
work is the least expensive of all. Bhai Balwantrai said that
Mulchandbhai needed Rs. 500 for the Antyaja Ashram, which has
been paid to him on his personal security. All your queries have now
been answered.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 10923

450. LETTER TO CHUNILAL D. GANDHI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 11, 1926
BHAISHRI CHUNILAL,

I have your letter as well as the hundi from your friend.
intend to use the money for propagating khadi.

I

S JT. C. D. G ANDHI
C/ O TATA MILLS (LTD.)
BOMBAY HOUSE, B RUCE S TREET
F ORT, B OMBAY
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19611

350

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

451. LETTER TO DEVCHAND PAREKH
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Friday, June 11, 1926
BHAI DEVCHANDBHAI,

Here is a letter from the Dewan. Now we have to wait for the
rest of this month at any rate.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19612

452. LETTER TO KANTILAL H. PAREKH
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 11, 1926
BHAISHRI KANTILAL,

I have your letter and it is quite to the point. You did well in
writing. If you still have anything to ask do write to me without
hesitation. The responsibility concerning khadi that rests on you and
on others like you cannot be taken away, until we get men who will
put less responsibility on others or who have the same capacity as
yourself and until they are able to carry on khadi work by themselves.
Along with the spread of the khadi movement we also exhort people
to lead a simple life. Until we give up some of our undesirable habits
khadi work cannot gain momentum.
If to make khadi a practical proposition is interpreted to mean
that it should compete with mill-made cloth, I think that is almost
impossible. Dharma need never enter into such competition. Millowners may give away their cloth gratis just to kill khadi, but can we do
the same with khadi? There certainly is competition in trade when
commodities are offered, [virtually] for nothing. I am willing to listen
to all critism of the work there. And I am eager to remove all
recognizable faults. If it is said that since the workers are my own
men the demands of that centre are readily conceded, the complaint is
entirely baseless. I know it, because it is contrary to my nature to do
so. Of course, one thing is certain I am entirely useless where I cannot
trust people. I shall be glad if you let me know why you regard the
complaint as reasonable.
I am not at all perturbed by the way Ramdas has now been
selling khadi. It cannot be said that he compels people to buy khadi.
But one can certainly say that they buy it owing to a sense of shame
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

351

or out of a desire to help others. I see nothing wrong in it. Only thus
can the spread of khadi be initiated. The over-all expense on khadi is
much more than the artisans’ wages, hence it is our duty to effect as
much economy as possible. That depends on the spirit of sacrifice
and the efficiency of the workers. I believe this improvement is
coming gradually. But please make whatever suggestions you can in
this regard. We shall certainly implement as many of them as
possible.
Now about you. If I know why you have lost faith in the khadi
movement, I can find a remedy. We must promote the desire to work
without remuneration. But how many people will do that? Before
you do what you like, there is need to assume a big responsibility, you
may certainly stay in the Ashram as long as you consider it necessary.
The Ashram made you what you are and its reward therefore is your
character. Always guard it. Make it nobler every day. That itself is
the return. How long you can serve by living in the Ashram depends
perhaps on your own convenience. One can free oneself of worries
on one’s own. If freedom from worry depended upon another’s
convenience, it could never be had. When the season there is over, do
come here. Before that if you have anything particular to say, do
write to me. If the answer I have given is not complete, please let me
know.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 10927

453. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 12, 1926
I have your letter. You will have misfortune. But there is as
much connection between your being in Tiruchengodu and the water
scarcity as there is between Z—a newcomer—being in the same
district and the scarcity. Those who charge you with rivalry
unconsciously give your presence an importance you did not deserve.
But as there is not much danger of your becoming inflated, let those
good people who so charge you have all the pleasure they can derive
from their belief.
The Finland idea is dead and decently buried. Dr. Dalal has
suspected Hydrocele in Devdas. Even if it requires an operation it
would be a minor thing. I certainly don’t worry about it, perhaps,
352

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

1

because I don’t dread the knife so much as I dread drug-taking.
Poor Santanam! It almost appears as if we in India have more
than our share of domestic troubles. And in India the Southern
Presidency seems to take the first place.
I shall speak to Shankerlal about the arrangements of the tour.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat : S.N. 10929

454. LETTER TO FENNER BROCKWAY
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 12, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your cable. I am so sorry you had to go to the expense of cabling me. Newspaper correspondents will publish things
without verification. There was a talk about my going to Finland. But
it was announced in the newspaper that everything was arranged,
whereas, nothing was certain. The final decision come to was that I
hould not go to Finland. Had I gone, Iwould certainly have accepted
your invitation. As it was, I had to send you the following cablegram
which I hope you duly received.
“Thanks, not going Europe.”
Yours sincerely,

F ENNER BROCKWAY, E SQ.
INDEPENDENT LABOUR P ARTY
13, GREAT GEORGE S TREET
LONDON S. W. 1
From a photostat : S.N. 11361

1

The source has “a” in place of the words “as I”.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

353

455. LETTER TO KONDA VENKATAPPAYYA GARU
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 12, 1926
DEAR FRIEND ,

What a sad letter you have sent me. I appreciate the confidence
you have given me. After all it is these domestic troubles which
enrich one’s life, for, they enable us to realize the vanity of wordly
pomp, worldly riches and worldly happiness and enable us also to
realize the true beauty of ahimsa, otherwise, love of the purest type.
I am glad both your wife and daughter are improving. I hope
that the improvement will be continuous and permanent.
Yes, Devdas had an operation. He was dischaged last week and
is now taking his convalescence with Jamnalalji at Mussoorie. I am
not going to Finland. There was a talk about my going. But I
decided not to go.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S.N. 19616

456. LETTER TO C. V. KRISHNA
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 12, 1926
MY DEAR KRISHNA,

I have your letter. This is my message for the Conference:
I wish the Conference every success. The fact of its being held
on the Pinakini Satyagraha Ashram grounds is a tribute to the
memory of the late Hanumantha Rao who devoted his life selflessly to
the national cause. I hope that the various conferences, being held
there will emphasize the necessity of hand-spinning and khaddar and
that the black taint of untouchability that I discovered when I was in
that district will be removed as a result of the effort of the Conference.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S. N. 19617

354

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

457. LETTER TO “FORWARD”
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 12, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

Here is the best reminiscence I can give you of Deshbandhu for
your special number :
‘Throughout my privileged stay with Deshbandhu at Darjeeling
during the closing days of his earthly life, I found that, ill as he was,
the bulk of his time was devoted to the thought of his country. Even
whilst he had fever on he would discuss with me the future plans that
he had laid down for his country’s uplift. I often ask myself whether
we are doing anything or enough to have deserved such a man as
Deshbandhu.’
Yours sincerely,

THE EDITOR
“FORWARD”
19, B RITISH INDIAN S T.
C ALCUTTA
From a photostat : S.N. 19618

458. LETTER TO GANGABEHN MAJMUDAR
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, June 12, 1926
RESPECTED GANGABEHN,

Your letter. What can I do if you distrust persons who stay with
me? I can’t agree upon the prices, etc., of two years ago. I can pay
you only at present rates. Over and above that, I shall try to pay you
as much as I can. I only want you to appoint someone you trust to sit
with a person nominated by me. Both of them may fix the prices
according to existing conditions and I am prepared to pay them. I
would request you to settle this matter urgently.
BAPU
S MT. G ANGABEHN MAJMUDAR
NAGARWADA, R ICHEY R OAD
AHMEDABAD
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 10942
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

355

459. LETTER TO MULSHANKER KANJI BHATT
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, June 12, 1926
BHAISHRI MULSHANKER,

I could make out nothing from your letter. I can intervene only
if there is a debt due to you in law or in equity. I find neither in this
case.
S JT. M ULSHANKER KANJI BHATT
KALBADEVI, N EW MARKET, R OOM NO. 27
BOMBAY-2
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19613

460. LETTER TO SOMNATH PURUSHOTTAM
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, June 12, 1926
BHAI SOMNATH ,

I have your letter. In my view the primary rules to be observed
by all are truth and non-violence. And I believe that one who does
not control his palate can observe neither rule. The practice of some
yoga would, I imagine, be necessary for successfully observing these
rules.
S JT. S OMNATH P URUSHOTTAM
BHANGWADI THEATRE
BOMBAY-2
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19614

461. LETTER TO JAGJIVANDAS NARANDAS MEHTA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Saturday, June 12, 1926
BHAISHRI JAGJIVANDAS,

Bhai Shambhushanker has arrived here. I discussed everything
with him. Just now he has asked for Rs. 300. A hundi for the amount
is sent herewith. Some of the debts are small, which he says he would
pay off. I have found a debt of Rs. 1,300 from you. Bhai Shambhushanker has also told me that you intend to take interest on that
amount. I feel that you cannot charge interest on money [lent for]
356

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

public causes. Bhai Shambhushanker says that you constantly complain that you get no money from me, and you have to spend your own
money. I remember no occasion of with holding money without
reason. Some delay might have been caused in understanding things;
but for that, there was no delay whatever. Even if I have unreasonably
delayed payment, you must never give your money and, if you do,
you should not charge interest. I am prepared to pay off the money
on behalf of the Parishad, when the question of interest is sorted out.
Bhai Shambhushanker’s salary was also discussed. He should take Rs.
50 up to July and then Rs. 25. Bhai Shambhu-shanker would think it
over and write to me. He deserves much more but he has told me of
his desire to lead a selfless life and his resolve to take nothing for
public service as far as possible. Hence I suggested Rs. 25.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 19615

462. WHAT IS NATURAL?

1

No word seems to be more abused today than the word
‘natural’. For instance, a correspondent writes, “as eating and
drinking are natural to man, even so is anger.” Another seems to
argue : “The sexual function is as natural as the other functions of the
body. Were it not so, God would not have endowed it to man. If it
was not our duty to curse the wicked and to bless the good, why
should we have been endowed with the faculty of cursing and
blessing? May it not be our duty to develop all our faculties to
perfection? And thus himsa would appear to be as much one’s
dharma as ahimsa. In short virtue and vice are figments of our
imagination. Your ahimsa is a sign of weakness, inasmuch as it
expresses only one side of our nature. Rather than regard it as the
highest religion, why should we not regard it as the highest irreligion?
Ahimsa Paramo Dharmah was orginally Ahimsa Paramo Adharmahthe negative prefix a (not) having somehow dropped out, or been
rubbed out by some enemy of mankind. For on many occasions,
ahimsa can be demonstrated to be the highest irreligion.” This is not
one man’s argument, I have boiled down and put together the
2
arguments of many. The theoryabout the negative a in ahimsa being
1

The Gujarati original of this appeared in Navajivan, 13-6-1926. This is a
translation by Mahadev Desai.
2
Slip for adharma
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

357

dropped was propounded by an old barrister friend, and he did so in
all seriousness. Indeed if we were to put man in the same category as
the brute, many things could be proved to come under the description
‘natural’. But if they belong to two different species, not everything
that is natural to the brute is natural to man. “Progress is man’s
distinction, man’s alone, not beast’s.” Man has discrimination and
reason. Man does not live by bread alone, as the brute does. He uses
his reason to worship God and to know Him, and regards the
attainment of that knowledge as the summum bonum of life. The
desire to worship God is inconceivable in the brute, while man can
voluntarily worship even Satan. It must therefore be, and is, man’s
nature to know and find God. When he worships Satan, he acts
contrary to his nature. Of course, I will not carry conviction to one
who makes no distinction bet-ween man and the brute. To him virtue
and vice are convertible terms. While to the man whose end and aim
is realization of God, even the functions of eating and drinking can be
natural only within certain limits. For having knowledge of God as
his end, he will not eat or drink for the sake of enjoyment but solely
for sustaining the body. Restraint and renunciation will therefore
always be his watchwords even in respect of these functions.
And if it is man’s nature to know and find God, sexual
indulgence should be contrary to his nature, and complete renunciation of it will accord best with his mission. For realization of God is
impossible with-out complete renunciation of the sexual desire. It is
not man’s duty to develop all his faculties to perfection; his duty is to
develop all his Godward faculties to perfection and to suppress
completely those of a contrary tendency.
Anyone blessed with choice or free will to accept and reject
cannot but distinguish between good and evil, virtue and vice. For
these mean in other words nothing but things to be accepted and
things to be rejected. Thus robbing someone of his property is a thing
to be rejected, hence bad or sinful. We have within us both good and
bad desires. It is our duty to cultivate the former and to suppress or
eradicate the latter, and if we fail therein we should remain brutes
though born men. Birth as a human being is therefore declared by all
religions as a rare privilege—a state of probation. And Hinduism says
that if we are weighed and found wanting we should have to be reborn
as beasts.
358

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The world is full of himsa and nature does appear to be ‘red in
tooth and claw’. But if we bear in mind that man is higher than the
brute, then is man superior to that Nature. If man has a divine mission
to fulfil, a mission that becomes him, it is that of ahimsa. Standing
as he does in the midst of himsa, he can retire into the innermost
depths of his heart and declare to the world around him that his
mission in this world of himsa is ahimsa, and only to the extent that he
practises it does he adorn his kind. Man’s nature then is not himsa,
but ahimsa, for he can speak from experience, his innermost conviction, that he is not the body but atman, and that he may use the
body only with a view to expressing the atman, only with a view to
self-realization. And from that experience he evolves the ethics of
subduing desire, anger, ignorance, malice and other passions, puts
forth his best effort to achieve the end and finally attains complete
success. Only when his efforts reach that consummation can be said to
have fulfilled himself, to have acted according to his nature. Conquest
of one’s passions therefore is not superhuman, but human, and
observance of ahimsa is heroism of the highest type, with no room
therein for cowardice or weakness.
Young India, 24-6-1926

463. MAHUDHA KHADI CENTRE
I give below some facts from the report of this Centre which
Shri Mohanlal Pandya has sent to me.
The Centre provides spinning work to 261 women, of whom
236 are Muslims. The rest belong to the Brahmin, Vania and Barot
communities. The number of spinners is increasing day by day. This
work is a great help to them, as they would not go out of their homes
to do any other work. The Muslim women call the spinning-wheel the
glory of the housewife.
As a result of this activity, three persons are employed in
carding and five women in making slivers. Eight looms are operating.
The quantity of yarn produced is 20 maunds a month.
Previously, they spun yarn of 6 counts, but now the Centre does not
want them to spin yarn of less than 10 counts and does not, therefore,
pay less than 5 annas per pound. That comes to Rs. 1212 per maund,
the total for 20 maunds being Rs. 246. This means an average earning
of less than a rupee for every woman who spins. Shri Mohanlal,
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

359

however, tells me that it is probably one and a half rupees. If he is
right, then either the number of spinners is smaller or the yarn spun is
of a higher count.
From this quantity of yarn they weave every month 65 pieces of
khadi, each of 18 yds. length and 27 inches width. They make from
these pieces towels of 112 yds. length and 22 inches width, and small
square hand-kerchiefs. Most of this khadi is sold in Bombay. From
1
2
Magashar to Vaishakh , khadi worth Rs. 1,294 was sold locally. The
Centre now has stocks of khadi brought from other sources too.
Their sale during the last three months amounted to Rs. 842. The
selling price of the khadi is fixed at 20 per cent less than the cost
price. The Centre has a staff of six persons.
I commend to this Centre and others like it the example of
Bengal. There all khadi is produced for local consumption and,
therefore, every effort is made to meet local needs. The result is that a
large quantity of fine khadi with greater width is produced, and the
production of such khadi is increasing day by day. If, in this manner,
we work to meet local needs, we get opportunities of coming into
contact with people belonging to all classes of society and are able to
serve them, and at the same time the consumption of khadi will also
spread to larger numbers. If we adopt this method of promoting the
use of khadi, a good many problems will be solved automatically and
by and by we shall advance not in arithmetical progression but in
geometrical progression.
If the same attention were paid to improving the strength of the
yarn as is paid to its fineness, every weaver would agree to weave that
yarn. Experience tells us that if we wish to improve the quality of
yarn, the spinner should himself or herself prepare the slivers. It need
not be pointed out that this will add to the earnings of the spinners.
Another suggestion which I should like to make to workers is
that they should go to villages in the interior and acquaint themselves
with the conditions there. They should study the conditions of the
poor in those villages and examine the possibility of introducing the
spinning-wheel among them. I know that it is very difficult for
people like us, brought up in modern conditions, to go and live in
1
Names of months in the Indian calendar, corresponding roughly to
November-December and April-May
2
ibid.

360

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

places far removed from any railway station. Once we are there, we
cannot leave as often as we might want. However, it is in these villages
that real work awaits us, and eventually we shall be forced to go to
them. There are more than 7,000 railway stations to serve seven lakh
villages, and, if the Government’s tax collectors can reach them, why
should not servants of the country go there to give the people a return
for the taxes which they pay? It should not be forgotten that the
people who collect the taxes as also those who benefit from them
directly or indirectly are from among our own middle class.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 13-6-1926

464. WHAT PROVISION SHOULD BE MADE FOR
DISABLED CATTLE?
1

A gentleman devoted to cow-protection writes :
Those who have read my articles [on the subject of cowprotection] cannot be in doubt about my views on this point, for I
cannot even for a moment entertain the idea that disabled cattle
should be left uncared for. I believe it to be the duty of all of us to
look after such cattle. But I have often pointed out that kindness to
animals does not mean merely this. Cow-protection has a wide
connotation, and we do not discharge our duty to cows and buffaloes
fully by merely looking after disabled cattle. Cow-protection means
preventing, in a manner consistent with dharma, that is, without doing
anyone harm, the unnecessary slaughter of cattle which is going on at
present. Today, either through ignorance or fanaticism, we have given
cow-protection an extremely narrow meaning. That is why we
helplessly witness or tolerate the unnecessary slaughter of cows before
our very eyes. With a little intelligence, some self-sacrifice and a
measure of practical knowledge, we can save countless cows and
buffaloes and thereby preserve the wealth of the country. An attempt
is being made in these pages to explain this. This way of protecting
cattle will necessarily ensure the protection of disabled and infirm
cattle. At present, such cattle are a burden on us, and therefore, one
might even say that they are not protected in the right manner. I am
1
The letter is not translated here. While generally approving of Gandhiji’s
views, the correspondent wanted to know what provisions he would recommend for
disabled cattle if the existing goshalas were turned into dairies as advised by him.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

361

convinced that, when we have solved the problem of cow-protection in
an intelligent manner, we shall be able to take excellent care of infirm
and disabled cattle.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 13-6-1926

465. LETTER TO N. S. VARADACHARI
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 13, 1926
MY DEAR VARADACHARI,

Your letter stuns me. Unless you have lost faith in the virtue of
khadi how can you possibly want to leave khadi work? I had hoped
that you were the last person in the world to think of deserting khadi.
I can understand your difficulties. But does not success in any
enterprise mean capacity for overcoming difficulties no matter
however great they may be? If you cannot possibly do with the salary
you are getting, you must let me know what you need. If the salary
cannot be paid out of the Charkha Fund, some extra work might be
found for you. “Where there is a will there is a way”. The only
thing needful is that there should be a determination not to desert
khadi no matter what it costs. But, if your faith in khadi has
slackened, you should tell me so. I have warned friends repeatedly
that if in their experience they find khadi to be an impracticable
proposition, they must not hesitate to say so first to me if they will and
then to the public. I have no desire to bolster up a wrong cause no
matter what grief it may give to me personally. As a matter of fact it
will be no grief to me but unmixed joy to discover my error. No
friend therefore need spare me when he finds that my faith in khadi is
like building castles in the air. But, if your faith is as green as when
you wrote your essay then you dare not desert khadi. If necessary,
you can come and discuss things personally with me.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. N. S. V ARADACHARI
ERODE
From a microfilm : S.N. 11184

362

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

466. LETTER TO V. LAWRENCE
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

June 13, 1926
MY DEAR LAWRENCE,

I was delighted to receive your full letter after so many months
or is it years? I did know that one of your sons was in Jaffna. How
strange however that he should never write to me? I suppose you are
now rich enough to let him even pay a visit to me. Let him come. I
will give him some lessons in spinning and he will also see something
of real Indian life.
Yes. I would love to listen to the music of your daughters.
Ramdas is just now with me. He is engaged in doing khaddar work.
He will be leaving me for his headquarters in a few days. Devdas had
an operation for appendicitis and he is now taking his convalescence
with a friend at a hill station. Chhaganlal and Maganlal are here with
their families. Jamnadas, the third brother whom you know, is in
charge of a national school at Rajkot. Mrs. Naidu is touring through
India. Mr. Andrews has gone to his friend Mr. Stokes who is living
near Simla. This finishes the news of those whom you know. I am
keeping well and passing my time principally in editing the two
newspapers.
With love to you all.
Yours sincerely,

V. LAWRENCE, E SQ.
19, F OUNDRY LANE
DURBAN, S. A FRICA
From a photostat : S.N. 19619

467. LETTER TO KISHORELAL MASHRUWALA
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Sunday, June 13, 1926
CHI. KISHORELAL,

I got your letter. As for my message, it was on these lines : If
you can free yourself occasionally for short intervals, you may be
able to do some work as a supervisor and earn something. This
suggestion was made in the belief that Balubhai would not be willing
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

363

at present to allow you to come to the Ashram. I knew well that you
would not like the suggestion and even said so to Nanabhai. But I
thought you might perhaps accept a supervisor’s job for a short time
as the work is, I think, lighter and while doing it you can stay in
Bombay. I would certainly like your coming, if you can, to the
Ashram and, if your health permits, your taking up lessons in
weaving. What you say about the students is right. I would
recommend it to them and would talk about women occasionally.
How long would Girdhari have to be there?
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 19620

468. LETTER TO KASAMALI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI,

Sunday, June 13, 1926
BHAISHRI KASAMALI,

Your letter. God is one. I do not understand your difficulty in
conceivign Him as formless. That which has a form cannot be allpervading, it needs must be the subtlest. It can therefore be only
formless. All must admit the need for a guru but one may not hastily
accept someone as a guru. In this age to seek a guru is to believe in
one, because to acquire a perfect guide one must perfectly qualify
oneslef. Moreover if we regard all faiths as true there is no need for
us to relinquish our faith or make others change theirs, since all can
adopt whatever satisfies them from all the religions.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : S.N. 10932

364

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

469. MESSAGE TO THE STUDENTS
The Gujarati Mahavidyalaya opened, after the last summer vacation, on June
14th, with an address from Gandhiji which, it being his day of silence, was read for
him. The following is the translation :

1921 and 1926—What a difference?
Please do not think that I am striking a melancholy note. We
are not going back, our country is not going back. We have gone five
years nearer swaraj and there can be no doubt about it. If someone
says that it was very nearly achieved in 1921 and today it is far
away—no one knows how far—do not believe it. Prayerful, wellmeaning effort never goes in vain, and man’s success lies only in
such an effort. The result is in His hands.
Strength of numbers is the delight of the timid. The valiant of
spirit glory in fighting alone. And you are all here to cultivate that
valour of the spirit. Be you one or many, this valour is the only true
valour, all else is false. And the valour of the spirit cannot be achieved
without Sacrifice, Determination, Faith and Humility.
We have built our Vidyalaya on the foundation of selfpurification. Non-violent non-co-operation is one aspect of it. The
‘non’ means renunciation of violence and all that stands for it, i.e., all
Government control. But so long as we do not co-operate with our
‘untouchable’ brethren, so long as there is no heart-unity between
men of different faiths, so long as we do not co-operate with the
millions of our countrymen by according to the spinning-wheel and
khaddar the sacred place they deserve, the negative prefix is entirely
nugatory. That non-co-operation will not be based on ahimsa, but
himsa, i.e., hatred. A negative injunction without a positive obligation
is like body without soul, worthy to be consigned to the flames. There
are 7,000 railway station for the 7,00,000 villages of India. We do not
even claim to know these 7,000 villages. We know only through
history the condition of villages not within easy reach of railway
stations. The only loving tie of service that can bind the villagers to us
is the spinning-wheel. Those who have not yet understood this basic
truth are in this institution to no purpose. The education is not
‘national’ that takes no count of the starving millions of India and
that devises no means for their relief. Government contact with the
villages ends with the collection of revenue. Our contact with them
begins with their service through the spinning-wheel, but it does not
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

365

end there. The spinning-wheel is the centre of that service. If you
spend your next vacation in some far-off village in the interior you
will see the truth of my remark. You will find the people cheerless
and fear-stricken. You will find houses in ruins. You will look in vain
for any sanitary or hygienic conditions. You will find the cattle in a
miserable way, and yet you will see idleness stalking there. The
people will tell you of the spinning-wheel having been in their homes
long ago, but today they will entertain no talk of it or of any other
cottage industry. They have no hope left in them. They live, for they
cannot die at will. They will spin only if you spin. Even if a hundred
out of a population of 300 in a village spin, you assure them of an
additional income of Rs. 1,800 a year. You can lay the foundation of
solid reform on this income in every village. It is easy I know to say
this, but difficult to do. Faith can make it easy. ‘I am alone, how can
I reach seven hundred thousand villages?’—This is the argument that
pride whispers to us. Start with the faith that if you fix yourself up in
one single village and succeed, the rest will follow. Progress is then
assured. The Vidyalaya wants to make you workers of that type. If it
is a cheerless job, the Vidyalaya is indeed cheerless and fit to be
deserted.
You will see that we open this term with a few changes in our
staff. Acharya Gidwani whose sacrifice rendered the opening of this
College possible, and who won the affection of students, has at my
instance accepted the office of Principalship of Prem Maha Vidyalaya,
Brindaban. I know that students were agitated over this. I congratulate
them on their devotion to their Principal. I give you today the
consolation that I gave the students that saw me the other day. We
have to put up with these partings. We can but treasure the good
things of our loved ones and follow them. Rest assured that we have
done everything in the interests of the College. Fortunately we have
Sjt. Nrisinhaprasad to serve us as Vice-Chancellor. He has lived with
students for years and he often comes in contact with you. Trust
yourselves to him. My doors are always open for every one of you.
It has been a constant source of sorrow to me that I have not been able
to come as closely in contact with you as I have wished.
Professors Athavale, Dalal, Mazumdar and Shah have left the
College. Their resignations were unavoidable. It is to be regretted that
we shall no more have the benefit of their scholarship. But in their
stead we have as Professors Sjts. Kikubhai, Jinabhai Desai, Nagindas,
Gopaldas and Gandhi.They are all ex-students of the Vidyalaya and
366

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

well may we take a pardonable pride in the fact. Let their industrious
scholarship be a source of honour to us. May God bless you with long
life for the selfless service of the country.
Young India, 17-6-1926

470. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI,

Tuesday [June 15, 1926]

1

CHI. JAMNALAL,

There has been no letter from any of you today. I certainly
hoped for one from Devdas. There is no harm if you cannot come on
the 26th. But that should be only on health grounds. Bhai Amritlal
2
Sheth has sent me a list today. You may take it that when you come
here you will have to spend three or four days in Kathiawar.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photos tat of the Gujara ti: G.N. 2867

471. LETTER TO GANGABEHN MAJMUDAR
Jeth Sud 5, 1982 [June 15, 1926]
RESPECTED GANGABEHN,

I have your letter. I find that I have not been able to persuade
you. I am helpless since you would neither accept my suggestion for
arbitration nor let the man sent by me inspect the goods. I am in no
wise bound to buy the goods, as you seem to think. It is my duty to
save the Rs. 10,000 which I have given to you. This is my last request
to you. If you agree to nothing, I would be driven in desperation to
approach a lawyer.
BAPU
From a microf ilm of the Gujara ti: S.N. 10942

1

The letter was evidently a sequel to the letter dated June 10; vide “Letter to
Jamnalal Bajaj”, 10-6-1926. The addressee’s reply bears the date June 18, 1926.
2
Gujarati journalist and public worker, one of the leaders of Kathiawar
Political Conference
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

367

472. LETTER TO MULCHAND UTTAMBHAI PAREKH
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

Tuesday, June 15, 1926
BHAISHRI MULCHAND,

I have your letter. I have made a minor change in your draft. In
case the Ashram is closed down, it is not clear what would happen to
the buildings. Would the buildings lapse to the Durbar along with the
land? If there is any such idea, it should be removed. In such a
contingency, the value of the buildings should be assessed by an
arbitrator and we should get back half of it. The names of the trustees
are all right, I return the drafts sent by you.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 12189

473. TELEGRAM TO DR. SUNDRI MOHAN DAS1
[On or before June 16, 1926]
WISH

FUNCTION

EVERY

SUCCESS.

GANDHI

Forward, 16-7-1926

474. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 16, 1926
DEAR FRIEND

I have your letter.2 I am moving in the matter. Only my capacity
for collecting monies has suffered a check which, on occasions such
1

This was sent on the first death anniversary of C. R. Das which was being
observed as Chittaranjan Hospital Day.
2
In regard to the destruction by fire of the Servants of India Society printing
presses at Poona, Gandhiji had written to Sastri on May 30, June 4 and June 11; vide
“Letter to V. S. Srinivasa Sastri”, 30-5-1926, “Letter to V. S. Srinivasa Sastri”,
4-6-1926 and “Letter to V. S. Srinivasa Sastri”, 11-6-1926.

368

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

as this loss to the Society, I somewhat deplore.
I am glad you have written to Seth Ambalal 1. I am also writing
to him. Jamnalalji2 is due here very shortly. I therefore do not propose
to write to him.
Yours sincerely,

R T. H ON . V. S. S RINIVASA S ASTRI
S ERVANTS OF INDIA S OCIETY
DECCAN GYMKHANA P.O.
P OONA C ITY
From a photostat: S.N. 10936

475. LETTER TO C. VIJAYARAGHAVACHARIAR
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 16, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter3 for which I thank you. Hakim Saheb4 has not
yet written to me. There is a letter due from him to me apart from his
promise to you to write to me. You are quite right in saying that I
should be bored by any discussion on political matters, for there is
nothing new to be said upon them. I cannot possibly enthuse over
Councils. My politics are confined to the spinning-wheel, the removal
of untouchability and the prayers for Hindu-Muslim unity, etc.
These three absorb the whole of my time and attention. What is the
use of my interesting [myself] in things which I cannot appreciate,
which I do not understand and which even repel me? So you will see,
it is not you who bore me. Come and talk to me on the usefulness of
the spinning-wheel, on the ways of spreading its message of hope,
instruct me on the technique of the art and you will never weary
me with your talk. If you ask me to listen to the respective merits
1
2
3
4

Ambalal Sarabhai, Ahmedabad textile magnate
Jamnalal Bajaj
This is not available.
Hakim Ajmal Khan

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

369

of different Council parties or candidates, then, I should be aslittle
eager to discuss those things as I would to discuss the claims of rival
jockeys.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. C. V IJAYARAGHAVACHARIAR
F AIRY F ALLS VIEW
KODAIKANAL OBSERVATORY
S. INDIA
From a photostat: S.N. 10938

476. LETTER TO GIRDHARILAL
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 16, 1926
DEAR LALA GIRDHARILAL

I have your letter 1 with the instructive enclosure 2. I have read
both carefully. About the enclosure, I can say nothing. The points
raised in your letter: By all means try to bridge the gulf that at the
present moment seems to be widening between the two parties—
Hindus and Mussalmans. But I adhere to my opinion that no real
solution is to come at the present moment out of any effort. I see
distrust everywhere. Some more fighting is unfortunately in store for
us before a peaceful atmosphere is created. When each party expects
to humble the other, peace is impossible. It is more over my firm
conviction that this exaggerated importance we are giving to the
Councils out of all proportion to their usefulness, if there ever was
any, is keeping us apart. Everyone who remains outside the Councils
thinks that he is losing something. And, what is true of individuals is
true of communities and, therefore, there is a mad rush over getting as
much representation as possible and then getting in as many men as
possible with a communal taint. If you can see any good out of effort
made in an atmosphere such as this, I can but admire your zeal and
credulity. But I cannot enthuse over any such effort. I am sorry I
cannot send you a more hopeful or rather less discouraging letter.
1

Dated June 12, this had referred to the writer’s negotiations with the Muslims
for communal peace in Lahore and sought Gandhiji’s advice and suggestions (S.N.
11070).
2
A long statement on the communal problem dated June 11, addressed to
Motilal Nehru (S.N. 11070)

370

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I shall be more at home in advising about anything you might
have to say on Jallianwala Bagh.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
LALA GIRDHARILAL
C HAMBERLAIN R OAD
LAHORE
From a photostat: S.N. 11071

477. LETTER TO ASSISTANT EDITOR, “THE PEOPLE”
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 16, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

You ask me whether I see The People sometimes. I wish I could
say yes to your question. But the fact is that I rarely see weekly
newspapers. I glance at one or two dailies but most of my reading of
newspapers and magazines I am obliged to do through deputy.
You further ask me for birthday greetings. These I send you
most heartily and wish this offspring of Lalaji’s2 many happy returns
of the day.
Yours sincerely,

THE ASSISTANT EDITOR
“THE P EOPLE”
12, COURT R OAD
LAHORE
From a microfilm: S.N. 19621

1
Girdharilal had said he would write soon in regard to the Jallianwala Bagh
memorial.
2
Lajpat Rai

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

371

478. LETTER TO MOHMED HASAM CHAMAN
THE ASHRAM,

June 16, 1926
BHAISHRI MOHMED HASAM CHAMAN,

One who has a perfect understanding of ahimsa, who has gained
spiritual knowledge, and is filled to the brim with compassion can
certainly shed the turbulent body by forsaking food, drink, and so on
while chanting the name of Rama. You have done a very good thing
indeed in giving away five fields for the welfare of cattle.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm the Gujarati: S.N. 19916

479. LETTER TO HASAN ALI
ASHRAM,

June 16, 1926
BHAISHRI HASAN ALI,

. . . 1 Among the principal fruits I took were bananas, dates,
tomatoes, groundnuts and lemons. The spiritual outcome of it was
this: it was then that, in all my life and in respect of all things, I found
myself almost free from passion. I had to introduce changes in my
diet in England when I developed intense pain in my ribs.2 I had only
myself to blame for this pain. And then I came to India and again,
because of my own fault, I was afflicted with acute dysentery.3 After
this I could not recover my health no matter what means I tried. So
I started taking goat’s milk which I continue up to this day.4 I would
always feel sorry for having done so, but I had a desire to live for
the sake of the work I was doing and it persists even now. Yielding to
that desire I started taking milk which I still continue. Doctors in their
1

Omission as in the source
This was in 1914, when Gandhiji was in England en route to India, and
suffered from pleurisy.
3
In 1918.
4
Ibid.
2

372

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

researches think only of the body hence some or many of their
experiments tend to kill the soul. . . .
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19917

480. NOTES
DESHBANDHU
1

Today is the first anniversary of Deshbandhu’s death. He died
in harness, full of glory because full of faith. He believed in himself,
in his country, because he believed in God; Up to the very last day he
thought not of himself but of his country. He died for an ideal and he
lives today through his ideal because it survives him. The dissensions
in Bengal and the fratricidal war that is going on in India are indeed a
negation of his ideal. But this aberration I hold to be merely a passing
phase in working out the ideal. In the course of self-purification, we
are bound to come upon steep rocks and deep ravines. We must
bridge our way over the ravines and cut it through the rocks. And I
have full faith that we shall overcome our difficulties. They are
costing us dear. They may cost us dearer still. But no price will be
greater for working out our own salvation for which Lokamanya,
Deshbandhu and their predecessors lived and died.
THE P OSITION OF NON -CO-OPERATORS

A friend asks:
In the midst of so many parties in the country we hardly see where to
set our feet. When so many parties are being formed, is it not desirable that
those few who still believe in the boycott of Councils, Hindu-Muslim unity,
etc., should consolidate their forces and re-declare their ideals? We are being
accused of having turned our backs on swaraj and our creed of non-violence is
being openly sneered at. At every step we are being taunted that we are wasting
our time and energy. I admit that one need not be disturbed by taunts, but it
does appear desirable to organize ourselves and call upon those who are of our
way of thinking to join us. How long are we to have patience? How long must
our faith be tried?

If patience is worth anything, it must endure to the end of time.
1

June 16, 1926

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

373

And a living faith will last in the midst of the blackest storm.
Non-violence acts in a manner contrary to violence. I cannot advise
the formation of an additional party. Non-violent non-co-operation
can and must stand without an organized party. Non-violent
non-co-operation is on its trial. Let each one who has faith in boycott
of Councils, law-courts, etc., stand firm even though he may be alone
in his own district. Khaddar and national schools should satisfy
everyone who wants an occupation. The facts and figures I am
reproducing from week to week from reports received from various
khadi centres must convince the most sceptical of the progress that
khadi is making, surely though slowly. And the progress that is now
being made is not due to any momentary enthusiasm but it is due to a
reasoned faith in khadi. If non-co-operators have faith in non-violent
non-co-operation they will know that it is not dead but it is very much
alive and that it will give a good account of itself when the darkest
cloud threatens the horizon. It will be found then to be the one
sheet-anchor of India’s hope.
IN S EARCH OF GURU

As a result of my statement in Chapter I, Part II of My
Experiments with Truth1, that I was still in search of a guru, numerous
correspondents, Hindus, Mussalmans and Christians, have favoured me
with long letters telling me how to find a guru. More letters are still
coming in. Some tell me actually where to go and whom to see. Some
refer me to certain literature. I am grateful to all these correspondents
for their solicitude for my welfare. But let them and others realize that
my difficulty is fundamental. Nor does it trouble me. It is
fundamental because my conception of a guru is perhaps not of the
ordinary. Nothing but perfection will satisfy me. I am in search of one
who, though in the flesh, is incorruptible and unmoved by passion,
free from the pairs of opposites, who is truth and ahimsa incarnate and
who will therefore fear none and be feared by none. Everyone gets
the guru he deserves and strives for. The difficulty of finding the guru
I want is thus obvious. But it does not worry me; for it follows from
what I have said, that I must try to perfect myself before I meet the
guru in theflesh. Till then I must contemplate him in the spirit. My
success lies in my continuous, humble, truthful striving. I know the
1

Gandhiji’s autobiography started appearing serially in Young India,
3-12-1925.

374

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

path. It is straight and narrow. It is like the edge of a sword. I rejoice
to walk on it. I weep when I slip. God’s word is: ‘He who strives never
perishes.’ I have implicit faith in that promise. Though therefore from
my weakness I fail a thousand times, I will not lose faith but hope that
I shall see the Light when the flesh has been brought under perfect
subjection as some day it must. I wonder if the kind correspondents
will now understand my position and cease to worry about me but join
me in the search, unless they are satisfied that they have found Him.
F OR MANAGERS OF “GAUSHALAS ”

The Secretary of the All-India Cow-Protection Association
circulated some time ago among the managers of all known
gaushalas and pinjrapoles a set of questions asking for information.
Very poor response has been made to the request hitherto. Lists have
been printed and they can now be supplied on application to the
Secretary, All-India Cow-Protection Association, Sabarmati. Chaunde
Maharaj has undertaken to visit the majority of gaushalas in
Maharashtra and get the information personally from the managers
on behalf of the Association. I trust that the managers in these places
will give him all the information required. I need hardly say that the
A.I.C.P.A. has no desire whatsoever to acquire ownership of or
control over any of these gaushalas. The desire is merely to collect
information, tabulate and publish it for the guidance of all trustees
and managers of such institutions and to assist them with advice. It is
open to them, if they so wish, to be affiliated to the Association and
receive its guidance and the benefit of the assistance of experts whose
services the Association hopes to be able to secure at an early date.
But whether any of these institutions is affiliated or not, it will be the
duty of the Association to give all, the information in its possession to
these societies. It is hardly necessary to state that co-ordination of
effort on the part of nearly 1,500 gaushalas and their efficient
management must result in the saving of many more cattle than are
now saved. Affiliation would no doubt carry some responsibility on
the part of those who seek affiliation. In their own interest they will be
bound by rules made for their management and they will have to give
a percentage of their income to the central Association. But it is
entirely optional for every institution to seek or not to seek affiliation.
The object of this note is merely to seek information.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

375

S OUTH AFRICAN LEGISLATION

If anything is needed to emphasize the meaning of the warning
issued by Mr. Andrews and myself, here is an extract from a South
African letter:
I feel that through the passage of the Colour Bar Bill the Government is
not keeping its word with the Indian Government and the community,
especially when on the top of this comes the Natal Educational Ordinance
which, if passed, will mean the negation of educational rights we have, little
as they are at present. In the direction of economics we see joint Councils
raised under the Union Conciliation Act of 1921 in industries like furniture,
printing, building, etc.—in which thousands of Indians are involved, without
the Indian employees and employers being allowed to become members of the
Trade Unions or Masters’ Union who negotiate on behalf of the employees and
employers and who go to make up the joint Councils who prepare the
schedules or wages and other benefits; or, either allowed a voice in the joint
Councils. Of course we have no objection to legislation aimed at bettering the
conditions of workers, but at the same time what we do object to is that it is
not fair to Indian employees and employers that schedules of wages be
prepared which they have to abide by in which they have had no voice and the
effect of it all is the annihilation of both the Indian employer and employees.

It shows as clearly as day-light which way the wind is blowing.
The Class Areas Bill, because so much opposition was raised against it,
has been postponed hut the policy underlying it is being pursued by
the Union Government in a thousand other ways as instanced by the
correspondent. It is impossible therefore to be too watchful about the
way things are shaping in South Africa.
APRIL F IGURES

The following further figures show the progress of khadi in
April last more accurately, covering as they do the provinces of
Bengal and Gujarat:
Production
Sale
Bengal
Rs. 34,670-0-0 Rs.
34,470-0-0
Gujarat
Rs. 9,735-0-0 Rs.
17,052-0-0
________________
__________
Total Rs. 44,405 0-0 Rs.
51,522 0-0

376

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Total for other provinces as per previous reports
Rs. 92,542-0-0 Rs. 2,09,088-0-0
Grand Total Rs. 1,36,947-0-0 Rs. 2,60,610-0-0
Young India, 17-6-1926

481. SOME KNOTTY POINTS
A medical friend from far-off Burma writes:
Why do you emphasize khaddar and not swadeshi? Is not swadeshi the
principle and khaddar a mere detail?

I do not regard khaddar to be a detail. Swadeshi is a theoretical
term. Khaddar is the concrete and central fact of swadeshi. Swadeshi
without khaddar is like the body without life, fit only to receive a
decent burial or cremation. The only swadeshi cloth is khaddar. If one
is to interpret swadeshi in the language of and in terms of the millions
of this country, khaddar is a substantial thing in swadeshi like the air
we breathe. The test of swadeshi is not the universality of the use of an
article which goes under the name of swadeshi, but the universality of
participation in the production or manufacture of such article. Thus
considered, mill-made cloth is swadeshi only in a restricted sense. For,
in its manufacture only an infinitesimal number of India’s millions
can take part. But in the manufacture of khaddar millions can take
part. The more the merrier. Khaddar, in my opinion, is bound up the
welfare of millions of human beings. Khaddar is, therefore, the largest
part of swadeshi and it is the only true demonstration of it. All else
follows from it. India can live even if we do not use brass buttons or
tooth-picks made in India. But India cannot live if we refuse to
manufacture and wear khaddar. Khaddar will cease to have this
paramount importance when a more profitable employment is
discovered for the idle hours of India’s millions.
But says the Doctor:
Good khaddar is costly and the ordinary variety is ugly.

I deny that any khaddar is ugly. Want of the dead-sameness of a
machine-made article is not a sign of ugliness, but it is a sign of
life, even as absence of sameness in the millions of leaves of a tree
is no sign of its ugliness. As a matter of fact, it is the variety about the
leaves which gives a tree its life-like beauty. I can picture a
machine-made tree whose every leaf would be absolutely the same
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

377

size. It would look a ghastly thing, because we have not yet ceased to
love the living tree. And, why should the cost of khaddar, good or
bad, worry us if every penny we pay for it goes directly into the
pockets of the starving millions? My experience is that in the majority
of cases where people have taken to khaddar they have revised their
tastes about dress. Though khaddar may be dearer yard per yard than
the same quality of Manchester calico, the rejection of superfluous
clothing more than balances the extra cost. Those who wish to wear
fine khaddar can now obtain it at all the principal khadi centres.
The medical friend next questions the desirability of spinning
and gravely suggests that if everybody would spin, the poor people
who depend upon spinning for their livelihood would be losers. He
forgets that those who are called upon to spin by way of sacrifice
promote the khaddar atmosphere and make it possible to render
spinning easier and by small inventions and discoveries make it more
profitable. The wages of professional spinners cannot suffer in any
way whatsoever by sacrificial spinning.
The friend then asks:
Should doctors cease to prescribe foreign drugs and instead learn the use
of Ayurvedic and Unani drugs?

I have never considered the exclusion of everything foreign
under every conceivable circumstance as part of swadeshi. The broad
definition of swadeshi is the use of all home-made things to the
exclusion of foreign things in so far as such use is necessary for the
protection of home-industry more especially those industries without
which India will become pauperized. In my opinion, therefore,
swadeshi which excludes the use of everything foreign, because it is
foreign, no matter how beneficial it may be, and irrespective of the
fact that it impoverishes nobody, is a narrow interpretation of
swadeshi. Foreign drugs therefore, where they are highly efficacious
and not otherwise objectionable, I should use without the slightest
hesitation; that is, if I did not object to drugs altogether. But there is
no doubt that there is among many medical men with Western
diplomas a fashion, altogether harmful, of decrying Ayurvedic and
Unani drugs, some of which are indeed of great potency and cheap
withal. Any movement therefore on the part of those who have
received a training in Western medicine to explore the possibilities of
Ayurvedic and Unani systems would be most welcome and desirable.
The last question that this friend asks has been repeatedly
378

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

answered in these pages: “Are you against all machinery?”
Myanswer is emphatically, “No”. But, I am against its indiscriminate
multiplication. I refuse to be dazzled by the seeming triumph of
machinery. I am uncompromisingly against all destructive machinery.
But simple tools and instruments and such machinery as save
individual labour and lighten the burden of the millions of cottagers I
should welcome.
Young India, 17-6-1926

482. FOR MANAGERS OF KHADI CENTRES
Readers must have noticed the interesting information I have
been recently publishing about different khadi centres. I am now
tempted to ask all khadi centres to send me the following particulars:
(1) Number of spinners supported, with sex, religion and, if
possible, age. Wages paid to them. Their average monthly earnings
from spinning. Count spun. Monthly output of yarn received.
Number of villages served.
(2) If the cotton is hand-ginned, the quantity ginned and the
rate paid. The number of ginners employed. Their total earnings.
(3) If carding is done by professional carders, the number of
carders and sliver-makers employed. The rate of wages paid to each.
The total amount paid to them per month.
(4) Number of weavers employed. The rate paid to them and
total earned by them. The total output of khadi in yards, with width
and in weight.
(5) Cost of khadi up to weaving. Sale price. The total of local
sales. Other sales.
(6) Establishment charges. Number of men and women, paid or
volunteers, working in connection with the centre.
I hope that all the superintendents who see this paragraph will
kindly send me their returns. I would also add that these managers
would add any further any new particulars that they may consider to
be of interest to the movement.
Young India, 17-6-1926

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

379

483. KHADDAR IN NILGIRI DISTRICT
Khaddar is being hawked in the Nilgiri District, a wealthy
landlord having placed at the disposal of the khaddar workers his
bungalow for storing khadi and for their residence during their tour.
It appears that there was an exhibition at the Government Botanical
Gardens under the aegis of the Nilgiri Agri-Horticultural Society. An
application was made for exhibiting khaddar and spinning-wheels
there. The Secretary replied that the exhibits could not be allowed for
want of space although it is stated that the Secretary assured the public
that exhibits of any kind, although not for competition, were invited
for giving added strength to the show.
I publish this information as it is received though it seemed
difficult to believe that any Secretary would be guilty of such
childishness as to refuse khadi exhibits in spite of the open invitation
referred to. I shall be glad to publish any explanation that the
Secretary may have to offer, if he cares to, for the conduct ascribed to
him.
Young India, 17-6-1926

484. CATTLE WEALTH
The reader who has been following Sjt. V. G. Desai’s writings about
the cow could not have failed to notice the fact that in no other
country in the world save India are cattle a burden on the land or its
people. It may be said that the slaughter of cattle is not only not
repugnant to the vast majority of people in other lands but they
deliberately kill out superfluous cattle. One may even go further and
say that in such countries there is no such thing as superfluous cattle,
because cattle are actually bred for slaughter. In this argument there is
no doubt considerable force. But all the writings in these pages are
devoted to showing that, although the vast majority of people in India
will not slaughter cattle for food, by judicious management, her cattle
need not become a burden on the land and that their slaughter can be
made so dear as to enable only those people to slaughter who will do
so for luxury or in the name of religion. The aim of Young India
writings is to show that cattle at thepresent moment go to the
slaughter-houses because of our criminal negligence and want of
proper knowledge. It is further to show that the saving of an
enormous number of cattle is more a problem of economics than
380

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

religion; or rather to show that there is no conflict between religion
and economics. Indeed, I have myself gone further and stated that a
religion which is in conflict with fundamental economics is bad, and
that, in the reverse way, economics that are in conflict with
fundamental religion are also equally bad.
From the Western countries we can learn a great deal about
cattle economics apart from their slaughter for food. If the nation, or
say Hindus, would forego profits from cattle-keeping, the self-denial
would be enough to keep cattle during the natural term of their lives
even after they cease to give us a return in the shape of milk or
labour. The following passages1 from the introduction to Henry and
Morrisson’s treatise on Feeds and Feeding show how they regard
cattle wealth in America.
Young India, 17-6-1926

485. HAWKING KHADI
Praiseworthy efforts are being made in, all important khadi
centres to create a local market for khadi manufactured in those
centres. I take the following extracts 2 from a report of hawking
activities in Tamil Nad for a period covering l_ years ending last
March.
The following extracts from the Andhra report give the
experiences of hawkers in that province. The report covers a period of
ten months.3
Young India, 17-6-1926

1

The extracts, not reproduced here, gave details of many by-products of
animal husbandry useful to man.
2
The report, not reproduced here, furnished details of khadi sales by hawkers
in urban and rural areas and stressed the need for better propaganda in villages.
3
ibid
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

381

486. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI ,

Thursday, Jeth Sud 7 [June 17, 1926] 1
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. I had Pyarelal’s letter yesterday in which he
informed me of Dr. Mehta’s opinion. Appendicitis is something new
but I am not particularly worried. It is sufficient if you follow the
doctor’s instructions. I think the climate of the place will suit you.
There is no doubt that you will have to take complete rest. From your
future letters I shall expect to know whether the climate suits you or
not. I did not know that Matheran and Panchgani were at the same
height. I still think that Panchgani is higher. But we do not have to
make the comparison now.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
HOMI VILLA
P ANCHGANI
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

487. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
S ABARMATI ASHRAM,

June 18, 1926
CHI. PARASRAM,

I would now like to know when you can come. Wire me the final
date. I want to utilize you for Hindi Navajivan and work should be
done with expedition.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI P ARASRAMJI
THE “MALAVA MAYUR ” OFFICE
AJMER
From a copy of the Hindi: C.W. 6100. Courtesy: Parasram Mehrotra
1

382

From the postmark
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

488. LETTER TO KISHENSINGH CHAVDA
S ABARMATI ASHRAM,

Jeth Sud 8, 1982 [June 18, 1926]
BHAISHRI KISHENSINGH1 ,

It is good that you wrote to me. The letter was left in the diary
and, as soon as you left, I got busy with other matters. I could never
get away from them and remember it. Please pardon me.
I enclose a few scribbled sheets2.
From a microfilm Of the Gujarati: S.N. 19400

489. LETTER TO FULSINGH
S ABARMATI ,

Jeth Sud 8, 1982 [June 18, 1926] 3
BHAISHRI FULSINGHJI,

I have your letter, and I congratulate as well as thank you. I find
your criticism entirely valid. The thing is that enough money is not
spent on the job of correcting spellings at the Navajivan Prakashan
Mandir. In our efforts to bring out cheap publications, such mistakes
as you point out have crept in. I do not write this in self-defence but
to stress the faults, because I feel that books published by the
Navajivan Prakashan Mandir should be flawless. I shall discuss this in
detail with Swami. Please send a list of all the mistakes you have noted
down.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
BHAISHRI F ULSINGHJI
C/ O C HAROTAR KELAVANI MANDAL
ANAND
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 288

1
2
3

Gujarati writer and social worker
These are not available.
The postmark reads: “20-6-26, Ahmedabad”.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

383

490. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
S ABARMATI ASHRAM,

Friday, Jeth Sud 8 [June 18, 1926] 1
CHI. DEVDAS,

It would appear that you have taken a vow not to write. In
Bombay the rule was well observed, but from Mussoorie one letter has
been received for the whole Ashram. Eschew laziness. If Jamnadasji
cannot come here on the 26th,2 he should not worry. His health is also
somewhat indifferent. It is therefore imperative that he should get
perfectly fit. Aren’t Lalji’s [wounds] completely healed yet?
Mathuradas has now got wed to Panchgani.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19622

491. MESSAGE TO NELLORE ADI-ANDHRA CONFERENCE3
[Before June 19, 1926]
This is my message for the conference. I wish the conference
every success. The fact of its being held on the Pallipad Satyagraha
Ashram grounds is a tribute to the memory of the late D. Hanumantha
Row who devoted his life selflessly to the national cause.
I hope that the various conferences being held there will
emphasize the necessity of hand-spinning and khaddar and that the
black paint of untouchability that I discovered when I was in that
district will be removed as a result of the efforts of the conference.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Hindu, 21-6-1926

1

The reference to the addressee and Lalji convalescing at Mussoorie suggests
that the letter was written in 1926.
2
For a meeting of the All-India Spinners’ Association
3
This was sent to the secretary of the Pallipad Satyagraha Ashram where the
conference was held on June 19, 1926, under the presidentship of Harala Devendrudu,
M.L.C., D. K. Nageswara Rao Pantulu read out the message.

384

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

492. LETTER TO BIRENDRANATH SEN GUPTA
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI ,

June 19, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. In my opinion, attainment of divine
knowledge is impossible so long as there is any lustfulness in man.
A partner who is absolutely sure of his ground is not obliged to yield
to another. I hold mutual consent to be absolutely necessary. I do
recommend complete abstention for national workers. But I know that
this is a counsel of perfection and each one must decide for himself
and according to his ability.
Where one is doing one’s best even in the midst of chaos
and confusion, there is no cause for disappointment. If boys want
technical training, they should have either carpentry or smithy, not an
elaborate workshop fashioned after the European style but they
should work under an ordinary carpenter or smith and when they
have mastered their art, they will take up to European developments
and assimilate what is necessary. This becomes cheap and effective.
I think that you should confine yourself to the work
immediately before us. Mass education will come naturally out of any
honest and concentrated activity.
There is no trouble in the Gujarat Vidyapith except that some
professors who are really no non-co-operators even so far as
educational work is concerned had to resign.
I am sorry to hear about what you say of Babu Ramdas Gour.
By every kindly act we should all discourage him from his
explorations.
Yours sincerely,

BABU BIRENDRANATH S EN GUPTA
THE BIHAR VIDYAPITH
P.O. DIGHAGHAT
P ATNA
From a microfilm: S.N. 10943

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

385

493. LETTER TO A. S. DAVID
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 19, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. 1 I understand what you mean. But I must
confess that I still less like your latest letter. But I don’t propose to
argue. I repeat my advice that it will be better for you to come here
and see things for yourself before you take any further step
whatsover.
Yours sincerely,

A. S. DAVID, E SQ.
71, D ILKUSHA
LUCKNOW
From a photostat: S.N. 10944

494. LETTER TO S. RAMANATHAN
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI ,

June 19, 1926
MY DEAR RAMANATHAN,

I have seen the letter Maganlalji has written to you. I am
receiving bitter complaints about deterioration of the quality of Tamil
Nad khadi. This deterioration must be stopped at any cost and I think
that a public statement is necessary to admit and explain the existing
deterioration if you accept the verdict pronounced by so many
people. I translate for your benefit a paragraph from Jerajani’s2 letter
to me whom I referred the complaint for my guidance. He says:
The goodness that one noticed in Tirupur Khadi before is
certainly not to be found now. But during the current year there
is a little improvement. The khadi organization in Tirupur has
1

David had written to Gandhiji, on June 10, in regard to his interest in
bread-labour and his desire to join the Ashram. He had expressed his intention to
dissociate from Missionary activity and sought Gandhiji’s help and guidance. (S.N.
10917.) Vide also “Letter to A. S. David”, 5-6-1926.
2
Vithal Jerajani, a prominent constructive worker, connected with the
All-India Spinners’ Association

386

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

endeavoured to remedy the glaring defects this year. But there is
room for more improvements. They have standardized ten
strands to a quarter of an inch for the warp. But they have not
set a standard for the woof. And, therefore, the weavers put as
many or as few strands in the woof as they like. The tendency,
therefore, is for the khadi to be loose and weak.
Please investigate and let me know accurately if you admit
deterioration. If so, how far has it gone, what steps can be taken to
remedy the evil and how did the deterioration set in and who is
responsible for it?
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S. R AMANATHAN
S ECRETARY
ALL-INDIA S PINNERS’ ASSOCIATION
(TAMIL NAD BRANCH)
ERODE
From a microfilm: S.N. 11191

495. LETTER TO G. RAJAGOPALACHARI
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 19, 1926
I send you herewith a copy of my letter to Ramanathan. 1 You
will do, I know, whatever is possible.
I expect you here at the end of the month.
Yours sincerely,

ENCL. 1
S JT. C. R AJAGOPALACHARIAR
GANDHIASHRAM

P UDUPPALAYAM
TIRUCHENGODU
From a microfilm: S.N. 11190

1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

387

496. LETTER TO D. N. BAHADURJI
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 19, 1926
DEAR FRIEND

Nurgisben sent me your yarn for examination. It was not bad at
all. The strength was nearly 50 and evenness over 40. This is an
extremely good record for a beginner and for one who has not sat at
the wheel for hours at a time. What I would like you to aim at is 70
marks for strength and over 45 for evenness. The highest yet obtained
is 79 and 49, respectively.
I hope Mrs. Bahadurji is keeping all right. She owes me a letter.
Yours sincerely,

D. N. B AHADURJI , E SQ.
R IDGE R OAD
MALABAR HILL P.O.
BOMBAY
From a microfilm: S.N. 19623

497. LETTER TO SANTISUDHA GHOSH
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 19, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. Surely it is not too late for a girl of 19 to
change her mode of life and to obtain self-control. As a matter of fact,
it is never too late to do either of these two things. The only thing
needful is perfect faith in God and waiting upon Him to make the
necessary change.
I do believe that mind has much to do with the body. If you
have got any constitutional diseases, you should medically treat them,
388

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and if you are merely weak in body because of the weakness of mind,
faith in God and His power to make us better should restore you.
Yours sincerely,

S RIMATI S ANTISUDHA GHOSH
C/ O MR. K. N. GHOSH, M.A.
ALIKONDA (BARISAL)
From a photostat S.N. 19624

498. LETTER TO GANGABEHN MAJMUDAR
June 19, 1926
POOJYA GANGABEHN,

I have your letter. Your allegations are such as do not deserve to
be answered, so also your language. But since you agree to the
appointment of an arbitrator, we must appoint one. But I can see that
making the panchanama 1 is itself going to be a problem. However if
you get a panchanama made, send it to me so that I shall be able to
think over it. But I feel you must consult a lawyer about all this.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S. N. 10942

499. LETTER TO MOTILAL ROY
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI ,

June 19, 1926
DEAR MOTI BABU,

I have your letter. I do hope that your khadi work is making
steady progress. Do please keep me informed of the happenings from
time to time.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
BABU MOTILAL R OY
P RABARTAK S ANGH
C HANDRANAGAR
BENGAL
From a photostat: G.N. 11026

1

A written statement announcing the appointment of an arbitrator or
arbitrators and terms of reference
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

389

500. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

Jyaistha Shukla 9 [June 19, 1926] 1
BHAI GHANSHYAMDASJI,

Of course you know about the loss incurred by the Servants of
India Society. In this connection Srinivasa Sastri has asked me also to
go round with a begging bowl. He has a right to ask me. I have
already written in Young India, but Sastriji desires that I should write
to my friends also. Although I do not approve of the political
activities of the Society, I cannot forget the honesty, patriotism and
sacrifice of its members and therefore I look upon it as a duty of
every patriot to support and sustain it. If you hold the same opinion,
do send some donation and, if possible, ask your other friends also to
give something.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From the Hindi original: C.W. 6129. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

501. MISCELLANEOUS
C OMMUNITY DINNER AFTER A DEATH

A gentleman writes as follows, expressing his feelings about my
describing the custom of giving a community dinner after a death as
uncivilized:2
I have stated so often that all that is written in Sanskrit should
not be regarded as holy scriptures. Nor should everything which we
find written in the Manusmriti and other authoritative works be
accepted as coming from the pen of the original authors of the works,
or, even if that is so, as having literal authority at the present day. I do
nothing of the sort. Certain principles aresanatana 3, and people who
1

In 1926 two presses of the Servants of India Society were destroyed by the
fire. The reference to the loss indicates that the letter was written in that year; vide
“Servants of India Society’s Relief Fund”, 24-6-1926.
2
The letter is not translated here. The correspondent had asked Gandhiji how,
calling himself a sanatani Hindu, he could denounce the practice of community
dinners after a death, which was enjoined by the Shastras.
3
Eternal

390

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

believe in them are sanatanis; but we need not believe that the
practices which were enjoined in certain ages on the basis of those
principles are valid in other ages too. Customs and practices change
with place, time and circumstances. The practice of giving a
community dinner after someone’s death may have had some
meaning in old days, but in modern times our reason cannot accept it.
Faith has no place in a sphere in which we can exercise our reason.
Faith has meaning only in relation to what is above reason. In this
case, our reason tells us that giving a community dinner after a death
is not a part of dharma. Our experience of the world also tells us that
no other religion enjoins or sanctions such a practice. We should
therefore, have much stronger reason than the authority of Sanskrit
verses to accept such dinners as enjoined in Hinduism. They are not at
all consistent with the principles taught by the holy books of
Hinduism or, for that matter, by the holy books of any other religion.
We can see with our own eyes the harm they do. Against this evidence
of direct observation, what weight can we attach to Sanskrit verses.
Neither our reason nor our heart nor our knowledge of other
countries of the world justifies the practice of giving community
dinners after a death. I have no better reason than this, and no one
need be expected to have, for believing that such dinners are
uncivilized. As those who believe that everything old is bad are wrong,
so also are those who believe that it is good. Whether old or new,
everything should be tested on the anvil of reason, and anything
which does not stand the test should be rejected.
LIQUOR S HOPS AND P ARSIS

A Parsi gentleman writes to say:1
This correspondent has provided me a double opportunity, for though
I write very little these days against the evil of drink my conviction has
not become less strong. I have now an opportunity of showing this,
and I can also, at the same time, remove a misundersta-nding. Let us
deal with the second point first. I have never said that only Parsis
should stop running liquor-booths. My view is that all communities
should forgo the financial benefit which the liquor trade may bring.
There are many other means of honest livelihood, against which no
1

The letter is not translated here. The correspondent had requested Gandhiji to
state his view about the general impression among Parsis that, whereas he pleaded
with them to stop running liquor-booths, he made no such appeal to Hindus, some of
whom took over booths given up by Parsis.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

391

one can raise any objection. I cannot but feel sorry when I see anyone
leaving these and taking up liquor trade. If I had power in my hands,
not a single liquor shop would remain in the country. There is no
such thing as the right of drinking and, therefore, there would be no
question of depriving people of a legitimate right. Selling liquor
should be as much a crime as stealing. If I have addressed my appeal
to Parsis, that is because they are more enlightened than others and I
expect more from them. I cannot, however, approve of anyone,
whether he is a high-caste Hindu or a low-caste Hindu or belongs to
some other community, carrying on liquor trade. Let us take up the
first question. I still hold, in their entirety, the views about the evil of
drinking which I expressed in 1920-21. The more I think and
observe, the more terrible the harm done by the evil of drinking
appears to me. Some crimes are wholly the result of drinking. I am,
therefore, impatient to take every possible legitimate measure to
abolish this evil. But our helplessness is so great that we cannot
quickly carry out even such a beneficial programme as prohibition. If
I could teach people to adhere to non-violence, I would once again
start the movement of picketing liquor shops. But it seems today that
we worship only the power of the sword. In such circumst-ances, I do
not have the courage to advocate any strong measure.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 20-6-1926

502. KHADI IN SURAT
Tours for the sale of khadi, wherever they were undertaken,
seem to have been successful. Shri Bharucha writes to say:1
I am quite sure that such tours would succeed in other places as
this one has done in Surat. All that is required is hard work and tact.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 20-6-1926

1

The extract is not translated here. The correspondent had stated that during a
tour of three and a half days he had sold khadi worth Rs. 2,800.

392

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

503. THE WHEEL OF “ YAJNA” IN NEPAL
If the spinning-wheel is a means of yajna in this age and this
country, and if yajna (sacrifice) has a place among all people and all
religions, there is no harm in describing it as the wheel of yajna. This
name occurred to me without any effort on my part when I read the
following letter. Its author1, who comes from Nepal, is an inmate of
the Ashram. He had to go through much suffering to be able to join
the Ashram. He decided to master the science of the spinning-wheel
and popularize it among the poor in Nepal. It is now three months
since he returned to Nepal, and he has written a letter in Hindi giving
an account of his work there during this period. The following is a
translation of it:2
This is an example of work worth emulating by every lover of
the spinning-wheel. This khadi-worker has the capacity for
self-sacrifice, determination, knowledge of the science of spinning,
discrimination and humility. Anyone who has these virtues will come
by other wealth easily enough.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 20-6-1926

504. LETTER TO KRISHNADAS
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 20, 1926
MY DEAR KRISHNADAS,

I have your letter at last after having waited for it for a
long time. The decision not to go to Finland has certainly given
me immense relief and satisfaction.3 The temptation to go was strong
but I felt that the invitation was not of the character that would
move me from India. If I had gone at all, I would have gone not to
1

Tulsi Maher
The letter is not translated here.
3
On April 6, 1926, K. T. Paul had conveyed to Gandhiji an invitation to
attend the World Conference of Young Men’s Christian Association at Helsingfors,
Finland, in August 1926. After considerable correspondence, Gandhiji ultimately
declined. Vide “Letter to K. T. Paul”, 7-6-1926.
2

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

393

deliver any political message but to come in contact with the student
world and talk to them about the purity of personal life. It was that
aspect of it which first tempted me. But when I discovered that the
invitation was prompted and not spontaneous I felt that there was no
call. I entirely endorse Guruji’s opinion that if one has no influence
in one’s own surroundings, one cannot gain it by going out of them
but by success without, gain influence within.
For personal reasons I am certainly sorry that you are not
returning to me for the time being. But I approve your decision to
remain there to serve Guruji and to be at your mother’s call whenever
she requires your presence. You will send for more money without
hesitation whenever you require it.
I am keeping good health. Devdas is taking his convalescence
with Lalji in Mussoorie. Jamnalalji and Laxmidasbhai are also there.
Jamnalalji probably returns here on the 26th. I had seen the Indian
Review verse. Are you now much stronger than you were? I suppose
you know that Tulsi Maher is doing extremely well in Nepal. Pyarelal
is still with Mathuradas who has gone to Panchgani on Doctor
Mehta’s advice.
Yours,

S JT. K RISHNADAS
C/ O S. C. G UHA , E SQ.
DARBHANGA
From a microfilm: S.N. 19625

505. LETTER TO TULSIDAS
THE ASHRAM,

Monday, June 21, 1926
BHAISHRI TULSIDAS,

Girdhari writes that he, too, has now been discharged [from the
hospital]. So I feel like writing something to you. Shall I thank you? I
know that none of us deserved the affection you have shown to my
friends. How can I repay such affection? It would be some sort of
compensation if these youths and myself devote our whole life to the
394

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

service of the country. May God bless you.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
S IR HARKISHANDAS HOSPITAL
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19918

506. LETTER TO DR. DALAL
THE ASHRAM,

Monday, June 21, 1926
BHAISHRI

Girdhari writes today that he has been discharged [from the
hospital]. May I then write a word of thanks? I know writing
minimizes the value. You and I are both busy. Your time should not
be wasted. These youths and I can perhaps repay your services to
some extent by devoting ourselves to the service of the country.
Devdas has said a lot about your simplicity and I am very happy to
hear it all.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
DR. D ALAL
C HOWPATTY
BOMBAY
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19919

507. LETTER TO PATTABHI SITARAMAYYA
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 22, 1926
DEAR DR. PATTABHI,

You know that all my sympathies are with you in your great
sorrow. 1 I never knew anything about Sudakshina’s death. Though I
1
While replying to a postcard from Gandhiji, Sitaramayya had written of the
death of his eight-year-old daughter and recalled how, when only three years old, she
had given away her bangles for Gandhiji’s work (S.N. 10935).

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

395

cannot recall her features, I well remember her having parted with her
bangles with the greatest cheerfulness. Do please come and pass some
time with us in the Ashram whenever you can.
Now about Keshu. I did not write on behalf of Maganlal. 1 As
Keshu is just now acting as one of the nurses for me, he takes me in
his confidence. I do not know that Maganlal even now knows that I
am in correspondence with you about him. Not that he need not know
it; but we all remain so busy that, when we do talk, we talk only about
things necessary. And as I have nothing to consult him about in the
matter of Keshu’s education, I have not discussed with him the plans I
am maturing. However, he does know that Keshu wants to increase his
knowledge of mechanical engineering. Is there a technical institute in
the Mysore State? And, if there is, do you know anything about it?
And do you claim yours to be the best in India? Please complete the
information by telling me whether you have any such thing as terms
during the year or are you open all the year round to receive pupils
whenever they come?
Yours sincerely,

DR. P ATTABHI S ITARAMAYYA
MASULIPATAM
From a photostat: S.N. 10949

508. LETTER TO N. S. VARADACHARI
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 22, 1926
MY DEAR VARADACHARI,

Your letter has much relieved me. I know that your resolution
will remove all your difficulties. The question of increment is a mere
detail. You will not be alarmed at the manner in which I have
discussed the problem arising from letters like yours. There has been
a crop of such letters recently from several parts of India. I thought,
1
Sitaramayya had mistaken Gandhiji’s query regarding technical education as
being intended for Maganlal Gandhi, and had praised the latter’s “incipient genius”
which would benefit by workshop experience. Vide “Letter to Satish Chandra Das
Gupta”, 22-6-1926.

396

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

therefore, that I would gently discuss the problem in the pages of
Young India.
I have seen C.R.’s 1 letter to you. I saw it only yesterday,
Shankerlal being in Bombay. The thought never grasped my mind
that Ramanathan’s case and the increase given to him had anything to
do with you. On the contrary, Shankerlal told me that your pecuniary
difficulty arose, or at least came to his notice, earlier than
Ramanathan’s. And in any case, I have too great regard for you even
to suspect that you would want to take an improper advantage of any
situation.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. N. S. V ARADACHARI
From a microfilm: S.N. 11194

509. A LETTER2
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 22, 1926
MY DEAR FRIEND,

Why do you say that I am seemingly or otherwise indifferent
towards you or your cause? I have mentioned to you my difficulty.
I cannot make any dispositions without the assistance of ordinary
channels created by the Charkha Sangh. If I make personal
dispositions of the Charkha Sangh funds, the whole organization will
break down. I am, therefore, pleading with you not to distrust Satis
Babu, but do as he wishes you to do and you will find that, in the end,
you will get all the facilities you need. Why do you distrust Satis
Babu? The two letters you have sent me are plain enough. But if you
cannot hit it off with him, join the Abhoy Ashram. If we are to make
khadi a great success that it should become in the near future, we must
learn to work in co-operation, subordinate our own views, inclinations
and our pride. Differences of principle are few and far between. In
your own case, after all there is no principle at stake. You may
consider your way of khadi work to be superior to that suggested by
another. Surely that is no cause for heart burning or even dispute,
except by your. . . .
From a copy: S. N. 11195R
1
2

C. Rajagopalachari
Addressee not known

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

397

510. LETTER TO MOHAMMAD SHAFEE
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 22, 1926
DEAR SHAFEE SAHIB,

I was delighted to receive your long, interesting and hopeful
letter. 1 I have been following your doings in Bihar. It is a move in the
right direction. Some of the statements you make in your letter are
painful reading. I should be deeply hurt to find that Hindus had the
designs upon the Mussalmans that you describe in your letter.2
I take it I have your permission to discuss your letter with
Rajendrababu.
For myself, you will find me coming out of my shell the
moment I see that God wanted me to do so. For the present my action
lies in seeming inaction.
Yours sincerely,

MOHAMMAD S HAFEE, E SQ.
OF MUZAFFARPUR
BIHAR S HARIF
From a photostat: S.N. 11073

1

In this Mohammad Shafee, who recalled having met Gandhiji at Ahmedabad
on May 5 and 6, spoke of his endeavours “to bring about some understanding between
the Hindu and Muslim workers of my Province” and of a conference of Hindu-Muslim
unity workers held at Chapra on June 8, 9 and 10. A joint Hindu-Muslim deputation
had toured the Province “to carry the message of peace to the masses”. Shafee had
stressed in his letter that it was time “to pursue the work of reconciliation with greater
vigour, in a larger area and with bigger personalities” (S.N. 11073).
2
Shafee had alleged that some Congress workers considered that in Bihar the
Hindus, by virtue of their superior numbers, could retaliate against the Muslims for
wrongs done to the Hindus in other Provinces.

398

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

511. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 22, 1926
DEAR SATIS BABU,

There are two things in which I want your help outside the khadi
work. Keshu, as you are aware, is a born mechanic. He wants to make
further progress. That he thinks he can only do by being in some
mechanical engineering institution or shop. I would like to satisfy his
ambition. But I do not know where he could be put. I have sent for
the syllabus from the Andhra National Institute at Masulipatam, 1
which I have got. But I know that you can give me the best advice in
this matter. That is one thing.
The second is the soap question. As the colony here is growing
in extent, the expense of soap increases. A cake of soap for the body
costs 4 to 6 annas. Washing soap a cake two annas. Is there not a
cheaper way of cleaning our bodies and our clothes if one wants to
use something more than water? If you give me a simple recipe, I shall
certainly make the soap at the Ashram if that proves cheaper. Having
manufactured so much soap, you can perhaps tell me what to do. I
want a prescription something after Dr. Ray’s style. You may
remember what he said about tooth powders. He said: “the Bengal
Chemical Works tooth powder was for fools, but chalk or powdered
coal was the best powder for wise men like himself.” Is there any such
simple soap prescription for wise men?
I observe Hemaprabhadevi has ordered 12 copies of Ashram
Bhajanavali. The last edition is almost all exhausted and I have
discovered many typographical errors in it. It is the most popular
publication of the Navajivan Printing Press. The edition is now being
carefully revised by a committee and I hope that in a short time a
faultless edition will be published when she can have as many copies
as she likes.
I do not mind your not coming if you are wanted for your work
there. I shan’t strive with you about your personal finance. I am
1

Vide “Letter to Pattabhi Sitaramayya”, 22-6-1926.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

399

satisfied so long as both of you keep perfect health and perfect
temper.
Yours,

S JT. S ATIS C H. D AS GUPTA
KHADI P RATISHTHAN
170, B OW BAZAAR S T.
C ALCUTTA
From a photostat: S.N. 19630

512. LETTER TO MRS. PERIN CAPTAIN1
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 22, 1926
You do remember Miss Haussding. Don’t you? You will meet
her on Friday. I had expected a letter last week. But none came. Her
main letters have, however, begun to arrive. She is therefore likely to
come by the boat (Razmak) mentioned by her. And if she has arrived,
please telegraph to me so that I can send someone to meet her at
Ahmedabad station.
Yours,

MRS. P ERIN C APTAIN
ISLAM C LUB BUILDINGS
C HAUPATI
BOMBAY
From a microfilm: S.N. 19631

513. LETTER TO K. T. MATHEW
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 22, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I think that even if you alone resign and seek
re-election, it would be some education for the people. Satyagraha on
1

400

Grand-daughter of Dadabhai Naoroji
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

your part would certainly be out of place.
Whilst generally speaking practice of law is not an ennobling
task, it is not difficult to retain one’s principles and earn a livelihood
from the practice of that profession. I think it will be difficult to find
support such as you require from any public institution, and it will be
a pity not to utilize the legal ability you have acquired in maintaining
yourself. I have no doubt that in Cochin itself there is great scope for
men like you for doing public service.
Yours sincerely,

K. T. MATHEW, E SQ.
MEMBER LEGISLATIVE C OUNCIL
KUNNAMKULAM
C OCHIN S TATE
From a microfilm: S.N. 11226

514. LETTER TO V. V. DASTANE
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 22, 1926
MY DEAR DASTANE,

I have your letter. The meeting of the Council is on the 26th,
not 22nd. It is not the first meeting of the Council. Several meetings
have taken place.
Is your reminding about 2,000 yards a wish for alteration in
the rule? If it is, I am afraid we must not touch the rules as yet,
though I hold the same opinion as you that it would be better if we
have 2,000 and regular half hour per day. I am afraid many
membersare in arrears. Unsteadiness is the bane of our life.
Though I have not answered your query about the loan of
Rs. 500, it is not as if I have not enquired about it. I understand from
Shankerlal that Jamnalalji would not like to divert the use of the fund.
You should write to him. He is likely to be here on the 26th instant.
Yours,

S JT. V. V. DASTANE
JALGAON
From a microfilm: S.N. 11192

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

401

515. LETTER TO TIRATHRAM TANEJA
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 22, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter for which I thank you. I suppose not much
skill is required for the use of foreign dyes. Is it not a fact that one
cause of their popularity and superiority is the facility with which
foreign dyes can be handled? Those, therefore, who want to use
foreign dyes are using them. But a body like the All-India Spinners’
Association can make researches only in indigenous dyes. The utmost
it can do is not to boycott foreign dyes.
I agree with you that for hand-spinning to become more
widespread, the quality of yarn should be improved both in strength
and evenness. About the comparative merits of hand-weaving, I am
afraid hand-weaving will not work among millions, if only because it
is not available for millions. And it is too complicated for millions to
learn. Hand-spinning is the only thing that everybody can do.
Therefore, our concentration must be on that and that alone.
Your sincerely,

S JT. T IRATHRAM
From a copy: S.N. 11193

402

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

516. LETTER TO BHUPENDRA NARAYAN SEN
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 22, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I am glad you are going back to Arambagh,
You must develop the power of resisting malaria. I know nothing
about the resignation of Tarini Babu. I shall enquire. But supposing
that he accepts the inspectorship and you do something else, who will
do the actual work in Arambagh? It seems to me to be a wrong
method of going about the work, if it is a matter of finding
maintenance, otherwise why not belong to the Khadi Pratishthan and
work Arambagh under Khadi Pratishthan? And if you do not care for
Khadi Pratishthan, why not belong to the Abhoy Ashram? And if you
are to take a course of medicine, the question again arises who will
work Arambagh? My impression is that you should be where your
work is or else you will make no headway. It may be however that I
have not yet grasped the meaning of what you have described in your
letter. You will then explain.
I hope Profulla has now got rid of his eye trouble. I have not a
shadow of doubt that the time is coming when the country will learn
that there is no work but the work of construction. It opens up such
illimitable scope for solid work. What does it matter whether along
those lines we get swaraj today or tomorrow? I know that it is the
shortest cut,
I must not be tempted to move out of Sabarmati during this
year. God will open a way for me next year.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. B HUPENDRA NARAYAN S EN
23, N ANDARAM S EN S TREET
P OST HATKHOLA
C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm: S.N. 11196

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

403

517. LETTER TO CHAMPABEHN MEHTA
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

Tuesday1, Jeth Sud 11, June 22, 1926
CHI. CHAMPA2 ,

I have your letter. Much time has passed since I have had news
of the children’s health. Bhai Manilal is in Ahmedabad. He spoke of
having got your letter. I write this letter to express the hope I have in
you. I hear that Chi. Ratilal is extravagant with his money. Now he has
asked for money from me. I have written to him saying that I can give
him nothing without Doctor’s permission. I don’t know whether you
get a chance to read the letters I write to him. I take it that you do.
What I expect you to do is not to let Ratilal spend money
unnecessarily. Keep a proper account or make him do it. I expect you
to gain a hold over Ratilal by your self-control and strength of
character so that he might mend. This work, I think, is not beyond the
capacity of a virtuous woman. No one can deal with the mental
infirmity of Ratilal but you, if you wish, can certainly do that. You
have given me that hope.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19626

518. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

Tuesday, June 22, 1926
CHI. MATHURADAS,

Received your letter. It is good that you have taken a bungalow.
There was another letter from Sir Prabhashanker Pattani saying that
we should not hesitate to keep his bungalow. But I feel that we should
not keep it too long. It is good that you intend to go to Matheran. But
if you notice strikingly good results in Panchgani, I think, you should
not move from there. One prefers Panchgani because of its altitude. In
1
2

404

The source has Tuesday; however, in 1926 Jeth Sud 11 fell on Monday.
Daughter-in-law of Dr. Pranjivandas Mehta
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Matheran you can get cool air but you cannot have the height—that is
its defect. But why talk now about what would arise after September?
In Bombay you won’t need the help of anyone—would you? After
going to Panchgani if you need Mahadev, write to me. Panchgani is a
big town. Facilities for shopping, etc., are as good as at Deolali. So
Pyarelal would have no difficulties there.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19628

519. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI ,

Tuesday [June 22, 1926] 1
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. I had no doubt at all that the climate there
would suit you. All of you will enjoy it during the rains. On my
inquiring many people told me that water evaporates there as fast as it
rains. Where there is moisture, there is danger. Girdhari was
discharged from the hospital the day before yesterday.
Blessings from

BAPU
S JT. M ATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
HOMI VILLA
P ANCHGANI
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

520. LETTER TO DUDABHAI
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

Tuesday, June 22, 1926
BHAI DUDABHAI,

I have your letter. Write to Bhai Balwantrai saying that you have
not received your salary yet. It is necessary that you keep on writing
to him about all the difficulties you have. He too has suggested it. I
was very happy at your decision not to leave the school at any cost. I
had a talk with Bhai Balwantrai about your salary. Most probably you
1

From the postmark

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

405

will have no difficulty now. Write to me promptly when Lakshmi’s
clothes are torn and, if the new ones are to be stitched here, send me
her measurements also.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19629

521. LETTER TO VISHNU KARANDIKAR
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 23, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter with enclosures. The letters are of no use to
me, for, as you know, Young India is not a newspaper. It is, as a friend
has aptly said, a viewspaper. I could not, therefore, take in your notes
unless I alter the whole scope of the paper which I must not do.
I am asking the manager of the Satyagraha Ashram to send you some
Ashram photographs if there are any available. You need
not worry about paying for them. All the recent photographs of mine
that you may have seen are snapshots taken unawares, for, for the last
ten years, I have not given a sitting to any photographer.
I shall see to it that you get a complimentary copy of Young
India regularly. My articles are always written on almost the last day
possible for going to print and the date of publication is so arranged
as to catch the European mail of the same week. Therefore it is not
possible to send you an advance copy of my articles.

VISHNU KARANDIKAR
61, FLEET S TREET
LONDON E.C. 4
From a photostat: S.N. 10773

406

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

522. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 23, 1926
MY DEAR CHILD,

I have your letter. Now you know everything about the much
talked of visit to Finland. I felt that the time had not yet arrived for
going. I could see no clear definite light. Undoubtedly, had I gone to
Finland, I would have gone to Denmark also. I had made that definite
promise to Anne Marie and I would have loved to have seen your own
home. But that was not to be.
Mirabai is doing quite well and she is standing the heat
wonderfully well. I am glad you have a helper. You have not yet told
me what sort and what quantity of old khaddar is to be sent to you.
But Maganlal has made a parcel. It is being despatched today to the
address given by you at ‘Craiglea’ I suppose ‘Craiglea’ is the name
of the cottage in Kodaikanal. It is quite like Menon that he should be
devoting himself to the care of the sick. You refer to Rs. 10/-. Nothing
has been received here as yet. Nothing need be sent.
Yours,

BAPU
MRS. E STHER MENON
‘CRAIGLEA ’
KODAIKANAL
From a photostat of the original in N. A. I.; also My Dear Child, p. 81

523. LETTER TO V. A. SUNDARAM
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 23, 1926
MY DEAR SUNDARAM,

It was sweet of you to have sent me those Tamil hymns so as to
reach me on my silence day and the date; it was quite easy reading for
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

407

me and your translation was a great help. It is like paraphrase of
verses from the Bhagavad Gita or from the Bible.
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 3192

524. LETTER TO NAJUKLAL N. CHOKSI
S ABARMATI ASHRAM,

Jeth Sud 13, 1982, June 23, 1926
BHAISHRI NAJUKLAL,

I have your letter. I do hope you realize that my last letter to
you and Moti 1 remains unanswered. Ashram Samachar was not
published last week owing to Maganlal’s illness. Most probably it will
come out this week. I get news from Bhai Lakshmidas almost daily.
Only today there has been no letter from him. He is keeping good
health. He does not get fever there. He also does a lot of walking.
Anandi had fever for two days. Now she is all right. Tell Moti to shed
laziness and write a letter.
Everyone is awaiting the rains now.
Blessings from

BAPU
BHAISHRI NAJUKLAL
S EVASHRAM
BROACH
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 12129

525. LETTER TO JAGJIVAN
S ABARMATI ASHRAM,

Jeth Sud 13, 1982, June 23, 1926
BHAI JAGJIVAN,

Your letter. You should not leave your present school in a
hurry. Moreover, I will have to ask Amritlal Sheth before taking you
1

408

Wife of the addressee and daughter of Laxmidas Asar
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

elsewhere. My advice to you is, tell him about all your difficulties and
stay where you are.

C/ O ANTYAJA S HALA
R ANPUR
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19633

526. LETTER TO SHAMBHUSHANKER
S ABARMATI ASHRAM,

Jeth Sud 13, 1982, June 23, 1926
BHAISHRI SHAMBHUSHANKER 1 ,

I had your letter. I accept and applaud your decision about
salary. You will draw Rs. 50 p.m. up to the month of July, so the
change will take effect from August onwards. I have not yet received
Bhai Jagjivandas’s letter. You have not sent me the copy of the
agreement which has been sent to you for your signature; but from
what you write I can see no objection to including the immovable
property if you wish to bind yourself. As I see it, the responsibility for
paying the damages will arise only for losses caused by your
carelessness; not for other losses. I also agree with you that there
should be a worker to help you. We should think over the conditions
on which such a man should be engaged. Let us hope that by the
grace of God it would rain. Think about and write to me of all the
jobs that are usually done during the rainy season and others that
could be done. It is better if you have a talk about khadi with
Maneklal and Chhaganlal. How much of such khadi could they have
with them? We have to think about it if it is much. The khadi that Bhai
Vajeshanker sells, in whose name does he get it made? How much
khadi has he got woven? Isn’t he in Hanod on behalf of the State?
There is only one principle underlying the khadi activity. In India
crores of people do not have any occupation except agriculture.
Sufficient livelihood for the crores cannot be obtained from
agriculture alone. Similarly, agriculture can’t take up their whole
time. They must have some other occupation and that is
hand-spinning. So we are propagating it everywhere. Khadi produced
1

A khadi worker of Gariyadhar in Saurashtra

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

409

from hand-spun yarn is thus a means of propagating spinning. We
endure the various fraudulent practices of [some] spinners, ginners
and weavers, etc., but when we come to a stage when we can’t bear
such practices, we stop taking work from them. The way you have
suggested is the only way to make them guileless. That is, we should
ourselves become guileless, pure, selfless and hardworking.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19634

527. LETTER TO NANABHAI BHATT
S ABARMATI ASHRAM,

Jeth Sud 13, 1982, June 23, 1926
BHAISHRI NANABHAI,

I send herewith Bhai Gokulbhai’s letter. I understand nothing in
it. When Vallabhbhai comes, I will talk about it. Let me know what is
your opinion. Can we, even if we want to, give our permission without
a meeting of the committee?
C/ O R ASHTRIYA S HALA
BOMBAY
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19635

528. CHARKHA IN OTHER LANDS
Sjt. C. Balaji Rao of Coimbatore has circulated printed extracts
collected with much labour from ‘Peoples of All Nations’ showing
what place the ancient wheel occupies in the homes of other peoples. I
reproduce them below slightly abridged:1
Only those who are obsessed with prejudice will refuse to see the
potency of the wheel in the foregoing extracts, assuming, ofcourse,
that the statements made in the original compilation are true. The
greatest obsession is the poor wage earned by the spinner. If we would
but get out of ourselves for a while and step into the shoes of the
famishing millions, we would at once discover that what appears
trifling to us is a fortune for them. We would further discover that
millions can add only a few pice to their daily income which, as it is, is
1

These are not reproduced here. They dealt with the position of the spinning
industry in various countries of Africa, Europe, Asia and South America.

410

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

no more than a few pice. It is at the most Rs. 40 per year, i.e., say 7
pice per day.
Young India, 24-6-1926

529. SERVANTS OF INDIA SOCIETY’S RELIEF FUND
I gladly publish the following appeal to the public made by
Sjt. Sastri:
The Servants of India Society have sustained a terrible loss by the
fire which brought to ruin the Arya Bhushan Press and the Dnyan Prakash
Press. These had been built up with great patience and foresight by Mr.
Gokhale, who knew the mutations of public support and desired to provide for
the Society a constant source of income. Deprived of their mainstay, the
members of the Society cannot but turn in their distress to their countrymen
for that prompt and generous help in money which alone can put them back in
their former position and enable them to resume their career of service to the
public. I have already appealed to personal friends through private letters, and
I wish by this means to reach the wider pubic who are interested in the Society
and its work. Sympathy and help are flowing in from all sides, and our hearts
have been gladdened beyond measure by the spontaneous expressions of
goodwill received from those who are not in habitual agreement with us on
public matters. As I said on another occasion, it seems as though the essential
kindliness of human nature, being so often forced out of its natural current by
conflict of interests, were only waiting for a pretext to come back to its own
channel.
We calculate that two lakhs of rupees would be required to enable us
to make a fresh start. The sum is large, and there is depression all round. Still
my colleague and I have every confidence that in a few months’ time we shall
get what we want. Our members will go round to various places, but they are
not many and cannot be everywhere. We look to our associates and
sympathizers in all parts of the country for active help. We beg them to
respond to this appeal as though it had been made to them individually and in
person. No amount is so small but it will be welcome; in fact small reflection
that we are known and appreciated by a wide circle of those whom we seek to
serve.

The total amount collected at the time of circulation of the
appeal amounted to over Rs. 26,000. I hope that the whole of the two
lacs required to set the two presses and the papers going will have
been subscribed by the time these lines appear in print. The true
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

411

insurance for public concerns like the Servants of India Society is
public goodwill reduced to concrete terms.
Young India, 24-6-1926

530. SACRIFICE
I have before me several letters from young men complaining
that they have so many family burdens that the poor salary they get
from public work is totally inadequate for their wants. One therefore
says he must give up public work and go to Europe by raising a loan
or securing a gift and increase his earning capacity; another is in
search of a paying job; yet another wants a capital to start a paying
business. Everyone of these young men is a sound, honest and
self-sacrificing worker. But a reaction has set in. Family requirements
have increased. Khadi or national education does not satisfy them.
They do not desire to be a burden upon public service by asking for
an increase. But the logical outcome of this attitude of mind must
mean, if it becomes at all general, either stoppage of the public service
which depends upon the labours of such men and women, or a
general indefinite increase which in its turn must bring about the same
undesirable result.
It was because this process of multiplication of wants out of
proportion to our surroundings was discovered to be going on with
increasing velocity that non-co-operation was conceived. And thus
conceived it was not non-co-operation with persons, but with an
attitude that was responsible for the system which had seized us in its
serpentine coils and which was reducing us to dust. The system had
raised the standard of living among us, its creatures, wholly
unwarranted by the general condition of the country. And since India
did not live upon exploitation of other peoples, the expansion of the
middle class who were also the middle-men meant extinction of the
lowest strata. Hence the smallest villages were dying out through sheer
exhaustion. This was all plain to many of us in 1920. The arresting
movement is yet in its infancy. Let us not hinder it by any hasty
action.
This artificial increase in our wants has been felt more severely
than it otherwise would have been, because of the persistence of the
family system which the Western method is ill-designed to support.
The joint system having become wooden, its evils have become
412

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

accentuated, its sweet graces have disappeared. Thus, evil has been
added to evil.
Our self-sacrifice must, therefore, be in terms of the requirements of the country. The reforms required are more from within
than from without. A perfect constitution superimposed upon a rotten
internal condition will be like a whited sepulchre.
The process of self-purification must therefore be completed.
The spirit of self-sacrifice must be extended. Great as the sacrifice has
been, it is nothing compared to the demands made upon us by the
country. We dare not support able-bodied members of the family—
men or women—who will not work. We may not contribute a single
pice towards the expenses of conforming to meaningless or
superstitious customs, such as caste-dinners, or towards forming
expensive marriage connections. Every marriage and every death
brings an unnecessary, cruel burden upon the head of the family. We
must refuse to regard such acts of self-denial as self-sacrifice. They
are evils to be counteracted with courage and resolution.
There is too, for us, the inordinately expensive education. When
it is difficult for millions even to make the two ends meet, when
millions are dying of starvation, it is monstrous to think of giving our
relatives a costly education. Expansion of the mind will come from
hard experience, not necessarily in the college or the school-room.
When some of us deny ourselves and ours the so-called higher
education, we shall find true means of giving and receiving a really
high education. Is there not, may there not be, a way of each boy
paying for his own education? There may be no such way. Whether
there is or there is not such a way is irrelevant. But there is no doubt
that when we deny ourselves the way of expensive education seeing
that aspiration after higher education is a laudable end, we shall find
out a way of fulfilling it more in accord with our surroundings. The
golden rule to apply in all such cases is resolutely to refuse to have
what millions cannot. This ability to refuse will not descend upon us
all of a sudden. The first thing is to cultivate the mental attitude that
will not have possessions or facilities denied to millions, and the next
immediate thing is to re-arrange our lives as fast as possible in
accordance with that mentality.
Without a large, very large, army of such self-sacrificing and
determined workers, real progress of the masses, I hold, to be an
impossibility. And without that progress, there is no such thing as
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

413

swaraj. Progress towards swaraj will be in exact proportion to the
increase in the number of workers who will dare to sacrifice their all
for the cause of the poor.
Young India, 24-6-1926

531. ‘MAHATMAJI’S ORDER’
A teacher writes:
There is a small group of boys of our school in . . . who have been
regularly sending 1,000 yards of self-spun yarn to the A.I.S.A. for some
months, and they have been doing this little service merely on account of
intense love for you. If anyone asks them the reason for their spinning, they
reply: ‘It is Mahatmaji’s order. It has got to be obeyed.’ I think such mentality
on the part of little boys is to be encouraged in every way. Slave mentality is
something quite different from the spirit of hero-worship or implicit
obedience. These boys are now anxious to get some message from you in your
own handwriting for their inspiration. I am sure their request will be complied
with.

I do not know whether the mentality betrayed by this letter is
hero-worship or blind worship. I can conceive occasions when implicit
obedience without waiting for reasoning out causes is a necessity. It is
essentially the quality of a soldier. And no nation can make
substantial progress without the possession of that quality by a vast
number of its people. But occasions for such obedience are and must
be rare in any well-ordered society. The worst thing that can happen
to boys in a school is to have to render blind obedience to everything
that the teacher says. On the contrary, if teachers are to stimulate the
reasoning faculty of boys and girls under their care, they would
continuously tax their reason and make them think for themselves.
Faith only begins where reason stops. But there are very few actions in
the world for which reasonable justification cannot be found. A
teacher would not tolerate from his pupils, who were asked to account
for drinking boiled and filtered water in a locality where the quality of
well-water was suspected, an answer to the effect that such were the
orders of a mahatma. And if it be wrong to admit such an answer, in
the supposed case, it is surely wrong to approve of the justification
for spinning that the boys of the school in question have given for
their spinning. When I am dislodged from my mahatmaship in that
school, as I have certainly been dislodged in several homes to my
414

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

knowledge (for some of my correspondents have been gracious
enough to inform me of their lost love), I am afraid the
spinning-wheel will be destroyed. Surely, a cause is often greater than
the man. Certainly, the spinning-wheel is greater than myself. I should
be exceedingly sorry to find, when the hero-worship of me is
destroyed, because of some fatuous mistakes that I may commit or
because people are enraged against me for some cause or other, that
the good cause of the spinning-wheel had to suffer. It is therefore
infinitely better that the pupils should reason out for themselves all the
things that are capable of being so treated. The spinning-wheel is
essentially a thing for reasoning out. With it, in my opinion, is mixed
up the well-being of the whole mass of Indian humanity. Pupils
should, therefore, learn something about the deep poverty of the
masses. They should have an ocular demonstration of some villages
that are crumbling down to pieces. They should know the population
of India. They should know the vast extent of this peninsula and they
should know what it is that all the many millions can do to add to their
scanty resources. They should learn to identify themselves with the
poor and the downtrodden in the land. They should be taught to deny
themselves, so far as possible, things that the poorest cannot have.
Then they will understand the virtue of spinning. It will then survive
any shock including disillusionment about myself. The cause of the
spinning-wheel is too great and too good to have to rest on mere
hero-worship. It lends itself to scientific economic treatment.
I know that there is among us a great deal of blind hero-worship
such as this correspondent has described, and I hope that the teachers
of national schools will take note of the warning I have uttered and
prevent their pupils from lazily basing their actions upon statements,
without testing, of men reputed to be great.
Young India, 24-6-1926

532. FOR A.I.S.A. MEMBERS
The managers of Khadi Bhandar, Princess Street, Bombay, and
of The A.I. Charkha Sangh Khadi Bhandar, 14, Dadi Sheth, Agyari
Lane, Kalbadevi Road, Bombay, inform me that on sending them their
certificates of memberships the members of the A.I.S.A. can become
members without payment of these Bhandars and get all the
concessions allowed to the paying members including all their
circulars and a rebate on purchases. They further announce that,
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

415

during the month of July there will be sales in both the stores at
reduced rates. The prices will be invariably reduced by 6_ per cent
but on some special goods the reduction will be 25 per cent and in
some cases even 50 per cent. The reduced rates will last till the end of
the next month.
Young India, 24-6-1926

533. NOTES
VILLAGE ORGANIZATION

Professor Narayandas Malkani’s notes on his recent tour in
Bardoli Taluka are both interesting and instructive. The reader will
find there a brief account of an experiment in village work that has
been going on in that Taluka amongst the backward classes since
1921 when the wave of temperance reform swept through the land.
Here in this small tract the introduction of the wheel is bringing about
a slow but steady revolution in the life of the simple dwellers. But for
the charkha, temperance workers could not have had any footing in
these villages. Nor could they have produced any impression
whatsoever upon the villagers, if they had not come in touch with the
people in many other ways and found a profitable employment for
occupying every idle moment of theirs. The workers have been able
to divert the minds of villagers from drink and interest them in
spinning. Effort is being made to educate the children of these
people. The education that is being given them is by no means of the
orthodox type. It fits in with their surroundings and is intended to
draw out all their faculties. The idea being not to manufacture clerks
but to make citizens of the children, well able to take care of
themselves and well able to preserve intact their hereditary occupation,
namely, agriculture, spinning, weaving, etc. But the experiment is still
in its infancy. The child is father to the man. And even in this infant
stage of the experiment everything that has gone on hitherto gives
promise of a brilliant future. For, with the introduction of
hand-spinning, the trades necessary for sustaining it are also being
gradually revived amongst the people. It is not too much to hope that
this revolution that is going on amongst the people may enable them
to get rid of, what Professor Malkani calls, ‘the native bureaucracy’
and that not by violent but by strictly non-violent means, means that
are calculated to convert not to coerce ‘the native bureaucracy’. For,
416

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the people simply need to be independent of both the money-lender
and the publican, of the first by ceasing to want credit and of the
second by ceasing to drink.
A TRAVESTY

‘The voluntary repatriation’ described by Dr. Malan, the Union
Minister 1, is anything but voluntary. It is stimulated, aided or induced.
And if the process continues unchecked, it may presently become
compulsory. A large number of men repatriated are said to be
colonial-born. No colonial-born Indian to whom India is only a
geographical expression will voluntarily repatriate himself. Again it is
not voluntary repatriation when an agency is set up, probably paid by
results, to collect repatriation recruits and when these recruits are
detained in compounds pending repatriation. It seems to me that this
detention in compounds is likely to be declared illegal if it is tested in
a court of law. For detention without a guard would be useless. And
placing a guard over free and innocent men would amount to
wrongful confinement. I know of no regulation in 1914 that
permitted the Government to detain such men in guarded camps. If
repatriation is to be voluntary it must be free from the pestering
attention of recruiting agents and there should be no detention in
depots or camps.
THE TRUE GURU

In confirmation of my note on the definition of a guru, a
correspondent sends the following interesting information:
In connection with your definition of a guru, I am reminded of the
beautiful lines of the poet-saint Ramadas. He said:

‘You cannot find a better guru than viveka or the power of
discriminating from untruth, right from wrong or good from evil. There is no
better disciple than chitta or mind, and no nobler friend than one’s jeeva or
soul.’ In fact, Ramadas points out that man need not go outside himself in
search of a guru. ‘Be guided by your power of discrimination, derived from your
implicit faith in God, keep your mind under control of such a power and nobly
sacrifice the self.’ This in essence is the advice of the Maharashtrian saint.

Young India, 24-6-1926
1

Of South Africa

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

417

534. TO READERS OF “ HINDI NAVAJIVAN”
It has ever been a matter of sorrow to me that I am not able to
write for Hindi Navajivan or look after it. After Shri Haribhau
Upadhyaya was posted for khadi work, I have received several
complaints regarding the language of Hindi Navajivan. It is said that
the quality of the language has deteriorated, that there are
grammatical errors and that the idiom has a foreign ring. It is also said
that sometimes the meaning conveyed is just the opposite of what is
intended. All this may be true. Although the translators do their work
with devotion and industry, it may well be that they, being Gujaratis,
make mistakes. I am looking for a person who knows Hindi. I hope,
when I find one, the chances of error will be fewer. At the same time,
it may be appropriate to point out that, after all, Hindi Navajivan
carries only translations. Of course, I shall do my best to see that the
meaning is not distorted. The truth, however, remains that I have not
the ability to bring out Navajivan in Hindi. I have neither the time to
manage its affairs nor the requisite knowledge of Hindi. I agreed to
bring out Hindi Navajivan on the insistence of friends and out of a
desire that those who know only Hindi should not remain
unacquainted with my ideas. This work can be continued if readers
will help. They can help in two ways: (1) they can point out the errors,
and (2) they can refuse to buy the paper when the errors become too
many to put up with. Navajivan is not published out of any financial
motive. It is brought out solely to advance the general good. If, owing
to faults of language or some other reason, it cannot serve the purpose
for which it is intended, it will be our duty to close it down.
All the translations carried in this issue are by persons whose
mother tongue is Hindi.
Readers will oblige me by pointing out errors in this issue.
[From Hindi]
Hindi Navajivan, 24-6-1926

418

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

535. LETTER TO DEVI WEST
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 24, 1926
MY DEAR DEVI1 ,

So you are an orphan now. And yet, why an orphan! Father had
died full of years and contentment that he lived a life of godliness and
was liked by those who knew him. I hope, therefore, that you and
other members of the family have not given way to grief. What a
beautiful motto on the tomb-stone: To live in hearts we leave behind is
not to die.
Yes. Indeed, India is today cut up into two owing to these mad
riots. God’s ways are inscrutable. I am hoping that the fighters will be
soon exhausted. It is simple madness that gives rise to these fights.
We are keeping fairly well. I say fairly well because Radha and
Rukhi are just now ill. They have malaria. Devdas has undergone an
operation for appendicitis. He is convalescing now. Manilal is still in
phoenix. Ramdas is doing khadi work. Have not seen Bhai Kotwal for
many months now.
Did I tell you that I had an English friend living in the Ashram?
Her name is Miss Slade. We have given her an Indian name, Mirabai.
A German lady is coming probably this week.
Yours,

DEVI
23, G EORGE S TREET
LOUTH , L INC.
ENGLAND
From a photostat: S.N. 19639

1

Sister of Albert West, Gandhiji’s associate in South Africa

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

419

536. LETTER TO REV. WILLIAM PATON
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 24, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. I had indeed said that if the way was
open for me, I would go to Helsingfors. But I was eventuated [sic] that
it was not. Had I gone to Finland, I would have visited England also.
There were so many invitations from kind friends, yours being the last
amongst them.
I am glad to know that the new Viceroy desires to do what is
right and that he is moved by religious conviction.
Yes. Indeed Andrews did exceedingly well in South Africa. But
for his labours there would have been no Conference.
With regards to you and Mrs. Paton,
Yours sincerely,

R EV . W ILLIAM P ATON ,
1, W ORLEY R OAD
St. ALBANS
(ENGLAND)

M. A.

From a photostat: S.N. 10775

537. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 24, 1926
MY DEAR CHARLIE,

Absence of any letter from you except the one you wrote from
Simla means, I hope, that you are enjoying your stay with Stokes. I
hope that the visit has given you rest and peace.
Shankerlal told me that you were grieved over my chafing you
about your Christian partiality. But I hope that you have got over the
grief and turned the incident to one of joy. Is it not a matter of joy
that you should have friends who will not always be serious with you?
I am so glad I had not gone to Finland. I have received several
letters of congratulations on my decision not to go. Amongst these
420

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

was a Punjabi Christian friend who came here and passed a night
before going to Helsingfors. He has gone as a delegate.
Happenings in South Africa do not give one much hope of a
satisfactory conclusion to the deliberations of the Round Table
Conference.1
If you receive this in Kotgarh, please give my love to Stokes and
Mrs. Stokes and Gregg2.
Yours,

R EV . C. F. A NDREWS
C/ O S. E. S TOKES, E SQ.
KOTGARH , S IMLA HILLS
From a photostat: S.N. 19640

538. LETTER TO LAKSHMIDAS P. ASAR
S ABARMATI ASHRAM,

Jeth Sud 14, 1982, June 24, 1926
CHI. LAKSHMIDAS,

I have your letter. I have written to you about Anandi3. Dr.
Kanuga was called in. He wanted to administer quinine. He had said
that he would himself send the medicine. She remains very restless
these days; so I have not insisted on getting the medicine from him.
Chhaganlal went to his place once, but could not find him. So quinine
is being given regularly from here. At the moment the fever has
subsided. Quinine will be continued for some time. What you write
about a bath is right. I will see that she remains particularly careful
about it. There has not been a drop of rain here. Its failure is causing
apprehension.
Radha 4, Rukhi 5 and Kusum 6 are down with fever. Kusum has
been keeping indifferent health ever since she came from Bombay.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19636

1

A Round Table Conference on the position of Indians in South Africa was to
be held in Cape Town. Vide “That Round Table Conference”, 22-7-1926.
2
Richard B. Gregg
3
Daughter of the addressee
4
Daughter of Maganlal Gandhi
5
ibid
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

421

539. LETTER TO PRABHALAKSHMI
S ABARMATI ASHRAM,

Jeth Sud 14, 1982, June 24, 1926
CHI. PRABHALAKSHMI,

Your letter. In accordance with your wishes, I would not use
your letter without your permission. If people gossip, how can we
muzzle them? We should be amused if we are accused when we are
innocent. When we are in the wrong, however harsh others may be
towards us, we ought to be more severe with ourselves; then we won’t
find their harshness unbearable. Since God is all-pervading, without
attributes and without form, we should instal Him in our hearts and
meditate on Him. All of us—whether great or small, good or bad,
intelligent or dull and so on—are what we are by virtue of our past
deeds. To enquire who have done worthy deeds and why we have
become as noble as we are, and so on, is to lay claim to godlike
perfection and, in all this arrogance, the question is never answered.
Thus, faith comes when reason fails. Your duty just now is to become
tranquil, forget all that has happened and fulfil your function in
radiant perfection.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19637

540. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
S ABARMATI ,

Thursday, Jeth Sud 14 [June 24, 1926] 1
CHI. DEVDAS,

Your letter. I saw [your] letter to Mahadev. My rebuke had been
issued by then. From my reference to compound interest you would
have guessed that. I had got your letter on the way. Girdhari has been
discharged from the hospital, but his health does not appear very
good. He is expected here now. Jamnalalji would also arrive at about
the same time. After that I would think things over and, if there is any
need, I would send him there. I wrote letters to Dr. Dalal and Bhai
Tulsidas soon after Girdhari’s discharge. I wrote to them that it was
only by dedicating ourselves to the country’s service that we could
1

The reference to Girdhari’s discharge from the hospital suggests that the
letter was written in 1926; vide “Letter to Tulsidas”, 21-6-1926.

422

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

discharge to some extent the debt we owe them. Dr. Dalal has replied.
Herewith I send you his letter.
From a photostat of the Gujarati S.N. 19638

541. TELEGRAM TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
S ABARMATI ,

June 25, 1926
MATHURADAS
HOMIVILLA P ANCHGANI
PYARELAL

MUST

NOT

COME.

‘NAVAJIVAN’1

ARRANGED.

WRITING.

BAPU
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

542. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI ,

Friday [June 25, 1926] 2
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your telegram. It surprised me. I learnt about the matter
when Mahadev told me. In his letter to Pyarelal he wrote a sentence in
jest. Mahadev thinks your telegram is the result of that. Please do not
think that Pyarelal is particularly needed for the work. It is true that, as
is my nature, I do make use of people who are there, according to
their qualifications. But that does not mean that Pyarelal should come
here. I have made arrangements here for the Hindi Navajivan. If I
need more help, I shall have Pyarelal send translations from there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1
2

Hindi Navajivan; vide the following item.
The date has been inferred from the contents; vide the preceding item.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

423

543. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

Friday [June 25, 1926] 1
CHI. DEVDAS,

Along with this I send you Bhai Tulsidas’s letter. Velabehn 2 is
indisposed since last night. Her old ailment has recurred while she was
in Bombay. Tell Bhai Laxmidas that there is nothing to worry about.
Rajendrababu has arrived and would stay here up to the 29th or 30th.
He has come here for a meeting of the Charkha Sangh. It will meet
tomorrow. The German lady 3 is expected here tomorrow. There is a
letter from Kishorelal saying that Girdhari would arrive here
tomorrow. He cannot be said to have completely recovered.
From a photostat Of the Gujarati: S.N. 19641

544. LETTER TO MOTIBEHN CHOKSI
S ABARMATI ASHRAM,

Saturday, Jeth Vad 1, 1982, June 26, 1926
CHI. MOTI,

At last, after many days and that too on reminding you, I do
have a letter from you. Will this laziness ever go? Anandi had fever
and it has now subsided. Velabehn also had fever for the last few days.
She is better today. Radha and Kusum are still in bed.
Have you maintained the habit of reading or have you now
given it up owing to laziness? Can I ask about the spinning?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 12133

1

The reference in the letter to a meeting of the Charkha Sangh, All-India
Spinners’ Association, which was held on June 26, 1926 suggests this date.
2
Wife of Laxmidas Asar
3
Miss Haussding

424

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

545. LETTER TO GOKALDAS H. THAKKAR
THE ASHRAM,

June 26, 1926
BHAISHRI GOKALDAS,

Your letter. I have nothing to write on except the charkha and
allied subjects. I have never seen your paper. And I do not like to
write for a paper I know nothing about. Please therefore excuse me.
MOHANDAS GANDHI
S HRI GOKALDAS HIRAJI THAKKAR
S ECRETARY, “S EVAK MANDAL”
S EVAK MANDAL KARYALAYA
OPPOSITE P OST OFFICE
JAMNAGAR
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19921

546. POSSESSED BY GHOST OF SUSPICION
“A Passenger” has written the following letter without giving
his name.1 Such letters do not deserve any notice. One does not know,
however, how many workers may be victims of such suspicions. The
issues raised in the letter are worthy of attention. I made inquiries
immediately on receiving the letter, and discovered that the facts of
the case are quite different from what they are represented to be by
“A Passenger”. The person against whom these allegations are made
is engaged in work which he simply could not have carried on if he
travelled without paying proper fare as he is stated in this letter to
havedone. He is, moreover, being watched by railway officials. If he
were even once caught travelling without a proper ticket, his career of
public service would come to an immediate end. He generally travels
third class, but a friend had bought for him a second-class ticket from
Morbi and so he had taken a seat in that compartment. From Muli, he
changed into a third-class compartment for a short distance because
he wanted to be with a friend who was travelling in that compartment.
1

The letter is not translated here. It stated that a leading worker in Saurashtra
had been travelling by railway without paying the proper fare.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

425

The worker has still with him the number on the second-class ticket
which he held. Normally, no one preserves the number on a railway
ticket but, as mentioned above, railway officials are a little too kindly
disposed to him and ask him frequently to show his ticket. He also,
therefore, has made it a practice to note down the number on his
ticket. It does not appear that “A Passenger” had taken the trouble to
examine the ticket himself or ask the worker for his explanation. So
much about the facts of this case.
The complaint made in this letter should give every public
worker reason for pride, and also teach him to be vigilant. It should
give reason for pride because it shows that people expect to see
perfection in workers who wear khadi, and it teaches him the need for
vigilance because a worker wearing khadi must avoid any lapse. It
should, however, be admitted that many self-seeking “workers” have
exploited the khadi dress. Wearing khadi and having made people
believe that they were men of self-sacrifice, such workers deceive
society and refuse to make any amends. Such khadi-wearers disgrace
khadi.
It is a perfectly legitimate assumption that anyone who cheats
the railway company in the matter of fare will ultimately plunder the
country, too, for his own gain. And yet many people think that it is
not wrong to cheat the railway company and to travel by a higher
class on a lower-class ticket. It is desirable that people who wear khadi
and others engaged in national work keep away from such dishonesty.
People, too, should understand that all persons who wear khadi are not
saints, and those who do not wear it are not wicked men. Anybody,
irrespective of whether he is a good man or a bad man, is free to adopt
khadi as his dress. If others look upon khadi as sacred and feel
themselves sanctified by wearing it, that is their special faith and does
them honour. But this special faith of theirs does not concern the
world. It is but right that people in the world should trust a person
only after he has been put to the test.
In conclusion, I should like everyone to know that I have
no disciple, or rather that I have only one, myself. All my time is
taken up in teaching myself, and so I need no other disciple.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 27-6-1926

426

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

547. NOTES
S PINNING IN S ANSOLI 1

Sansoli is a village in the Kalol taluka of Panch Mahals district.
Shri Ranchhoddas Shah has sent some interesting information about
the spinning activity there, which I reproduce below:2
The number of spinning-wheels is not large enough to be
remarkable, but the quantity of yarn produced on each wheel is quite
good. But the most interesting particular mentioned in this report is
that the spinner himself or herself cards the cotton and makes the
slivers. It is essential that this improvement in the method of work
should, wherever possible, be adopted forthwith. Carding is an easy
operation, and those who card their own cotton can spin better and
finer yarn and produce more of it in the same time, whereas it is
difficult to spin to one’s satisfaction if the carding has been done by a
hired carder. Another point worth noting here is that the cultivator
who gins the cotton grown by himself increases his earning
considerably. The practice of ginning cotton at home can be revived
only if the spinning is also done at home. Thus the revival of
hand-spinning will automatically bring about the revival of many
other industries which have disappeared, and enable an intelligent
cultivator to add considerably to his income.
S ELF-PURIFICATION AMONG C HODHRAS 3

Shri Narayan Malkani, a professor in the Gujarat Mahavidyalaya, had recently been to the parts around Vedchhi in Bardoli
taluka and saw the work being done among the Chodhras there. He
has sent a report of his observations for Young India of which I give
here only the gist, since many points mentioned in the original are
meant for readers outside Gujarat. In 1921 a good many villages had
got rid of the evil of drink. Afterwards, a good number had started
drinking again. The enduring work which is now being done there,
thanks to some workers having settled for good in the area, is
interesting to observe. Shri Narayan Malkani is reporting only about
the “clean” villages, clean in respect of drinking.
1
The name, Sanosali, as originally spelt, was corrected in a note in
Navajivan, 11-7-1926.
2
The letter is not translated here.
3
A scheduled tribe in South Gujarat

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

427

The Chodhras rank high among the Kaliparaj1 communities.
They till their own land; but, thanks to their addiction to drinking, the
owners of liquor shops and money lenders in the area have become
their masters and function as the “local” Government of the area.
Those among them who succeed in freeing themselves from the grip
of this “local” Government may be said to have won swaraj.
The Vedchhi Ashram2 has strengthened the anti-drink
movement through sound work in the field of khadi. Four hundred
spinning-wheels are in commission at present, which means that 800
persons spin on them daily. There are more men than women among
them. In the first 3 year 500 lbs. of yarn was spun; last4 year, the
quantity rose to 16,000 lbs. This gave about 4,000 square yards of
khadi. The people stock the required cotton from what they grow in
their own fields, card it themselves and then spin. The yarn is woven
into cloth in Vedchhi itself by Chodhra boys. The charge for weaving
is only two annas a yard but the weaver gets some other help in
addition to his wages. In some villages, this activity has provided work
to carpenters too, and as a result people can have a fairly good
spinning-wheel for Rs. 2. In this way, the people who wear khadi
spend only two annas for every yard they use; and, where previously
no supplementary occupation existed, two such occupations, weaving
and carpentry, have come into existence.
When I visited the area two years ago, I asked the people how
much they got through the spinning-wheel every year. An old man
replied with evident pleasure that they got ten rupees. Shri Narayan
Malkani gives detailed figures now. A Chodhra family requires 34
yds. of cloth in a year—10 yds. for children and 24 yds. for the
husband and the wife. The family gets these 34 yards for Rs. 4_,
whereas previously when they bought their requirements in the market
they had to pay Rs. 22 for the same quantity. Thus a family
producing its own cloth saves Rs. 17_. It is true, of course, that this
does not take into account the cost of cotton. What would a poor
Chodhra get for that cotton if he sold it in the market? Seven rupees
for 14 lbs. The net saving, therefore, comes to Rs. 11. To them this is
1

Scheduled tribes in Gujarat; literally, dark-skinned people
The Ashram at Vedchhi, a village in the Surat district of Gujarat, managed by
Jugatram Dave
3
The words “first year” and “last year” were corrected in Navajivan,
11-7-1926.
4
ibid
2

428

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

a big enough saving. It is not as if all the families keep back the 14
lbs. of cotton which they would require and spin it into yarn, but we
may say that a movement in the direction has started.
R EFORMING VILLAGE LIFE

We saw above that with the help of the spinning-wheel a slow but
steady change is being brought about in the lives of the poor
Chodhras. Without the aid of the spinning-wheel, the workers could
not have come into contact with the village people merely by making
speeches against the evil of drinking. If, moreover, they had not
shown to the latter a profitable way of spending the whole of their
spare time, what effect could they have produced by their propaganda
work? The workers stopped the village people from drinking and
placed the spinning-wheel in their hands. They started schools for
children, schools, moreover, in which the pupils do not receive the
kind of clerk-making education which other schools impart but get
education which will help them to be good farmers, spinners and
weavers and live as useful members of society. The experiment is still
in its initial stage; but the present ways of a child can tell us a little
what he will be like when he grows up, and we can, therefore, hope
from what has been achieved so far that we shall get excellent results
in course of time. For, along with spinning, other occupations
connected with it are also being revived. We may hope that, as a result
of the work which is being done, the people will become free from the
grip of what Prof. Malkani calls the “local” Government of the area,
and that not by throwing off its yoke through force but by awakening
the conscience of the present masters and bringing about a change of
heart in them. This will happen because, once people learn to give all
their time to work and stop borrowing money from professional
money-lenders and patronizing the liquor shops, they are bound to
become free from the grip of either.
A C ORRECTION

Referring to the “Note” in the Navajivan of June 13, about the
Mahudha khadi centre, a gentleman writes as follows:1
If we had many more such readers who read their Navajivan
carefully and drew attention to errors, in a short time the paperwould
1

The letter is not translated here. For the “Note”, vide “Mahudha Khadi
Centre”, 13-6-1926.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

429

be free from errors. It is certainly my own ambition that the paper
should contain no error of fact, should use no improper word or be
faulty in language. I know, however, that faults of language occur.
Errors of fact creep in sometimes through inadvertence. The only
claim I can make is that the language of the paper is restrained. As
regards errors of fact, we need the help of readers. To prevent faults
of language, the press should have more efficient workers and those
who write for Navajivan should be studious of their language. I am
not well equipped in regard to any of these, but despite these
handicaps the desire to continue Navajivan is strong. Those readers of
the paper, therefore, who love it have no option but to bear for the
present with the errors which occur.
The correspondent is certainly right in regard to the error in
multiplication pointed out by him. Asked about the quantity of yarn
produced from 20 maunds of yarn, Shri Mohanlal Pandya explains:
The statements that 20 maunds of yarn was produced and 65 pieces of
khadi were woven in [the month of] Vaishakh does not mean that all the 20
maunds of yarn was used for producing the 65 pieces. For 65 pieces, at the
most 11 maunds of yarn would be required. The rest remained in balance. The
quantity of yarn left in balance varies from month to month, depending on the
number of weavers who work during the month.

I need not suggest to friends who send reports that they should
bear in mind that Navajivan has readers who read the paper with
attention and, therefore, should work out their figures carefully and
supply full details.
TRUE GURU

A gentleman writes as follows in support of my note explaining
the qualities of a true guru:1
Ramdas Swami has actually said in so many words that man
need not search for any guru outside of himself; that one should
follow the path indicated by one’s own sense of discrimination born
of one’s faith in God, be guided by that sense of discrimination and
always work in a spirit of sacrifice. That saint of Maharashtra has said
in these few words all that needs to be said.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 27-6-1926
1

Vide “Notes”, 17-6-1926, under the sub-title, “In Search of a Guru”, and
“Notes”, 24-6-l926, under the sub-title, “The True Guru”.

430

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

548. LETTER TO G. D. CHATTERJEE
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 27, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter drawing my attention to Mr. Spender’s
article. 1 I am inclined to deal with the portion quoted by you in the
pages of Young India.2
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S JT. G. D. C HATTERJEE
LAHORE
From the original: C.W. 7740; also G.N. 8778. Courtesy: Parasram Mehrotra

549. LETTER TO C. VIJAYARAGHAVACHARIAR
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 27, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. Mr. Muggeridge3 will be quite welcome
whenever he comes.
I wish I could see eye to eye with you in regard to the temple.
But unfortunately, I cannot enthuse over it. My temple today is the
spinning-wheel through which I see the possibility of bringing a ray
of hope to the crumbling cottages of India.
I thank you for your enquiry about Devdas. He is convalescing
1

Gandhiji discussed portions from Spender’s article in Young India; vide
“Colour Bar v. Swadeshi”, 1-7-1926.
2
This letter was returned by the Dead Letter Office.
3
Malcolm Muggeridge Union Christian College, Alwaye, whose speech on
“Nationalism and Christianity” Gandhiji published in Young India, 22-7-1926. Vide
“Letter to C. Vijayaraghavachariar”, 9-7-1926.
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

431

at Mussoorie with a friend.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. C. V IJAYARAGHAVACHARIAR
KODAIKANAL
From a photostat: S.N. 12061

550. LETTER TO S. SHANKER
THE ASHRAM
S ABARMATI ,

June 27, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I still think that you ought not to leave your
job and come to me. It is much better that you follow out in Bombay
the rules of life at the Ashram. Surely there should be no difficulty
about your learning Hindi and Sanskrit in Bombay. There are so
many classes. There is a free Sanskrit class conducted in Kalbadevi
Road 1 by Narahari Shastri. It should be easier for you to go to some
one to teach you Hindi.
If you will go to the untouchable quarters in Madugaum, you
will have no difficulty in knowing untouchables from touchables.
There is in Matunga 2 a school conducted for untouchables. You can
devote some time to that school if you choose to do so. And where
you cannot do any personal work for them, and if you have even a
few pice to spare, you may set aside that amount and give to those
who are working for the so-called untouchables.
Yours sincerely,

S. S HANKER , E SQ.
BOMBAY
From a microfilm: S.N. 19642

1
2

432

In Bombay
Suburb in Bombay
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

551. LETTER TO D. N. BAHADURJI
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 27, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. 50 strength means half of what it should be.
And strength means the quality of twist. A properly twisted thread will
stand the strain of a standard weight and still not break and that
standard means 100 marks. But if it stands only half of that weight, it
would be 50 marks. But 50 strength is really not good enough for the
weaver. Mill yarn too rarely attains 100 marks. But 70 marks would
be creditable and it will offer no difficulty to the weaver in weaving.
50 is the standard mark for evenness of thread. When a well-twisted
thread is not even, it snaps as it passes through the apparatus which is
meant for receiving hundreds of threads called warp which give us the
width of cloth. If the thread is uneven, it breaks from time to time.
The more even the yarn, therefore, the better it is for weaving; hence
the necessity for obtaining at least 45 marks for evenness. Constant
looking at the strand after the spinning is finished enables one to
gauge the evenness, and the actual breaking of the yarn in order to
gauge the strength enables one to arrive roughly at the possible
strength. And when you get your yarn tested from time to time, you
are in a position to make the necessary improvements which come by
careful progress. I hope I am now clear. I felt so thankful and
delighted that you are taking so much interest in this poor man’s
work. What a silent revolution it would mean in our life if we could
identify ourselves with the poorest of our people in a practical manner
such as the spinning-wheel presents!
Your sincerely,

D. N. B AHADURJI , E SQ.
BOMBAY
From a microfilm: S.N. 19643

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

433

552. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI MEHTA
S ABARMATI ASHRAM,

Jeth Vad 2, 1982 [June 27, 1926]
BHAISHRI BHAGWANJI,

I have your letter. Why do you suppose that I am prejudiced
against you? Because I cannot accept your argument it does not mean
that I am prejudiced against you. It is not my experience that I could
refrain from sensual pleasures because I am married. How can I then
accept this position? Among my friends there are a number of
life-long celebates, men as well as women. Then how can I entertain
any doubt?
About God I shall write in Navajivan when I have the time. I say
when I have the time because the question you ask has been asked
often and there will be nothing new in my reply; but I shall try to take
it up for your sake. I have never had any doubts about your honesty.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
S HRI BHAGWANJI ANUPCHAND MEHTA
S ADAR
R AJKOT
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 19924

553. LETTER TO LAXMIDAS P. ASAR
S ABARMATI ASHRAM,

Jeth Vad 2, 1982, June 27, 1926
CHI. LAXMIDAS,

I get your letters regularly. Valabehn is better but I find
she has to be nursed with utmost care. Anandi has started running.
Mani has donated her nose-ring to me and has also got her gold
necklace snapped up by me. It has been resolved that the price of
khadi made through the Charkha Sangh could be put up by 6_ p.c. to
12_ p.c. to meet the cost of establishment and distribution. It has
also been decided that before implementing this resolution the views
of all the agents should be ascertained. It is very good that you do a
lot of walking. Do not be in the least hurry to come over here. I
434

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

wouldnot be satisfied even with 83 p.c. strength in the yarn. My
intention is to get 100 p.c. but I do not know where the difficulty lies.
If the strength is 100 p.c. the evenness of the yarn also, I am sure,
would be 100 p.c. I believe it is so because I find that the evenness of
my yarn improves with the strength.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 19645

554. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
S ABARMATI ,

Jeth Vad 2, 1982, June 27, 1926
CHI. DEVDAS,

Your letter. You did not write to me what work you had at
Motilalji’s. Whatever it might have been, I am happy that you had a
chance to serve him. I can also say that it is not worth coming here
now. It has been very hot. It did rain yesterday, so it may get a little
cool. It is very sultry today, it could not but be because people were
dying not to speak of animals—for want of rain. And even now we
need plenty of rain.
Rajendrababu is leaving just now. In the current issue of Hindi
Navajivan, he has had a good share. It is good that all three of you do
a lot of walking. I wish you to return only after gaining good
strength. Khadi is bound to command respect as long as there are a
few khadi-wearers at any rate who selflessly devote themselves to
social service. I have not read a single book of Hardy’s. He was or is a
good novelist—that’s all I know about him. I could not get
thoroughly acquainted with that German lady as I am very busy with
my work. I intended to see her today, but could not.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 19646

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

435

555. LETTER TO RAI PRABHUDAS BHIKHABHAI
ASHRAM,

June 27, 1926
BHAISHRI PRABHUDAS,

Your letter. You should write without reserve whatever you wish
to and I shall answer as far as I can. Whatever the Gita says about the
practice of yoga is only commendatory. It does not propose to teach
any of the exercises. These should be learnt from a proper person. I
myself do not know their sequence. I cited the example of friends
who have practised pranayama1. If one could attain brahmacharya
merely through pranayama, a great problem would be solved but
thereby brahmacharya would come to lose much of its importance. I
do hold that pranayama and such other exercises make the
observance of brahmacharya easier for the aspirant. I may even put
someone from amongst the brahmacharis staying with me under
those who have experience. You must not interpret what I say to mean
that I want you to give up your studies. Indeed I wish you all success
in them.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
S JT. R AI P RABHUDAS BHIKHABHAI
KATHANA LOT
P OST KATHLAL
Via NADIAD
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19922

1

436

Breath regulation
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

556. LETTER TO BASANTI DEVI DAS
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 29, 1926
MY DEAR SISTER,

I hope you received my telegram 1 about Bhomble. I do not
know what to say or how to console. When I think about poor Sujata
and you, the whole picture of sorrow rises before me. I can only hope
that your innate bravery is not only keeping you up, but is proving a
tower of strength to Sujata and all other members of the family surrounding you at the present moment. Do let me have a line if you can.
Yours,

S HRIMATI BASANTI DEVI DAS
C/ O S UDHIR R OY
2 BELTOLA R OAD
C ALCUTTA
From a photostat: S.N. 19644

557. LETTER TO NARANDAS ANANDJI
ASHRAM,

June 29, 1926
BHAISHRI NARANDAS,

Today Prof. Gidwani gave me the shocking news that the vine
whose grapes you send me with such love is treated with specially
slaughtered goat’s blood, or the blood brought from the slaughterhouse to feed the roots of the plant. He said that Bhai Ranchhoddas
gave him the news and Bhai Ranchhoddas himself brings the grapes
from the orchard. I cannot credit this story. It seems there is some
misunderstanding somewhere, but since the doubt has arisen, it should
be resolved. I thought of sending you a wire, but am writing this
1

This is not available. Vide “Letter to Urmila Devi”, 30-6-1926.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

437

instead, seeking explicit clarification. But do reply to me by wire. If
the tale is true, please stop sending me the grapes.
Blessings from

BAPU
BHAISHRI NARANDAS ANANDJI
KARACHI
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19923

558. LETTER TO MOTILAL
ASHRAM,

June 29, 1926
BHAISHRI MOTILAL,

Your letter. A man who sets out to find the right guru, should, I
believe, become free himself from faults and passions. Being free
from faults and passions does not mean being absolutely perfect. It is
only modest to feel the need for a guru. A guru need not necessarily
be a living person. Even today I regard as my guides some who,
though not yet perfect, have reached a high stage [of spiritual
development]. There is no point in trying to know the difference
between a perfect man and God. Since it is impossible to get a perfect
answer, one must find a reply through one’s own experience.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS GANDHI
S JT. M OTILAL
C/ O MESSRS KUNVERJI UMARSHI & C O.
C OOPERGANJ
KANPUR
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19925

438

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

559. LETTER TO URMILLA DEVI 1
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 30, 1926
2

I have your letter . Since then I have also learnt about
Bhomble’s death. Though it is a very severe blow, perhaps, it is well
that he has passed out of the present body. I do not know how Sujata
is bearing her grief. You will tell me all about the last moments of the
boy. He had many faults, but he had also a nobility about him which
was most charming. But he had lost the power of struggling against
the devil within him.
The Bengal politics make me sad and miserable when I think of
them.3 It is difficult to follow the intricacies from this distance. How is
it that Das’s most trusted men have seceded? I almost feel that it
would have been better if you had stood aloof from the quarrel. But,
of course, you being on the spot should know best.
The death of Deghapatia 4 is also a sad business. I remember
having met him at Darjeeling. You know when. Having such a slight
acquaintance, I have not written to his family. But you will please
convey my condolence if you think fit. And, the son, what about
him?5 A terrible tragedy. One feels absolutely helpless when one
contemplates such things over which there is no control.
Yes, Devdas is quite all right and he is at Mussoorie,
convalescing with Jamnalalji’s friends. We have now a German lady as
an addition to the Ashram. I do not know how she will fare; it is yet
too early to say.
Yours,
From a photostat: S.N. 10954
1

C. R. Das’s sister
Dated June 21, 1926
3
Urmila Devi had written, inter alia, of the “constant quarrelling” between the
Sengupta group and the so-called aristocratic group in the Congress, consisting of
such leaders as T. C. Goswami, N. R. Sarkar, S. C. Bose, and Dr. B. C. Roy, and had
reported that the aristocratic group had deserted the Congress altogether and aligned
itself with mischievous elements (S.N. 10946).
4
The Raja of Deghapatia
5
Urmila Devi had written that the twenty-eight-year-old son of the Raja lay
seriously ill and dying.
2

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

439

560. LETTER TO IGNATIUS
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 30, 1926
MY DEAR IGNATIUS,

I have your letter and the book. Please thank your friend on my
behalf for having sent the book. I am returning it to you as I have
read the book and I have also a copy of it. I read it in the Yeravda jail
and a copy was presented to me by a well-known Catholic friend, I
think, in Dehra Dun. I like the book for the charming simplicity with
which the saintly girl has described her life, her hopes and her
aspirations. The supernatural part of it had no appeal for me. The
persistency with which she secured admission to the Convent
commanded my respect and admiration. The purity of her character
was worthy of adoration. Her rigorous self-examination was inspiring.
The canonization, etc., did not interest me.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 11198

561. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 30, 1926
MY DEAR C. R.,

I have your letter about Tirupur khadi. The complaint is not
about seasonal khadi. The comparison has been set up between last
year’s and this year’s production. And the correspondent, who was
himself a lover of khadi and an admirer of Tirupur khadi, contends
that it has been progressively deteriorating. And as you see, Jerajani
endorses the verdict up to a point. Whether a public statement is made
or not, I think a more thorough investigation is necessary. If the hot
season causes deterioration, we must either find out ways and means
of combating the evils of heat or we must frankly tell the public that
they must expect two qualities according to the seasons and, therefore,
also two prices.
440

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

With reference to your tour, I have well-nigh despaired of any
tour coming forth during the year through no fault of anybody. It is
difficult to get you all ready at the same time. And you will insist
upon having some unavoidable thing at the last moment and postpone
your departure which is the conjuction of your stars. I would suggest
complete cancellation of touring unless you have courage enough to
go out even single. Manilal is not available till the first of September.
He has been postponing the work of his Railway Association from
time to time and I cannot put any pressure upon him when he pleads
the cause of his association. Jamnalalji never cancels a programme, he
accepts, but it is unjust to him and unjust to the cause to bind him to a
programme which is not irrevocable. I have therefore freed him from
all obligations. He will join you when you are ready if he at all can.
Nobody wants to tour without you. You are therefore the central
figure. Seeing that your own movements are erratic and beyond your
control, the only thing to do is for you to say when you will move out
and such men as can be got together will form the company. And if
you have not the heart to undertake the job on these conditions, by all
means give up the idea of touring this year, only remember this much
that the Maharashtra tour has been fixed up after your definite
instructions. But if these instructions were conditional upon Manilal
Kothari and Jamnalalji joining you, let the Maharashtra tour also be
cancelled. Please wire to me your decision. And do not hesitate to say
no if the touring is really beyond you, whether on account of your
difficulties at Tiruchengodu or any other. It is no use trusting to
chance.
Devdas is still at Mussoorie. He is gathering strength and
helping Punditji1. In what way, he does not state. Laxmidas and Lalji
are with him. Jamnalalji was here. He has gone for a few days to
Ranpur to examine Amritlal Seth’s undertaking. Rajendra Babu left
yesterday. Pyarelal is still with Mathuradas who, as you know, has
gone to Panchgani, and is rendering invaluable help to Mathuradas. I
have now a German lady. She came here on Saturday. Thus the
Ashram is fairly full. Chhotalal has now calmed down and is trying to
specialize in spinning and weaving, etc. There is no question therefore
now of his travelling with you or coming to you.
Yours,
From a copy: S.N. 11199

1

Motilal Nehru

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

441

562. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

June 30, 1926
I have your postcard. It is surprising how you managed to get ill
somehow or other. Instead of having a good and quiet time at
Kotgarh, you must have blood-poisoning1.
I wrote a long letter some days ago to the Kotgarh address. Do
please let me know fully how you are keeping. Do come here if you
at all feel like it. And you know you will have all the nursing that you
can possibly desire or need.
Yours,
From a photostat: S.N. 19647

563. LETTER TO ANIL KUMAR MITRA
THE ASHRAM, S ABARMATI ,

June 30, 1926
MY DEAR ANIL,

I have your letter. I am sorry that you are unable to go back to
Santiniketan. You will let me know how you finally fix yourself up. I
would like you not to publish the autobiography just now. Because I
am revising the first part with a view to publishing it in book form in
English. As soon as it is revised and published you shall have a copy
when you can make the necessary corrections and publish the translations. But before you do so, I would like you to send the manuscript
for Mahadev to see. As you know, Mahadev knows Bengali.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy : S.N. 32253

1

442

Caused by insect bite
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

564. A.I.C.P.A. BALANCE-SHEET
The following is the balance-sheet of the A.-I. Cow-Protection
Association ending 30th April 1926:1
It will be noted that the proceeds of the sale of yarn have been
very poor because the yarn was mostly bad. 2 If the subscribers will
improve the quality of their yarn, they will without extra trouble or
expense to themselves increase the amount paid by them.
Young India, 1-7-1926

565. COLOUR BAR v. SWADESHI
Thus writes Mr. Spender:
Gandhi would keep out European goods; the South Africans
would go a step further and keep out the Indians. Swadeshi and Colour Bar Bills
are the obverse and reverse of the same idea; both follow from the despairing
thought that East and West cannot intermingle without destroying each
other’s characteristic ways of life. Gandhi, the saint, is full of benevolence,
and I listened to him while he earnestly disclaimed all sympathy with violent
or anarchical ways of changing any existing order. Yet, as he discoursed on
the ravages which Western industrialism had wrought in the Indian village, I
had the feeling that, if he were Emperor of India invested with plenary powers
the regulations that he would make for the admission of Europeans and their
settlement in India might not greatly differ from those which the South
Africans are attempting to impose on Indians in South Africa today. I have a
very real respect for Mr. Gandhi, and I am, of course, aware that the last thing
that he desires is to afford excuses for either form of intolerance. It is
nevertheless true that ‘Swadeshi’ and ‘Colour Bar’ belong to the same spiritual
family. 3

This paragraph from Mr. Spender’s article furnishes an
extraordinary study in what Tolstoy would call hypnotism. Under the
hypnotic influence of the standardized thought of the English official
in India, Mr. Spender is unable to see any difference between the
Colour Bar Bills of South Africa and the Indian swadeshi in terms of
1

The accounts are not reproduced here.
This was only Rs. 26 and odd out of receipts totalling a little over Rs. 6,154.
3
This was evidently the portion of Spender’s article quoted by G. D. Chatterjee
in his letter to Gandhiji; vide “Letter to G. D. Chatterjee”, 27-6-1926
2

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

443

khaddar. Mr. Spender is an honest Liberal. He has some sympathy for
Indian aspirations. But he cannot escape the influence of his
immediate surroundings. What is true of him is no doubt true of every
one of us. Hence the necessity for non-co-operation. When the
surroundings are vicious, we must cut ourselves off from contact with
those surroundings, in so far at least as our contact is voluntary.
But whether Mr. Spender’s extraordinary proposition is an
outcome of the hypnotic influence of his surroundings or whether it is
really his own original idea, let us examine it. The Colour Bar Bill is
aimed at men, not at measures. Swadeshi is aimed at measures
only.Colour Bar is indiscriminately against a man’s race or colour.
Swadeshi knows no such distinction. The upholders of the Colour Bar
would carry out their purpose even violently, if necessary. Swadeshi
eschews all form of violence, even mental. The Colour Bar has no
reason behind it. Swadeshi, in the form of khaddar, is a scientific
formula supported by reason all along the line. Under the Colour Bar
every Indian, no matter what educational qualifications he may
possess, even though he may be thoroughly Westernized, is an
undesirable person in the estimation of the Europeans of South
Africa. The Colour Bar Bills are violent in purpose, for, they would
keep the natives of the soil and the Asiatic settlers for ever as unskilled
labourers and will not allow them to rise above that status. The Colour
Bar Bills are intended to do, under the name of civilization and for its
protection, perhaps, in a more virulent form, what has been done in
the name of Hinduism by Hindus to the so-called untouchables. But it
is worthy of note that untouchability, whatever may be said to the
contrary, is fast dying in India. Those who are devoting themselves to
the removal of untouchability are also those who are enthusiastically
advocating the universalization of the spinning-wheel. Untouchability
is admitted to be an evil. The Colour Bar is being raised almost to the
status of a religion in South Africa. The Colour Bar Bills would harm,
and deprive of their possessions innocent men and women without
any just cause. Whereas swadeshi is intended to harm not one single
soul, it seeks to return to the poorest of the land what has been taken
away from them almost by force. The Colour Bar Bills are exclusive.
Swadeshi is never exclusive in the sense in which the colour Bar Bills
are. Swadeshi has no sympathy with the formula that East and West
can never intermingle. Swadeshi does not banish all foreign or
European goods, nor all machine-made goods, nor for that matter
does swadeshi tolerate all home-made goods. Swadeshi admits of and
444

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

welcomes the introduction of all foreign goods that cannot or need
not be manufactured in India and that would benefit her people. Thus
swadeshi admits all foreign books containing pure literature, all
foreign watches, foreign needles, foreign sewing machines, foreign
pins. But swadeshi excludes all intoxicating drinks and drugs even
though they may be manufactured in India. Swadeshi concentrates
itself upon the spinning-wheel and khaddar, to the exclusion of all
foreign cloth and even cloth manufactured in the mills of India, for
the very simple, sufficient, satisfying and moral reason that the
destruction of the spinning-wheel has meant the destruction of the
only supplementary industry of India for the millions of its peasants
without furnishing any substitute. Thus, swadeshi in the form of
khaddar and the spinning-wheel is a paramount necessity for the very
existence of the millions of her paupers. Whereas the Colour Bar Bills
are a response to the greed of a handful of Europeans who are, after
all, exploiting the resources of a land which belongs not to them, but
to the original inhabitants of South Africa. The Colour Bar Bills have,
therefore, no moral foundation whatsoever so far as I can see. The
exclusion or the extinction of the Asiatic settlers of South Africa is in
no way required, can in no way be proved to be necessary, for the
existence of the South African Europeans. Still less can the
suppression of the original inhabitants of South Africa be defended
on any single moral ground. It is, therefore, painfully surprising to
find a person of Mr. Spender’s experience and attainments putting
the highly moral swadeshi in the form of khaddar in the same
category as the Colour Bar Bills. They do not belong to one family,
let alone spiritual, but they belong to absolutely different families as
different as the North Pole is from the South.
Mr. Spender speculates upon what I would do if I were
‘Emperor of India invested with plenary powers’. Perhaps I can
speculate with greater authority. If I were Emperor of India, I would
extend the hand of fellowship to the whole of the world irrespective of
caste, colour or creed, for, I claim the whole of mankind to be the
children of one God, having absolutely the same capacity for
self-realization as the tallest amongst them. I would disband
practically the whole of the army of occupation in India, retaining
only such police as may be necessary for the protection of her citizens
against thieves and robbers. I would not bribe the Frontier tribes as
they are being bribed today. But I would cultivate the friendliest
relations with them and to that end send out reformers amongst them
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

445

in order to find out the ways or means of providing useful occupation
for them. I would guarantee the fullest protection for every European
living in India and all honest European enterprises. I would impose a
prohibitive tariff on all foreign cloth so as to exclude it entirely from
India and bring khaddar under State control, so as to enable every
villager who chooses to spin, feel that the products of his or her
spinning-wheel would be taken up. I would prohibit the importation
of intoxicating liquors and close down every distillery, confining the
manufacture of alcohol and opium for proved medical necessity. I
would guarantee full protection to all forms of religious worship, save
what is repugnant to the moral sense of mankind. I would throw open
to the so-called untouchables every public temple and public school
to which all other Hindus have right of admission. I would summon
the representative of both the Hindus and Mussalmans, search their
pockets and deprive them of all eatables and of all lethal weapons, if
they have any, and lock them together in one room and open it only
after they have settled their quarrels. There are of course many other
things that I would do if I were Emperor of India. But since there is
little chance of my being one, the foregoing is enough as a fair
sample of what one who is mis-called a visionary, but whoconsiders
himself a practical man, understanding the wants of the poorest
people, would do if he had the power.
Young India, 1-7-1926

566. ‘TOWARDS MORAL BANKRUPTCY’-I
Kind friends continue to send me cuttings from Indian
newspapers approvingly dealing with the question of birth-control by
the use of contraceptives. My correspondence with young men on
their private conduct is increasing. I am able to discuss in these pages
only an infinitesimal portion of the questions raised by my
correspondents. American friends send me literature on the subject
and some are even angry with me for having expressed an opinion
against the use of contraceptives. They deplore that, an advanced
reformer in many ways, I should be medieval in my views about
birth-control. I find too that the advocates of the use of contraceptives
number among them some of the soberest of men and women of all
lands.
I therefore thought that there must be something very decisive
446

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in favour of the methods advocated and felt too that I should say on
the subject more than I have done. Whilst I was thinking of the
problem and of the question of reading the literature on the subject, a
book called Towards Moral Bankruptcy was placed in my hands for
reading. It deals with this very subject and, as it appears to me, in a
perfectly scientific manner. The original is in French by M. Paul
Bureau and is entitled L’ Indiscipline des Moeurs 1 which literally
means “the indiscipline of morals”. The translation is published by
Constable Company and has an introduction by Dr. Mary Scharlieb,
C.B.E., M.D., M.S. (Lond.). It covers 538 pages in 15 chapters.
Having read the book, I felt that, before I summarized the
author’s views, I must in justice to the cause read the standard
literature in favour of the methods advocated. I consequently
borrowed from the Servants of India Society such literature as they
had on the subject. They have very kindly lent me some of the books
in their possession. . . . Kaka Kalelkar who is studying the subject has
given me Havelock Ellis’s volume specially bearing on the subject
and a friend has sent me the special number of The Practitioner in
which is collected some valuable medical opinion from well-known
practitioners.
My purpose in collecting literature on the subject was to test the
accuracy, so far as a layman could, of M. Bureau’s conclusions. One
often finds that there are two sides to questions even when scientists
discuss them and that there is much to be said for either side. I was
anxious, therefore, to know the viewpoints, of the advocates of
contraceptives before I introduced to the reader M. Bureau’s volume.
I have come to the deliberate conclusion that so far at least as India is
concerned, there is no case for the use of contraceptives. Those who
advocate their use for Indian conditions either do not know them or
choose to ignore them. But if it can be proved that the methods
advocated are harmful even in the West, it would be unnecessary to
examine the special Indian conditions.
Let us therefore see what M. Bureau has to say. His studies are
confined to France. But France means much. It is considered to be
[one of] the most advanced countries in the world and, if the methods
have failed in France, they are not likely to succeed elsewhere.
Opinions may differ as to the meaning of the word ‘failure’. I
must therefore define the word as it is here meant. The methods must
be proved to have failed if it can be shown that moral bonds have
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

447

loosened, licentiousness has increased, and, instead of the check
having been exercised by men and women for purposes of health and
economic limitation of families only, it has been used principally for
feeding animal passions. This is the moderate position. The extreme
moral position condemns the use of contraceptives under every
conceivable circumstance, it being contended that it is not necessary
for man or woman to satisfy the sexual instinct except when the act is
meant for race reproduction, even as it is not necessary for man or
woman to eat except for sustaining the body. There is also the third
position. There is a class of men who contend that there is no such
thing as morality or that if there is, it consists not in exercising
restraint but in indulgence of every form of animal appetite, so long
as it does not so impair the constitution as to render it unfit for the
very indulgence which is its object. For this extreme position, I do not
suppose, M. Bureau has written his volume. For, M. Bureau concludes
his books by quoting Tom Mann’s saying: ‘The future is for the
nations who are chaste’.
In the first part of his book, M. Bureau has collected facts which
make most dismal reading. It shows how vast organizations have
sprung up in France which merely pander to man’s basest tastes. Even
the one claim of advocates of contraceptives that abortions must
disappear with the use of these methods cannot be sustained. ‘It is
certain’, says M. Bureau, ‘that during the twenty-five years that have
especially seen the increase in France of anti-conceptionist methods,
the number of criminal abortions has not become less.’ M. Bureau is
of opinion that abortions are on the increase. He puts down the figure
at anything between 2,75,000 and 3,25,000 per year. Public opinion
does not look upon them with the horror that it did years ago.
Young India, 1-7-1926

567. NOTES
KHADDAR EXHIBITIONS IN BIHAR

I have before me a fairly long report of the Khaddar
Exhibitions that have been recently held in Bihar. The inspiration to
hold these exhibitions was derived by Babu Rajendra Prasad from
such an exhibition held by the All-India Agrawala Maha Sabha at
Delhi during the year. The first such exhibition in Bihar was opened
by Babu Satis Chandra Das Gupta of Khadi Pratishthan, Calcutta. And
448

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

as it proved successful, similar exhibitions were continued to be held
in various parts of Bihar. The first exhibition was held on the grounds
of Bihar Vidyapith on the banks of the Ganges, some three miles from
Patna. The second was held in the Bihar Young Men’s Institute and it
was opened by Sadhu Vaswani of Sind. The third was held at Arrah
and the fourth at Muzaffarpur and was opened by Maulvi Saheb
Muhammad Shaffee. The fifth was held at Chupra 1 and was opened
by Maulana Mazhar-ul-Haque. The sixth was held at Mairnea, a small
village in the district of Chupra and the seventh and the last mentioned
in the report was held at Gaya on the 11th instant. The highest
attendance was at Gaya, in spite of terrible heat. It totalled 7,000.
There was a large number of ladies included in the number. The least
attendance was 2,000. The report goes on to state:
These
exhibitions
are being
visited
by
Congressmen,
non-Congressmen, Government officials, Zamindars, lawyers, big and small
merchants, and in some cases even Europeans. The exhibition at Mairnea was
visited by crowds of simple villagers, rather than middle-class men.

The khadi sales averaged over a thousand each, the lowest being
Rs. 400 at Mairnea, and the highest being Rs. 2,000 at Gaya. The
report says:
In these exhibitions all discord and disunion between Hindus and
Mussalmans or political leaders holding different views was absent.

The methods adopted are:
We approach at every place some prominent person and request him to
organize a khadi exhibition. We secure an influential man to open it.
Invitation cards are issued to prominent people. The exhibition is advertised
by means of notices, placards, etc. In the evenings, during the exhibition
time, magic lantern lectures are given illustrating the khadi movement.
Crowds are attracted to these lectures. After the exhibition is over, khadi is
hawked in the places where it is held. We propose to continue to hold these
exhibitions and expect to clear off our stock which amounts to Rs. 80,000.

I observe from this report that noted men conducted the sales
and hawking at these exhibitions.
P ROFESSOR P RESENTED WITH KHADDAR

Quite recently, the students of the economic department of the
Patna College presented Professor Hamilton on his retirement with a
1

Also spelt as ‘Chapra’

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

449

piece of khaddar of local manufacture with the following remarks by
their spokesman as quoted in The Searchlight:
Sir, I know you to be a devout follower of the late Prof. Marshall who
lays down the basic concept of all his works on economics: ‘It is on the one
side a study of wealth, on the other and more important side, a part of the
study of man.’ And for you we cannot choose a better present than a piece of
khadi, from start to finish, a Bihar product, made of the indigenous Kukti
cotton. It lays bare to you, Sir, not only the economic endeavours of our
country but the very heart of our nation. On the side of wealth-production it
represents that part of it which goes to increase the poor man’s mite, and on
its human side, represents the country’s struggle to provide food for the
famished and to clothe the shame of the naked.

It is to be wished that all the students whether of Government
college or other will appreciate the economics of khaddar as the Patna
College students have done and will follow their example whenever
they have any occasion to make presentations.
KHADDAR IN MYSORE

A correspondent writes:
Some khaddar lovers of Mysore have started a co-operative society in
Mysore town since July 1925. Not much khaddar is yet locally produced. The
organizers therefore secure khaddar from Andhra, Tamil Nadu and Karnatak.
The Society intends to increase its capital. At present they have 365 shares of
Rs. 10 each. The shareholders are required to pay Re. 1 per month on each
allotted share. But some have paid the whole amount. There are 103 members
of the society. The shop purchases locally spun yarn at the rate of Rs. 12 per
pound. It is then locally woven. The society is spending only Rs. 32 per
month for the establishment and other charges. The paid-up capital between
July 1925 and May last was Rs. 2,036. Khaddar purchased was Rs. 8,365.
Khaddar sold was Rs. 8,088.

This is no doubt an unpretentious beginning for a town like
Mysore. But if the example is copied by other towns and if the
management is able and honest there is no doubt that there is a great
future for khaddar in Mysore.
WHO C AN AFFILIATE ?

A question has been asked what are the terms of affiliation for
goshalas to All-India Cow-Protection Association. No rules have yet
been passed by the Committee. But I adopt the suggestions of
Chaunde Maharaj that it should be one per cent of the net income of
450

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the society seeking affiliation. Full particulars should be supplied at
the time of affiliation and the applicant society should be prepared to
endorse the objects of the Association and submit to inspection and
audit by the Association. The affiliated institution or society shall have
the right to have the advice of the experts of the Association and free
use of the literature at its disposal and such other guidance as may be
in its power to render. These rules will naturally be subject to the
sanction of the Committee of the A.-I. Cow-Protection Association. I
would welcome suggestions before the rules are placed before the
Committee.
Young India, 1-7-1926

568. ALL-INDIA DESHBANDHU MEMORIAL
A correspondent draws my attention to the fact that the
acknowledgments of amounts received on behalf of the All-India
Deshbandhu Memorial Fund have been loosely dealt with in Young
India in that there has been no continuity. This is true because as
intimations were received either from the Secretary or the Treasurer I
passed on the memoranda without checking and without examining
the last totals. The correspondent is therefore unable to know whether
the monies paid by himself have been actually credited to the
All-India Deshbandhu Memorial Fund or not. Upon receipt of this
letter, I corresponded1 with the Treasurer and secured a copy of the
full list of subscribers to date. In order to avoid any confusion and
error and so as to enable every subscriber to find out for himself
whether his subscription has or has not been received, I am publishing
the full list2. I am unable to give the whole list in one issue, if only
because the second part of the list is still under examination.
I need hardly assure the reader that the funds at the Treasurer’s
office are most jealously kept and they are banked as soon as they are
received. The confusion has arisen not owing to faulty or careless
book-keeping, but owing to omission to publish all lists received at
the Young India office. I shall be thankful if subscribers will look up
the list that is being now published and call my attention to any
omission they may discover.
Young India, 1-7-1926
1
2

This letter is not available.
Not reproduced here

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

451

569. LETTER TO SHEWAKRAM KARAMCHAND
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

July 2, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. It is perfectly possible to completely stop
involuntary night discharges. I have not entirely succeeded, but I
know that it is perfectly possible. I have been free often for months
and months. And I recall even a time when I was free for over a year.
Why that long spell of freedom was broken is a long story. The
discharges are neither natural nor beneficial for health. They are an
interruption to the full development of health and, when one’s mind
has become absolutely free from passion of every kind, night
discharges are an impossibility. It is a state attainable by all. But it is
attained by sustained and even painful effort.
I have your second letter also which I might deal with
later in the pages of Young India.1 I have always wanted to give
yourboys a letter in my own handwriting, but something or other has
come in the way. Here are a few lines now.2
Yours sincerely,

Encl. 1
S JT. S HEWAKRAM KARAMCHAND
TEACHER
M. A. V. S CHOOL
OLD S UKKUR
(SIND )
From a microfilm: S.N. 19648

1

It is not clear what the addressee’s second letter was about; vide, however,
“Conservation of Vital Energy”, 2-9-1926.
2
The enclosure is not available.

452

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

570. LETTER TO SATCOWRIPATI ROY
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

July 2, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your telegram, but such news as you have given me
always travels fast. I got the news of Bhomble’s death twenty-four
hours before your telegram. I telegraphed to Sudhir and wrote also to
Basanti Devi giving such comfort as was possible.
I hope you are keeping well and that things in Bengal are
shaping themselves right.
Yours sincerely,

BA[B]U S ATCOWRIPATI R OY
BHAWANIPUR
C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm: S.N. 19649

571. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS PODDAR.
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

Friday [July 2, 1926] 1
BHAI RAMESHWARJI,

Your letter. As for God, He is always testing us. What does
it matter if a whole lifetime is spent in repeating Ramanama. We
should repeat Ramanama with faith that it is the best remedy.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 164

1

From the postmark

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

453

572. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
THE ASHRAM,

July 2, 1926
BHAISHRI KAKA,

Both your letters to hand. Much of what you write is due, I see,
to your misunderstanding. I am not backing out at all. Only I would
not be on the committee which I do regard as right. All the rules are
framed by the committee. Even in the matter of selecting a name, do
not accept my suggestion only. I do not think there are more men on
the committee than are needed. Nowadays Mama 1 and Narahari 2 do
not come here at all. There is at present such an understanding with
Vinoba that every three months he should come and stay here for
quite some time. I have asked for a copy of the rules being sent to
Mama, Narahari and Appa3.
As the principles were laid down at the time of the founding of
the Ashram4 they are not mentioned in these rules. Panditji 5 and
Chhaganlal Joshi6 can both be on the committee. They do not wish to
be there I rather liked their plea. They are neither particularly
enthusiastic nor indifferent about the committee. I regard the
committee as absolutely necessary. It is indeed my aim not to tie down
the committee here and now with too many rules.
I believe we cannot yet interest ourselves in the affairs of the
families. One who has lived in the Ashram for five years and
studiously endeavours to observe its rules can become a member of
the managing committee. The committee of course has overall control
of all the departments.
If your interpretation of the rules is correct they will have to be
amended.
I have conceived of the school as an autonomous body within
the Ashram itself. The managing committee is not intended to acquire
some prerogatives for its members. Living in the Ashram and leading
1
2
3
4
5
6

454

Vaman Laxman Phadke
Narahari D. Parikh
Appa Saheb Patwardhan
In 1915
Presumably, Narayan Moreshwar Khare
Head Master of the Ashram school.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

a similar life [elsewhere] I regard as one and the same.
I did know your opinion on the question of prayer, but I did not
send you my comments. All the aspects had been discussed here, so I
presumed you must have inferred my opinion from it. There was an
open discussion and I had discussed the matter specially with
Mahadev. Had I found a difference of principle in the opinion you
held, I would have joined issue with you.
From my standpoint, I do not agree that there is any divergence
between us in regard to the ideals of the Ashram school. The reason
why you think there is, is that you do not fully understand that I am
an anekantavadin1. I am quite convinced that we are at present in no
position to take pupils from outside; besides we are trying new
experiments every day. It is certainly desirable to make experiments,
but we cannot involve outsiders even if we try to. Fortunately they are
not so simple-minded as to get themselves readily involved. People all
over the world act in accordance with current traditions and that is
only right. We are either too advanced or too backward for many to
keep us company. I believe, nowhere else in India is the educational
field so wide as ours, because we deal with children and also with their
parents. We may not perhaps be in a position to cope with that field,
but what I say is true. What does it matter if people from outside
compare our school with Ambalalbhai’s? Should we not be guided by
our own conscience? Certainly we have no wish to boycott anyone.
Tulsidas, the Antyaja, would have a place right here.
The object in having you on the committee is clear enough, viz.,
that all may feel the need to consult you while you are at the Ashram.
Let us assume that perhaps Maganlal may not feel that way. Is that
any reason why you should hesitate? If my idea of the committee is
correct, Mahadev, Kishorelal and Maganlal cannot by themselves
carry the burden.
The ideal before the school would be to discover through
experiments what national education is and for the teachers to
consider themselves as pupils because they are seekers, too, groping
for their ideal. I place you and myself in the same category. The idea
you have in regard to khadi is equally true in regard to education.
What you have yet to do is this. Return the rules after
adding to or deleting from them. There may possibly be an error in
1

In Jainism one who looks at things from various points of view

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

455

incorporating into the rules that part of your criticism which all
accept. Therefore I want you to translate your own criticism into the
rules, so that it will be easy for everyone to understand it. Else we
would all be trying to interpret them in our own way.
You write nothing about your health. Let me know about the
weather there. Shanker has written many letters to you. Now what
about his complaint that you have not replied to them?
Blessings from

BAPU
S JT. K AKASAHEB
YEOTMAL
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19926

573. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI ,

Friday [July 2, 1926] 1
CHI MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. You are bound to gain weight in that climate.
The stomach trouble should not persist now. What is your body
temperature now? There is quite a crowd at the Ashram at present. A
lady2 who was to come from Germany has already arrived.
Blessings from

BAPU
S JT. M ATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
HOMI VILLA
P ANCHGANI
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

The postmark bears the date July 3, 1926. The Friday preceding that date was

2

Helene Haussding

July 2.

456

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

574. LETTER TO V. R. KOTHARI
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

July 3, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. 1 Jamnalalji is now here. I have discussed
the thing with him. His opinion is that your institution is good so far
as it goes. It is an ordinary type of boarding house looking after
about 25 boys belonging to the depressed classes. The funds which
friends place at my disposal for this work are limited. Several
institutions, some better carrying out the purpose I and those who are
associated with me have in view, are being supported. To pay you Rs.
10,000/- would be to pay practically the whole of the expense of the
building. When you embarked upon the scheme, you had not any
help through me in view. It seems to me that you should exert
yourself to approach others who are also interested in such work and
enlist their support. It is not right for me to burden the trust at my
disposal with a single heavy item. It seems to me that Rs. 5,000/- can
be more usefully employed for the same cause by distributing the
same amongst several equally needy and equally efficient institutions.
I have shownthis letter to Jamnalalji who is as much interested in the
welfare of the depressed classes as I am and who helps me in raising
funds for such purpose.2
Yours sincerely,

S JT. V. R. K OTHARI
P OONA C ITY
From a microfilm: S.N. 11127

1

On March 9, 1926, Kothari had referred to a grant of Rs. 5,000 Gandhiji gave
him for a Depressed Classes Hostel, at Bari, in Sholapur District and renewed his
request for a further grant. Jamnalal Bajaj paid a visit to the institution (S.N. 11120).
On June 28, Kothari wrote reminding Gandhiji of his request for the grant (S.N.
11188).
2
In reply to this, Kothari wrote again on July 5 (S.N. 11128).
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

457

575. LETTER TO SHALIGRAM SHASTRI
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

July 3, 1926
BHAI SHALIGRAM SHASTRI,

Your letter to hand. Also received your telegram. You must have
got my telegram informing you that Harihar Sharma was going back
and that you might fix any date after August 16. I can well
understand the reason for your not coming at this time.
I send you a copy of the scheme which Pandit Harihar Sharma
has drawn up in consultation with the local workers. Please study it
and place it before the committee if necessary, and obtain their
opinion also on this.
From a microfilm of the Hindi: S.N. 19650

576. KHADI WORK IN GARIADHAR
Shri Shambhushanker has been working in Gariadhar on behalf
of the Conference 1. His record of work is noteworthy. He persuaded
1,l00 families in 41 villages around Gariadhar to stock cotton and
helped them with all facilities up to the stage of weaving.
Approximately 3,000 maunds of cotton has been stocked, out of
which 800 maunds was ginned on hand-wheels. There is a cess on
carding in this region, but those who carded this cotton for being
turned into slivers were exempted from this cess. Out of all these
families, only 112 families availed themselves of the assistance offered
by the conference in terms of its resolutions on the subject, namely,
one-half the expenditure incurred oncarding and weaving. Till now,
only Rs. 164 have been spent on this account. As near-famine
conditions prevailed in this area, cheap slivers were also supplied.
About 8 maunds of slivers were sold to nearly 50 families, at the rate
of 6 annas a pound, and most of this was used for making women’s
garments. It is estimated that no more than Rs. 50 would have to be set
aside for this purpose. In addition to this, because of the famine
conditions, cotton was also purchased from the market and got spun
1

458

Kathiawar Political Conference
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

into yarn on payment, with a view to having it woven into cloth. So
far, 295 maunds of cotton have been ginned, and made into slivers in
the Centre itself. The quantity is in the process of being spun and
woven into cloth. The cost of ginning came to Rs. 110. The
cotton-pods yielded 93_ maunds of cottonwool and 190 maunds of
cotton-seeds. The yarn being spun is of 4 to 8 counts. The rate of
payment for spinning is five pies per count. The rate for carding and
making slivers is Rs. 2-12-0 per pound, and for weaving it is Rs. 8.
The khadi woven is of 24 inches to 27 inches width, and one maund
of khadi measures between 110 and 115 yards in length. Shri
Shambhushanker tries to get all the khadi produced sold locally. He
has so far sold 962 yards of khadi at the rate of 17 annas for 3_ yards,
which comes nearly to 5 annas a yard. A maund of yarn is woven into
cloth every day. Moreover khadi is woven in this area for the Amreli
Khadi Centre too. This khadi measures 30 inches in width. The work
in this centre is being done efficiently and economically, and the chief
reason for this seems to be that Shri Shambhushankerbhai mixes with
and maintains close contacts with each spinner, carder and weaver. My
object in publishing the figures which I receive from the various
centres is that they may learn and derive inspiration from one another.
Healthy and pleasant competition amongst the various centres should
be welcome. The field of work is so large that it offers scope for
sacrifice for thousands of voluntary workers and can help thousands
of others to make a living. Those, moreover, who become interested in
this work and realize that village life can have the beauty of poetry
can derive the utmost happiness from it.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 4-7-1926

577. RESTRICTIONS ON WOMEN IN MENSES
A widow writes as follows:
I am told that a woman in menses should not touch books, paper,
pencil, slate and such other things connected with learning. Do you also
believe in this?

Such a question can be asked only in a wretched country like
India which is disgraced by foolish notions about touching and not
touching things. Some of the rules forbidding such a woman to touch
a particular thing can be justified on grounds of health and morality.
During that period, the woman is unfit to do hard work. It is very
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

459

necessary that she should remain undisturbed by sex desire. A
married woman should altogether avoid the company of her husband,
and rest is very necessary for her, but it is not only not improper for
her to read good books or to study but, on the contrary, I believe that
it is desirable and necessary that she should do so. We can think of a
number of household chores which such a woman can do with
comfort and with little exertion.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 4-7-1926

578. GUJARAT KHADI PRACHARAK MANDAL
According to the accounts for the second Chaitra 1 received
from the Gujarat Khadi Mandal, 3,854 square yards of khadi was
woven in fifteen different centres out of yarn spun personally by
people who got it woven. One of the centres wove 410 square yards of
khadi from ready yarn and 3,348 sq. yards of khadi for sale was
woven in ten centres. A subsidy of Rs. 1,433 at the rate of _ an anna a
vishi2 per yard was given to fifteen centres. Khadi worth Rs. 7,580 was
sold through eleven stores. The total number of workers in the
various centres was 41. Besides, there were 15 carders, 117 weavers,
172 persons spinning for themselves and 683 spinning for wages.
The figures of work for a period of eleven months are as follows:
Khadi woven out of yarn spun by the persons who had it woven,
35,033 sq. yards; khadi made from ready-made yarn, 7,756 sq. yards;
khadi for sale, both spinning and weaving done through the centres,
20,595 sq. yards; a subsidy of Rs. 10,584 at the rate of half an anna;
the sale of khadi through the various stores, Rs. 80,063. These figures
do not include those relating to centres in Kathiawar. During the
second Chaitra, the Mandal sold 19 spinning-wheels, 50 taklis3, 32
spindles, 105 Ib. of slivers, 40 lb. of yarn, 60 bows for carding, 29
charkhas and 56 aterans 4. In the figures above, annas and fractions
have been left out. These statistic may seem ludicrous in the context
of our aim of bringing about boycott of foreign cloth, but, as a
1

A month in the Hindu calendar, roughly corresponding to March-April; in
this year there was an extra, i.e., second Chaitra.
2
A unit of a warp comprising twenty threads
3
Spindles worked with hand
4
Wooden gadgets on which yarn is wound off a spindle

460

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

measure of the progress of khadi itself, of the help given to the poor
and from the standpoint of middle-class men and women who wish to
earn their living through voluntary service, they are not ludicrous but
heartening. As our capacity for work improves and workers acquire
self-confidence, khadi will make even faster progress. Anyone who
takes the trouble to think cannot but see that, if there is any work
which can become universal in the country, it is that connected with
the production of khadi.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 4-7-1926

579. LETTER TO V. A. SUNDARAM
[SABARMATI ],

Monday [July 5, 1926] 1
MY DEAR SUNDARAM,

I have your welcome letter. So you will give me a Tamil lesson
and something noble every Monday. I understand all the Tamil you
have given me, of course with your careful notes.
Love to you all. I have mentioned your proposal to Devdas. But
I do not think, he will come. He is all right now.
Yours,

BAPU
S UNDARAM
C/ O MRS. S TOKES
KOTGARH
Via S IMLA
From a photostat: G.N. 3182

1

From the postmark

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

461

580. LETTER TO THE EDITOR “ HINDOO”
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

July 5, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

Here is my article1 for the Hindoo if it may be so called.
Yours sincerely,

Encl. 1
THE EDITOR
Hindoo
S IND (HYDERABAD )
From a microfilm: S.N. l9652

581. MESSAGE FOR “ HINDOO”
July 5, 1926
I must not be tired of repeating what I found to be a
fundamental truth for India’s freedom. I can therefore commend to
the readers of Hindoo the spinning-wheel and khaddar. I know how
severely Sind has proved disappointing, but I know that the time is
coming when Sind will also respond.
From a microfilm: S.N. 19652

582. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
July 5, 1926
CHI. MANILAL,

Your letters to hand. I expect there would be no hitch in
arranging your marriage when you come here. Certainly nothing can
be finalized before your arrival. If you must marry, you must restrain
your extravagance. Everyone coming from there complains of this.
I find your explanation inadequate. But you will always be what
you are. I do not want to control you. I shall be content with whatever
1

462

Vide the succeeding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you let me know.
The books you ordered have been dispatched. Please remit their
cost immediately. The Ashram can grant no credit, because it has no
private sources of income. I hope this is quite clear.
I learn now for the first time that Shanti does not satisfy you. I
am glad however to learn that Dahyo does.
Please send me the old book of newspaper cuttings maintained
by me. There are also a number of books which are of no use there;
you had better send them here or bring them with you.
Devdas is quite well. He is enjoying the climate of Mussoorie.
Ramdas is in Amreli.
What is one to write about Harilal1? Rami 2 is in the Ashram.
You do not seem to have made use of the many articles which
Mahadevbhai sent you. Of course, that does not matter. An editor
ought to have the right to decide what he will accept and what he will
not. But should he not write even a letter of thanks or an
acknowledgment?
When you come, be armed with a notice to me: ‘Marry me off
in fifteen days’ time; I must take the next steamer.’
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1118. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi;
also G.N. 4705

583. LETTER TO TEHMINA KHAMBHATTA
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

Tuesday [July 6, 1926] 3
DEAR SISTER,

Your letter to hand. I was certainly expecting it. Every time
I take up Mrs. Eddy’s 4 book, I do remember Bhai Khambhatta. I
1

Gandhiji’s eldest son
Daughter of Harilal
3
From the postmark
4
Mary Baker Eddy (1821-1910), author of Science and Health with Key to the
Scriptures (1875)
2

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

463

am very glad to learn he is recovering. How can we get tired of
diet or a medicine which proves beneficial to us? I have certainly not
forgotten about sending my opinion of Mrs. Eddy’s book. But
sincethere is no urgency about it, I give it only such time as I can
spare from my other occupations.
Blessings from

BAPU
S MT. T EHMINA BEHRAMJI KHAMBHATTA
275, H ORNBY R OAD
F ORT
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 4362. Courtesy: Tehmina Khambhatta

584. A MESSAGE1
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

July 7, 1926
The greatest contribution that India can render to the sum of
human happiness is to attain her freedom by peaceful and truthful
means. Whether such a thing will ever come to pass is more than one
can say. Indeed, appearances would contradict any such belief. Nevertheless, my faith in the future of humanity is so great that I cannot but
hold any other belief than that India will gain her freedom only
through peaceful and truthful means and no other. May all, therefore,
who share my belief help India towards that supreme consummation.
From a photostat: S.N. 19656 a

585. LETTER TO NURGIS CAPTAIN2
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

July 7, 1926
I had your long letter. After you were twelve hours away from
Aden, your criticism about the young men you saw on board is true
though painful. This cow-protection cry on the part of many educated
1
2

464

It is not known to whom this message was sent.
Grand-daughter of Dadabhai Naoroji
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Hindus is a false cry. But, after all, they are but a drop in the ocean of
Hindu humanity and against these few beef-eaters, there are
millionswho would rather die than touch beef and its restraint to be
treasured, for our upward growth depends upon our self-restraint.
Poor Yeshwantprasad is still suffering. The guinea worms have
not left him entirely. He is at Bhavnagar undergoing treatment from
his own hakim. Jamnabehn is also there. Mira is getting on quite all
right. And, now we have the German sister who was expected to come.
She too has made herself at home. I am quite well. Devdas is at
Mussoorie. You know that he had an operation for appendicitis. He is
quite all right now. You must be thoroughly restored before you
return.
Mr. Bahadurji’s yarn that you sent me for testing was not bad at
all. His test gave nearly 50 per cent. 60 per cent is really required for
weaving purposes. We are at present concentrating upon increasing
the strength of the yarn instead of the speed and the same has reached
up to 90 per cent. Probably, at the end of the month someone may
reach 100 per cent.
Yours,

NURGISBEHN
GENEVA
From a microfilm: S.N. 19653

586. LETTER TO A. T. GIDWANI
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

July 7, 1926
MY DEAR GIDWANI,

I hope you are going on well in your new surroundings.
You will be interested to know that I wrote to Narayandas the
same day that you gave me the information about grapes and asked
him to telegraph to me. 1 He telegraphed saying that he was replying
my letter. I immediately came to the conclusion that the worst you
have told me was true. The promised reply has not yet been received.
Meanwhile Hatham sent another telegram stating the whole information will be given to me if I promise not to fast. Poor simple
1

Vide “Letter to Narandas Anandji”, 29-6-1926.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

465

Hatham, as if by his telegram he has not told me all I did know. I gave
up the grapes immediately I got the telegram from Narayandas.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19654

587. LETTER TO V. B. TYAR
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

July 7, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your article on ‘Sandhya Prayer’. It is interesting, but
not required for the readers of Young India. They will not understand
it. The prayer that the readers of Young India find emphasized is the
prayer of the heart.
I return the article. You may need it. I hope you are succeeding
with your charkha.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. V. B. TYAR
MILITARY ACCOUNTS
MAYMYO
(BURMA)
From a microfilm: S.N. 19655

588. LETTER TO BHUPENDRA NARAYAN SEN
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

July 7, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I now understand somewhat better your plans.
But tell me wherein you differ from Khadi Pratishthan and Abhoy
Ashram in your plans to develop some of the items of constructive
programme on your own lines.
The only suggestion I have about malaria is its prevention.
There is no certainty about it. But I feel that if a person keeps his
body pure and unlogged and takes the ordinary precautions about
pure water and pure food, he is not likely to be troubled by malaria.
466

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You ask me to tell you all about my health. There is, however,
nothing to tell because it seems to be quite all right for the moment.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm S.N. 19656

589. LETTER TO MISS KATHERINE MAYO
THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

July 7, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your second letter. 1 The notes were duly corrected,
amplified and posted to you. I hope you have received them. If they
have gone astray, please let me know. I believe that the original is not
yet destroyed. If they have not been received by you, let me inform
you that they were amplified as they were sent by you. You will
therefore kindly wait for the amplified copy if you have not received
it already.
Yours sincerely,

MISS KATHERINE MAYO
BEDFORD HILLS
NEW YORK (U. S. A.)
From 3 photostat: S.N. 10778

590. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKER PATTANI
S ABARMATI ASHRAM,

July 7, 1926
SUJNA BHAISHRI,

For a long time I have kept with me a letter from a weaver of the
Dhed caste only with a view to sending you an excerpt from it. In
1

Writing this on May 26, Katherine Mayo had acknowledged Gandhiji’s letter
of April 9 with enclosures, pointing out that his secretary had overlooked returning
her notes of the talk Gandhiji gave her and her friends. She wanted either that they
should be returned to her corrected, amplified, etc., or that Gandhiji should confirm
that they were correct (S.N. 10754).
VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 1926

467

your present state of health, I am afraid, I ought not to write this to
you, but since you have not relinquished charge of the State’s
administration, a petition from the poor may reach you. This man
writes:1
I do not know how dead cattle are disposed of in Bhavnagar.
please get information on this point and do what is proper. Why does
not the State itself set up a tannery to handle all the dead cattle? In
fact why should not the State also run an ideal dairy and supply pure
milk at low price to children?
S IR P RABHASHANKER P ATTANI
BHAVNAGAR
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 19657

1
Not translated here. The correspondent had complained against the
indiscriminate slaughter of animals by a person to whom the Bhavnagar State had
granted the monopoly of disposing of dead cattle.

468

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I
VITHALBHAI PATEL’S LETTER TO GANDHIJI
BOMBAY ,
May 10, 1926
DEAR MAHATMAJI ,

When I accepted the office of President of the Legislative Assembly I had made
a resolution within myself that I would devote the savings from my salary towards the
furtherance of some object calculated to promote the national welfare. It was not
possible for me for various reasons to save anything worth the name within the first
six months. Since the last month, however, I am glad to say that I am quite out of the
woods, and can, and do, save a substantial amount. I find that, on an average, I require
Rs. 2,000 per month for my expenses. The amount of my net salary, excluding
income-tax, is Rs. 3,625. I propose, therefore, to set apart Rs. 1,625 per month,
beginning from the last month, to be utilized hereafter in such manner and for such
purpose as you may approve. I have, of course, some ideas in the matter, and I will in
due course discuss them with you. But whether you agree with me in those ideas or
not, the amount is at your disposal.
I enclose herewith a cheque for Rs. 1,625 for the month of April.
I trust you will not decline to take this responsibility.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

V. J. P ATEL
Vithalbhai Patel—Life and Times—II. P. 669

APPENDIX II
I. THE SABARMATI PACT1
The conference convened at the instance of Pandit Motilal Nehru was held at
Sabarmati Ashram, Ahmedabad, on the 20th and 21st. . . Telegrams and letters were
received. . . including one from Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya which contained
suggestions about bringing all Indian political parties on a common platform in a
united Congress.
The conference adopted the following agreement, as embodying its decision
on points specifically discussed :
1 This appeared under the title “Swarajists and Responsivists : The Ahmedabad
Compromise”.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 192

469

It is hereby agreed between the undersigned, subject to the confirmation of the
All-India Congress Committee, that the response made by the Government shall for
purposes of Clauses (a) and (b) of the resolution II-B (4) of the All-India Congress
Committee, dated March 6 and 7, 1926, be considered satisfactory in the provinces, if
the power, responsibility and initiative necessary for the effective discharge of their
duties are secured to ministers and the sufficiency of such power, responsibility and
initiative, in each province, shall be decided in the first instance by Congress
members of the Legislative Council of the Province, subject to confirmation by a
Committee consisting of Pandit Motilal Nehru and Mr. M. R. Jayakar.
It is further agreed that the said Committee will decide all disputes in the
Congress provinces of the Bombay Maharashtra, Bihar and the C.P. Marathi. This
agreement has been subscribed to by the undersigned in their individual capacities,
and it will be submitted for ratification to the executive of the Swaraj and Responsive
Co-operation Parties. It will be placed for ratification before the All-India Congress
Committee at a meeting which is being convened on May 5 and 6 next, at Sabarmati.
The compormise is signed by Sarojini Naidu, Motilal Nehru, Lajpat Rai, M. R.
Jayakar, N. C. Kelkar, B. S. Moonje, M. S. Aney, D. V. Gokhale, G. A. Ogale at
Sabarmati, April 21, 1926.

II. A. I. C. C.’S DELHI R ESOLUTION
The Clauses of Resolution II-B(4) of the A.I.C.C. meeting at Delhi referred to
in the agreement state that Congressmen shall
(a) refuse to accept offices in the gift of the Government until, in the
opinion of the Congress, a satisfactory response is made by the Government;
(b) refuse supplies and throw out budgets until such response is made by the
Government, except when the Working Committee instructs otherwise.

III. R ESPONSIVISTS’ AKOLA MANIFESTO
The Responsive Co-operationist Party manifesto, issued at the Akola
Conference in February last, declared regarding their Council programme :
We believe that no programme of bringing about constitutional dead-lock by
resorting to the policy of uniform, continuous and consistent obstruction can be
successful unless tried on a large scale, and backed by some sanctions behind the
same.
We believe that the best course under the present circumstances is that
of Responsive Co-operation, which means working the Reforms, unsatisfactory,
disappointing and inadequate as they are, for all they are worth; and using
the same for accelerating the grant of full responsible Government and also
for creating, in the meanwhile, opportunities for the people for advancing their
interests and strenghtening their power and resistance to injustice and misrule.

470

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The policy of working the Reforms necessarily includes the capture of all
places of power, responsibility and initative which are open to election by, or are
otherwise responsible to, the party within the legislature, subject to such conditions
with regard to policy, programme and kindred matters as may seem desirable to
impose from time to time.1

IV. THE BREAKDOWN

OF THE

P ACT

At the meeting of the All-India Congress Committee at Ahmedabad on the 4th
May, Pandit Motilal announced that, owing to irreconcilable differences between the
signatories of the Sabarmati Pact regarding the interpretation of its terms, the
negotiations that he had been for the past few days carrying on with the
Responsivists had broken down, and the Pact had, therefore, fallen through and was
non-existent. A letter from the Responsivists was read by the Secretary confirming
in the main Pandit Motilal’s statement.

V. MOTILAL’S S UBSTITUTE F ORMULA
The following is the text of the substitute formula which was handed to the
Responsivists leaders on the 4th morning :
Having regard to the fact that doubts and differences have arisen as to the true
interpretation of the agreement arrived at between Mrs. Sarojini Naidu, Messrs Lajpat
Rai, M. S. Aney, M. R. Jayakar, N. C. Kelkar, G. A. Ogale and Pandit Motilal Nehru
at Sabarmati on the 21st April, 1926, this meeting of the All-India Congress
Committee, while fully agreeing with the principles, policy and programme laid
down in resolution 7 of the Cawnpore Congress and resolution 2(b) of the All-India
Congress Committee passed at Delhi on 6th and 7th March, 1926, and fully believing
that dyarchy in any form or shape is wholly unworkable in the best of conditions, is
of opinion that with a view to remove all doubts and differences and to put the true
issue before the country, it is expedient to state clearly what shall constitute the
statisfactory response referred to in the said resolution.
It is, therefore, hereby resolved :
That the acceptance by the Government of the principle underlying the
resolution passed by the Assembly on the 8th February, 1925, shall constitute a
satisfactory response by the Government to the national demand for full responsible
Government, and the immediate adoption by the Government of the various steps
mentioned in the resolution of the Assembly passed on the 8th September, 1925,
shall for the present be taken to be a sufficient compliance with the said principle.
(2) That if Responsible Government in the fullest sense is guaranteed by the
Government to come automatically in the near future by the adoption of steps other
1

Parts I, II and III are reproduced from the Indian Review, April, 1926, and
Parts IV, V and VI from the issue of May, 1926.

VOL.35 : 2 APRIL, 1926 - 7 JULY, 192

471

than those mentioned in the resolution of the Assembly passed on the 8th September,
1925, and if, in the meantime, substantially full Responsible Government in the
provinces is granted, the response so made by the Government shall be considered
sufficient in the provinces for the purpose of accepting ministerships and
considering the provincial budgets on their merits, provided that no such response
shall be considered adequate unless it includes :
(a) The release or trial according to law of all political prisoners who are at
present datained without being convicted by a duly constituted court.
(b)

The repeal of all repressive laws.

(c) The removal of all disqualifications now imposed on persons who have
served the sentences passed on them, from standing for election to elected bodies in
the country.
(d) The abolition of non-official nominations to membership of Council
and throwing open the seats of nominated non-official members to election by the
general electorate.
(3) That the adequacy of any action by the Government in any province as is
referred to in resolution 2 shall on the recommendation of the Congress members of
the Legislative Council of that province be decided by the Working Committee.

VI. R ESPONSIVISTS’ DISAPPROVAL
In their reply, Mr. Jayakar and his colleagues pointed out :
We have carefully considered the draft which we regarded as a travesty of the
Pact and a complete repudiation of the same. We think that the draft furnishes no
common ground on which we could profitably meet and discuss. Under the
circumstances, we are of opinion that no useful purpose will be served by our
attending the Working Committee’s meeting this morning, and we have, therefore,
decided not to attend the same. We feel that we need not have been dragged all the way
to Ahmedabad from our distant homes to be made sport of in the manner the draft
proposes to do.
The Indian Review, April and May, 1926

472

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

