1. A GREAT FRIEND GONE
It is not usual in these columns to have obituary notices of all
the great men who pass away. This is a journal devoted to a special
cause. Such notices are taken generally only of those who had
specially identified themselves with the Harijan cause. I had to use
extraordinary self-restraint to avoid noticing Kamala Nehru’s death. It
almost become an oppression. But I need exercise no such restraint
about Dr. Ansari’s death. For he was essentially a symbol of HinduMuslim unity with Hakim Saheb Ajmal Khan. Dr. Ansari never
wavered in his faith even when it was put to a severe test. He was an
orthodox Mussalman proud of his descent from the helpers of the
Prophet when the latter was most in need of help. His very staunchness
and his intimate knowledge of Islam made Dr. Ansari a believer in
Hindu-Muslim unity. It is no exaggeration to say that he had at least
as many Hindu as he had Mussalman friends. He was one of the ablest
physicians in all India. His advice was freely available to the poor of
all races. And what he earned from the princes and rich men, he spent
with both hands among his many needy friends. No beggar
approached him without emptying whatever his pocket contained, and
he never counted what he gave. He was a tower of strength to
hundreds of men and women who swore by him. I have no doubt that
he has left many literally weeping for the personal loss they have
sustained. He has left a wife who is a philosopher though invalid. She
is too brave and too much of a believer to shed a tear over her loss.
But the many whom I have in mind are no philosophers. Their faith in
God is vapoury; their fatih in Dr. Ansari was living. It was no fault of
theirs that their faith in God was weak as with most of us. They had
many proofs of the Doctor’s friendship when they thought God had
forsaken them. They little knew that even the great Doctor could only
help them so long as his Maker allowed him. Would that what he
could not accomplish while he was alive would be accomplished by
his death.
Harijan, 16-5-1936

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

1

2. HINDI OR HINDUSTANI−II
In the previous article1 I have already showed how and why I
regard Hindi and Hindustani as synonymous terms and why it is
necessary to retain the use of the word ‘Hindi’.
An objection to the use of the word ‘Hindi’ has been thus stated
in the letter2 reproduced in the last issue:
It has been studied by Mussalmans in the past and they have done as much
if not more than their Hindu brethren to raise it to the status of a literary
language. But it has also religious and cultural associations with which
Mussalmans as a whole cannot identify themselves. Besides, it is now
evolving a vocabulary that is exclusively its own and is generally
unintelligible to those who know only Urdu.

If the Mussalmans of old studied and enriched Hindi in the past,
why should they of the present generation avoid it? Surely the Hindi
of old had greater religious and cultural associations than modern
Hindi has today. And should one avoid the use of a language because
of its religious and cultural associations? Must I avoid Arabic and
Persian for their religious and cultural associations? I may not be
affected by the latter, if I do not want to be or if I have antipathy
towards them. Surely if we are to live together as blood-brothers that
we are, we may not fight shy of each other’s culture. And why quarrel
with the use of Sanskrit words, in Hindi to the point of rebelling
against the language itself? The unnatural process of using Sanskrit
words in the place of simpler current words or giving the derived
words their original Sanskrit form is undoubtedly a reprehensible
practice and robs a language of its music. But a certain use of Sanskrit
words, as the nation expands, is inevitable in the hands of Hindus who
know only Sanskrit, as the use of Arabic is inevitable in the hands of
Mussalmans who know only Arabic, though both write the same
language and have no special likes or dislikes. Educated Hindus and
Mussalmans will have to acquaint themselves with both the forms. Is
this not true of all growing languages? Educated Englishmen know
both ‘sympathy’ and ‘fellow-feeling’or ‘fatherly’ and ‘paternal’ or
1

Vide “Hindi or Hindustani”, 9-5-1936
For extracts from the letter, vide Appendix, “For Hindustan only”,
9-5-1936.
2

2

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

yearly’ and ‘annual’. The difficulty with us is that just now our hearts
are not one and the best of us are affected by the virus of mutual
suspicion.
Hindi, Hindustani and Urdu are different names for the same
speech just as the dialects of Cornwall, Lancashire and Middlesex are
different names for the same speech. What is being aimed at today is
not to evolve a new language but to adopt the language known under
the three names as the inter-provincial language. I believe Shri
Munshi was right when he defended the form of the language used in
Hans. For rendering, say, a Tamil or Telugu piece into Hindi or
Hindustani, the use of Sanskrit words is almost inevitable, even as the
use of Arabic words would be inevitable if one was translating an
Arabic piece into Hindi or Hindustani. Rabindranath’s Gitanjali in
Hindi would read much less musical than it does, if its Hindi or
Hindustani translation studiously avoided the Sanskrit words with
which Bengali is replete. Literary Musssalmans like Moulvi Abdul
Haq Sahib or Aquil Sahib have but to make thier own contribution to
the common speech to avoid its degenerating into a language only
spoken by the Hindus. I would if I could wean them from treating the
Urdu form as the exclusive speech of Mussalmans, as I would wean
literary Hindus from treating Hindi as the exclusive speech of Hindus.
If none of them is weaned, there will be no common speech for
Hindus and Mussalmans of the North, no matter by what name it is
known. Here at least, therefore, we do not need to quarrel about the
name. Call it by what name you like, if only you mean the same thing
in all sincerity.
There remains the question of script. At the present moment
insistence on Devanagari by Mussalmans is not to be thought of.
Insistence on the adoption of Arabic script by the vast mass of Hindus
is still less thinkable. What therefore I have suggested as the definition
of Hindi or Hindustani is ‘that language which is generally spoken by
Hindus and Mussalmans of the North, whether written in Devanagari
or Urdu’. I abide by that definition, in spite of protests to the
contrary. But there is undoubtedly a Devanagari movement with
which I have allied myself whole-heartedly and that is to have it as the
common script of all the languages spoken in the different provinces,
especially those which have a large Sanskrit vocabulary. Anyway, an
attempt is being made to transcribe in Devanagari script the most
precious treasures of all the languages of India .
Harijan, 16-5-1936
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

3

3. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM GANDHI
NANDI DURG,

May 16, 1936
CHI. PURUSHOTTAM,

You must have received an unexpected letter 1 from me even
before I got yours. The noble hopes expressed in it could be
entertained only of one like you brought up in the Ashram from
childhood. Vijaya alone would know the state of her mind but you
have to be a teacher to her. The circumstance is common in the Hindu
family. If you wish to follow the duties of married life as I have
suggested, I have also outlined its restriction in my article. If you find
these difficult, it only means that you have not really understood the
one purpose of sexual intercourse. Even to the husband the wife is a
mother. It has been said in a book that the woman giving birth to a
child gives birth to a portion of the husband himself, and that
therefore after she has conceived she deserves to be daily honoured
with a namaskara much as his own mother. Such things are looked
upon as intellectual indulgence. The conviction that such things need
to be put into practice has not gone down people’s throat. Hence they
turn a deaf ear to any talk of acting according to it. “The path of God
is for the brave alone.” Read this to Vijaya if you think it fit.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

4. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 16, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,

Herewith a letter2 for Purushottam and Marybehn’s letter to
you. Yesterday I had a telegram telling me of the death at Rishikesh
of a very benevolent lady, Tarabehn Chesley, whom you do not know.
1
2

4

Vide “Letter to Purushottam and Vijaya Gandhi”, 14-5-1936
Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

She was on her way to Badri-Kedar with two other women. She was a
learned person, living an exceedingly simple life.
Kusum is having a nice time. She comes out daily for a walk
with me. I do hope this place will help her recover her health. Kanu
moves about, absorbed in his work. He has been trying to train his
hand on the dilruba 1 , and his instrument accompanies the Ramayana
recitation every day. All the three brothers2 sing the verses in unison,
and now Kusum has joined them. Sardar walks for four hours every
day, and Mahadev and Mani accompany him. It is beyond my
capacity to take such long walks. Kumarappa and Shantabehn are of
course here. Both are good company to each other and spend their
time working. Ba keeps fairly good health. This is how our little world
here goes on.
I learn from Kusum’s talks that the Bal Mandir has been
running at a loss. In my opinion, we should send an account of
income and expenditure to the parents and notify to them that the Bal
Mandir would be closed if they did not help to meet this expenditure.
You may also mention that the house rent, etc., is not included in the
accounts . You should, however, include Kusum’s salary of Rs. 35 or
40 as also those of the other teachers, if any, whatever they are paid.
We might go about begging to run the school if the children belonged
to the Harijan or some other so-called lower communities, but
certainly not for the others; and emphatically not a Bal Mandir. The
very poor cannot afford to send their children there; nor is there any
great need that they should. Please think over this and, if you are
convinced about it, you should consult the Committee and give the
parents notice of one or two months. Kusum says that you have
increased the fee already, in which case the increase should be only to
the extent of meeting the increased cost. You must be aware that there
are several schools in the country, which bring profits to the owners
after defraying all expenses. Many schools, for example, the Bharda
High School, are a source of income. Only the Proprietary High
School of Ahmedabad and some others regarded as national schools
and some experimental schools are run with the help of contributions
1
2

A stringed musical instrument
Kanti Gandhi, Kanu Gandhi and Navin Gandhi; in fact, cousins

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

5

raised from the public. I think we should get away from this kind of
work and give our time to work among Harijans and in the villages.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8490. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

5. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
May 16, 1936
CHI. AMRITLAL,

I read the two lines you added to Nimu's letter to me. See that
you preserve your health. Give the body as much milk, curds and
ghee as it might need. It is only if you preserve your health that I shall
be able to take from you all the work I want. Tell Bhanubapa that an
obstacle has again cropped up. A fresh estimate is contemplated for
the place where the building is to be put up. This is a complicated
affair. Perhaps Mahadev will have to be sent to Nasik.
Did you hear anything further as regards the summons?
Let Nimu have her studies to her fill.
All are well and happy here. The coolness here and the hot
winds there—what a contrast! Yet one may not say that here I am in
better health than there. The fact is that heat does not affect me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10714

6. LETTER TO NEKI RAM SHARMA
NANDI DURG,

May 17, 1936
BHAI NEKI RAM SHARMA,

Please convey my blessings to Chi. Chandrakala and Chi.
Omprakash. May their married life be happy and devoted to service.
Vandemataram from
M. K. GANDHI

S HRI NEKI R AM S HARMA
BHIWANI
(PUNJAB)
From the Hindi original: Gopichand Bhargava Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

6

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

7. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
NANDI DURG,

May 17, 1936
DEAR DAUGHTER,

All that you write about Doctor Saheb is perfectly true. We have
no one to take his place. But we do not know if his death was for the
good or otherwise. God alone is the best judge. He gives and He takes
away. We should only learn a lesson from Doctor Saheb's death. We
should carry on from where he left. Mourning and fasting serve no
purpose. Those who believe in God have no reason to fear death.
Those who are born are bound to die. You do not want any more
clarification on your earlier letters, do you? Now you do not have to
go to Patiala or Chitrakoot or even to join me. To me you can come
whenever you feel like it. Otherwise the Harijan Ashram is all you
should devote yourself to. This is not my own suggestion but deduced
from the last letter from Doctor Saheb. You are taking, I hope, the
medicine prescribed by him. We are all well. I do not write separately
to Tyagiji. Rajkishori is happy, I suppose.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: G.N. 335

8. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
NANDI HILL,

May 18, 1936
MY DEAR REBEL,

You must have seen all I have written about Dr. Ansari.1 I may
weep over his death selfishly. But there need be no sorrow over his
death, if one is certain, as I am, that it is only the perishable body that
has perished, not the indestructible soul within. Having put off the old
garment, it will put on a new and better one.2 His services are not lost.
If we have faith we may be sure that he is serving even now though in
an unseen manner. Being used only to relying upon the feeble and
1
2

Vide “A Great Friend Gone”, 16-5-1936
Bhagavad Gita, II. 20 and 22

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

7

often unreliable evidence of our senses, we refuse to believe that
things go on which transcend our senses and which are far more
durable and useful than the passing show our senses note and make us
alternately weep and laugh. Enough of this wisdom-spinning.
Yes, I shall try to secure for you ivory goods and the rest within
the limits assigned by you.
Ku. is flourishing. Dr. Subba Rao will examine him and Shanta
about the 20th instant.
I hope you have been able to persuade Dalip to take “rest and
be thankful”. The court work will go on without him for a few weeks
or months. The services have taken good care about their work.
Why do you worry about your inability to invite Mira? These
are limitations of a joint family which both you and I must recognize.
Friendships do not exist, must not, for selfish gratification. Mira is
quite happy though she is melting in Wardha heat. She is joyous in
that she is superintending the creation of my hut. She is looking after
the minutest detail with the greatest care. And she is glad too that I
shall be her neighbour in the very near future D.V.
You are exasperating. When you meet me you will forget all
about Kallenbach1 . Why not out with the talk? Let me share the joke
or own up the shame, if I see any in what I might have said. But I hear
so many things about myself about which I am an utter stranger that I
shall not be surprised if what you have heard ranks among them.
Love to you all.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3573. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6382

9. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 18, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

I hope you got my letter2 from Nandi.
Yes, Dr. Ansari’s death is a great personal loss. Both birth and
death are great mysteries. If death is not a prelude to another life, the
1
A German architect who became a friend and associate of Gandhiji in South
Africa; vide also “Letter to Amrit Kaur”, 28-5-1936
2
Vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 14-5-1936

8

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

intermediate period is a cruel mockery. We must learn the art of never
grieving over death no matter when and to whom it comes. I suppose
that we shall do when we have really learnt to be utterly indifferent to
our own and the indifference will come when we are every moment
conscious of having done the task to which we are called. But how
shall we know the task? By knowing God’s will. How shall we know
the will? By prayer and right living. Indeed, prayer should mean right
living. There is a bhajan we sing every day before the Ramayana
commences whose refrain is “Prayer has been never known to have
failed anybody. Prayer means being one with God.”
I am glad you are making progress with the buildings. Rs. 300
for the land and the building in Varoda should prove enough for the
time being at any rate. I wish you would be able to squeeze in the
fence. There need be no paid labour for it. Balwantsingh and
Munnalal should be able under your direction to put it up. The
material should cost practically nothing. Fence and some shade is the
chief thing. We are all flourishing. But those who are profiting most
are Sardar, Shanta and Ku. They were the ones who positively needed
the bracing air of a hill. The others not so much and so they do not
show visible signs of gain. I see we shall not be able to move away
from Mysore before 15th June.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6335. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9801

10. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
May 18, 1936
MY DEAR CHILD,

You are being tested. Why should you have “ flu even in a cool
place like Kodai? But I know you will keep your peace even in the
midst of tortures and live up to your motto. 1 You will tell me when
you are free. My prayers and my love are with you.
BAPU
From a photostat: No. 140. Courtesy: National Archives of India

1

Vide “Letter to Esther Menon”14-5-1936

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

9

11. LETTER TO DR. GOPICHAND BHARGAVA
NANDI HILL,

May 18, 1936
DEAR DR. GOPICHAND,

The people in Maganwadi report that they have not yet got
cow-milk ghee. They will be presently out of stock. Please see to the
supply.
Yours,

BAPU
DR. G OPICHAND BHARGAVA
LAHORE, P UNJAB
From a copy: Dr. Gopichand Bhargava Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

12. LETTER TO GOVIND V. GURJALE
May 18, 1936
DEAR GURJALE,

I have your letter. Much as I should like to visit you, I cannot do
it. I have come here for Sardar’s health. I have other patients, too, with
me. And I must keep time.
My advice to you is for you simply and solely to live like a
villager. Therefore your own expenses can only be under Rs. 10 per
month. If there is any productive work to be done, get it done by paid
labour. Labour combined with intelligence must always be selfsupporting.
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1399

10

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

13. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
May [18, 1936] 1
BHAI BAPA,

I see the point about Amtussalaam. Her silliness we can afford to
suffer, but Rukmini’s hurts.
I do not see how Rajaji’s suggestion can be acted upon. We may
procure ten thousand acres of land right now, but who will put it to
use? How can it be colonized? Supposing we get the land in
Dharampur2 would it be of any use? I think, therefore, the idea is
not worth consideration. We have no remedy but that of exposing the
missionaries’ tactics and rendering more and more service if possible
to Harijans.
Now about the Rs. 3, 000. He has left it to me and hence I have
not sent the sum on to you. I would soon spend it all if I came across
a place suffering from acute scarcity of water. I understand that the
sum is not such as could be included in our current fund. Do you
know of any cause for which you can spend it right now? If so I shall
send the sum for it or to you if you ask for it. Otherwise my idea is to
spend the sum on the repair of wells for Harijans, which comes under
my purview. Would it not be right to spend it that way rather than ask
for money from you when such need arises? All the same, I am
prepared to act according to your wishes.
Now the fourth thing, which is a new one. Hardly could we
persuade Surajbehn3 to quit when a demand for the building has come
on behalf of the Women’s Servants of India. For my part, I think that
these women’s idea is quite different. It smells of Western polish.
These women do not with to go along the lines that I have all along
followed in the course of my work among women. There may well
need for their work, but I think we should not use this income for
such a purpose. You should however give your opinion with a free
mind, and explain to me if I am making any mistake. While you are
roasting there, we are enjoying the coolness of this place. What can be
done? I envy you.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1157

1
2
3

From the contents and the G.N. Register
A small town in the inhosptiable terrain of the Dangs
A worker of the Bhagini Samaj, Bombay

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

11

14. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
May 18, 1936
CHI. PRABHA,

You have been causing some anxiety. It is over 12 days since I
got your little note. There was a wire from you, to which also I have
replied.1 How are you keeping now? Have you started taking milk?
How much milk do you take? What is your decision?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3469

15. LETTER TO PYARELAL
NANDI DURG,

May 18, 1936
CHI. PYARELAL,

I have read both your letters carefully. Why do you write in
English? You ought to write either in Gujarati or Hindi. We must take
a vow not to talk or write in English except when it is unavoidable. Is
this habit of conversing and writing in English not a great drawback?
You must also cultivate writing a neat hand.
Your impression of Yashodhara is not wholly correct. I found
Akshaychandra’s behaviour faultless. Yashodhara will be seeing me. I
had a long lucid letter from Akshaychandra. I know Yashodhara very
well.
Hence your case must be examined independently. Haribhau’s
letters to me give an altogether different impression. I do not think
Yoga has gone to the length you imagine. Yoga is not just repeating
what she is tutored to speak. But your case is not related to your like
or dislike of her. I find your case amazing. Your love did not need a
response.
Your getting her or the desirability of your getting her was not,
is not, and should not be a necessity in your life. That is one sign of
pure love. Your love was extraordinary, yet it had certain ordinary
features, such as the need for Haribhau’s mediation. It would have
1

12

Vide “Telegram to Prabhavati”, 13-5-1936
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

been better without it. But what even if it was brought in? The idea
occurred to you too. Perhaps it was inevitable. You are not perfect, are
you? You can say that perfect love was born in an imperfect man and
that made love imperfect. I shall act on your suggestion if there is an
occasion. But I know that you would not find anyone who would pass
the test you have suggested.
I must stop here or I shall miss the post.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

16. LETTER TO PRABHUDAYAL VIDYARTHI
NANDI DURG,

May 18, 1936
CHI. PRABHUDAYAL,

If your nose bleeds, clean it with cold water every morning and
also inhale water through the nose. Keep a wet cloth on your head
throughout the day as I am doing. Otherwise, consult a doctor. There
is no need to go to Sind. Tell Nanavatiji that I have given instructions
about ghee. Tell Bhanu Bapa that I have sent a letter to Nasik. Pursue
your studies diligently.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI P RABHUDAYAL
MAGANWADI
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 11670

17. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
May 18, 1936
CHI. BRAJKISAN,

Only today have I reached your letter of May 1. It was received
during the days of our preparation for Nandi and it remained
unattended to. Now Dr. Ansari is no more. I had such faith in his
treatment that whenever a patient was under his care I used to rest
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

13

fully assured. But I do not know what you will do now. Illness seems
to be your constant companion. Now give me all the details.
It was the right thing to close down the Bhandar. Your helath
would not permit you to cope with this work. And it becomes dificult
to carry on such an enterprise solely depending on others. I
understand what you say about Nair1 . If no one will stay with him the
Ashram may be closed down. Nair may return to Malabar or work
under the Harijan Sangh or come over to me. Coming to me implies
that I shall post him anywhere. It will not be possible to keep him at
Segaon where I am going to live. You may show this letter to him, so
that I need not write separately to him. If not the whole of it, give him
a copy of this paragraph.
If you have a balance or Rs. 50 or whatever the amount, please
send it to me. I shall utilize it as I wish. You should keep with you
only the amont required for your maintenance.
You have of course my permission to come to Wardha whenever
you wish. You must not take up any work involving permanent
responsibility. You may take up only such work as can be
relinquished whenever you have to, or none at all. Your primary duty
is to improve your helath which you must somehow improve. It
appears that the Delhi climate suits you best; therefore you should live
there most of the time and engage yourself if you can in the kind of
work I have suggested. It will be good if you live in a rented place in
the Harijan Nivas. Kshama had offered to erect a room if some land
near the colony could be acquired. You could live there paying rent if
she accepts it. I have made all the suggestions I could, except one.
Gadodiaji2 has come across a hakim practising nature cure. Please see
him. His treatment might prove beneficial to you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2447

1
2

14

Krishnan Nair
Lakshmi Narayan Gadodia
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

18. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
May 18, 1936
DEAR DAUGHTER,

Why are you quarrelling with Bapa? Was not whatever he wrote
meant for your own good, to protect you from Rukmini? Is he to
blame? Bapa asks me to explain it to you. Tell me what there is to
explain.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: G.N. 336

19. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
NANDI HILL,
May 19, 1936
DEAR TEACHER OF SLANG,

You are adding to your titles. Your breast won’t hold them all.
Then perhaps you will shed some or better still select one and reject
the rest.
Terrible lightning has just now burnt up all the fuses and we are
in utter darkness. A little light has been made up for me with cotton
wicks and eating oil. This bungalow seems to have no substitute for
electric lights.
It was good you got the Tr.1 Maharani to give you Rs. 500.
I do hope they will accept your terms about Urdu broadcast.
You certainly deserve congratualtions.
Mrs. Marsden will be supplied with Mahadev’s fine yarn. His is
the finest.
I must trace the lace. It must not be lost.
I hope you are quite restored now.
Ku. and Shanta are flourishing.
Love.
BAPU
From the oiginal: C.W. 3574. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6383
1

Travancore

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

15

20. A LETTER
May 19, 1936
My search is not outward, it is inward. Perhaps the search is its
own reward. If an embodied guru is a necessity in my case, God will
send him to me.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From the manuscript of Mahdev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

21. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
May 19, 1936
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

After many days I have your letter today. Apart from the letters
I wrote to you in April, I wrote on May 1, 12 2 and 18. Whose fault
could it be if you got none of them? You must take it that I do write
in reply to yours and, in the absence of any letter from you, would
certainly write a reminder card. I shall ask Kanti why he has not been
writing.
You miscalculate the dates. Yours was [received] not on the 17th
but on the 19th and was written on the 14th, and on that basis this
should reach you on the 24th, and if you do not get my letters by
then wire receipt of this. I shall await your wire on the 24th and the
25th unless I hear fom you in the mean while. Yes, Jayaprakash saw
me and spoke to me. Patwardhan had accompanied him. He said
nothing in reply to the letter I had written. I understood that he did
not want to reply. He spoke to me only of your future, proposing that
you should undergo Montessorie training for three months at Kashi
and then he wants you to live in Patna. He sought my consent, which I
readily gave. There can be no harm in your learning the Montessorie
method, though I don't fancy it. You should, however, follow his wish
and train yourself in the Montessorie method. I expect you will then
be staying in Patna or some such place. I believe you will decide this
1
The addressee had suggested to Gandhiji to accept as his guru a certain
person living near Madras.
2
This appears to be a slip for ‘13’.

16

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

point with him in a personal talk. This is the substance of our talk.
Your things have gone with Jayaprakash.
How very foolish of you that you did not write to me to say that
you were unwell. Do you have the fainting fits now? What about
taking milk? Why did you have to go to Banaras? And again why to
Sitab Diyara? What is your routine at Srinagar?
I have already told you about our party. All are fine. Sardar is
daily having walks for four hours, Mani and Mahadev accompanying.
Kumarappa and Shanta have benefited much. Kaka arrived the day
before yesterday. Ba and I are well. Tari and Kusum continue to be
weak. Ramayana recitation and the prayers go on as usual. I expect
the Ayodhyakanda will be over tomorrow. The address is given in my
letter of the 1st of 12th.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3470

22. LETTER TO RAMIBEHN K. PAREKH
May 19, 1936
CHI. RAMI,

I have your letter. You did well in writing to me. I shall send for
Manu after I have reached Wardha, although, if Manu so wishes, she
might even now go to Wardha since Nimu has taken up her stay at
Maganwadi. I trust you and the children are keeping well. I hope
Kunvarji is well enough.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9726

23. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
May 19, 1936
CHI. MANUDI,

You managed all right to escape. You know that Taribehn is
here, don't you? All are well and happy.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9726
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

17

24. LETTER TO FATAH-ULLA-KHAN
NANDI,

May 20, 1936
The holy Koran I regard as a book of spiritual experiences, the
same as, say, the Bible or the Zend-Avesta. I do not know the Quran
offers more real solution to the modern problems than the other
scriptures of the world. The competition today is not between the
different scriptures of the world but between the representatives
thereof and then between the latter on the one hand and those who
reject the authority of the scriptures altogether.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

25. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
May 20, 1936
CHI. BRAJKISAN,

I read your letter about the Union. Taking into consideration all
the circumstances, I feel that you should dissociate yourself from this
affair of the workers. You must put it out of your mind; it is beyond
your strength. Your word will not carry weight. Hence your presence
is in the long run likely to harm the workers instead of benefiting
them. Your duty at present is only to recover your health. Who can
come over from Ahmedabad? Whoever comes, can he succeed? We
must content ourselves with the tasks within our capacity. There is
therefore no need to offer any opinion about the scheme. Tell me all
the details regarding Dr. Ansari.
You must have got my earlier letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 2446

18

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

26. LETTER TO ASAF ALI
NANDI HILL, B ANGALORE,

May 21, 1936
DEAR ASAF ALI,

You have done well in writing to me. I can drink in all the news
you can give me about the deceased brother. He was nothing less to
me. I have already written to Zohra and Zakir Husain 1 about the
details. I should receive their replies tomorrow or the day after. But
you will now send me what they may not be able to.
As to the memorial, I fear we can get nothing worthy just now.
Even the little thing about Kamala is causing difficulty. Since Lalaji2
memeorial I have discountenanced any memorials for big people like
Dr. Ansari. I should wait for better times not materially but politically.
Sardar who is here joins me in this view. But let me know what G. and
R. have to say.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

27. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
May 21, 1936
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

Here are two cuttings from The Hindu.3 I have refused to believe
that you are correctly represented by the reporter. But I would like the
1

Vide “Letter to Zakir Husain”, 11-5-1936
Lala Lajpat Rai
3
The first cutting read: Bombay, May 18—Mr. Jawaharlal Nehru, addressing
a ladies' meeting this evening, said that he was asked in several places why he had not
included women in the Congress Working Committee. He was surprised that no such
question was forthcoming from women.
He continued, “The responsibility of choosing the Working Committee
members rests with the President, and you all know what the situation was at
Lucknow. You know the price I had to pay for my views and I will have to continue to
pay such price. Choosing the Working Committee members was not so easy. You are
also aware, I, as President, encountered many odds at Lucknow and my wishes were
not carried out. Possibly, another man in my place would have resigned but I propose
to do my utmost.”
The other cutting read: Bombay, May 18—Mr. Nehru when he visited the
Khadi Bhandar today expressed doubts as to whether hand-spinning and weaving were
an economic proposition. From his experiences in the united Provinces, he could say
that it was not so. He, therefore, favoured development of machinery.
2

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

19

correct version, if you can send me one on both the subjects. 1 The
exclusion of women was entirely your own act. Indeed, nobody else
had even thought it possible to exclude a woman from the cabinet. As
to khadi I have understood you to say that it is indispensable in the
present economy of the nation and that when the nation came to its
own, hand-made cloth might have to give place to the mill-made.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1936. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

28. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 21, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

This fever I do not like at all. I hope you have given yourself
adequate rest. If your hut cannot be ready at the expected time, it does
not matter, nor for that matter my hut. You must not put an undue
strain on yourself and should take all the fruit you may need. I am
glad both B.2 and M. 3 were with you in the nick of time. I am
impatient to be with you. But it cannot be before 17th or 18th.
Tara’s death has disturbed me much. She was an extraordinarily
good woman, possessing great strength of mind. Her love was
amazing. I have a graphic description of her death. Brave Mahadevi4
was by her side all the time.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Do you know the price paid for your plot in Varoda?
From the original: C.W. 6336. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9802

1

Vide Appendix “Letter from Jawaharlal Nehru”, 25-5-1936, also “A False
Alarm”, 6-6-1936.
2
Balwantsinha G. Shah
3
Munnalal G. Shah
4
Vinoba Bhave's disciple Mahadevitai

20

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

29. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
May 21, 1936
CHI. JAMNALAL,

Tarabehn was indeed an extraordinary woman. Her
singleminded devotion, firmness of mind, purity, generosity and love
of India baffle description. Mahadevi, too, rendered excellent service
and also showed courage.
Mirabehn writes to me of her illness. The lady’s faults are
negligible, but her merits are worthy of emulation. May God save her.
Madalasa, Om are fine. I am returning both the letters.
I expect you are taking care of your health. Are you following
the instructions I sent you in the matter of diet? Do you take enough
rest? Do you take a daily walk? Do not ignore Janakibehn's
suggestion regarding the abdominal belt.
Everything is all right here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2980

30. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
May 21, 1936
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,

I got your letters here at Nandi Durg. The photos are excellent.
I have sent them to Ramdas and Devdas. What is Ali doing? Are Ali
and Ismail partners in business? What is the trade they carry on? I
hope they are not baffled by the great rise in population.
I should be glad if someone would look after your work and
you could make a trip here. But avoid the temptation to visit me if
you cannot save the necessary money. Do not incur the heavy
expense merely for the sake of a trip if you all keep well and enjoy
other amenities too.
It does not surprise me to hear that Indian Opinion is under a
boycott. Continue to publish it as long as the people want it; stop it if
they do not like it. We surely ought not to be unduly insistent. What is
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

21

the present number of subscribers? How many of them are Hindus
and how many Muslims? Do you sell any copies otherwise?
130 lb. is too much weight for Sushila. She should and can
easily reduce it by 10 lb. She should eat less of starch and take
enough fruit, give up ghee for some time if necessary, but not milk.
This will certainly bring down the weight. She must not omit to take
exercise but walk at least six miles every day, that is to say, for two
hours at her normal speed. She should also take hip-baths.
Maybe I have written to you earlier about our party here at
Nandi Hill. If I have not, here it is. Sardar, Manibehn, Tari, Kusum
Gandhi, Navin, Kanti, Kanu, Ba, Kumarappa, Shantabehn (the
Englishwoman) and Kakasaheb. Sardar, Manibehn and Mahadev have
daily walks for four to five hours. Kusum and Shantabehn, too, walk
just as much, and the rest of us for two hours. The climate here may
not be said to have proved quite beneficial to Tari, though she is better
than on the plains. Her health has suffered pretty much on account of
worry and indifference to treatment. Kusum, too, is weak, no doubt,
but comparatively better.
Recitation from the Ramayana is conducted daily. A fairly
good number of people attent it. The morning and evening prayers
are of course held as usual.
Devdas may now be said to be well enough. I think the letter is
now long enough.
We shall be going to Wardha on June 15.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujar ati: G.N. 4851

31. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
May 21, 1936
CHI. LILAVATI,

Your weight has gone up fairly well. Hence you should be asked
to stay on there. You did very well to have visited Gangabehn. You
gave me no news of Bachubhai's health.
What is Tansukh's1 salary?
1

22

Tansukh Bhatt
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

It was hasty of you to have begun walking. Never be impatient
in anything. Rest your leg and have it completely cured. Why don't
you use home-made paper? It is quite easy to make and is cheap, too.
We ought to pay attention to things that are regarded as trivial. Now
that you are confined there, should you not introduce as many
country-made things as possible?
You may pay a visit to Nagpur. You may go wherever you want
to before reaching Segaon.
It seems I shall reach Wardha on the 17th at the earliest.
All here are doing well.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Tarabehn passed away on her way to Badri-Kedar. Mahadevi
nursed her exceedingly well. She had a severe attack of fever.
Hoodbal 1 means rashness.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9342

32. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
May 21, 1936
CHI. PREMA,

Here in Nandi Durg, I may claim, I am able to dispose of each
day's mail practically on the same day. I read your letter of the 18th
last evening, and am replying to it today.
It matters little what hopes I cherish about you. You may go on
striving according to what you think these hopes are and according to
your ability.2
You have put the question very well. You could have put it still
more plainly. 3 I have always had involuntary discharges. In South
1

Gandhiji had used this expression in the letter dated May 14, 1936.
The addressee had pleaded lack of confidence in her own capacity to grow
into an illustrious brahmacharini, as hoped for by Gandhiji. Vide “Letter to
Premabehn Kantak”, 13-2-1933
3
The addressee could not readily believe Gandhiji's confession of involuntary
violation of brahmacharya. Vide “Nothing without Grace”, and letter to the
addressee, “Letter to Premabehn Kantak”, 6-5-1933. After an inconclusive discussion
with and at the instance of Acharaya Bhagavat the addressee had hesitantly sought
clarification from him.
2

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

23

Africa they occurred at intervals of several years. I do not remember
exactly. Here in India they have been of months. I have mentioned
the fact of my getting discharges in a few articles of mine. If my
brahmacharya had been completely free from discharges, I would
have been able to place before the world very much more than I have
succeeded in doing. But it seems practically impossible that a person
who has indulged in sex gratification from the age of 15 to 30, maybe
with his own wife only, can, on taking a vow of brahmacharya,
control the discharge of his vital fluid completely. One whose capacity
for retention has progressively weakened from day to day for fifteen
years cannot recover it fully all at once. Both his body and mind will
have become too weak for that. I, therefore, consider myself a very
imperfect brahmachari. But my position is like that of the castor oil
plant which looks big on a heath where there are no trees. People
know this shortcoming of mine.
The experience which tormented me in Bombay was a strange
and painful one. All my discharges so far had occurred in dreams and
they never troubled me. I could forget them. But the experience in
Bombay occurred while I was fully awake and had a sudden desire for
intercourse. I felt of course no urge to gratify the craving, there was
no self-forgetfulness whatever. I was completely master of my body.
But despite my best efforts the organ remained aroused. This was an
altogether strange and shameful experience. I have already explained
the cause.1 As soon as that cause was removed the state of remaining
aroused came to a stop, that is, waking state.
Despite my imperfection, one thing has always come easily to
me, viz., that thousands of women have remained safe in my
company. There have been occasions in my life when certain women,
though aroused, were saved by God, or say, I was saved. I am a
hundred per cent certain that it was God who saved us and, therefore,
take no pride in the fact. It is my unceasing prayer to God that I
might remain in the same condition till the very end of my life.
I have been striving to attain to Shukadeva's2 condition. I have
not succeeded in that aim. If I succeed, I would become a eunuch 3
though possessed of the vital fluid and discharges would become
impossible.
1
2
3

24

Vide “Letter to Premabehn Kantak”, 6-5-1936
Son of Vyasa and the ideal brahmachari described in the Bhagavata.
Vide New Testament, St. Matthew , XIX, 12.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

However, the views which I have recently expressed1 regarding
brahmacharya have no flaw in them and contain no exaggeration.
With effort, any man or woman can attain that ideal. This does not
mean that the whole world or thousands will realize, it in my own
lifetime. Let it take centuries to be realized, but the ideal is correct, is
realizable and must be realized.
Man has a long way to travel yet. His instincts are still those of a
beast. Only his frame is human. Violence seems to reign all round.
Untruth fills the world. And yet we do not doubt the rightness of the
path of truth and non-violence. Know that the same is the case with
regard to bramacharya.
Those who strive but continue to burn inwardly are in fact not
striving. They nurse lust in their minds and only wish to control loss
of the vital fluid, to refrain from the physical act of intercourse. Such
persons are correctly described in Chapter II2 [of the Gita]. They may
be regarded as hypocrites.
What I am at present striving to achieve is purification of
thought.
Modern thought regards brahmacharya as adharma and
recommends the ‘dharma’ of self-indulgence and control of progeny
by artificial means. My soul rebels against this.
Sex-craving will always remain in the world, but its moral basis
rests and will ever rest on brahmacharya.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10381. Also C.W. 6819. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

33 . LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
May 21, 1936
CHI. MUNNALAL,

You reached there quite in the nick of time. You could get the
1
2

Vide “For Contraceptives”, 4-4-1936 and “For Women Reformers”, 2-5-1936
In fact Chapter III. 6

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

25

right type of work since you arrived when Mirabehn was really hard
pressed. I am hoping to reach there on the 18th.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8605. Also C.W. 6991. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

34. LETTER TO PYARELAL
NANDI DURG,

May 21, 1936
CHI. PYARELAL,

I have your letter of the 17th. It would be better to learn the
facts from me instead of knowing my mind. Hence, only that step
would be correct which does justice to both. I was really unhappy that
you did not come. Otherwise, why should I have got the ticket?
I consider the service of the lepers, etc., the greatest thing only if
you can stick to it. I did believe that Yoga would not have approved of
your becoming a fakir. Those day are gone. Faith is the only thing
left for the present age. For that, I would consider renunciation the
best thing. There is hardly any scope for human endeavour.
Occasions may occur when human endeavour is possible. Right now,
there is a feeling of utter defeat. Hence there is nothing left except to
depend on God’s power. That is the reason why I did not show
displeasure at your going to Calcutta or Orissa. I never considered it
important. I had already suggested that it would be right for you only
to stay with me. Even now, that is how I feel independently of
anything. Hence I would appreciate it if you abandon what you are
pursuing and came to me. But I would not like it if you ran away
from Calcutta or Orissa after settling there.
As I see it you still do not have mental poise. You are not at
peace. You have not found faith. It seems your mind is wavering
between faith and human endeavour. If that is the case, I think your
place is only with me.
I have no doubt at all about Yashodhara. Her love was merely
attachment. It had not the backing of the spirit or strength of sacrifice.
26

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Had she been even a little firm, she would not have had any trouble. I
shall know more when she sees me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

35. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
May 22, 1936
MY DEAR REBEL,

Your note-paper is certainly very good. It shows the very great
progress made by the hand-made paper industry. I think it is a good
idea your sending for uncut paper and hav[ing] it cut to order there.
Perhaps that would support a few poor people there, if you get
enough orders there. The question then would be whether it would be
worth while your devoting your time to such details. You must be the
best judge. You have to make the best use possible of your time in
Simla consistently with the preservation of your health such as you
have.
You are quite idiotically reserving so many things to tell me
when we meet. When that great event comes to pass, you will have
forgotten most of the things. I am sure you are not making notes of
these reservations. For once therefore you had better be a little wise
and reserve nothing for the next meeting. There will be enough to
discuss when we meet. And I hope you are telling the Adampur
people whatever they need to be told. Certainly you should tolerate
nothing fraudulent, no matter what it costs. No cost is too great to pay
for your putting down fraud in a pure movement.
Did I tell you about Tara's death during her pilgrimage to
Badri-Kedar? You will see all about this in Harijan.1 She was one of
the noblest of women I had the good fortune to meet.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3575. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6384

1

Vide “In Memoriam”

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

27

36. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
NANDI HILL,

May 22, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

My heart is with you though my body is here.1 I had expected a
word from you but I have one from Radhakrishna. His letter
contemplates bringing you to Wardha. I hope it was not necessary. Of
course whatever is thought necessary for quick recovery must be
done. You must not allow the building programme or anything else to
prey on your mind. Without good health, you can carry out no
programme. I look forward to tomorrow bringing good news.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
We descend to Bangalore on 31st.
From the original: C. W. 6337. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9803

37. LETTER TO CHUNILAL
May 22, 1936
BHAI CHUNILAL,

I have your letter. Now that Thakkar Bapa is arriving there
everything must settle down. From now on it is not necessary to send
the papers to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXII

1

28

The addressee “had gone down with a severe attack of malaria.”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

38. IN MEMORIAM
Miss Mary Chesley, an Englishwoman, came to India in 1934
when the Congress was in session1 in Bombay. As soon as she landed
she came to my hut in the Congress camp and told me she knew
Mirabehn and had expected to come with her but somehow or other
she had preceded her by a week or there-about. Her desire was to
serve India through her villages. She did not prepossess me by her
talk and I thought she would not stay in India many months. But I was
wholly mistaken. She had come to know of Miss Mary Barr who had
already commenced village work in Khedi, a village a few miles from
Betul (C.P.). Miss Chesley found her way to Mary Barr. Mary Barr
brought Mary Chesley to Wardha and we were together for a few
days. Miss Chesley showed a determination that surprised me. She
began work with Mary Barr in Khedi, adopted the Indian costume and
changed her name to Tarabehn and toiled at Khedi in a manner that
alarmed poor Mary Barr. She would dig, carry baskets full of earth on
her head. She simplified her food as much as to put her health in
danger. She had her own handsome income from Canada from which
she kept only a paltry sum of about Rs. 10 for herself and gave the
rest to the A.I.V.I.A., or to Indians with whom she came in contact
and who seemed to her to give promise of being good village workers
and who needed some pecuniary help. I came in closest touch with
her. Her charity was boundless, she had great faith in the goodness of
human nature. She was forgiving to a fault. She was a devout
Christian. She belonged to a Quaker family. But she had no
narrowness about her. She did not believe in converting others to her
own faith. She was a graduate of the London School of Economics
and a good teacher, having conducted togther with a companion a
school in London for several years. She realized at once that she must
learn Hindi and was regularly studying it. For being able to pick up
conversational Hindi she lived for a few months in the Wardha Mahila
Ashram and there with two members formed a plan of going to BadriKedar during summer. I had warned her against the adventure. But it
was difficult to turn her from such adventures when once her mind
was made up. So only the other day she started with her friends on
1

In the last week of October

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

29

her perilous pilgrimage. And I got a brief message on the 15th from
Kankhal saying, “Tarabehn expired”. In her love for India's villages
she was not to be excelled by anybody. Her passion for India's
independence was equal to that of the best among us. She was
impatient of the inferiority complex wherever she noticed it. She
mixed with poor women and children with the greatest freedom.
There was nothing of the patron about her. She would take service
from none, but would serve anybody with the greatest zeal. She was a
self-effacing mute worker whose left hand did not know what the right
had done. May her soul rest in peace.
Harijan, 23-5-1936

39. BRIBERY
Bribery in the name of mamul1 and the like to railway officials
and the others is not an unusual occurrence in Indian life. Any
official with whom the public has anything to do is generally said to
be open to receive bribes even for the performance of his duty, not to
speak of committing breach thereof. I have had to suffer in my time
for refusing to pay a paltry anna at the third-class ticket windows for
getting my ticket in my turn which would never come because
favourites had to be served first. I have had to wait for hours
sometimes before I could get a chance of buying my ticket. The
customs and the railways are the two departments with which the
general public have to come in frequent touch. And it is there that the
public suffer most. A correspondent draws my attention to the woes of
public workers who want to despatch goods or receive consignments.
At either end unless you are prepared to bribe officials, you are made
to wait exasperatingly long. He wants to know how this evil can be
remedied. There is desire among spirited workers to resist this
immoral blackmail. It is difficult to advise in this matter. Obviously no
bribe2 may possibly be given. Equally obviously public work must not
be allowed to suffer. There is no quick remedy against a petty official
who misuses his brief authority. Threat to lodge a complaint produces
no effect on hardened officials. They know their strength and use it
mercilessly, for it is a matter of pecuniary gain for them. They have
come to think these perquisites are a part of their pay. And he who
1
2

30

Custom
The source has “bribery”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

questions their right to demand them needs to be taught a lesson.
Lesson or no lesson, someone has to have the courage to bring to
book those who will not recognize the new spirit that is seizing so
many workers. Despatch or clearance work may suffer for the time
being. It is worth while taking the risk, if thereby officals will learn the
elementary morality of not taking bribes. If they are ill paid, let them
demand a higher pay, but they may not take bribes from the public
whom they are paid to serve. I hope the higher authorities will see
these lines and deal effectively with the evil which they know does
flourish widely.
Harijan, 23-5-1936

40. MARRIAGE BY PURCHASE
Some months ago The Statesman opened its columns to a
discussion of the dowry system prevalent among many castes almost
all over India, and dealt with it editorially. I used to write on the cruel
custom1 often enough in the columns of Young India. The cuttings
from The Statesman revive the cruel memories of what I used to know
then. My remarks were aimed at deti leti as the custom is known in
Sind. Enough educated Sindhis were found who exacted large sums
of money from parents who were anxious to see their daughters well
married. The Statesman has carried on a crusade against the custom in
general. There is no doubt that the custom is heartless. But so far as I
am aware it does not touch the millions. The custom is confined to the
middle-class who are but a drop in the ocean of Indian humanity.
Whenever we talk of evil customs, we usually think of the
middle-class. The millions living in the villages have their customs and
woes of which we have as yet but little knowledge.
This however does not mean that one may ignore the dowry evil
because it is confined to a comparatively small number of the people
of this country. The system has to go. Marriage must cease to be a
matter of arrangement made by parents for money. The system is
intimately connected with caste. So long as the choice is restricted to a
few hundred young men or young women of a particular caste, the
system will persist no matteer what is said against it. The girls or boys
or their parents will have to break the bonds of caste if the evil is to be
eradicated. Then the age for marrying has also to be raised and the
1

The source has “customs.”

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

31

girls have to dare to remain spinsters, if need be, i.e., if they do not get
a suitable match. All this means education of a character that will
revolutionize the mentality of the youth of the nation. Unfortunately
the system of education has no connection with our surroundings
which therefore remain practically untouched by the education
received by a microscopic minority of the boys and girls of the
nation. Whilst, therefore, whatever can be done to abate the evil must
be done, it is clear to me that this evil and many others which can be
named can only be tackled if there is education which responds to the
rapidly changing conditions of the country. How is it that so many
boys and girls who have even passed through colleges are found
unable or unwilling to resist the manifestly evil custom which affects
their future so intimately as marriage does? Why should educated girls
be found to commit suicide because they are not suited? Of what
value is their education if it does not enable them to dare to defy a
custom which is wholly indefensible and repugnant to one's moral
sense? The answer is clear. There is something radically wrong in the
system of education that fails to arm girls and boys to fight against
social or other evils. That education alone is of value which draws out
the faculties of a student so as to enable him or her to solve correctly
the problems of life in every department.
Harijan, 23-5-1936

41. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
NANDI HILL,

May 24, 1936
CHI. MARY,

I have your letter. You will see my note 1 on Tara in Harijan.
Yes, she made in Rishikesh a will in Hindi making over evrything to
me. It is signed simply Tarabehn. Do you know who her relatives are?
Do you know her address in Canada? If you do, please send [it]. Her
friend in England is Miss. P. Blythe, Anthorn School, Quakers Lane,
Potters Bar, London. I have written to her at length and so has Shanta.
I am sending your letter to Sumitra through Satyadevji. His address is
Gurukul, Kangri, U.P.
1

32

Vide “In Memoriam”, 23-5-1936
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I have heard from Miss Madden. I am glad you have given me
particulars about her. It is plucky at her age to come to village work.
But faith can overcome mountains. I am writing to her.
The climb up did not hurt me at all.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Address: Bangalore City. After 31st May till 15th June.
Herewith for Gopal.1
From C. W. 3391. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

42. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 24, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

The late-fee letter of 20 and the one of 21 reached me at the
same time. It does often happen like that to late-fee letters. However,
nothing is lost. I had R.' s2 note the previous day. I do hope you had
no further fever. I hope too that you are still taking rest. You never
give yourself enough rest after these attacks of malaria. I wish you
could become proof against them. You should go to some hill or
seaside for that rest. I could easily send you to a Kathiawar seaside
place where you would have quiet, would be happy and be doing
some village work. Let us see what the coming rains have in store for
us. No rooms as yet for Mahadev & Co.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6338. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9804

43. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 24, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

I am glad you are free from fever. Of course you were quite
right in ordering oranges.You should order from outside any other
1
2

The letter is not available.
Radhakrishna; vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 22-5-1936

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

33

fruit you may need. And do take plenty of rest before beginning
strenuous work. And you should seriously consider my proposal for a
change at a seaside place.
I would like you not to incur the expense of having partitions
made. I would like to improvise them as they may be need[ed] almost
like what Chhotelal had arranged for my bathroom, you will
remember. As it is I dread the cost of the hut. I hope Divanji is
keeping within the limits prescribed by me. The plinth, four walls and
a waterproof roof with open verandah and fence round is the
indispensable minimum. But you are giving me in addition a kitchen
and bath-room and a stable.
Let the other additions wait till after my arrival.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Give my blessings to Ram1 and Lakshmi2 . Tell them I hope they
will prove worthy of each other and the country.
From the original: C.W. 6339. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9805

44. LETTER TO FARID ANSARI
May 24, 1936
MY DEAR FAREED3 ,

Your letter gave me an agreeable shock. Your handwriting is an
almost exact copy of Dr. Ansari's. And I wondered how I could
receive the Doctor's letter when I saw your signature.
Neither Ammajan's fortitude nor Zohra's grief surprises me.
Zohra is a tender flower. She knows nothing of philosophy. She has
tasted abundantly of human love that has sustained her all these years.
Now the poor girl feels the void. It can never be wholly filled, not
even when she is married. Dr. Ansari's love for Zohra was unique.
There was nothing he would not do to make her good and happy.
And all this was out of pure selfless love.
I can understand your grief too. He was to you all you describe
him. The fact [is]4 he was a selfless friend and guide . . .5 . Such was his
1

Presumably, Rameshwardas Poddar's son Shriram and Purushottamdas
Jajoria's daughter Lakshmi
2
ibid
3
Dr. M.A. Ansari's brother's son
4
Illegible
5
ibid

34

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[greatness] ! May his spirit sustain us and enable [us to condu-] ct
ourselves [so] as to prove worthy [of] him.
You vainly approach me [for] relief and strength. I have none
of his great [nursing] skill nor do I possess the [devotion] of you all
that he had. But if my love for Dr. Ansari can be sufficient passport
for entry to the hearts of you, Zohra and others who were specially his
care, I can present that passport. For his death has deepened that love
whose bottom was as sound as that of human love can be.
I hope you are making steady progress.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a facsimile: Mahatma, Vol. IV, between pp. 112 and 113. Also C.W.
9797

45. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
May 24, 1936
CHI. PRABHA,

I was very happy to have your wire at the expected time. This
document leads me to conclude that you did not get my three earlier
letters. 1 Nor have they come back; I therefore do not know what
happened to them. Whatever it may be, I have of course given you the
substance of the earlier letters in the one you got. Kanti also did write
two letters. Write to me what food including milk you take and in what
measure, and also your daily programme.
Should you not speak frankly to him and seek his advice as you
do with me because I am away? There should be no hesitation in
doing so. By all means you may ask whatever can be asked through
letters. But you may certainly seek Father's assistance in anything that
calls for quick decision.
The chief mark of faith is that whatever the situation the inner
joy should abide. Everything is all right here.
Blessings from

BAPU
[PS.]
Send your reply to Bangalore where we shall go on the 31st.
Kumara Park, Bangalore City.
From a phototstat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3466
1

Vide “Letter to Prabhavati”, 19-5-1936

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

35

46. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 24, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,

I am sending to you Prema's first letter after the illness, as
originally desired by her. I hope the wedding1 passed off without any
hitch and you received my letters.2
Has Balkrishna reached Chorwad?
Kusum keeps fairly well. She comes with me for a walk daily.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Leaving Nandi on the 31st, we shall go to Bangalore and most
probably stay there for 14 days. The address is: Kumara Park,
Bangalore City.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8491. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

47. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
May 24, 1936
CHI. MUNNALAL,

I think you did well in going there. You should look upon
Mirabehn's company as a vertitable satsang3 . Serve her as much as
you can and put your heart in doing what she bids you. Don't you be
a burden to her in any way. Learn from Balwantsinha the entire
processing of cotton.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8604. Also C.W. 6992. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

1
2
3

36

Of Purushottam and Vijaya
Vide “Letter to Purushottam and Vijaya Gandhi”, 14-5-1936
Association with the good.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

48. LETTER TO C. VIJAYARAGHAVACHARIAR
NANDI HILL,

May 25, 1936
DEAR FRIEND,

It would have been delightful if you could have come to
Bangalore where we shall be from 31st to 15th June probably. Do
come even now, if health allows it
As you know I have planned to settle down in Segaon, a village
near Wardha. How far God will allow the plan to succeed He alone
knows. But I may not disturb it voluntarily. Therefore I dare not
attend the Exhibition, much as I would like to.
It is difficult to give a decisive opinion about the Lucknow
Congress. There was nothing alarming about it. And I do entertain the
hope that only good will come out of the confusion that seems to have
been created in the minds of Congressmen. After all has that not been
our history since 1920? It was inevitable when new ideas and new
policies were being introduced. I have great faith in Jawaharlal’s
nobility, sobriety and loyalty to the Congress. He won’t place it in
jeopardy.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

[PS.]
I did not attend the session for the opening. The telegram . . .
were read after I had left . . .2 was read

1

From the original: C. Vijayaraghavachariar Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

49. LETTER TO ZAKIR HUSAIN
May 25, 1936
MY DEAR ZAKIR,

Your letter has just reached me. The same post has brought a
copy of what Agatha Harrison wrote about the Doctor for Hitavada—
Servants of India paper in Nagpur. I send it to show what he meant to
me. I know he had interrupted his journey 3 to Europe. My pleading
1
3

& 2 The source is mutilated here.
During Gandhiji's 21-day fast which commenced on May 8, 1933

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

37

for the journey was in vain. He had run to me without [my] asking.
And he had gathered round him all the best doctors he knew. It was
almost worth fasting to have that extraordinary demonstration of love.
It might be taken in another light. One might well say it was folly to
fast if it was to cost the precious time of so many first-class physicians
who during those three weeks deprived their many patients of the
assistance they badly needed. Who knows how such demonstrations
should really be taken? We can but obey, in all humility, the will as we
can know it of Him who is the Controller-General of every second of
our life.
This long paragraph shows you the state of mind I am in. Not
that I have time enough and to spare here from the daily tasks. But I
am in the position of poor Zohra. If I had not the peremptory call of
duty from moment to moment, I should be as distracted as she is.
For the last three days I have been framing in my mind a letter
to you alone and then I thought of Shwaib 1 , then Khwaja 2 and then
quite forgetfully of Sherwani3 , not just then realizing that the big man
was also no more in the flesh with us. There are other Muslims I
know. But for this moment these were the names vividly before me.
But I know that none of you can become the infallible guide Dr.
Ansari had grown to be. It is not a question of merits. It is a question
of faith.
As I am writing this I feel I must confine myself to you. The
question I wanted to ask was and I still want to ask is, will you be to
me what the Doctor was on the Hindu-Muslim question? What
distracts me is not the absence of the warmth of a gentleman-friend, of
a God-believing and godfearing doctor. It is the absence of an
unfailing guide in the matter of Hindu-Muslim unity. My silence at
the present time on this question is not a sign of my apathy, it is a sign
of an ever-deepening conviction that the unity has got to come. Then
I ask, will you take Dr. A[nsari]'s place? In answer, do not think of
your status in society. If you have self-confidence, you must say
‘Yes’. If you have not, you must say ‘No’. I shall not misunderstand
you. I know and love you too well to misunderstand you.
Whether you become my guide or not, please answer the
question I asked, among others, Dr. Ansari in my last letter. Is this step
1
2
3

38

Shwaib Qureshi
Vide, “Letter to Khwaja Abdul Majid”, 7-6-1936.
Tasadduq Ahmed Sherwani
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the Frontier Govrnment has taken, that of practically refusing the
grant to Sikh Hindu girls' schools that teach through Hindi and
Gurumukhi right? I have been asked for months to express my
opinion. I have resisted the invitation till now. But the question is one
of principle and bears in its womb great consequences. I have
approached Sahibzada Sir Abdul Qayum in the matter. He has sent
me what is a painful reply. You can have a copy if you want it, before
expressing your opinion.
I do not know whether you share the opinion Mujeeb expressed
in his letter to me on Hindi-Hindustani question. 1 I would like you,
him, Aqil and other friends to read my two articles2 in Harijan and if
they do not give satisfaction, I would like you all to argue the thing
out with me, if you like through Harijan or privately. I see no cause
for difference of opinion. But if there is, we must try to remove it.
Love to you all.
BAPU
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

50. LETTER TO BHUJANGILAL CHHAYA
NAND I DURG,

May 25, 1936
CHI. BHUJANGILAL,

I have your letter. Young people should never write with a
pencil. In fact no one should. Pencil-writing fades out with passage of
time. It presents difficulty in reading.
You should have patience and be polite. Your father will not
come in your way if your conduct is faultless in all matters. He has the
right to test your firmness.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2603

1
2

Vide Appendix, “For Hindustani Only”, 9-5-1936.
Vide “Hindi or Hindustani”, 9-6-1936 and 16-5-1936.

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

39

51. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
May 25, 1936
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I send herewith Gopal's letter for you to read. He seems to have
been greatly shocked at Tarabehn's death. He has some faults as also
some good qualities. It now falls to my lot to guide him. I see no
difficulty in it; I have only to direct him from a distance. For the
present, I have suggested that he should stick to his insurance business
and prepare himself for village welfare work.
The question of Sumitra and Subhadra is complicated. I think
Tarabehn had taken them to Hardwar. I am inquiring. I am also trying
to know sumitra's mind. If, as Gopal says, Sumitra hands over custody
of Subhadra, I think we might keep the latter at the Mahila Ashram.
As for Sumitra, I have suggested that she should stay with Marybehn
in Khedi. Perhaps she may have to be given something towards her
expenses.
Do tell me your opinion in the matter. You must rest yourself.
[PS.]
In Nandi Durg up to May 30 and at Bangalore City from May
18 to June 15.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2981

52. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
May 25, 1936
DEAR SISTER RAIHANA,

It is wonderful to have your letter after so many months and in
such excellent Gujarati! You seem to have been improving your
knowledge of the language. How good if I could do the same with my
Urdu! But then, is the teacher or the pupil to blame for it?
What a way you have of telling me of Abbajan1 ! Inscrutable are
God's ways of saving him He wishes to! What beautiful situations He
brings about! A master Manipulator of strings, He makes us dance by
plucking at any of the strings He likes. We do not even feel that
1

40

Addressee's father, Abbas Tyabji
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

He is pulling the strings if we dance as He wishes. It is when we resist
Him that we feel the pull of the string, and then we begin
complaining. Observe Abbajan's face as you read this to him and write
to me what you notice. You should, however, suppress the letter if he
does not have the strength to listen and the doctors do not permit it.
You have mentioned so many members of the family that most
of them are no more than names to me. I do not remember any of the
faces, and I have to commit to memory the names. All the same, I am
myself a member of the family, am I not? And such a one as does not
even know the names of his own family members or their faces either!
But what can be done? That must be the plight of a person becoming
one of a vast family. But what is great about knowing name and form?
We are all children of the same Mother. If we truly understood this, we
could do without name and form, couldn't we? Read this to all,
apologize to them on my behalf and make them forgive me. Anyway,
do convey my good wishes and blessings.
Yes, Dr. Ansari's passing away has created a big void which will
be difficult to fill. Poor Zohra is lost in grief. I am sending her today
a second letter1 in my broken Urdu.
Sardar [and] Kaka are of course here and very much remember
Abbajan and Ammajan.
My address is Bangalore City up to June 15.
Can you read my writing? Has Hamida2 come?
SMT. RAIHANA T YABJI
SOUTHWOOD
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

1
2

Neither letter is available.
Addressee's brother's daughter

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

41

53. LETTER TO S. AMBUJAMMAL
NANDI DURG,

May 25, 1936
CHI. AMBUJAM,

I was delighted to get your letter. Krishnaswami1 must be happy
now. Your daughter-in-law too is happy, I hope. You must be keeping
well, physically as well as mentally. Your parents too must be doing
fine.
The climate here is friendly. Sardar takes plenty of walks daily.
The others too are all right and so am I.
Yes, we shall be in Bangalore for a fortnight, going there on the
31st instant. It will be good if [you] too can come. We have to go to
Wardha via Madras only.
Kamala wants to spend two or three days with me. I have sent
my consent.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Tell me if you can read the above with ease. There is Mrs.
Esther Menon living there in Shamrock Cottage. See her if you can
on my behalf and befriend her.2
From a photostat of the Hindi: C.W. 9607. Courtesy: S. Ambujammal

54. TELEGRAM TO MAGANLAL P. MEHTA
May 26, 1936
MAGANLAL P RANJIVAN MEHTA
MOGHUL S TREET, R ANGOON
YOU MUST NOT GO WITHOUT
FIRST

THEN

BANGALORE

SEEING

FORTNIGHT.

ME.

NANDI

COME

IF

HILL

TILL

ONLY

THIRTY-

FOR

ONE

DAY.

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1
2

42

Addressee's son
The postscript is in English.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

55. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 26, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

Your two letters 23rd, 24th came in today.
Of course if you are happier and better in Segaon, you will go
there. You must have rest and the food you want at the time you want.
Tell someone quietly there and perhaps matters will mend. I return the
maps.1 No corrections. You have thought the thing out well and it
stands.
No more today, as I am anxious to catch the post just now
going.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6340. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9806

56. LETTER TO VIYOGI HARI
BANGALORE C ITY, 2

May 26, 1936
BHAI VIYOGI HARI,

Only today I got your letter. The telegram regarding Sukirti's 3
wedding will go tomorrow. It is a good development. Send my
blessings to both. Convey to Bhagavati Prasad that I hope the motive
behind this marriage was not lust but only pure religious feeling. The
purity in Sukirti and Bhagavati Prasad's life from now on will have a
great impact on the Hindu world.
I have already written about you. Your decision, I find, is
correct.
Blessings from

BAPU
1

The addressee had drawn “two alternative plans for the lay-out of the buildings, prayer-ground and compound”.
2
Gandhiji apparently meant this for the addressee’s reply
3
An inmate of the Harijan Ashram, Delhi
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

43

[PS.]
Hand over the enclosed letter to Amtussalaam.
It must be made clear that Sukirti’s marriage had no connection
with the Harijan Sevak Sangh. It need not be announced to the Press.
Does Bhagavati have parents or any other relatives? Has he been
thrown out by his caste or is there any such possibility?
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1071

57. LETTER TO K. HAZAREESINGH
[AS AT] WARDHA,

May 26, 1936
BHAI HAZAREESINGH,

I was about to leave for Nandi Durg when your letter reached
me. I had already received your book which however has been left at
Wardha. I have your letter before me.
I stayed in Mauritius for about ten days, while my boat was
lying at anchor. 1 There was no other purpose in my visit and this is
why only a few people may have been aware of my presence there.2 I
stayed in the house of some Muslim friends and that gave me an
opportunity of meeting other people. I also met the Governor at a
social function. Please convey my greetings to all my fellowcountrymen. Vandemataram.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a facsimile of the Hindi: A History of Indians in Mauritius, Appendix E

58. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 27, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

I gave a hurried reply yesterday to your two letters. I returned
also the two plans for the fenced yard. I did not examine your maps
critically, as I regard your judgment to be superior to mine. You have
a natural faculty for these matters.
1

Gandhiji, in fact, stayed in Mauritius for 20 days; vide “Speech in
Mauritius”, 13-11-1901
2
What follows is a translation as given in the source, the corresponding
Hindi original not having been reproduced.

44

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I think I have already told you1 that Mahadev's hut need not be
thought of just yet. I want first to feel my legs before incurring the
expenses of further buildings. It is wise to move slowly. The
experience of five days shows that contact can be retained even while
Mahadev & Co. are in Maganwadi. This is merely said to justify
cautious movement.
I must discuss with you the disorganization you noticed at J.'s 2
when we meet.
The storm you describe is an indication of what things can be in
the villages in the rainy season. Perhaps the things were better in
Segaon, because it is not on an eminence as Paunar is. Every position
has both its advantages and disadvantages. It is better therefore not to
make elaborate plans about things which are themselves unenduring.3
I think I have told you, we descend to Bangalore on 31st to
remain there a fortnight. We leave Bangalore any day between 10th
and 15th. It depends upon the engagements there. My inclination will
be to hasten the date of departure. I have not needed the outing. I
think Sardar has gained well. He won't need the full 15 days in
Bangalore. Therefore if we stay on till the last day, it will be business
that would keep us.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6341. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9807

59. LETTER TO MAULVI M. ASHRAF
AS AT WARDHA,

May 27, 1936
DEAR ASHRAF,

What can you expect from me? No doubt you have written to
Kumarappa and Shankerlal Banker. They can send you what little
literature the two Associations4 have produced. I am sure you do not
1

Vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 24-5-1936.
Jamnalal Bajaj
3
Explaining this the addressee writes: “While I was building Bapu's mud
cottage, a pucca brick bungalow happened to be being prepared for Jamnalalji at
Paunar. In the severe storm referred to the little mud cottage stood firm and the brick
bungalow collapsed.”
4
The A.I.S.A. and the A.I.V.I.A.
2

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

45

want Harijan, which deals with untouchability mainly and some moral
problems.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
MAULVI M. A SHRAF
P OLITICAL AND ECONOMIC INFORMATION DEPARTMENT
S WARAJ BHAWAN, A LLAHBAD
A.I.C.C. File, 1936. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

60. LETTER TO KANAIYALAL AND LILAVATI MUNSHI
May 27, 1936
BHAI MUNSHI AND CHI. LILAVATI,

If I could persuade myself to yield to your love, I would
certainly accept your hospitality. But now I am a party to keeping
even Sardar back. We had a talk yesterday and both of us came to the
conclusion that he too should not go [to Ooty]. From the point of
view of health, Nandi has agreed with us all, and especially with
Sardar. Do not think for a moment that the place can offer Nandi's
solitude. It is now cool in Bangalore too, and we hope to be able to do
some work after going there. It, therefore, seems unwise that Sardar
should part from me even for two days. Since my programme in
Bangalore will be crowded, I suggest that you should come here and
spend your last two days with us. If you do so, we shall be able to talk
a little and also do some work. The climate of Ooty is certainly
excellent, and so is the scenery. But I don't feel like going there just
for that reason, nor can I summon the courage to do so. Sardar has
already enjoyed your hospitality. I also shall enjoy it some day. As
for your love, I am tasting it daily.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7574. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi

46

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

61. LETTER TO VITHAL V. DASTANE
NANDI DURG,

May 27, 1936
BHAI DASTANE,

It appears you are expecting too much from me. You know my
present limitations in placing the thing before the country. Publicity,
however, is inherent in diligence in your own work.
In response to his letter I have asked Dev to let me know the
location, plan and other facts. In the mean while here are my answers
to your questions:
(1) In the rainy season you should grow there the requisite
vegetables as also a few flowering plants. You should also grow such
food grain as could be harvested by December. All this should be
utilized at the time of the Congress session. Measurements of the land
should be obtained right now. Make notes of places which are
waterlogged during the rainy season. If there is any tank which gets
filled up, this water too should be conserved. For this job you should
immediately obtain the services of an expert agriculturist and an
expert engineer. I take it that you will get their help gratis.
Do see Shankerlal right now. He knows about this more than
anyone else. Mhatre the architect has worked for two sessions; so
please take him there right now. Again ask Shankerlal about Nandalal
Bose and the material from the Santiniketan exhibition. Contact
Lakshmidas, as also Jajuji and Kumarappa.
Mhatre will help you with the calculations regarding the time
and space for the pandal, barracks, etc. Assume that the minimum
time required would be three months, so that the construction work
should start soon after the monsoon is over. But first of all prepare a
plan [of work].
The site should accommodate a hundred thousand people.
Enroll the names of men and women volunteers right from today.
Start with . . .1 , Vatsala2 and others.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1
2

Illegible
Addressee's daughter

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

47

62. LETTER TO TIRUPUR KHADI-PRODUCING
ASSOCIATION1
[Before May 28, 1936] 2
All I can say is that it is wrong for you to sell khaddar in the
circumstances in which you are doing. It hurts the poor people in
whose interest the affairs of the All-India Spinners' Association are
conducted.
The Hindu, 30-5-1936

63. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
May 28, 1936
MY DEAR REBEL,

Your letter came in yesterday. The post comes after the closing
of the outgoing mail.
You are a proper family partyJudge, Government Member,
Doctor, with rebellious sister in their midst and you want the Collector
Brother in your midst to finish your happiness. Remember that
feeding up an exhausted brother is not the only manner of expressing
a sister’s love. She has to know the food that is required for a given
constitution. I know cases where rich and nutritious food has resulted
in harm. But you have lived with me in vain if you do not know how
to choose the correct articles. The manner of preparing them must be
your very own.
When I read the sentence in your letter, attributed to me as
having ever said to Kallenbach, I couldn’t believe it. I re-read the
thing and then I laughed. I never lay down the law like that even for
little children. Though K. had immense faith in me, he would not
tolerate the autocracy and arrogance attributed to me. And faith like
his would not require such assertions of infallibility. You must now fill
in the gap and tell me who regaled you with the precious information
1

The Association had pointed out that they were paying the spinners decent
wages and ...that if they had really reduced the wages of spinners, they would not spin
for them but would forthwith go to the All-India Spinners' Association and that the
prices raised by the All-India Spinners' Association were too high. Vide “Uncertified
Khadi”, 11-4-1936.
2
The report appeared under the date-line “Tirupur, May 28, 1936”.

48

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and I might be able to throw some more light on the grave problem !
But my denial should not be taken to mean that I won’t lay down the
law for rebels and idiots and require obedience because it is given by
me. I must live up to the title given to me if only to give you the
satisfaction of proving your rebellious spirit! And then heaven help
me, if such assertion being heard by somebody is quoted as an
authentic example of my arrogance !!!
When we descend to Bangalore I shan’t have time to give you
such nonsense. Here there is quiet and therefore comparative leisure
for giving you senseless things.
I do hope this hospitality even of nearest and dearest is not
proving a strain on your weak body. I know what closest attention to
the tiniest details, of which you are capable when it is a matter of
loving service, means to the person giving such love. Happily
Shummy is there to prevent you from overdoing it.
Mira was badly ill but she is better now. She was taken to J.’s
bungalow. She must have returned to Segaon.
Rameshwari Nehru comes here today for three days. She had a
very successful tour in the Harijan cause in Travancore.
There was no indication in your note 1 on Lucknow Exhibition
that you did not want it published. I read it carefully, made alterations
to hide your identity and let it go. You will tell me how it reads. And
why did you not want it published? Next time you will mark all such
things suitably so as to indicate your wishes. That note had little value
if it was not meant to tell me people what a town-bred woman had felt
about the Exhibiton.
Here is a note received from Mr. Marsden which speaks for
itself.
Love.
TYRANT

[PS.]
Remember we descend to Bangalore City on 31st and stay there
not beyond 15th June.
From the original: C.W. 3728. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6884

1

Published in Harijan, 23-5-1936, under the title “A City Woman on the
Lucknow Exhibition”
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

49

64. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
May 28, 1936
CHI. AMTUSSALAAM,

I have a letter from you after a long time. Nowadays I am afraid
of writing to you. You see in my words what was not intended because
you have grown very suspicious. I am even considering whether I
should stop writing in Urdu. You were hurt by an innocent letter
containing nothing offensive because you put a contrary
interpretation on it. I was only jesting when I worte to you not to
quarrel with Thakkar Bapa1 . I know that you are not one to quarrel
with anybody, and hence it can be only a jest if I talk of a quarrel with
reference to you. I made the joke only after I had Thakkar Bapa’s
loving letter and understood that it was all over. Why should you then
feel unhappy and not be glad about it?
Shall I henceforth give up all joking with you?
What if there are all kinds of stories about you? Are you sure it
is not your suspicious nature that is at work here again? You are
concerned with your work alone. Tell me what other work can be
better than cooking for the Harijan children, feeding them and
keeping all things clean. Moreover, you have Tyagi and Rajkishori
with you and you should therefore experience no difficulty.
It will pain me greatly if you ruin your health. You ought to
forget the grief over Dr. Ansari’s death and take up the work he has
left behind.
The talk you had with your brothers at Patiala was not right. It
was nothing but your foolishness and it evoked the response it
deserved. What else would an unhappy member of the family say? All
have to bend before your obstinacy.
I had already sent for Saraswati and her mother even before you
made the suggestion. I believe they will come to Bangalore. Have no
anxiety on Kanti’s account.
The reply should now be addressed: Bangalore City.
I am writing to Sukirti and Raj. Write about your health.
1

50

Vide “Letter to Amtussalaam”, 18-5-1936.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Tell me whether you can correctly read this letter.
Have I not answered all your questions now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 595

65. LETTER TO RAJKISHORI TYAGI
May 28, 1936
CHI. RAJKISHORI,

Your letter. You need not return if you do not like to live in the
Mahila Ashram. You should write a letter to Sethji 1 regarding this.
Write to me in detail what you did not like at the Mahila Ashram.
It is better to stay with Amtussalaambehn and Tyagiji is of
course there. Learn form him as much Hindi and arithmetic as
possible.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 6637. Also C.W. 4285. Courtesy: Chand
Tyagi

66. TELEGRAM TO PYARELAL
NANDI,

May 29, 1936
P YARELAL
15 C OLLEGE S QUARE
C ALCUTTA
YOU

HAVE

WHOLLY

MISUNDERSTOOD

MY

LETTER.

ABANDONING REFERS PRESENT WORK.

BAPU
From a photostat: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1

Jamnalal Bajaj

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

51

67. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
May 29, 1936
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I have your letter of 25th instant. 1 So you are touring with
almost feverish speed. May you have the requisite strength. Even a
week at Khali will be a godsend.
I propose to make public use of your statement on khadi 2 . I
have received so many inquiries. The distorted summary3 has caused
consternation among our people who have faith in khadi. Your
statement will ease the situation a bit.
Your explanation about the omission of a woman on the W. C.
does not give me satisfaction. If you had shown the slightest desire to
have a woman on the Committee, there would have been no difficulty
whatsoever about any of the older ones standing out. There was
pressure if it may be so called only about Bhulabhai. 4 And the first
time his name was mentioned you had no objection. There was no
pressure about any other member. And then you had this unfettered
choice of omitting a socialist name and taking a woman. But so far as
I remember you yourself had difficulty in choosing a substitute for
Sarojini Devi and you were anxious to omit her. You even went so far
as to say that you did not believe in the tradition or convention of
always having a woman and a certain number of Mussalmans on the
cabinet. Therefore so far as the exclusion of [a] woman is concerned,
I think it was your own unfettered discretion. No other member would
have had the desire or the courage to break the convention. I must
also tell you that in certain Congress circles the whole blame is being
thrown on me, for I am reported to have excluded Mrs. Naidu and to
have insisted on having no womana thing for which as I said to you
I had not even the courage. I could not exclude even Mrs. N., not to
mention a woman.
As to the other members too, I have been under the impression
that you chose the members because it was the right thing to do for
1
2
3
4

52

Vide Appendix, “Letter from Jawaharlal Nehru”, 25-5-1936.
Vide, “A False Alarm”, 6-6-1936.
Vide footnote to “Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru”
Bhulabhai J. Desai
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the cause. There was no question of behaya 1 or hayadar 2 when all
were actuated by the noblest of motives, i.e., service of the cause
according to their lights. I may say that your statement which your
letter confirms has given much pain to Rajen Babu, C. R.3 and
Vallabhbhai.4 They feel and I agree with themthey have tried to
act honourably and with perfect loyalty towards you as a colleague.
Your statement makes you out to be the injured party. I wish you
could see this viewpoint and correct the report if it is at all possible.
As to the third thing. I would love to have the thing cleared. I
cannot guess what you want to say. But that must wait till we meet. I
must not add to the strain you are already bearing.
About Dr. Ansari Memorial, I have given 5 Asaf Ali my clear
opinion that the memorial for the Doctor should await better times
politically as it has for Papa6 . Do you think otherwise?
The Kamala memorial is making slow progress.
Herewith the Princess’s letter containing a reference to Indu.
Love.
BAPU
[PS.]
Bangalore City till 10th.
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1936. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

68. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 29, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

So you are in Segaon already. I do not mind. If you get there
the comforts you need, it will be where your heart is. If you get the
rains, of course there can be no building. Therefore let all labour that
can be used be given to the walls and the roof. If these are ready and
the walls dry, the rest can be finished even after the rains. But I am not
going to worry, if in spite of all effort the building is not ready for
1

Shameless
A self-respecting person
3
C. Rajagopalachari
4
Vide Appendix “Letter from Vallabhbhai Patel to Rajendra Prasad”,
29-5-1936.
5
Vide “Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru”, 21-5-1936
6
Motilal Nehru, who had passed away on February 6, 1931
2

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

53

occupation by the time we return. No strain should be put upon your
weak body.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
The accompanying for Munnalal. I hope you got a basket of
fruit sent by Janammal1
From the original: C.W. 6342. Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9808

69. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
May 29, 1936
CHI. MUNNALAL,

I have your letter. Both of you 2 are passing through a severe
test. We ought to learn to live in a village, come wind, come rain. The
city-dwellers have their own risks to run and yet live there, and so do
the villagers. At present we have ceased to belong to the town nor have
we come to belong to the village and, hanging midway between the
two, we are in a miserable state.
Blessings to both from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8603. Also C.W. 6993. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

70. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
May 29, 1936
CHI. AMRITLAL,

You must have got my reply to your telegram. The reason for
replying by wire was that if for some reason Nimu should wish not to
go she need not go. I am not enthusiastic about Nimu’s going to
Bombay. Her mother would not very much need Nimu‘s services as
her sister is in Bombay and so are her sister’s husband and her
brother. However, I permitted her to go thinking that since Ramdas
has sent a telegram she might think it necessary to go. Show this to
her if she is there.
1
2

54

Cousin of S. Ambujammal
The other being Balwantsinha
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Dispose of the letters enclosed herewith. If no one from
Mirabehn has turned up to receive the mail, make inquiries at
Jamnalalji’s. And if no one from Jamnalalji’s is going, someone at
Maganwadi should take it to her. Munnalal too is with Mirabehn.
Letters should now be sent to Bangalore City.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10715

71. SELF-CONTROL AGAIN
Your recent articles1 on self-control have created quite a stir. Persons
who are in sympathy with your views find it difficult to exercise self-control
for any length of time. They argue that you are applying your own experience
and practice to the whole mankind. And even you have admitted that you do
not fulfil the definition of a complete brahmachari. For you yourself are not
free from animal passion. And since you admit the necessity of limiting the
number of children a married couple may have, the use of contraceptives is the
only practical method open to the vast majority of mankind.

Thus writes a correspondent.
I have admitted my own limitations. In this matter of selfcontrol v. contraceptives, they constitute my qualifications. For my
limitations show quite clearly that I am like the majority of earth
earthy and can have no pretensions to any extraordinary gifts The
motive for my self-control was also quite ordinary, viz., the desire to
limit the progeny for the purpose of serving the country or humanity.
Inability to support a large family should be a greater incentive than
the very distant one of serving one’s country or humanity. That in
spite of thirty-five years of successful (from the present standpoint)
self-control, the animal in me still needs watching shows in an eminent
degree that I am very much an ordinary mortal. I, therefore, do
suggest that what has been possible for me is possible for any human
being who would make the required effort.
My quarrel with the advocates of contraceptives lies in their
taking it for granted that ordinary mortals cannot exercise selfcontrol. Some of them even go so far as to say that even if they can,
1

Vide “For Contraceptives”, 4-4-1936; “For Women Reformers”, 2-5-1936;
also “Birth-Control [-I], “Birth- Control-II” and “For the Young”, 28-3-1936
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

55

they ought not to do so . To them, no matter how eminent they may
be in their own spheres, I say, in all humility but with utmost
confidence, they are talking without experience of the possibilities of
self-control. They have no right to limit the capacity of the human
soul. In such instances the positive evidence of one person like me, if
it is reliable, is not only of greater value but decisive. To dismiss my
evidence as useless because I am popularly regarded as a ‘mahatma’
is not proper in a serious inquiry.
Far more weighty is the argument of a sister who says in effect:
We, the advocates of contraceptives, have come on the scene only
recently. You self-controllers had the field all to yourselves all these long
generations, maybe thousands of years. What have you to show to your credit?
Has the world learnt the lesson of self-control? What have you done to stop
the misery of over-burdened families? Have you heard the cry of wounded
motherhood? Come, the field is even now open to you. We do not mind your
advocacy of self-control. We may even wish you success, if perchance you
save wives from the unwanted approaches of their husbands. But why should
you seek to decry the methods which we employ and which take note of and
make every allowance for common human weaknesses or habits and which
when properly employed almost never fail to accomplish their purpose?

The taunt is dictated by the anguish of a sister filled with
compassion for the families that are always in want because of the
ever-increasing number of children. The appeal of human misery has
been known to melt hearts of stone. How can it fail to affect highsouled sisters? But such appeals may easily lead one astray, if one is
lifted off one’s feet and, like a drowning man, catches [at] any
floating straw.
We are living in times when values are undergoing quick
changes. We are not satisfied with slow results. We are not satisfied
with the welfare merely of our own caste-fellows, not even of our own
country. We feel or want to feel for the whole of humanity. All this is
a tremendous gain in humanity’s march towards its goal.
But we won’t find the remedy for human ills by losing patience
and by rejecting everything that is old because it is old. Our ancestors
also dreamt, perhaps vaguely, the same dreams that fire us with zeal.
The remedies they applied for similar ills, it is possible, are applicable
even to the horizon that appears to have widened beyondexpectations.
And my plea based on positive experience is that even as truth
and ahimsa are not merely for the chosen few but for the whole of
56

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

humanity to be practised in daily life, so exactly is self-control not
merely for a few ‘mahatmas’ but for the whole of humanity. And
even as because many people will be untruthful and violent, humanity
may not lower its standard, so also though many, even the majority,
may not respond to the message of self-control, we may not lower our
standard.
A wise judge will not give a wrong decision in the face of a hard
case. He will allow himself to appear to have hardened his heart
because he knows that truest mercy lies in not making bad law.
We may not attribute the weaknesses of the perishable body or
the flesh to the imperishable soul that resides in it. We have to regulate
the body in the light of the laws that govern the soul. In my humble
opinion, these laws are few and unchangeable, capable of being
understood and followed by the whole of the human family. There
would be differences of degree but not of kind in their application. If
we have faith, we won’t lose it because it may take a million years
before humanity realizes or makes the nearest or visible approach to
its goal. In Jawaharlal’s language, let us have the correct ideology.
The sister’s challenge, however, remains to be answered. The
“self-controllers” are not idle. They are carrying on their
propaganda. If their method is different in kind from the method of
contraceptives, so is and must be their propaganda. “Self-controllers”
do not need clinics, they cannot advertise their cure for the simple
reason that it is not an article to be sold or given. But their criticism of
contraceptives and warning to the people against their use is part of
their propaganda. The constructive side has always been there, but
naturally in an unfelt and unseen manner. Advocacy of self-control
has never been suspended. The most effective is that of example. The
larger the number of honest persons who practise successful selfcontrol, the more effective becomes the propaganda.
Harijan, 30-5-1936

72. NOTES
PRIZE E SSAY ON BARTER
Those who are interested in the question of barter in the place of
exchange are reminded that the date for closing the competition is
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

57

drawing near. I reproduce below the notice1 that appeared in Harijan
dated August 31, 1935.
CERTIFIED DEALERS, NOT CERTIFIED KHADI
The manager of the Burma Branch of the A. I. S. A. writes to
the Secretary: 2
With reference to the article of Gandhiji under the caption “Uncertified
Khadi” in Harijan of 11-4-1936, I beg to bring to your notice the fact that
here in Burma also, spurious khadi is sold in large quantities and it is a
common practice amongst the uncertified dealers to demonstrate to the buyers
that they are stocking and selling khadi certified by A.I.S.A., by showing to
them the words “Certified by A.I.S.A.” stamped on (some) cloth or the label
bearing these words affixed on (some) cloth ....
We have therefore often and often to bring to the notice of the public
and the credulous buyers the fact that khadi or cloth is never certified by A. I.
S. A. but it is only the dealer or the party that is certified, (and the public are
advised to buy only from A.I.S.A. or A. I. S. A. certified dealers or depots.)
You will thus see that it is wrong for us to use the words “certified khadi” or
“uncertified khadi” because it only strengthens the hands of uncertified
dealers.
Now that the use of these words is made even by Gandhiji. . . I have not
been able to check myself from bringing to your notice the mistake that we
unconsciously commit by using the words “certified khadi” or “uncertified
khadi”. . . .

I gladly make amends. It is undoubtedly an error to speak of
certified khadi. It will be difficult to certify pieces and it is futile to
expect buyers to make sure of every article they purchase, whether it
is genuine or not. The A.I.S.A. has always therefore followed the
practice of certifying stores and dealers selling only genuine khadi in
the cloth line. I hope that, whether in Burma or elsewhere, lovers of
khadi will make themselves sure that they buy only from stores or
dealers certified by the A.I.S.A.
Harijan, 30-5-1936

1
2

58

Not reproduced here; vide “Prize Essay on Barter System”, 26-8-1935
Only excerpts of the letter are reproduced here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

73. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
NANDI HILL,

May 30, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter of 28th.
Of course you will incur the expense of a latrine. It may be well
to rig up a bathroom also side by side as we had in Sabarmati.
I would not want you to go to a seaside, if your hut on an
apology for a hill serves the same purpose.
I hope we shall reach Wardha on 15th June, Monday, if not on
14th. My effort would be to reach there on a speaking day. That can
only be Sunday. But if I cannot manage it, I shall be satisfied to reach
there even on Monday.
You must have by now heard about Harilal's acceptance of
Islam. If he had no selfish purpose behind, I should have nothing to
say against the step. But I very much fear that there is no other motive
behind this step. Let us see what happens now.
We descend to Bangalore City tomorrow.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6343. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9809

74. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
Saturday, May 30, 1936
. . . 1 just read in the paper about Harilal's exploit. There could
be no harm in his being converted to Islam with understanding and
selfless motives. But he suffers from greed for wealth and sensual
pleasures. At Nagpur he gave me to understand that he would do
anything whatever to satisfy his greed. I shall be spared all the mental
pain if I find my impression wrong and if he turns a new leaf. But
here it is [like] adding meat-eating to drinking, and he had more or
less assumed the freedom to eat meat. All the same none of you
1

Omission as in the source

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

59

should be unhappy about it. What is destined must be. He had ceased
to belong to any faith and now he has taken on the label of Islam.
That does not make him a follower of the faith, though we should
indeed feel satisfied if he truly practises in his life what is best in
Islam. And if this is a mere show, it does not deserve to be lamented.
This instance should make us all alert and we should [try to]
understand whatever religion we follow and bring credit to it.
Read this to Devdas and send an extract to Manilal.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

75. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
May 30, 1936
CHI. PRABHA,

I got your letter which arrived just today. I read it and promptly
destroyed it. Hence I am writing this ‘out of my head’, i.e., on the
basis of my recollection.
You are bound to have a burden to shoulder while there. God is
there to take care of you. You are quite right in reducing your food
when there is much work to attend to, but it would be good not to
have to give up milk. Perhaps you will be getting more rest at Sitab
Diyara.
I follow the point about Chandramukhi 1 , Vidyavati2 . You have
well escaped it. You must have learnt about Tarabehn's [death]3 . My
opinion is that you should go to Banaras and learn what you can.
After all, you do wish to read. You should, therefore, welcome this
new knowledge. You will meet some new persons and it will please
Jayaprakash. It is a different matter if you could convince him with
your arguments, but the better thing is not to have much argument. It
is all right if you could persuade him with a casual discussion. Only
after the completion of the Banaras course shall we consider what is to
be done.
1

Jayaprakash Narayan's brother's daughter
Addressee's sister
3
This sentence, being illegible in the source, is taken from Bapuna Patro−
10: Shri Prabhavatibehnne,. The book however places the letter under May 20, which
is a slip.
2

60

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Don't you think you have now my opinion of the Banaras
proposal fully?
Give me an account of Chandrakanta's wedding, if you can.
Where is Sumangal1 and how is he? Do you know anything about
him? Tomorrow we leave for Bangalore City from where we proceed
to Wardha on the 13th at the latest, reaching there on the 15th. I shall
be living at Segaon, five miles from there. Perhaps I shall be visiting
Wardha once a week. My hut is under construction.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
The newspapers report that Harilal has become a Muslim.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3471

76. LETTER TO PYARELAL
[May 30, 1936] 3
CHI. PYARELAL,

You must have received the telegram I sent you yesterday. What
should I write to you? Such utter lack of faith ! Where there is faith,
even a wrongly written word would be rightly interpreted. I did not
write anything wrong. You must know that I do not revise my letters. I
have many letters to write. Sentences are written as they come from
the pen. They should be interpreted only in the context of the relevant
facts. How can “abandon what you are pursuing and come to me” be
interpreted the way you have done? “What you are pursuing” is a
reference not to Yoga but to your work in Calcutta or Orissa. I wrote
that way because I felt that although that work is worth doing, it may
be better in your interest to stay with me. But what is the remedy when
you see such a contrary meaning in it? In my view that indicates the
height of suspicion and lack of faith! But it is like ‘once bitten twice
shy’. But in this case it is like being shy even though there is no bite
at all.
It is possible that I may have the remedy even for such lack of
faith.
Have you understood the meaning of what I have said? There
1
3

Sumangal Prakash
From the reference to the telegram; vide the preceding item.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

61

is no scope for wrong interpretation at least in this.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I shall be at Bangalore city after Mar 31.
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

77. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
May 30, 1936
CHI. LILAVATI,

I have your letter. It is an excuse that hand-made paper is not
available there. Do not people find similar pretexts for not wearing
khadi? All these are signs of laziness and lack of earnestness.
I shall reach Wardha latest on the 17th or 18th. It is probable
that I shall leave by the 14th or the 15th.
Prema’s address is: Sasvad, near Poona.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

78. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
[Before May 31, 1936] 1
CHI. NIMU,

I got your letter. Also Nanavati’s with it. I was very pleased lo
learn that you feel quite at home there and are having the education
that you wanted. That Nanavati will give you a certificate is equally
gratifying. Look after every thing carefully as if it was your own.
Preserve cleanliness. Keep the kitchen perfectly neat. There will be
little for you to do yourself but certainly you can keep an eye over
everything. As a general rule, women are better at such jobs. This may
not be true of all women but it can certainly be said of you. I will not
1
From the reference to Gandhiji’s proposed visit to Bangalore on May 31;
Gandhiji left Nandidoorg for Bangalore on May 31, 1936; vide “Letter to Begum
Mohammad Alam”, 9-1-1933

62

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

write to Nanavati today. Tell him so. . . .1 I hope it will not be
necessary to go to Ahmedabad. I wrote to you what Ramdas wrote to
me about his illness. I have written to Sarita as well. I will leave for
Bangalore on 31st May. If you address your letter to Bangalore City,
it will do.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

79. DISCUSSION WITH C. V. RAMAN
AND LADY RAMAN2
[Before May 31, 1936] 3
The young men wanted Gandhiji to go to their Institute . . . . If he listened to
them, he would have to listen to many other requests, he argued in reply. Some of
them wanted his autograph and had also thought of presenting him with a purse for
Harijans.
[GANDHIJI:] I wish every one of you would want my autograph so
as to swell that purse; but you must do all that where I am staying, but
not drag me to the Institute.

The moment he was told that it was the Science Institute, he capitulated.

Of course, if it is the Science Institute you are talking of, I must
make an exception in its favour, provided Sir C. V. Raman will show
me some magic there.
He said to Lady Raman:

I have heard all kinds of good things about you from your
husband, but I have to find out how far they are true. He told me the
other day that whilst he is absorbed in his science, you find time for
all kinds of humanitarian activities.
[LADY RAMAN :] Not as much as I should be doing. But I am certainly
interested in khadi and Harijan welfare and social service and things of that kind. You
know, Mahatmaji, I have been a spinner since many years ago. Some fifteen years
ago I sent you a quantity of my own hand-spun yarn to be woven into cloth and the
1

Some words here are illegible in the source.
Who were accompanied by some students of the Science Institute
3
According to Mahadev Desai's “Weekly Letter”, from which this and the
following item are reproduced, these discussions took place at Nandi Hill where
Gandhiji stayed till May 31, 1936.
2

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

63

late Maganlal Gandhi sent the cloth on to me. But my husband had no faith in the
wheel then. He would put away my wheel, smash it and break it; but I am glad to tell
you that in my own life-time the day has come when he no longer ridicules the wheel.
He too believes in it.

I am very happy. Well, then, I want you to do a little work for
me. Did you ever meet the late Kamala Nehru?
Once or twice, Mahatmaji. But I know the old Mrs. Nehru very well.

But you of course know what a good woman Kamala was. You
know how she spent herself for the country. But what I prize most of
her is not her political contribution but her great spiritual beauty
which I should like every man and woman to know.
Yes, I know of her services and her moral beauty.

Then you must help me in collecting some money for the
Memorial we are having for her.
And he explained to her the object of the Memorial.
“Oh yes, Mahatmaji,” she said, “don't I know how you sat down in Calcutta
after Deshbandhu Das's death1 for a few months and collected as much as 8 lakhs? You
can certainly collect a lot if you sat down like that here. I had the privilege of helping
in that collection. I was in Calcutta then.

Oh yes, but I have not the time I had then at my disposal. But
you can bring to bear all your influence and collect as much as you
can.
Lady Raman heartily agreed. As this business was going on, in came. . . Sir C.
V. Raman. She was talking in Hindi as he came in. “Now, is that Hindi any good?” he
asked jocularly.

Certainly as good as your science.
“Oh yes” spoke... Sir C. V. Raman, “she has an amazing capacity for picking
up languages. She knows Hindi, she knows Bengali better than Hindi.”

Of course, she has stayed in Calcutta for some years.
“Not necessarily for that reason. I, too, have stayed with her. But I know not a
word. And now here she has picked up Kannada and talks it.” Sir Chandrashekhara
[Venkataraman] then began wondering what language could be the language for the
masses of India and seemed for a moment to be inclined to the belief that English had
the chance.

Don't you think it will be a bad day for the many millions of
India who know Hindi without learning it to attempt to know English?
1

64

On June 16, 1925.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

And Sir Chandrashekhara [Venkataraman] immediately said he was glad that
Hindi was making rapid strides in South India and added: “I know Hindi, too,
Mahatmaji. I understand it very well. I learnt it from no less a teacher than Malaviyaji
whose wonderful Hindi I had sometimes to hear for hours when I was in Kashi, and I
could not help learning it. But I cannot speak Hindi. It is that conceit, you know, that
I am full of as much as you.”

Harijan, 6-6-1936

80. DISCUSSION WITH DR. ERIKA ROSENTHAL1
[Before May 31, 1936] 2
[DR. ROSENTHAL :] Could you teach me how to make them co-operate with us?3
[GANDHIJI:] I am trying to learn it myself. You may have heard
that I am now going to settle in a genuine village instead of living in a
glorified village that Wardha is. Well, all that I have been saying to the
people and my co-workers will be there put to the test. But if I have
said that I am going to learn the art, there is no doubting the fact that
the only way is to go in their midst and do the things oneself.
Dumping educated patrons amongst them or even mere enlisting the
help of monied men cannot go a long way. One must do as the late
Mary Chesley did.
And with that he narrated the pathetic life-story of Tarabehn Chesley who met
her death on her pilgrimage to Badri-Kedar.
“But,” said Dr. Rosenthal, “that was, if I may say so, a rash adventure and I
should not imitate her.”

No, I do not want you to. I am talking of her spirit—the spirit in
which she tried to identify herself with the poorest. There is Miss
Mary Barr there who, if you please, is more sensible, who makes
allowances for her own limitations and still has completely identified
herself with the people. You must see for yourself the work she is
doing.
I must. What I mean is that a foreigner cannot and must not adopt all the ways
and habits of Indians. He should assimilate what is best in their life. Many an Indian
1

Daughter of Dr. Paul Deussen and wife of a doctor who, following the Nazi
persecution of Jews had come of India. She was doing welfare work in Mysore.
2
Vide footnote 3, “Discussuion with C. V. Raman and Lady Raman”,
31-5-1936
3
She had asked Gandhiji “the secret of teaching people to help themselves”.
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

65

goes to Europe and picks up the superficial things of European life, much to his own
damage. That is what I don't like.

What you say is cent per cent true. The foreigners ought not to
attempt to adopt more than they naturally and easily can. Miss Barr
has, I think, struck the true balance.
“Yes, one has to sit down in the midst like missionaries,” said Mr. De Souza
who accompanied her.
“Yes,” said Dr. Rosenthal but energetically added, “but not with the desire to
convert the people. The religious motive is what spoils most of their work I hate
conversion.”

No doubt you would, being the daughter of your father.
And yet, you will be rather surprised that I have come up against a sentence in
my father's writings which I cannot understand. He says, in effect, that he could not
understand why people were unable to accept a religion because of the outside
temptations that were offered them.

It must be just the contrary. I should like to see that text. It
cannot be as you say.
I shall send you the text.

Yes, do. And then if I am right and you are wrong you will have
to admit that I am a better son of your father than you are his
daughter.
Yes. I think, Mahatmaji, we have to contend against religion being mixed up
too much with the daily life of our people.

No, if it is true religion we want more of it.
I do not want to exclude true religion. I shall give you an example. We have in
one of our centres a very good Harijan nurse. One day a Brahmin came there wih his
son who was suffering from sores. The doctor with the help of the nurse washed the
sores and dressed them and bandaged them. But lo and behold the consternation of the
Brahmin when he found that it was a Harijan nurse who had dressed his boy's sores. He
took him to the nearest river, bathed him and washed away the whole dressing and
bandage!

That is no religion. It is rank superstition. You will come across
instances of that kind, but they are getting fewer every day.
Harijan, 6-6-1936

66

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

81. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
BANGALORE C ITY,

May 31, 1936
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

I have your postcard. It is surprising that you never are quite
free from illness. However, watch the result of the serum injection.
Why should Babu 1 write to me, now that she is a learned lady?
However, I would not complain if she never wrote to me, so long as
she does not fall ill or grow weak. I know complaining will not avail
but I would not complain even to myself, if Babu made her body like
copper.
How very seriously you take the Narandas episode! It is contrary
to non-violence. Not to mind the pain inflicted whether by a friend or
by a foe is one more form of non-violence. Such conduct is part and
parcel of non-violence. Moreover, we must also think of the friend's
point of view. Why should we be pained if he said or did something
without ill will even though his words or act were improper? You
could point out his error, if any, to Narandas in case you are
convinced that he is not a man to take any step out of ill will. Be
patient if he is unable to see his error, but never take offence. Even if
you think that he had an evil motive, your heart should feel no shock
because a malicious person deserves to be pitied. Should we take
offence at the act of one who deserves pity? My purpose in writing
this is that you may analyse the state of your mind, apply to it the
touchstone of non-violence and, if you detect your error, rectify it,
cleanse your heart and calm down.
Blessings to you all from

BAPU

[PS.]
We shall be here till the 12th.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.G. 18

1

Sharda, addressee's daughter

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

67

82. SPEECH AT CHICKBALLAPUR
May 31, 1936
1

Addressing the gathering in Hindi Mahatmaji said as the doctor had asked him
not to overexert himself he did not propose to make a long speech to them. He was
very glad to address them that day which happened to be the birthday of H.H. the
Maharaja of Mysore. Along with the people of Mysore, he joined in praying to God
to give long life and prosperity to their beloved Ruler.
He prayed further that it may be given to H. H. the Maharaja of Mysore to
approach more and more to Ramarajya in Mysore. In olden days, Ramarajya meant a
government in which everyone in the country, including the lowest ryot, had peace
and plenty.
Continuing, Mr. Gandhi thanked the people of Chickballapur for their cordial
welcome. He and members of his party had all been very well cared for during their
stay at Nandi Hills and they had all benefited greatly by their stay. The Government
as well as the people had shown him great love and he and his party were duly
thankful to them.2

The Hindu, 1-6-1936

83. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, CHINTAMANI3
May 31, 1936
Addressing the gathering, Gandhiji said that medical advisers had prohibited
him from raising his voice. Fortunately, it was one and the same thing to them
whether he raised the voice or not. He wished he knew their own language. It would
have been better perhaps if many of them could have followed his . . . Hindi or
Hindustani. He still lived under the hope that before he died he would see educated
India speaking the inter-provincial language Hindi or Hindustani. He knew that
there were some people who entertained, quite falsely, in these parts of India the
notion that the movement of Hindi was conceived in order to supplant the provincial
languages, but this belief proceeded from gross ignorance. This movement had
contributed handsomely to further the working knowledge of Hindi or Hindustani. It
had . . . intended to strengthen the vernacular provincial languages. But provincial
languages would suffer stagnation so long as they could not extend help to other
1

Ismail Sheriff translated Gandhiji's speech into Kannada.
A purse of Rs. 100 was presented to Gandhiji. Accepting the purse he
smilingly said: “It is too small. Only hundred rupees. Three times shame!”
3
An address on behalf of the Municipal Council was presented to Gandhiji.
Over 2,000 people attended the meeting.
2

68

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

languages. The English language had a definite place and an international character.
But it had certainly no place whatsoever in the heart of the masses of India.
Proceeding, Gandhiji said that it was a great day for the people of the State as
it was the birthday of His Highness the Maharaja of Mysore. He would also join them
in their prayers wishing the Almighty to give him long life and prosperity. (Cheers)
They all knew what views he held about the quality of the rule of Princes in
India. Princes forgot their duty. In ancient days they carried their administration in a
way which was called Ramarajya. In Ramarajya, there was no such thing as grinding
poverty. People lived in absolute peace. There was no one high or low. He wished
that that principle of Ramarajya was translated into practice in all parts of India.
Continuing, Mahatma Gandhi said that they had done well in presenting him
with a little purse1 for the Harijan Fund. He called it little because it was possible for
them to give him a better purse. Nothing that they could give for the Harijan cause
was sufficient penance. There could be no peace for them until the Harijans were
levelled up to the highest status in Hindu society. They must enjoy absolutely the
same rights as other Hindus. While they were entitled to take credit for what little
they had done for Harijans, he was glad that they admitted that much more remained to
be done. He therefore hoped that they would redouble their efforts in that direction.

The Hindu,1-6-1936

84. SPEECH AT KOLAR
May 31, 1936
Mahatmaji thanked the Municipal Council for the address and the townsmen
for the purse. He would like to join the people of Kolar in wishing His Highness the
Maharaja of Mysore many a return of the birthday which his subjects all over the
State were celebrating with great joy. He was glad to hear that the Municipality was
doing some work in the cause of the Harijans. He was also very much pleased to hear
that the Municipality had many more things to do for the Harijans. Unless
untouchability was blotted out, root and branch, the Hindu society would perish.
Therefore, so long as untouchability remained in the land in one form or another,
they could not say that they had done anything for the cause of the Harijans.
Proceeding, Mahatmaji congratulated the Mysore Government on the
establishment of khadi centres and appealed to the people to take to khadi. He wished
he could go to other parts of India and say that in Mysore State at least, the people
wore khadi and used swadeshi articles.

The Hindu, 1-6-1936

1

Of Rs. 201

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

69

85. SPEECH AT LABOURERS’ MEETING
KOLAR GOLD F IELDS,

May 31, 1936
Gandhiji, speaking to a mass meeting of mine-labourers for a few minutes,
said he had paid a hurried visit to the labour huts which seemed to him too small, too
ill-lighted and too low-roofed to be fit for human habitation. If the workers only
knew what they could do for themselves by combining their training and intelligence
they would realize that they were no less proprietors of the mines than the managers
and shareholders. Their labour was better gold than the metal they extracted with their
labour from the bowels of the earth.1
Gandhiji made an earnest appeal to the mining authorities to see to the
betterment of the lot of coolies working in the mines, through whom the mining
authorities derived their maximum benefit. Mahatmaji wanted that the mining
officials should give the same facilities to the coolies working underground as they
did to the highly paid officials.
Mahatmaji said that he could not congratulate the management on their efforts
to house the poor. He understood that the labourers were charged about twelve annas
to one rupee per hut. The rent should be much less.
He reminded the mine-owners that unless they voluntarily recognized the due
status of labour and treated it as they treated themselves, time was not far distant when
labour would dictate its own terms. He mentioned his theory of trust which he had
propounded before the Ahmedabad mill-owners. He told the workers that whilst it was
right and proper to assert their rights they ought to do their tasks as if the mines were
their personal property. He also asked them to shun drink, gambling and other vices.
Mahatmaji observed that considering the cause for which the money was
collected, this sum of Rs. 619 from the Kolar Gold Fields area was not much.2

Harijan, 13-6-1936, and The Hindu, 1-6-1936

1
2

70

The following two paragraphs are from The Hindu.
This sentence is from The Hindu.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

86. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
NANDI HILLS,

Wednesday [May 1936] 1
CHI. JAMNADAS,

I got your letter.
For your throat, you must consult a good doctor. Consult
Haribhai in Ahmedabad or Dr. Mehta or Dr. Rajab Ali in Bombay.
Let me know what you propose to do.
Do not pay the rent to the old aunt herself but pay it to the
owner of the house and obtain a receipt from him. Pay the rent which
has been fixed. Keep the balance with you. Meet the owner of the
house and inquire.
If the quantity decreases in spite of the students working . . .2
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33820

1

The letter is written from Nandi Hills which Gandhiji visited twice—in 1927
and 1936. The 1927 material has no reference to the addressee whereas the 1936
material indicates that Gandhiji was in communication with the addressee and there is
evidence of the addressee teaching at the Rajkot Rashtriya Shala; vide, “Letter to
Narandas Gandhi”, 3-7-1935; “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 20-9-1935 and “Letter to
Narandas Gandhi”, 25-9-1935. Hence, the letter was presumably written between May
10 and 31, 1936 when Gandhiji stayed at Nandi Hills.
2
The last sentence is illegible.
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

71

87. SPEECH AT MUNICIPAL COLONY, BANGALORE 1
[After May 31, 1936] 2
I was taken to the huts of the workers in the Kolar Gold-fields
the other day. I could not help remarking that the huts were not fit for
human habitation. With the mining Company declaring fat dividends
of 30 to 40 per cent it seemed to be cruel to me that those who earned
the profits for them were housed in those dismal hovels. The huts you
have built here are certainly better, they are well ventilated and well
situated. But there ought to be something like a minimum standard of
a hut for unmarried people and of a hut for married couples and
couples with children. We ought to realize that husband and wife must
not share the same room with grown-up children. These cabins
provide for no privacy. I cannot understand municipalities measuring
out land for their poor employees by so many feet. One more room
for each of these huts and a verandah is an absolute necessity. I am
glad you propose to provide the same facilities for the Harijan
employees, but pray bear this suggestion in mind when you build
houses for them. There are, I am pained to say, still numerous
municipalities which provide no housing facilities for their lowest paid
employees. I do not know when we shall realize our duty to the most
essential of our servants. If we do not do so ere long, the doom will
soon settle on our society, as it must, if the society does not correct
itself.
Harijan, 11-7-1936

1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”. The colony, consisted of
250 huts, built by the Municipality for its employees.
2
From the reference to Kolar Gold-fields in the speech it is evident that this
visit took place after May 31, 1936.

72

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

88. TELEGRAM TO THE SECRETARY, HINDU SABHA,
DELHI1
June 1, 1936
HINDU S ABHA
C ARE KALIA , D ELHI
THANKS.
RELIGION

IGNORE
OF ALL

SUCH
ABERRATIONS
IMPURITIES.

EXCEPT

FOR

PURGING

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

89. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
BANGALORE C ITY ,

June 1, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

Your letter of 30th is before me. I am glad you are making
steady progress. If you will always keep some strength in reserve, you
will be proof against malaria.
Yes, we had a strenuous time yesterday. I was none the worse for
it. Sardar picked a bad cold on the way and he won’t give it up even
today. The boys and the girls remained behind to see the gold mines.
They return today. The right hand has been giving excellent work. I
am therefore giving it rest.
The Gujarati papers are full of Harilal’s exploits.2
If you will be in local Simla,3 there will have to be a local line to
it too. And there will have to be variations in the two temperatures to
attract me!
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6344. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9810

1

This was in reply to the addressee’s telegram saying: “Hindus shocked over
Harilal’s conversion. Please guide how we can reclaim misguided brother.”
2
He had embraced Islam and changed his name to Abdulla.
3
The reference is to the addressee’s cottage which was going to be built at
Varoda, “an apology for a hill”, as Gandhiji had described it in a previous letter; vide
“Letter to Mirabehn”, 30-5-1936
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

73

90. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
June 1, 1936
DEAR SATIS BABU,

You give me a satisfactory account of your health. Not so
Pyarelal. He says your heart is not sound and that you are constantly
overstraining yourself. I wish you would recognize that such treatment
of the body is a positive sin.
Are you dealing with the same famine that Profulla is dealing
with? Or is this some other?
I see several difficulties about leaving something permanent
after every exhibition. We never get a site where we can build
anything solid. Then there must be that [local] 1 desire which would
pay for the thing and ensure its upkeep. We are having the next
Congress in a bona-fide village. What would you suggest? How
cheaply can we organize it? You know that the Lucknow [show]2 did
after all become self-supporting.
We leave Bangalore City probably on 12th instant.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1630

91. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
June 1, 1936
MY DEAR REBEL,

We descended yesterday and work began. We toured the gold
area the whole day, collected over Rs. 1,000 for Harijan cause and
returned after 10 p.m. not much tired.
It is warm in Bangalore compared to Nandi Hill. And nothing
pleases after the bracing air and isolation of Nandi Hill which for me
has a charm which no other hill possesses. It was not without a sigh I
left Nandi. Sardar is almost disconsolate. He won’t even go out for
awalk. I had my usual hour. But Bangalore itself is undoubtedly
pleasant at this time of the year. Only Nandi has spoiled us.
1
2

74

Not clear in the source
ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am glad you are again able to spin.
Yes, your envelope is good. But you must not pay through the
nose for them. It must be an idle hour’s job for someone who is in the
household or given to those who would be thankful to earn an honest
anna.
Why should you feel helpless? Why not be wholly satisfied with
what you can get through during the day? You may be angry with
yourself when you neglect anything. But what can you do when time
runs against you?
You must have seen Harilal having adopted Islam! He must have
sensation and he must have money. He has both. I am thinking of
addressing a general letter to Mussalman friends. 1 I will see how it
shapes itself. Poor Ba and poorer Kanti2 . Both were much upset.
Love.
TYRANT

[PS.]
You are right about our unbusiness-like habits. Go for those
who betray them.
S HRI R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
MANOR VILLE
S IMLA W.
From the original: C.W. 3729. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6885

92. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
June 1, 1936
CHI. NARAHARI,

I hope you have all returned, and in much better health. How
did Manibehn3 fare at the place? Is she now quite well? Did Vanamala4
and Mohan 5 gain in health? You used to take long walks, didn’t you?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9094
1
2
3
4
5

Vide “Statement to the Press”, 2-6-1936
Harilal’s son
Addressee’s wife
Addressee’s daughter
Addressee’s son

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

75

93. LETTER TO H. L. SHARMA
June 1, 1936
CHI. SHARMA,

Last night, on reaching Bangalore, I got your letter of May 12.
By now you must be in Khurja. I hope you are keeping fit. I shall
certainly reach Wardha on the 15th; you can come over then. In the
mean while write to me at Bangalore City.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsh,
facing p. 251.

94. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1
BANGALORE,

June 2, 1936
The newspapers report that about a fortnight ago my eldest son
Harilal, now nearing fifty years, accepted Islam and that on Friday last
29th May in the midst of a large congregation in the Jumma Musjid at
Bombay, he was permitted to announce his acceptance amid great
acclamation and that, after his speech was finished, he was besieged by
his admirers who vied with one another to shake hands with him. If his
acceptance was from the heart and free from any worldly
considerations, I should have no quarrel. For I believe Islam to be as
true a religion as my own.
But I have the gravest doubt about this acceptance being from
the heart or free from selfish considerations. Everyone who knows my
son Harilal, knows that he has been for years addicted to the drink evil
and has been in the habit of visiting houses of ill-fame. For some
years he has been living on the charity of friends who have helped
him unstintingly. He is indebted to some Pathans from whom he had
borrowed on heavy interest. Up to only recently he was in dread of his
life from his Pathan creditors in Bombay. Now he is the hero of the
hour in that city. He had a most devoted wife who always forgave his
1

The Statement, published in Harijan under the title “To My Numerous
Muslim Friends”, was issued to the Press on June 2, 1936.

76

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

many sins including his unfaithfulness. He has three grown-up
children, two daughters and one son, whom he ceased to support long
ago.
Not many weeks ago he wrote to the Press complaining against
Hindus—not Hinduism—and threatening to go over to Christianity or
Islam. The language of the letter showed quite clearly that he would
go over to the highest bidder. That letter had the desired effect.
Through the good offices of a Hindu councillor he got a job in
Nagpur Municipality. And he came out with another letter 1 to the
Press recalling the first and declaring emphatic adherence to his
ancestral faith.
But, as events have proved, his pecuniary ambition was not
satisfied and in order to satisfy that ambition, he has embraced Islam.
There are other facts which are known to me and which strengthen my
inference.
When I was in Nagpur, in April last, he had come to see me and
his mother and he told me how he was amused by the attentions that
were being paid to him by the missionaries of rival faiths. God can
work wonders. He has been known to have changed the stoniest hearts
and turned sinners into saints, as it were, in a moment. Nothing will
please me better than to find that during the Nagpur meeting and the
Friday announcement he had repented of the past and had suddenly
become a changed man having shed the drink habit and sexual lust.
But the Press reports give no such evidence. He still delights in
sensation and in good living. If he had changed, he would have
written to me to gladden my heart. All my children have had the
greatest freedom of thought and action. They have been taught to
regard all religions with the same respect that they paid to their own.
Harilal knew that if he had told me that he had found the key to a
right life and peace in Islam, I would have put no obstacle in his path.
But no one of us, including his son now twenty-four years old and
who is with me, knew anything about the event till we saw the
announcement in the Press.
My views on Islam are well known to the Mussalmans who are
reported to have enthused over my son’s profession. A brotherhood
of Islam has telegraphed to me thus:
Expect like your son you truth-seeker to embrace Islam truest religion
1

For Gandhiji’s comment on it, vide “Letter to P. M. Naidu”, 3-3-1936

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

77

of world.

I must confess that all this has hurt me. I sense no religious spirit
behind this demonstration. I feel that those who are responsible for
Harilal’s acceptance of Islam did not take the most ordinary precautions they ought to have in a case of this kind.
Harilal’s apostasy is no loss to Hinduism and his admission to
Islam is a source of weakness to it if, as I apprehend, he remains the
same wreck that he was before.
Surely conversion is a matter between man and his Maker who
alone knows His creatures’ hearts. And conversion without a clean
heart is, in my opinion, a denial of God and religion. Conversion
without cleanness of heart can only be a matter for sorrow, not joy, to
a godly person.
My object in addressing these lines to my numerous Muslim
friends is to ask them to examine Harilal in the light of his immediate
past and, if they find that his conversion is a soulless matter, to tell him
so plainly and disown him and if they discover sincerity in him to see
that he is protected against temptations so that his sincerity results in
his becoming a godfearing member of society. Let them know that
excessive indulgence has softened his brain and undermined his sense
of right and wrong, truth and falsehood. I do not mind whether he is
known as Abdulla or Harilal if, by adopting one name for the other,
he becomes a true devotee of God which both the names mean.
Harijan, 6-6-1936

95. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
June 2, 1936
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I have your letter.
I shall be satisfied if you can get proper rest at Juhu; take
exercise and observe the food restrictions. You certainly need the belt
for your abdomen though you may also consult a doctor if you like.
We shall reach Wardha on the 15th. Madalasa 1 has scribbled a
couple of lines perfunctorily. I would not mind her not writing if by
1

78

Addressee’s daughter
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

going there she has gained weight and thrown her mental worries into
the sea.
Where is Om1 ? I of course have Shriman’s Hindi work 2 . I shall
write something and send it. You must have read about Harilal.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2982

96. LETTER TO PARIKSHITLAL L. MAJMUDAR
June 2, 1936
BHAI PARIKSHITLAL,

The enclosed letter3 is for your information. I have written to
him that he should place his suggestion before you and before Bapa if
the latter happens to go to Bharuch.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
We shall be here till the 13th.
This letter certainly does not mean that you are to accommodate
him. I do not even know him. This responsibility is yours entirely.
The reply to Jagjivandas amounts only to this.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4039

97. LETTER TO ABUL KALAM AZAD
[After June 2, 1936] 4
DEAR MAULANA SAHEB,

If you have seen the enclosed I would like your considered
opinion on the points raised therein. Is such conversion valid in
1

Addressee’s daughter
A collection of Hindi poems, Rotika Raga; vide “Letter to Shriman Narayan
Agrawal”, 13-7-1936.
3
This is not traceable.
4
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 2-6-1936
2

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

79

Islam? Is the method adopted lawful? Is the way the thing is being
advertised lawful or permissible? Will you publish your opinion or
permit me to publish it?
Yours sincerely,

M.K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

98. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
June 4, 1936
MY DEAR REBEL,

I congratulate you on not being nominated 1 . If some of the
things you have drop out of themselves, it would be a gain.
As to the Y. M. C. A., I would not hazard an opinion without
having fuller knowledge.
I have myself chosen the ivory things for you today. They will
be sent to you by the depot with invoice. If the things are ill-chosen or
not to your taste, you must blame yourself for having commissioned
for the choice an ignoramus. You will give me your opinion without
reserve. Proper address has been given.
The weather in Bangalore, too, is cool enough.
I have addressed a fairly long letter to Muslim friends. I observe
that the papers over here have been afraid to publish the full text. You
shall have it if it is not published anywhere.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3576. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6385

99. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
June 5, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,

Yours of Ist has just arrived. “Empty bottles” are more needed
in Segaon than perhaps in Maganwadi. But I am not less in
Maganwadi for being in Segaon than when I was there without
Segaon. But no extra exertion should be put forth to secure them.
1

80

To the Jullundur Municipality
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Whatever you have to spare should come my way when you are
coming. The razors are not used for knives. They are used for
shaving. You shall see the specimen knives when you come. Yes, you
will occupy a corner wherever I am both on your way to Waltair and
return.
Self-praise is no praise. And when one always insists that she can
never be coerced the hearer will take it with a grain or two of salt. A la
J. you belong to a system that is based on coercion. Therefore the less
you talk of not being coerced the better!!
The return of the khes to you is a double-distilled stupidity. Did
you get the lace too? Poor Jerajani sent me a copy of the letter he sent
to his people saying that the khes was to come to me and the lace to
you. This is an idiotic circle. Are you responsible for the infection?
Anyway do write a strong letter of protest to the sender. And do not
spend money on sending it. You should bring it. You must obey.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3577. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6386

100. LETTER TO MIRZA ISMAIL
BANGALORE,

June 5, 1936
DEAR SIR MIRZA,

Many thanks for your letter. It emboldens me to ask you, please
put the following before His Highness.
I understand Harijans are not allowed even to attend the Durbars
whenever they are held. I can find no warrant in Hindu religion for
the bar. Unless there are valid and insuperable objections to the relief
being granted, I do hope that the prohibition will be removed.
I would urge the necessity of opening all State temples to
Harijans on the same terms as the savarna Hindus.
I am hoping we shall meet before we leave Bangalore which we
expect to do the 12th inst.
With renewed thanks for the hospitality and attention we are
receiving.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

81

101. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 5, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,

I was silent over your letter because I wanted to have a talk with
Kanu, which I had at length yesterday. He does not wish to be away
for the present at any rate. He particularly wishes to acquire from me
whatever he can just by remaining by my side although he no doubt
wants to learn a good deal of music from Panditji 1 . Hence, I have
assured him that he may rely without fear on my promise that I would
gladly let him go any time he thinks he has had enough of me or
wants to go to Panditji or anywhere else and obtain some special
knowledge. I think this is enough for the present. Of course I shall be
watching him.
He has a clean mind, but after all he is only an adolescent.
Some-times he suffers from melancholy but it is momentary and there
is no particular reason for it. Didn’t we all at his age have a similar
experience more or less?
As for the school, I am getting convinced more and more that
we should start thinking in terms of closing it unless it becomes selfsupporting. For, if it does not stand on its own it could be looked
upon as being run to serve our needs. We however believe that
knowledge should be imparted only to the seeker. Yes, of course we
would go begging money for such students if we have any as might
thirst for knowledge and yet be unable to pay their way. If we had
such seekers, they would cheerfully carry out our word and within a
year fully bear their financial burden. There are many institutions of
the kind in America where immediately on admission the student
begins to earn his board side by side with his studies. You may
continue this discussion in your letter if you wish.
Kanu has gone through this letter and says that I am not correct
in saying that he has a great desire to learn music under Panditji. If he
is ordered to go to Ahmedabad, he would rather learn it at the
Gandharva Vidyalaya under Shankarrao2 Vyas although it cannot be
said that this is what he wishes. According to his present state of mind,
1
2

82

Narayan Moreshwar Khare
‘Shankarlal’in the source, which is obviously a slip.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

his only wish is to be with me and do what I ask him to. He will be
under my care and there is no reason to worry on his account. He has
written a long letter to you.
I have written to the Press on the subject of Harilal, though
nothing has been published yet. I do not say anything here, hoping it
will be in print in due course.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
The progress made there in spinning is excellent in my view. As
for Sardar, I will speak to him. He should, however, make it a point to
come if he can have an opportunity.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./III. Also C.W. 8492. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

102. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
June 5, 1936
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I have your letter. I was pained to read about Bachubhai 1 . You
cannot leave him as long as he is bed-ridden. Tell Jugatram2 to consult
a homoeopath. Homoeopathy has not won my faith, but it helped
Devdas and a medical specialist3 whom we met here is all praise for it.
In any case it will do no harm, and may do some good.
I am returning Kusum’s letter. I should like it very much if she
went to Bochasan. If Lilavati feels inclined to go, I would certainly
encourage her to do so. I will have a talk with her when I return to
Wardha on the 14th. Amtul Salaam is not at Wardha. She is still in
Delhi and is not too eager to leave it. If she joins, she can of course
give you much help and the work will benefit her, too. Write to her at
Delhi; she reads Gujarati. Her address is: Harijan Nivas, Kingsway,
Delhi.
1
2
3

Addressee’s nephew
An Ayurvedic physician of Bombay
Captain C. Oommen, the Medical Expert of the Grace Medical Mission

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

83

Do come and see me when I visit Gujarat. I will find some time
for you.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—6 G.S. Gangabehnne, pp. 90-1. Also C.W. 8831. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

103. LETTER TO H. L. SHARMA
June 5, 1936
CHI. SHARMA,

You must have received the letter I sent. I got your telegram
here. You must have passed through Wardha at that time.
Amtul Salaam is in Delhi ailing. You should go there and try
your newly acquired knowledge and then come over to Wardha when
you can.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
We reach Wardha on the 14th.
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsh,
facing p. 252

104. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
June 5, 1936
CHI. AMTUL SALAAM,

I have your letter.
Shall I ever prevail with you? Why should you not come to me
if you are in bad health? Why should you stick on there in spite of
your bad health? I have of course written to Sharma who has now
reached Khurja.1
1

84

Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I follow your point about the food there. For the present,
however, I cannot think of any suggestion. I shall be much pained if
you do not eat what you should.
Ask the resident boys to write to me once so that I can start
writing to them. It would be helpful if I knew their names, their
standard of knowledge, etc.
Where is Sukirti gone?
We shall be reaching Wardha on the 14th.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 617

105. LETTER TO RAJENDRA PRASAD
June 5, 1936
BHAI RAJENDRA PRASAD,

Pass on the enclosed letter to Pierre Ceresole1 . I saw your letter.
You must have received a copy of Jawaharlal’s letter. This time we
shall have to further clarify many things.
I hope you are keeping well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: C.W. 9875, Courtesy: Rajendra Prasad

106. THE LEPROSY PROBLEM
Wardha is a Tahsil having a fair share of lepers. Village workers
often come in contact with them. What are the workers to do? May
they freely mix with the lepers? How may they help these unfortunate
people? Is there any cure? These are daily questions for serious
village workers. I, therefore, approached Rev. Donald Miller, whom I
have had the pleasure of knowing for years as a great worker among
lepers in the Purulia Leper Asylum and otherwise, for simple
1

A Swiss pacifist, President of the International Voluntary Service, who had
come to India for helping in the relief work in Bihar
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

85

directions for village workers. He readily agreed and a series of letters
to an imaginary village worker was the result. The first letter is given
below. 1
Harijan, 6-6-1936

107. A FALSE ALARM
When I saw a newspaper report purporting to be a summary of
what Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru had said on khadi during his recent visit
to the Khadi Bhandar at Bombay, I refused to believe it. It seemed to
me to be so thoroughly contrary to what I had understood to be his
considered view about khadi. I, therefore, sent the cutting to the
Pandit,2 and the following is the reply he promptly sent me.
I attended and spoke at several dozen meetings in Bombay__I have lost
count of them—and had no time to see reports. I spoke in Hindustani of
course, and reporting was no easy matter—and then condensed reports are apt
to be misleading. The report of what I said on khadi, however, was pointed out
to me and was corrected the same day or the next day. What I had said was that
for many reasons—economic, political, social—khadi was an important item
in our present programme and must be encouraged, but that I did not think that
it could finally solve our poverty problem, especially if the present social
system continued. This system transferred the improvements and additional
earnings of the peasant to the landlord. But I pointed out that this theoretical
argument did not apply today. For this I said that although I was in favour of
big industry, I believed that even with the increase of industrialization there
would be considerable room for the development of cottage industries in India.
At present, of course, they were even more important from various points of
view.

This position may not satisfy the ‘whole-hoggers’. But it is
vastly different from the misleading report. Such misreporting is the
lot of public men, especially in India, where they have to speak in an
Indian language which reporters do not always understand and which
has invariably to be translated into English for the purpose of transmission by wire. The moral is, the public should wait for authentic
1
Not reproduced here. This and the other four articles of the series first
appeared in Harijan and later in the form of a booklet, The Leprosy Problem.
2
Vide, “Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru”, 21-5-1936

86

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

information before believing the so called pronouncements of leaders
in important matters.
Form the letters I have received I see that the report created
great uneasiness among some khadi workers. To them I should like to
give a warning. It is fortunate that, for all practical purposes, what
Pandit Jawaharlal actually says is satisfactory. He is too noble to say
anything to please anybody if he does not believe in it. The quotation
from his letter, therefore, derives added weight from the fact that the
helmsman of the Congress holds views favourable to khadi, But khadi
workers should know that there are many important public men
outside the Congress who decry khadi and would never touch it. They
should know too that even in the Congress ranks there are some who
do not believe in khadi, who are never tired of ridiculing it, and use it
merely as a measure of discipline till they succeed in banishing it
from the Congress programme. Khadi has progressed in spite of these
obstacles. No doubt it would have made greater progress if we had not
such opposition to contend against. It is a matter of very great consolation that Pandit Jawaharlal believes in khadi as he does. But what
should khadi workers do if he, on further study, finds it necessary to
declare himself against it? I hope that after sixteen years of experience
of khadi and its possibilities, we have a sufficient number of
confirmed believers whose faith in it is based on thier own knowledge
of its working. If it is still a derived faith, the prophecy of a great
journalist will undoubtedly come true that on my death khadi will also
die and that the wheels that would be broken after the natural event
would be sufficient for full cremation of the body.
This nervousness over the false alarm is a portent if it is a token
of weak faith of khadi workers. I suggest to them that they examine
their own position and if they have doubts about the great economic
importance of khadi, let them revise their attitude. In order to help
them to carry on the examination, I propose, if at all possible, in the
next issue, 1 to put my view of the importance of khadi for India from
several points of view.
Harijan, 6-6-1936

1

Vide “Is Khadi Economically Sound?”, 20-6-1936.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

87

108. INDIA IN A VILLAGE
I tender my congratulations to the Maharashtra Provincial
Congress Committee on their decision to hold the next Congress
Session at Khirdi, a village near Faizpur—another village in East
Khandesh. If the plans are properly laid and preparations undertaken
in advance, the Reception Committee will be able to put up a brave
show at a comparatively less cost than is usually incurred at these
annual national gatherings. The conditions are obvious. The Committee must not aim at reproducing a city in the village. That would be
doing violence to the whole conception. They should aim at giving
the city people who, let us hope, will gather in their thousands, such
hospitality as a model village should be able to supply. In other words,
we should see in December a miniature edition of village India in
Khirdi. By wise planning the organizers will find that there is
practically nothing that a model village cannot supply in the way of
hygienic comforts, proper food, proper sanitation, and in case of
sickness proper medical aid. These are not to be had today in the
generality of villages. Therefore, I have used the expression ‘model
village’. A model village should lack nothing that is required for
healthy living. But everything in a village has to conform to the
village scale which need never be shoddy and [has to] be, at the same
time, subdued. For lighting, I would suggest electric light, though it
may be a long time before our villages are able to have electricity.
The whole show should be an object lesson both for villagers and
townsfolk. The chief attraction of the Congress will necessarily be the
exhibition. The Lucknow Exhibition was undoubtedly a success when
one realizes that it was the first effort of its kind. The coming
exhibition should be a much greater success and yet, so far as I can
see, need not cost as much as the Lucknow Exhibition did. In order
that it may become a success, artists, engineers and like professional
men will have to volunteer their services free of charge on a larger
scale than heretofore. And they will have to approach what to me is a
sacred task with the village mentality.
Harijan, 6-6-1936

88

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

109. FOR UNCERTIFIED KHADI DEALERS
Unfortunately it has been found that owing to the increased
scale of wages that are being offered to hand-spinners on behalf of
the A.I.S.A. and a consequent slight rise in the price of a certain style
of khadi, several uncertified dealers are selling khadi as if it was
certified by the A. I. S. A. and some of them do not even hesitate to
defend their unpatriotic and unhumanitarian action on the ground
that the A. I. S. A. is not a registered body.1 In order to ascertain the
true legal position instead of relying on his own ancient knowledge of
law, Shri Rajagopalachari referred to an eminent lawyer for opinion
and this is his decisive opinion:
I have no doubt that the Tirupur merchant has been wrongly advised as to
the law. The law protects unregistered bodies as much as registered bodies in
this respect. To use an unregistered name pretending to be somebody that he is
not is as much a deceit of the public as it would be if the name had been
registered. Registration under a statute may have statutory consequences and
protections; but in the protection of the public from deceit there is no
distinction between registered and unregistered names. It is absurd prima facie
that because a name is not registered, he can assume the same name and pass
off goods as certified by A. I. S. A. An action will lie for injunction and
damages. Injunction you will have. Damages will depend on proof that
persons purchased believing the stuff had been made or certified by the A. I. S.
A.
If formal opinion with authorities is required I shall get it drawn for you
at an early date.

(Sd.) T. R. V. S ASTRI
Ooty, 23rd May, ‘36

The eminent lawyer is no other than the ex-Advocate-General of
Madras, Shri T. R. Venkatarama Sastriar. I hope that in view of this
opinion those dealers who are carrying on unauthorized sales of khadi
as if they were authorized by the A. I. S. A. will desist from the
practice which has been described as fraudulent. If it becomes
necessary, opposed though I am to resort to law-courts, I would not
hesitate in the interest of poor dumb spinners to advise legal steps
being taken against those who knowingly injure their poor sisters.
Harijan, 6-6-1936
1

Vide “Uncertified Khadi”, 11-4-1936

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

89

110. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
June [6] 1 , 1936
CHI. LILAVATI,

I have your letter. Serve Mirabehn as much as you can. It would
have been better if you had been to see Premabehn. Do not undertake
anything beyond your capacity. Do not talk too much. Do nothing
but bury yourself in work. Do not talk unless it is necessary. I expect
you have brought to Segaon only the necessary things.
I hope you are in good health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9343. Also C. W. 6618. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

111. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 6, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

I have your three letters received by the same post.
Devkapas2 seed can be had from Bengal and other places. I am
writing to Satis Babu.
I do not like the idea of bring [ing] the commode and pot or the
desk from Wardha. For commode there should [be] a stool with the
middle open and a half tin or a bucket or some such thing. For pot we
may use a bottle or keep a village metal pot. For desk something quite
cheap and serviceable made in Segaon. There need be no hurry about
these things. If you have not quite understood what I want, you may
wait till I return. Wooden bedstead may be brought, lota also. Stool
should be rigged up there. Another cow will be necessary. Consult
Chhotelal about it.
Did I tell you the date of departure is not 13 but 12. We reach
therefore on 14th, Sunday, D. V.
1
Illegible in the source. This letter appears to be the one mentioned in the
letter to Mirabehn dated June 6, 1936, the following item.
2
A Variety of cotton

90

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You may expect Lilavati by the time this reaches you. The
accompanying is for her.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6345. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G. N. 9811

112. LETTER TO S. AMBUJAMMAL
BANGALORE C ITY ,

June 6, 1936
CHI. AMBUJAM,

1

Your letter.
I am glad Padma is proving so good and satisfactory. You must
not judge sons from what you can say of Kichi 2 . Poor boy! His has
been an unfortunate development. Let us hope Padma’s goodness
well infect Kichi and make him also good.
I am glad you went to Esther. If you found her glad to receive
your visit, I would like you to go to her as often as you conveniently
can.
I was sorry to hear about Father’s continued illness. How nice it
would be if he would take nature cure. Mention this to him on my
behalf. He ought to pull through and get perfectly well through
proper dieting and water and sun treatment.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Bangalore City till 12th.
From the original: Ambujammal Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library.

113. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
June 6, 1936
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I have your letter of the 29th. You must have got my letter
repeating the reply I gave earlier. You did well in returning to milk.
1
2

Daughter of S. Srinivasa Iyenagar. This is written in Hindi.
Addressee’s son

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

91

Take 4 lb. and see. Do you get any fruit there, and do you find time
for walks? You seem to have been deeply immersed in serving the
family. Never give up your fixed course of prayers, etc. Teach
spinning [to the people there]. There are likely to be many singers of
the Ramayana there. Learn from them the tune in which to recite the
Ramayana. You can find the time once you have a settled
programme. For you have already learnt how to utilize even a short
interval of five minutes. You must be getting Harijanbandhu if not
anything else. Write regularly to Jayaprakash whether you hear from
him or not.
You should find a carding-bow.
Write to Mathuradas1 at Madhubani, P. O. Champaran, so that he
may send you what you need.
You should never lose your inner peace in spite of the many
outer worries.
I write nothing about Harilal here as I have said much through
the Press. Write to Amtul Salaam at Delhi; her address: Harijan Nivas,
Kingsway, Delhi.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
At Bangalore City till the 12th and at Wardha on the 14th.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 3472

114. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
[After June 6, 1936] 2
CHI. MIRA,

Yours of 3rd just to hand. Yes, Sejila should have a shed by
himself, so as to leave your verandah free. On second thoughts I think
it will be wise to bring the commode and the pot from Maganwadi for
European visitors. Therefore this is in addition to the plan suggested
by me.
1

Mathuradas Asar, a khadi expert of Sabarmati Ashram who had gone to work

in Bihar
2

From the contents it is evident that this was written after the letter to the
addressee dated June 6, 1936; “Letter to Chhaganlal Joshi”, 11-10-1935

92

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

If you get hold of peacocks, I do not mind. But I know nothing
of their habits.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6346. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G. N. 9812

115. LETTER TO KHWAJA ABDUL MAJID
AS AT WARDHA ,

June 7, 1936
Wonderful! I was about to write to you today about another
matter when I got your welcome letter. To hear from you is like
meeting a long lost friend or brother whichever you will; have both.
In my diconsolateness over Ansari’s death I thought of you,
Shuaib and Zakir Husain. I decided to write a long letter to Z. 1 I am
daily awaiting his reply.
Asaf Ali wrote to me about some memorial. I told him this was
not an opportune time politically for a national memorial to so big a
man. I gave the same opinion over Motilalji’s death. I have in mind
not the financial stringency but the political condition. If people
spontaneously send money and if we get a large enough sum, we
might make some use as a memorial by personal admirers and
obligers (cannot find the right word just now). I hold on to the
cheque2 till I hear from you or till we meet.
Your exposition of politics is deeply interesting. “Et tu, Brute!”
Do not take this literally in its application. How have the mighty
fallen? Do you remember your remark at the Ansari Hotel? But I do
not blame you. I have nothing but praise for your downright honesty.
Yes, we must meet. Do come to Wardha any day after 16th June. You
know that at the end of the month the whole Working Committee will
be there. But I know you want to discuss the thing first with me. Only
therefore the earlier you come the better.
Now for what I was to write about. If you have not seen my
public letter about my eldest son’s so-called conversion, I enclose a
cutting herewith. Read it and let me know your views. Is such a
conversion permissible and right? Is all this advertisement the poor
1
2

Vide “Letter to Zakir Husain”, 25-5-1936
The addressee had sent a cheque for Rs. 1, 000 for a memorial to Ansari.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

93

wreck and rake is receiving a proper thing? I have no anger against
Harilal. He is hardly responsible for his acts. During the past three
months he has gone through many changes. You must know that it is
not loafers who are responsible for what has happened and is
happening. Those who are accepted as responsible Muslims in society
are doing all this. Do study this phenomenon, interest yourself in it
for the sake of religion and this unhappy land. If you put a different
construction on the event, you will not hesitate to tell me so frankly.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

116. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
June 7, 1936
MY DEAR REBEL,

Do not be alarmed at the reduced prices of the articles sent to
you. I asked for it because you were to sell them as swadeshi
propaganda and might have to lose on them, too, if you are unable to
dispose of them. Let not your princely pride be wounded. You should
charge the full selling price plus postage, etc. No idiocy allowed in
business matters. For these things you are no rajkumari but a simple
sevika and trustee. I have a copy of the letter and bill sent to you.
Hope you are quite restored.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3578. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6387

117. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
June 7, 1936
CHI. MARY,

I return the letter from Hardwar and retain the other papers sent
by you.
Sumitra had left for Nagpur when your letter and mine were
received at the Gurukul. I now send them all to you. If Gopal is there,
he might know her address.
94

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

As to Tara’s1 other papers and things, they should be left
untouched till we know what can be done with the will.2 We have first
to trace her relatives who may be interested in her property. The
bicycle can certainly be used by Gopal. Similarly you may use the
sita [r].
I fear Dr. Nur Jahan has to be asked to keep her English things
with her for the time being. We reach Wardha [on 14th]3
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 6062 Also C.W. 3392. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

118. LETTER TO GOVIND V. GURJALE
June 7, 1936
MY DEAR GOVINDRAO,

You have given me interesting bits about your activities. May
they prosper. Never depart from the golden rule of cutting your cloak
according to your cloth. No debts to be incurred.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Bangalore City till 12th.
From a photostat: G.N. 1400

119. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
June 7, 1936
CHI. AMTUL SALAAM,

I have your letter. I am sorry to learn about the sudden death of
Prakashmani. Please convey my condolences to his relatives there if
any.
Where has Sukirti gone?
1

Mary Chesley, who died of pneumonia in May 1936, on her way to BadriKedar; vide “In Memoriam”, 23-5-1936
2
Vide “Letter to F. Mary Barr”, 24-5-1936
2
Illegible in the source.
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

95

Nothing can be better if looking after the children brings you
back to health. How does Rukmini behave now? Do you visit Dr.
Ansari’s?
Ask Sharma to come there; I have written1 to him.
Paparamma2 and Saraswati3 are arriving here tomorrow
morning. There is no question of Kanti going to Harilal now. He has
calmed down. You must have read what I have written about Harilal.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 616

120. LETTER TO JANKIE AMMAL NAIDOO
[AS AT] WARDHA ,

June 8, 1936
MY DEAR JANKIE,

I was delighted to have your letter. It is good Father is coming
to India. I wish you too had come. Of course after the rich living of
Natal, you may not appreciate the simple life here. And you will be
horrified to see the appalling poverty of the villages. That experience
would chasten you. However, Father will tell you on his return what
India is like.
Yes, all the Phoenixites are well.
Love.
BAPU4

[PS.]
Address:

M. K. Gandhi
Wardha
India
S HRI JANKIE AMMAL NAIDOO
37 M ALLINSON R D., S YDENHAM
DURBAN, N ATAL
From a photostat: G.N. 10463
1
2
3
4

96

Vide “Letter to Amtussalaam”, 5-6-1936
G. Ramachandran’s sister.
G. Ramachandran’s sisters’daughter.
This is in Tamil script.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

121. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
June 8, 1936
CHI. MARY,

I am in no hurry. Do finish your slivers and other urgent work
before tackling Tara’s box. I wrote1 yesterday or the day before
returning your letter to Sumitrabehn.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 6063. Also C.W. 3393. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

122. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
BANGALORE,

June 8, 1936
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,

I have the letters from you both. You must have read of
Harilal’s exploit. I am not sending you a separate copy of my article
as it has appeared in several newspapers. Nor have I anything to add
as I have said enough in my article. Ba has been unhappy but bears it
very patiently. Kanti is calm. I should have no worry or objection if
he reforms himself now.
We shall reach Wardha on the 14th. Tari is still not cured of her
ailment, but she is bound to get well if she follows my treatment with
patience. All the youngsters here, both boys and girls, are at present
busy sight-seeing in this State.
Lakshmi has been keeping indifferent health. She fell ill at
Bombay just when Devdas was about to leave for this place.
Ramdas is doing his agency business satisfactorily.
I have not the least grudge against Sushila’s going to live in the
city. One has to practise self-denial for the children’s sake. Without
this the latter cannot advance in life. It is just proper that both [the
children] are with you. I shall be satisfied if you do not Anglicize
them, but bring them up under the influence of dharma. Do not let
them forget their mother tongue and also teach them Hindi. I should
like them to learn Tamil since you are living there. None of your acts
1

Vide “Letter to F. Barr”, 7-6-1936

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

97

should encourage in them an infatuation for English. They will
acquire a working knowledge of the language. However, if one
acquires knowledge through one’s mother tongue, one can better
understand, digest and utilize it in one’s life. But then this is what I
think is wise. It is for you to adopt the course that you both find
agreeable. There is no question of doing anything merely to please
me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4852

123. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
BANGALORE,

June 9, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,

Your exploit in going with drawing-room slippers and missing
your way and walking till you were exhausted was worthy of an idiot.
You have more than earned the title !
This letter will probably be the last from Bangalore. We leave
here on 12th, reaching Wardha 14th.
Yes, Mira is quite well working as hard as she can at my hut.
Vidya hi seva 1 is quite good. But it is better to have Seva hi Vidya 2 .
Why not Vidya Sevayai, meaning Knowledge for Service? I suppose
you will have it somewhat like this:
This as artistically drawn as is possible to do. But you know what
I mean.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3730. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6886

1
“Knowledge itself is service”; the motto was needed for the crest of the Lady
Irwin College in Delhi.
2
“Service itself is knowledge.”

98

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

124. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 9, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

This will be perhaps my last letter from here. We hope to be in
Wardha on 14th inst.
Cartmen seem to be having a fine time there. 50 carts working at
a single job simultaneously must be a record for Segaon. I hope they
were all local. I expect to see you hale and hearty.
Evidently Balwantsinha and Munnalal were a godsend for you.
When I felt like accepting Munnalal’s offer and suggested to
Balwantsinha to seek your unbroken contact, ‚à‚¢ª I had no notion
you would find them almost indispensable. Anyway, their being with
you during your illness and convalescence was a source of great
comfort to me.
The Madras basket contained apples. Did you have them? They
were all from Janammal.
Love.
BAPU
From the Original: C.W. 6347. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9813

125. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 9, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,

You have, I believe, my letter1 about Kanu. They have all been
very busy sight-seeing. We hear from them from time to time. The
other day they paid us a visit also. Here is another letter from Prema.
You got the earlier too, I hope.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8493. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

1

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 5-6-1936

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

99

126. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
June 9, 1936
CHI. AMRITLAL,

We expect to reach there on the 14th morning. Attend to the
enclosed letters. I hope you are in good health and Bhansali is
practising his penance within limits. Of course I remember others, too,
but don’t write about them to save time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10716

127. TELEGRAM TO RAIHANA TYABJI1
BANGALORE,

June 10, 1936
ONE

OF

YOU

WILL

TRULY

MY

STAUNCHEST

FIND

GRAND

OLD

NATION

WHO

MUSLIM.

SARDAR

ME
MAN

KNEW
AND

EQUAL
OF
NO

GONE. 2

FRIENDS
SHARER

GUJARAT

IN

AND

DIFFERENCE

OTHERS

ALL

JOIN

MOTHER
LOSS.

FAITHFUL

BETWEEN

AND

FATHER

WAS

SERVANT
HINDU

OF
AND

ME.

The Bombay Chronicle, 11-6-1936

128. MESSAGE TO MANJULA M. MEHTA
June 10, 1936
Return with greater purity, kindness, health and self-restraint. I
have great expectations of you both. May you prove Doctor’s 3 true
heirs.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 1602

1

An almost identical telegram was sent to Mohammed Habib, son-in-law of
Abbas Tyabji.
2
Addressee’s father Abbas Tyabji died on June 9, 1936.
1
Addressee’s father-in-law, Dr. Pranjivan Mehta

100

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

129. INTERVIEW TO ADI-KARNATAKA
SANGH
June 10, 1936
Mahatma Gandhi stated that he was in full agreement with the view that no
work for the uplift of Harijans could be carried on satisfactorily unless it had their cooperation. No one had emphasized more than he the fact that in the service that they
had undertaken, to remove all social and other disabilities in the case of Harijans,
they were only discharging a debt of obligation, as they had committed the sin which
had doomed the persons to social and other hardships.1
He pointed out that the Kengeri Gurukul did not belong to the Harijan Sevak
Sangh; and that far from the Kengeri Gurukul excluding Harijans, it expressly served
Harijans and took in Harijans whenever they were forthcoming.
The next important thing was that the Conference was one of savarna Hindu
workers who were going to assemble in order to compare notes, discuss their
difficulties, find out their own weaknesses and to organize their work better. The
Conference was one of hereditary sinners who wanted to find out ways and
means of repaying the debt they owed to Harijans. How were the Harijans going to
help in this Conference ? They were certainly welcome to attend it, but how would
they help in the deliberations?
D’souza: You may call yourselves debtors but the Harijans cannot help
suspecting a superiority complex in all that you do, and you will lend yourselves to
the suspicion that instead of devising means to help them you are devising new
means to keep them down.

GANDHIJI:

If there is suspicion for which there is no ground, I do
not mind the suspicion. The savarnas’action if it is honest will dispel
it. I do not blame the Harijans because they have known nothing
better.
A HARIJAN :

GANDHIJI:

There is no suspicion. We simply wanted to narrate our hardships.

Need you narrate them to me? Don’t I know them?

1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”. P.G. D’Souza, leader of
the deputation, among other things pointed out that the Harijan Sevak Sangh took no
account of work being done by Harijans who wanted H.S.S. Funds to be made
available to them, that if Hindu opposition persisted the Missionaries were bound to
accentuate their antagonism, that the Harijans were not being admitted in the Gurukul
Ashram at Kengeri, that the Harijan Workers’Conference about to be held was going
to be a purely non-Harijan affair and that it was no use concentrating on temple-entry
when Harijans’economic and social conditions badly needed improvement.
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

101

Don’t I proclaim from the house-tops that you have to rise all along
the line? No; I want you to understand that it is a conference of
sincere sinners. You are all welcome of course, but you will find that
the complexion of the meeting is different from what you expect it to
be. We are all debtors; we know that we can pay nothing more than
small instalments, and that our creditors may be so enraged as to fling
those instalments in our faces and kick us out. But we have to tolerate
even this if such is to be our lot. For our goal is to pay the principal
with interest. When Dr. Ambedkar abuses us, I say that it serves us
right. Then sometimes the creditor becomes so great that he does not
care for the debt of the debtors. We, however, have to forget
everything else and concentrate on repaying the debt. The Shastras
say that when the cup of a people’s iniquity is full, they perish.
Hinduism is a dying cult if it will not purge itself of untouchability
and will perish, Ambedkar or no Ambedkar. If our attempt is sincere,
I assume you will see no superiority complex among the reformers. I
admit that as I see Hinduism, darkness envelops many savarnas. They
call irreligion religion. Now it is out of this darkness that a very
imperfect class of sinners are trying to come out. As regards the
condition of some Harijans, I am reminding the savarnas day in and
day out that it is they the savarnas who are responsible for the filthy
habits of some of the Harijans. I tell them it is wrong of them to insist
on Harijans getting clean before they receive the same status as other
Hindus. We have to admit them first and then make them clean. As
regards your disabilities, housing conditions, etc., I am pleading with
the State. Pray be patient. We may not be able to deliver the goods as
quickly as you want us to, but do not question our motives.
D’SOUZA: We thank you for having given us the assurance you have given. We
want you to extend to the Harijans the hand of fellowship. A sinner should not behave
as though in expressing penitence he was doing some service to God. I want you to
get the Harijans direct representation in the Mysore Assembly in proportion to their
population. They should be recognized as having attained manhood.

GANDHIJI: For that I must make a suggestion to you. You must
displace the present Maharajah and have me as such for a week !

Harijan, 27-6-1936, and The Hindu, 11-6-1936

102

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

130. SPEECH AT HARIJAN WORKERS’
CONFERENCE, KENGERI1
June 10, 1936 2
Whoever conceived the idea of this Conference gave vent to a
happy idea and we should be able to make good use of this meeting.
Though there are at this Conference representatives invited from all
parts of South India, there are others here, too, and instead of
confining myself only to the actual work of the delegates, I will make
some general observations.
These general observations I shall make for the benefit of the
savarna Hindus. Let them understand that this movement for the
removal of untouchability is different from other current movements
in India. So far as I am concerned, and so far as the Harijan Sevak
Sangh is concerned, the anti-untouchability movement is not a
political movement. Nor is it intended purely for the economic
amelioration of the Harijans nor yet for their social regeneration. But
this does not mean that we do not aim at the Harijans’ social,
economic or political advancement. We want all these improvements.
If we are honest about our work, progress in these directions is bound
to follow from our efforts.
But our goal is quite different from the things I have mentioned
just now. It is this: that untouchability is a blot upon Hinduism and
must be removed at any cost. Untouchability is a poison which, if we
do not get rid of it in time, will destroy Hinduism.
I know that those of you who are outside the ranks of workers
and delegates—nay, even some of the workers and delegates—do not
realize the real significance of what I am saying. But whether you
realize the significance or not, I must continue to express the views
which I hold and hold very strongly.
I can see in the continuance of untouchability slow destruction
overtaking Hinduism now, and I promise that if you study the thing
itself as I am doing, you will observe that the slow disintegration which
Hinduism is going through, may become so rapid as to make it
impossible for the workers to overcome it.
1

This was published in Harijan under the title “The Inwardness of Harijan
Movement.”
2
From The Hindu
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

103

And why do I say that untouchability is a curse, a blot and a
powerful poison that will destroy Hinduism? It is repugnant to our
sense of humanity to consider a single human being as untouchable
by birth. If you were to examine the scriptures of the world and the
conduct of peoples other than Hindus, you would not find any
parallel to the untouchability I have brought to your attention just
now. I can well understand a person being untouchable whilst he is
performing a task which he himself would feel makes him untouchable. For instance, a nurse, who is nursing a patient who is helpless and
bleeding and soiling his clothes and suffering from a disease giving
out from his body a foul smell, such a nurse whilst she is nursing such
a patient is untouchable. But when she has washed herself, she
becomes as touchable as ourselves. Not only that. She is not only just
as fit to move in society as any of us, but she is also adorable for the
profession which she follows. She is worthy of our respect and, so
long as we have ranks in our society, she must occupy a very high
place amongst us.
Now look at the other side of the picture. Take, for instance, Dr.
Ambedkar. He is pronounced as belonging to the Depressed Classes
and as being untouchable. Intellectually he is superior to thousands of
intelligent and educated caste Hindus. His personal cleanliness is as
high as that of any of us. Today he is an eminent lecturer in Law.
Tomorrow you may find him a Judge of the High Court. In other
words, there is no position in the Government of this country to which
he may not aspire and rise, and to which an orthodox Brahmin can
rise. But that orthodox Brahmin will be defiled by the touch of Dr.
Ambedkar and that because of his unpardonable sin that he was born
a Mahar (Untouchable)!
If we had not been habituated to think that untouchability by
birth is an integral part of Hinduism, we would not conduct ourselves
towards our fellow human beings as many of us conduct ourselves
even today.
I know that I have told you nothing new in this my talk to you
today. I know I have said this same thing in a much more burning
language than I have done today. Yet what I say is not, and will not be,
superfluous so long as this simple fact of the need for the removal of
untouchability does not affect your understanding or conduct.
Untouchability is a phenomenon which is peculiar to Hinduism
only and it has got no warrant either in reason or in the Shastras, and
104

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

what little I have studied of the Shastras and what I have been told by
people who have made a deeper study of them shows that there is no
warrant for untouchability by birth in Hinduism. I have not the time
now to go into the Shastric precepts. Nor is it necessary at this time of
the day to give you Shastric proofs for my statement. But what is
necessary is that if you are satisfied that untouchability is a blot on
Hinduism and that there is a danger of its destroying Hinduism, you
must set about removing it.
What will you do to remove it? If all of you will say that you
have done your duty by declaring that untouchability is a blot on
Hinduism, it will be a mockery. It will not be enough even if you in a
flush of enthusiasm go to a Harijan and touch him and embrace him,
and then forget all about him. It will not do even if you go to the
Harijan quarters every day and make it a point to touch a number of
Harijans as a token of your conviction.
What is required of you is that you should regulate your day-today conduct in such a manner that you make it absolutely evident to
the Harijans whom you come across that a better day has dawned for
them all.
You will begin by taking the Harijans along with you to the
temple if you are in the habit of going to a temple. But if you
discover that you will not be allowed into the temple along with your
Harijan companions, then if you have the living belief that I have that
untouchability is wrong, you will shun that temple as you shun a
scorpion or fire. You will then believe with me that such a temple is
not inhabited by God. I will take by way of illustration the greatest
temple known all over the world, viz., Kashi Vishwanath in Banaras.
The Lord who is supposed to reside there is known as the Lord of the
Universe. And yet in the very name of that Vishwanath the savarna
Hindus have today the impudence to say to the Harijans: ‘You shall
not come to this temple’!
I claim to be as good a Hindu as any orthodox Hindu. I have
endeavoured to enforce all precepts of Hinduism in my own life to the
best of my ability. I admit that my ability is small. But that does not
affect my attitude to and love for Hinduism. Yet, in spite of all that
love for Hinduism, with a due sense of my own responsibility I am
here to tell you that so long as the doors of the Banaras temple are
closed against a single Harijan, Kashi Vishwanath does not reside in
that temple and I could not possibly approach that temple with a
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

105

belief in its sanctity or in the faith that by worshipping there I should
be purified of my sins. I can have no sense of piety in respect of such
a temple. And what is true of Kashi Vishwanath is true of every other
temple in India which bars its doors to Harijans. It applies of course to
all such temples in South India, including the Guruvayur temple.
Thank God, the gates of the Guruvayur temple are closed to me.
But even supposing the trustees of that temple, or whoever is in
authority there, gave me permission to enter that temple, I could not
possibly avail myself of it so long as members of the Harijan
community are shut out. Unless every one of you here begins in the
way I have pointed out, he has not removed untouchability from his
heart.
It is absolutely of no consequence that a vast majority of
Harijans are uninterested in our campaign. Only this morning Mr.
D’Souza, leading a deputation of Harijans,1 told me that the Harijans
were not so interested in temple-entry as in their political and
economic ameliora-tion and perhaps a rise in their social status.
Naturally, they cannot think otherwise. For we are responsible for
deadening their sense of unity with us and their desire to worship in
common with us in our temples.
Therefore I say that the God of Hinduism is really non-existent
for them. It is true that the God of Hinduism is not different from the
God in Islam or Christianity. Only the mode of worship is peculiar to
each religion. If Harijans because of our own sins—our own
unpardonable treatment of them—have been taught to consider that
the temples visited by savarnas are not for them, you could not blame
them for their indifference in this matter. Force of habit has made
them indifferent. That Harijans in Travancore and other parts of India
have still got the desire to enter the temples and claim the same rights
as other Hindus, is a good thing and a comforting thing, but it does
not affect my argument.
There is another aspect of the opening of temples to Harijans
which you must not fail to realize. If you open your temples to
Harijans because they demand that they shall be so opened, you will
not be doing any great thing. But if you open the temples to them
because of a sense of sin for which you should atone, it becomes a
religious act. I should insist on Hindu temples being thrown open to
1

106

Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Harijans even if the Harijans in India were converted to another
religion and there was only one Harijan left in the Hindu fold. It is
this religious attitude that isolates the Harijan question from all other
questions, and gives it a special importance. If our present programme
was merely one of policy or political expediency, it would not have
the religious significance that it has for me. If it was demonstrated to
me to my satisfaction that the political or economic regeneration of
Harijans would be enough to retain the Harijans in the Hindu fold, I
should still want to open the temples and remove every trace of
inequality. Because for me it is, as it must be for you, a question of
repentance and reparation for the wrong we have done to our
fellowmen.
Thus the threat of the conversion of Harijans to other religions
which is agitating so many Hindus today, has no bearing on our duty
to Harijans. If we begin to quicken our activities, because of the threat
of conversion, then such opening will lose the significance which I
have outlined. I promise you that Hinduism will not be saved by such
means.
Hinduism can only be saved when it has become purified by the
performance of our duty without the expectation of any return
whatsoever from the Harijans. Nothing less than that can possibly save
Hinduism. If you do something by Harijans as a matter of expediency
or political manoeuvre, you have not rid yourselves of untouchability
in your hearts. There will come many occasions when that poison will
erupt on the Hindu social organism to such an extent that we shall be
confounded. If we are ashamed of untouchability, we must shed it, no
matter what results follow or may not follow.
I become impatient when savarna Hindus tell me from their
platform of high superiority that they will remove un-touchability
when Harijans give up their habits of drinking, eating carrion, uncleanliness, etc. Suppose my father, mother, son or daughter were
lepers, can I say that I will touch him or her only when he or she had
got rid of leprosy? I will be false to our sacred tie if I do not serve him
or her in his or her need. The position regarding Harijans is infinitely
worse, because we ourselves are responsible for the condition to which
Harijans have been reduced. For their drinking, eating carrion, and
other unclean habits we are directly responsible. Therefore, if we are
true, we have to embrace them in spite of their shortcomings; and I
hope, not without foundation, that immediately you adopt an attitude
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

107

of mind looking upon the Harijans as your brothers they will change
their habits. People who had experience in this direction will confirm
this statement. It is therefore first necessary that savarna Hindus
should purify their hearts and change their attitude towards Harijans.
I would ask you, please, not to fling in my face bad cases you
may have come across—cases where you befriended Harijans and
they refused to improve.
But having uttered this word of caution, I want to give you my
evidence. I do not know a single Harijan adopted by a Hindu who has
not reformed himself. As a matter of fact, it cannot be otherwise. The
Harijan is bound to feel the change to be too good to be true. The
novel experience of his improved surroundings will enable him to get
rid of the craving for drink or carrion-eating. As for cleanliness it is a
question of facilities made available to him. It is merely the cussedness
of the savarna Hindus that employs the arguments about the
uncleanliness of the Harijans, so that they themselves need not act
correctly.
I will close with a material thought. I have told you exactly my
views of the duty of every savarna Hindu to Harijans. There are many
more things that the savarna Hindu can do in his own personal
conduct.
But I know that there will be a lot of discussion among members
assembled here as to how to conduct the work of Harijan Sevak
Sanghs without money. I say to such delegates that the fear comes out
of their own want of faith. We want to move not half a dozen savarna
Hindus, we want to touch the hearts of millions of savarna Hindus.
Paupers though we are, we find that no Hindu temple has ever to be
closed for want of funds. I invite you to study this phenomenon. But
do not run away with the false idea that millions of Hindus always pay
to their temples merely out of superstition. There may be a partial
truth in that statement. But it is only a partial truth. The better part of
the truth is that the people who support these temples by their
offerings of pice or rice or coconut or supari 1 , do so because of an
indefinable faith that they are doing an act of piety. And I tell you
that you will not be doing justice to yourselves, or to India or to
humanity, if you will characterize these things as superstition. I know
that superstition is a long-lived thing. There are many monsters of
1

108

Areca-nut
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

superstition which have been given a long rope by the Almighty. But
however long their life, it is nothing in the cycle of time. The better
half of the truth is that there is some-thing undoubtedly holy and true
about the faith that takes millions to the temples. If you have faith in
the piety of the dumb humanity who support these temples, and faith
in your mission, each of you will become little temples and gather
pice or rice from the people.
If you remain content with the lazy delusion that a few
millionaires like Ghanshyamdas Birla will always send money to you
for your work, I assure you that the movement is bound to fail. You
will never be able to bring this movement to a successful conclusion
unless you realize the need to go to the dumb millions and collect
pice or even their rice as a token of their conviction that untouchability is a sin to be got rid of.
Never mind if it takes time before you are successful. Whether it
takes a few years or ages you must have unbounded faith that it is the
only way to convert savarna Hindus and bring this message to every
Hindu home. Know that time never runs against Truth. And this is the
downright truth: You have to get rid of untouchability or perish. Only
those become impatient who want to prop up a mission about whose
correctness they have a doubt. Have faith that when all the forces that
are arrayed against us—and they are mighty forces—have died down,
there is still this movement which will go on to purify Hinduism. But
if you lose heart, courage and faith and become too lazy to remain on
the watch-tower, do not blame people for not paying. The movement
will perish not because of external forces but because of internal
weakness. I urge every worker to approach the problem in this light.
Harijan, 20-6-1936

131. LETTER TO BALKRISHNA BHAVE
BANGALORE,

June 11, 1936
CHI. BALKRISHNA,

When you go for change of air or take other cures it never
occurs to me that you do it out of attachment for life. The body is a
field of duty. We must maintain it by taking proper care of it and for
that reason you should take all the necessary treatment. I am greedy
to take a lot of service from you and that is one of the reasons why I
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

109

make you wander from place to place. As long as you are weak you
will have to take service from others wherever you are. I do not see
any harm in it if it is done with humility in the name of God. The idea
behind it after all is that if God grants you health it will be utilized
only for rendering service. My advice therefore is that you should not
obstruct the improvement of your health by entertaining any kind of
worries.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

132. LETTER TO VALLABH
June 11, 1936
CHI. VALLABH,

Mahadev has already briefly answered your two letters
yesterday. “Vallabh” is all right. If you want to add anything to it, I
would suggest “das” 1 . First, because it is a simple suffix and secondly
because we have voluntarily accepted the dharma of service and also
because, the varnas having vanished, we are Shudras. Moreover,
Vallabhdas is generally a name given to sadhus. Let everyone in the
Ashram abuse you in just by calling you Swami but outside merely
Vallabh or Vallabhdas will be proper. You do not want to become
‘bhai’so you are only a half rival of Sardar. You should remain so.
Both of you are certainly servants. Let him be a ‘Sardar’; you
always remain a “das”
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

133. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
June 11, 1936
DAUGHTER RAIHANA,

It was very good you wired. For us, Abbajan is always alive. This
body is but a play lasting “a few days” 2 . However, the atman living
within is immortal. His body we consigned to the tomb. Our
association with it was momentary. He who had taken on the body and
whom we loved as our own is no doubt even now watching us. May he
witness all our acts, and save us from doing anything unworthy.
It was good that nearly the whole family was present at the time.
1
2

110

A servant
From a ghazal by Nazir Akbarabadi
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Please offer condolences on my behalf to all. Who will console me?
You know the bond between us.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

134. INTERVIEW TO M. V. JAMBUNATHAN
June 11, 1936
Gandhiji appreciated the efforts of Mr. Jambunathan1 in publishing an UrduHindi dictionary and gave a few suggestions to make his work more exhaustive and
more complete.
Referring to the Urdu-Hindi controversy, Gandhiji said it was due more to the
mentality of the Hindus and Muslims of the present generation than the scripts
themselves.

The Hindu, 13-6-1936

135. DISCUSSION AT HARIJAN WORKERS’
CONFERENCE, KENGERI2
[June 11, 1936] 3
You were rather hard in your speech4 about the temples. The savarna
orthodoxy feels that we have no faith in the temples and your remark will support
their feeling.
Q.

A. You are begging the question when you say that savarnas
feel that we have no faith in their temples. They are our temples as
much as theirs. My remarks were addressed to those who have faith in
the temples. We do not create any hostile feeling in the savarnas by
saying that God had left temples whose doors were barred against
Harijans. For God there is the God of our creation. If it was God of
His own creation, He would say: “Fools!Do you not see me
everywhere?” But God is good enough to forget that we are fools,
1
2
3
4

Of the Mysore University
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary.
Vide “Speech at Harijan Workers’Conference, Kengeri”, 10-6-1936

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

111

and thinks that we have enshrined Him in order to purge corruption
from our hearts. But when we discover that God whom we had
enshrined in our temples permitted a class of His devotees to be
regarded as untouchables, we said God had fled from such temples. I
therefore say we must not visit the temples that forbid the entry of
Harijans, and after we have finished with the members of our families
we should go out with the same advice to others.
Q. Is the Harijan Sevak Sangh entitled to fight caste as we know it, since
untouchability cannot go without the present caste going?

A. Untouchability has to go in its entirety, but so far as the
Sangh as a body is concerned we have confined its work to the
removal of the extreme form of untouchability. Therefore we do not
begin with an attack on caste, though most of the members
individually do not believe in and have discarded from their lives all
caste restrictions about food and marriage.
Q.

Shall we ever at some stage have to attack caste?

A. Why not? We recognize our limits and have thus restricted
the rate of our progress. When we have got confidence we can change
the creed of our Sangh and go a step further. Individuals, as I have
said, have gone further. So far as restrictions about intermarriage and
inter-dining are concerned, they are no part of varnashramadharma.
Both of them are individual matters. No Shastra can compel me to
feed or marry or refuse to do so with particular individuals. I urge
you to recognize the fundamental distinction between our own
personal conduct and the policy of the Sangh, which can only be
changed in accordance with its constitution.
Q. There were places where Harijans had as a result of the present awakening
given up handling dead animals and their disposal. There were places where Harijan
reformers had to ask their Harijan brethren to give up the work, if only to give up
carrion. In some places these had incurred the wrath of the savarna Hindus who had
declared a boycott against them and stopped all social amenities. What were the
Harijan sevaks to do?

A. It is our duty to protect the Harijans wherever such a thing
happens, and if life is made difficult for them, we should help them to
migrate to some more hospitable neighbourhood. But the best thing is
for Harijan Sevaks to find out from amongst savarna reformers,
including themselves, men ready to learn the art of curing hides and
tanning. There are tanneries where all the processes from the skinning
of carcasses to tanning are taught, and if we have many savarnas

112

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

ready to do this work the awakened Harijans will not fight shy of it.
But they have every right to abandon the work and take up anything
else, and wherever they will not take charge of it we must take it up
ourselves. Let us make the community realize the terrible waste of
wealth that is going on from day to day. If we knew the science of
dealing with carcasses, we should find that often a carcass pays more
than the animal being worn out and starved would have fetched when
alive. For the dead flesh can be turned into fine manure; the bones
need to be simply charred in order to be turned into rich manure, they
are also used to make buttons, handles, etc.; fat which can be easily
preserved is precious for various purposes; the intestines are valuable
for guts for carding-bows and musical instruments.
Q. But in our place a curious situation has arisen. The Harijan community is
strong, and they have resolved to face even social boycott. There is only a small
minority of Harijans who are in favour of continuing the work of the disposal of
carcasses. What advice am I to give them?

A.
Q.

Of course they should be free to continue their calling.

Even at the risk of being boycotted by their own community?

A.

No. Then we should not divide the community.
Q. Have we given up the Temple-entry Bill? Can’t we take it up again?
A. We have not given it up. It will be taken up as soon as the
conditions are propitious.
Q.

Can’t we make greater provision in the budget for propaganda?

A.

No. If I could help it, I should not permit even 5 per cent of
the budget for propaganda. But if you must expend money on
propaganda, you may collect money specially for propaganda, but
even then the Sangh will ask you to account for every pie you have
spent.
Q. In our work we find the existence of sub-castes and untouchability among
Harijans themselves a very great barrier. How are we to break the barrier?

A. By removing sub-castes and untouchability from ourselves.
The Harijans are simply imitating their masters. We have kept them as
slaves and taught them to imitate us. And you must remember that an
imitator improves on the original, i.e., he disfigures it.
Q. Don’t you think that the whole Harijan problem is in the last analysis an
economic problem, and that the moment you improve the Harijans’economic status
you solve the problem?

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

113

A. No. You may solve the economic problem, but unhappily the
Harijan problem, which is essentially that of the eradication of a
disease in Hinduism, will not be solved thereby. Dr. Ambedkar who is
economically much better off than most of us is still regarded as an
untouchable.
Q. A worker, apparently an iconoclast, seemed to be impatient of some of the
forms of worship among Harijans--including even their worship of Rama and
Krishna— and naively said: “I know that they worship sticks and stones, even when
they say they worship Rama and Krishna. And worship of these, however great they
may be, does not inspire me. May I ask them to regard you as an incarnation of God
and worship you, as I do?”

Amidst the laughter of all present Gandhiji calmly replied:
A. There is this difficulty staring me in the face: I am, you must
know, an idol of mud, and those who seem to you to be revolting as
ideals are my revered ideals. The names of Rama and Krishna fill me
and Krishna fill me with hope. So I would advise you to break your
incarnation—me—to pieces. That will be better than condemning
Rama and Krishna which is nothing short of violence to Hinduism and
to religion.
“But”, replied the friend, “Rama and Krishna were human beings.”

You think I am such a fool as to worship Rama and Krishna who
existed ages ago? I worship Rama and Krishna who exist today, who
have existed for all time, who know my innermost thoughts and who
continually correct me. If I were not sure of my Rama and Krishna,
existing on both sides of me, I should have gone mad with Sjts. X and
Y and questioners like you.
“But”, put in C.R. 1 , “this explanation may not improve matters. He might
regard you as an inearnation all the more for this explanation !”

Well, then I must remind you, young man, that if you are
confirmed in your opinion that I am an incarnation you will find that
one day I am no more. Will then God disappear for you?
But Christians also worship Christ?
Let me tell you that Christians worship the Christ who was
resurrected. In the same manner those who worship Rama and Krishna
worship Rama and Krishna who are more living than you are, or
certainly more living than I am. They live now and will live until
eternity. If ideals of Rama and Krishna are revolting to you, you
1

114

C. Rajagopalachari
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

should advise Harijans to forsake Hinduism, for I am quite sure that if
a man does not believe in Rama and Krishna as God he is not a
Hindu. A Muslim who says he does not believe in his Kalema will be
hounded out of Muslim company. Do not then ask me, if I worship
Rama who killed Shambuka and krishna about whom we hear all
kinds of legends. I worship the living Rama and Krishna, the
incarnation of all that is True and Good and Perfect.
Harijan, 4-7-1936

136. DISCUSSION WITH A HARIJAN COUPLE1
[On or before June 12, 1936] 2
Not knowing that they were Harijans, Gandhiji asked:

You are a married couple? What have you brought for me?
“We have brought flowers”, the bridegroom said.

But flowers won’t do. You are married and would you ask me to
be satisfied with flowers only?
Sir, we have brought grapes too.

The grapes are sour. Can’t accept grapes, can’t accept flowers.
Go and consult together and decide what to give me for the poor
Harijans.
“We are ourselves Harijans”, they exclaimed, and Sjt. Ramachandra put in on
their behalf: “Bapuji, he is Dewan Bahadur Srinivasan’s grandson.”
For a moment Gandhiji paused, as he had forgotten that the Dewan Bahadur was
a Harijan. and then said:

I see, I see. Then it is not you who should give, but I should give
you something.
We have come to have your blessings.

Of course you have them. Now tell me, are you happy in
Hinduism, or will you give up the wretched religion?
We are perfectly happy and we will never give up Hinduism.

May I then proclaim to the world that Dewan Bahadur Srinivasan’s grandson and granddaughter-in-law are happy in Hinduism?
1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”.
According to the source, this and the following discussion took place at
Bangalore where Gandhiji was till June 12, 1936.
2

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

115

Please do. We are perfectly happy.
“May we touch your feet?” Both did so and received hearty thumps on the
back—Gandhiji’s favourite way of giving blessings to those nearest to him.

Harijan, 27-6-1936

137. DISCUSSION WITH A POLISH STUDENT1
[On or before June 12, 1936]
[STUDENT:] I am keenly interested in rural reconstruction. There is at... 2 a
school conducted by Catholic Fathers. I shall help the school from the proceeds of
the sale of this photograph3 .
Returning the photograph Gandhiji said:

Ah, that is a different story. You do not expect me to support
the Fathers in their mission of conversion? You know what they do?
And with this he told him... the story of the so-called conversions in the
vicinity of Tiruchengodu, the desecration and demolition of the Hindu temple, how he
had been requested by the International Fellowship of Faiths to forbear writing
anything about the episode as they were trying to intervene, how ultimately even the
intervention of that body composed mainly of Christians had failed, and how he was
permitted to write about it in Harijan. He, however, had deliberately refrained from
writing, in order not to exacerbate feelings on the matter.
“But”, said the student, “the Christians among whom the Fathers I mention are
working became Christians long ago.”

Well, there they foment fresh troubles. I do not know why the
professors of a noble faith should assist in creating deadly quarrels
between two sections of the same faith.
But I myself am a Christian convert. I cannot tell you the happiness and the
solace that Christianity has meant to me.

I can understand that. You are using the language of a truly
converted Christian. You have a heart to lose or to keep. If the
Harijans in India reach your intellectual and spiritual level, and
experience your sense of original sin, I would bless them for
voluntarily embracing Christianity. Have you read what I have written
on my son’s so-called conversion to Islam? If he had become a
1
2
3

116

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”.
Omission as in the source.
On which the student wanted Gandhiji’s autograph.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Muslim from a pure and a contrite heart, I should have no quarrel
with him. But those who had helped him to embrace Islam and are
enthusing over his apostasy simply exploited his weaknesses. Theyare
no true representatives of Islam. My letter to the Muslims, I tell you,
was written with my pen dipped in my heart’s blood. Similarly there is
no redeeming feature about the Tiruchengodu conversions I have
spoken to you about.1
Harijan, 27-6-1936

138. ADVISE TO HINDI WORKERS2
BANGALORE,

June 12, 1936
Gandhiji advised Hindi pracharakas who are imbued with a sense of service,
not to fritter away their energies in all possible spheres, but to confine themselves to
the one work they had undertaken.
Gandhiji observed that it was quite possible for anybody, man or woman, to
attain full mental development through the mother tongue alone and he considered all
those who did not agree with the view as being guilty of treachery against their
mother tongue. Even if Sir Venkata Raman were to say that he could not explain his
researches in his mother tongue, Gandhiji would ask him to keep his Nobel Prize and
Knighthood to himself.

The Hindu, 12-6-1936

139. SPEECH AT HARIJAN WORKERS’
CONFERENCE, KENGERI3
June 12, 1936
We should do nothing having in view the threat of conversions.
For I am sure that everything that you will do merely to stop them will
fail of its purpose. Conversions or no conversions, we have to
redouble our efforts in order to remove all the disabilities under which
1

Here Mahadev Desai remarks: “The young man could see the deep pain with
which Gandhiji was speaking. He did not press him to give the autograph and took
his leave.”
2
More than 100 Hindi workers, including about 30 women drawn from all
parts of the State, met Gandhiji in the morning.
3
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”.
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

117

Harijans are labouring. The reaction that we should do something
because of the threat of conversions was bound to take place as we are
human beings. We may therefore take note of the fact but do no fact
but do nothingbecause of it. If we redouble our efforts because of the
threat, we shall slacken our efforts immediately the threat is carried
out, or the moment we find that the threat was empty. Either way, if we
slacken our effort we shall be harming the cause. Harijans will feel
that the whole of our agitation was, like a soda-water bottle affair,
momentary, and that there is now going to be nothing more. Our
movement is essentially religious and independent of political
vicissitudes. There can, therefore, be only greater and greater
dedication on our part. What shall we, then, a handful of us do for the
cause, when we find that thousands and thousands of our people are
wholly indifferent and will do nothing beyond passing a few resolutions? Somehow or other they do not feel that these resolutions are
addressed to them individually. Years ago eloquent speeches used to
be made on swadeshi, but speakers did not feel that they were bound
to carry out what they said. They took shelter under the phrase ‘as far
as possible’. There is no ‘as far as possible’on the question of
untouchability. If it is to go, it must go in its. entirety, from the
temples as from everywhere else. So if the thousands who passed the
resolutions in Travancore were serious when they raised their hands,
no power on earth can prevent the entry of Harijans to temples. Those
of us, therefore, who are working for the removal of untouchability
must convince the Harijans of our bona fides. I have, however, a suspicion that all who have come here are not as thorough in their action as
they should be. Most of you do not go far enough in identifying
yourselves with the Harijans’difficulties. You will say, ‘We belive in
the removal of untouchability only to the extent of the Harijan Sevak
Sangh programme.’If Harijan workers take shelter under this ‘thus
far and no further’, it will be difficult to convince Harijans that we are
sincere. Naturally Harijans want to have positive proofs of daily
increasing progress. They want to rise to the highest status that a
Hindu is capable of. I ask you, therefore, not to leave this conference
without discussing the difficulties that face us. If all our workers were
capable of making cent per cent delivery of goods and of becoming
cent per cent Harijans voluntarily, it would be well with us.
I do not want to blame anyone, I am simply thinking aloud, and
when Ramachandran wanted me to say what should be done I could
not put the thing more concretely. It is a question of ourselves feeling
118

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the thing. This cannot happen except with the conviction that if
untouchability does not go Hinduism will perish. I would go even
further and say: ‘I would pray that a religion which damns any
human beings because they were born in a particular section should
perish.’And I want you, if you feel with me, to pray that it ought to
perish if this blot on humanity is not removed. That points to the
necessity of our becoming Harijans in every sense of the term. Does it
mean that we should start eating carrion or drinking or living filthily?
No, we must feel miserable whenever they feel miserable, and try to
remove all that makes them miserable , Let us never say their misery is
due to their karma, but let us say we have made up our minds to
discharge at least a portion of our debts to them. Let us ask ourselves
every morning if we have done anything in discharge of that debt.
Unless we do this all our resolutions will be a fruitless effort.
Q.

What is to be our attitude to those who want to come back to Hinduism?

A.

We shall simply say to them:‘You are perfectly welcome,’but
you will offer no inducements to those you expect to win back by
doing so.
Q. Oh no. That is out of the question. I was wondering if you would approve of
any purification ceremony.

A. No purification ceremony is necessary. If they had become
converts wantonly, they will regretfully come back, in which case
those who take them back may ask them to do some shuddhi. I would
simply ask them to take Ramanama a hundred times.
Q.

Won’t you object to a Harijan sevak attending a voluntary shuddhi
ceremony of this character?
A. I see no objection to his attending such a ceremony, but let
him be clear that Shuddhi is no part of the Harijan Sevak Sangh’s
programme, and also he should be sure that the man wanting to be
reconverted was doing so absolutely freely and without the offer of
any inducement. The question is: Are you convinced of the downright
sincerity of the man wanting to be reconverted? If you are, do
everything to befriend him.

Harijan, 4-7-1936

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

119

140. CONVOCATION ADDRESS AT HINDI PRACHAR
SABHA, BANGALORE 1
[June 12, 1936] 2
I had no idea that when I promised to give you half an hour this
evening I was going in for an elaborate function and should have to
give you more time than I had bargained for. Not that I should not
have liked to give you more time. If it had been possible I should
certainly have given you two hours, examined you in Hindi, done a
little business by asking for contributions for Hindi propaganda, and
possibly for your ornaments. But that was not to be. Within a couple
of hours I shall be leaving Bangalore. That however, does not mean
that those who want to contribute may not do so after I have left.
I congratulate those who have won their diplomas and
certificates today. I hope they will keep up their studies and go on
adding to their knowledge every day. Those who go to ordinary
schools and colleges go there for a career, read their books for
examinations and the moment they leave their examination-hall forget
the books along with what they have learnt from them. Many care
more for degrees than for knowledge. But those who have won their
diplomas today have not done so for the sake of diplomas, for the
obvious reason that the Institution for the Propagation of Hindi does
not aim at helping you to win jobs. The diplomas and degrees
conferred on you are meant only as proof of the knowledge your
teachers have imparted to you. It is quite possible, of course, for a few
of you to earn your livelihood from your Hindi studies, but that
certainly is not our object.
It delights my hearts that a majority of the successful candidates
today are members of the fair sex. That indicates a bright future for
Hindi prachar and for Mother India, for I am firmly of opinion that
India’s salvation depends on the sacrifice and enlightenment of her
women. In many of the women’s meetings I used to address, I
emphasized the fact that when we wanted to speak of our ancient
heroes and heroines or gods and goddesses we would name the latter
first, e.g., Sita Rama, Radha Krishna and not Rama Sita or Krishna
Radha. This practice is not without its significance. Women used to be
1

Published in Harijan under the title “ The Question of Hindi”. Gandhiji
presided over the Convocation, which was attended among others by Srinivasa Sastri,
C. Rajagopalachari and Satyamurti.
2
From The Hindu, 13-6-1936.

120

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

honoured and their work and worth were regarded of special value.
Let us continue the tradition in its letter and spirit.
I shall take this occasion to give you a few obvious reasons why
Hindi or Hindustani alone can be the national language. So long as
you live in Karnataka ,and do not look out of it, a knowledge of
Kannada is enough for you. But a look at any one of your villages is
enough to show that your outlook and your’horizon have widened,
you no longer think in terms of Karnataka but in terms of India.
Events outside Karnataka interest you, but the interest cannot obviously go very far, without a common medium of expression. How is a
Karnataka man to establish and maintain contact with men from Sind
or U.P.? Some of our people have held and perhaps still hold that
English can be this medium. If it was a question of a few thousands of
our educated people, English would certainly do. But I am sure none
of you will be satisfied with that. You and I want millions of people to
establish interprovincial contacts, and they cannot obviously do so
through English for generations to come, if ever. There is no reason
why they should all learn English, and it certainly is no sure or
substantial means of winning a livelihood. Its value for this object will,
if anything, become less and less as more people come to learn it.
Then Hindi-Hindustani offers no difficulty in studying as English
must. Study of it is never going to take the time that study of English
would do. It has been estimated that the number of Hindus and
Mussalmans speaking and understanding Hindi-Hindustani exceeds
200 million. Would not the 11 millions of men and women of
Karnataka like to learn a language that is spoken by 200 millions of
their own brothers and sisters? And can they not very easily learn it?
The answer is supplied by a fact I noticed very strikingly a moment
ago. You have all listened to a Kannada translation of Lady Raman’s
Hindi speech. You could not but have noticed that the translation
adopted unaltered quite a large number of words which Lady Raman
had used in her Hindi speech—words like prem, premi, sangha,
sabha, adhyaksha, pada, ananta, bhakti, swagata, adhyakshata,
sammelan. All these words are common to Hindi and Kannada. Now
supposing someone was translating Lady Raman’s speech into
English, could he have retained any of these words? By no means,.
The English equivalent of every one of these words would be new to
the listeners. When therefore our Kannada friends say that Hindi is
difficult for them, they amuse me no less than they make me angry
and impatient. I am sure it is a matter of a few hours’careful study for
a month. I am 67 and have not many years before me, but I assure
you that when I listened to the Kannada translation I felt as though I
should not take more than eight days to learn Kannada if I gave a few
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

121

hours to it each day. With the exception of half a dozen, like the Rt.
Hon. Srinivasa Sastri and myself, all of you here are quite young.
Have you not energy enough to devote to a study of Hindi four hours
each day for just one month? Do you think it is too much to devote
this time to cultivate a contact with 200 millions of your own
countrymen? Now suppose those of you who do not know English
decided to learn English. Do you think any one of you would be able
to learn the language in a month by devoting four hours to it each
day? By no means. The reason why Hindi is so ridiculously easy is
that all the languages, including even the four South Indian spoken by
Hindus in India contain a large number of Sanskrit words. It is a
matter of history that contact in the old days between the South and
the North used to be maintained by means of Sanskrit. Even today the
shastris in the South hold discourses with the shastris in the North
through Sanskrit. The difference in the various vernaculars is mainly
of grammar. In the North Indian languages even the grammatical
structure is identical. The grammar of the South Indian languages is
of course vastly different, and even their vocabularies, before they
came under the influence of Sanskrit, were equally different. But now
even these languages have adopted a very large number of Sanskrit
words, so much so that I have not found it difficult, whenever I have
gone South, to get a gist of what was being said in all the four
languages.
I come now to our Mussalman friends. They know the vernaculars of their provinces as a matter of course and Urdu in addition.
There is no difference whatsoever between Hindi and Urdu or
Hindustani. The grammar is common to both, it is only the script that
makes the difference, and when one comes to think of it one finds that
the three words Hindi, Hindustani and Urdu denote only one.
language. If we were to refer to the lexicons of these languages, we
should find that most of the words are the same. For them, therefore,
barring the question of script which will adjust itself, there is no
difficulty whatsoever.
To return therefore, to where I began, if your horizon goes as
far as Srinagar in the North and Cape Comorin in the South, Karachi
in the West and Dibrugarh in the East—as indeed it should—there is
for you nothing for it but to learn Hindi. English, I have shown to
you, cannot be our lingua franca. I have no prejudice against English.
A knowledge of English is necessary for a few scholars, it is necessary
for international contacts, and for a knowledge of the sciences
pursued in the West. But I am pained when an attempt is made to give
122

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

English a place it cannot take. That attempt, I have no doubt, is bound
to fail. Everything looks proper in its own place.
There is a scare of which I should like to disabuse your minds.
Is Hindi to be taught at the expense of Kannada? Is it likely to oust
Kannada? On the contrary, I claim that the more we propagate Hindi
the more shall we stimulate a study of our vernaculars and even
improve their power and potency. I say this from my experience of
different provinces.
A word about the question of script. Even when I was in South
Africa, I thought that all the languages derived from Sanskrit should
have Devanagari script, and I am sure that even the Dravidian
languages could be easily learnt through the Devanagari script. I have
tried to learn Tamil and Telugu through the Tamil and Telugu scripts,
as also Kannada and Malayalam, for a few days, through their
respective scripts. I tell you I was frightfully upset over having to learn
four scripts when I could see that if the four languages had a common
script—Devanagari—I should learn them in no time. What a terrible
strain it is on those like me who are anxious to learn the four
languages? As between the speakers of the four South Indian
vernaculars, does it need any argument to show that Devanagari would
be the most convenient script for the speaker of one to learn the other
three? The question of Hindi as lingua franca need not be mixed up
with the question of script, but I have referred to this simply in order
to point out the difficulty of those who want to know all the Indian
languages.
Hirijan, 27-6-1936

141. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
BANGALORE,

June 12, 1936
I believe Sjt. Kodanda Rao to be incapable of having made the
claims attributed to him. viz., of being a Congress representative or
my ‘envoy’ 1 I consider him to be too straightforward a man to make
any such claim.
1

P. Kodanda Rao of the Servants of India Society was on a visit to Trinidad.

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

123

I do not know anything about his views on Hindi, but I must
decline to believe the statement put into his mouth that Hindi is of no
use for Indians overseas, or that he advised the educational authorities
there that they should not listen to any such claim put forth by Indian
settlers. I should be sorry if it is found that he holds these views,
because I think it is absolutely essential for Indian settlers not only not
to forget their mother tongue but to keep themselves in touch with the
literature and growth of Hindi.
The Hindu, 13-6-1936

142. A WITNESS FROM AMERICA
Miss Mabel E. Simpson of Montana (U. S. A.) writes to the
Editor:
I wish to express my appreciation of your publication. What it lacks in
size it more than makes up in quality. I greatly enjoyed Mr. Gandhi’s article on
birth-control displaying his usual clear insight into the heart of things. If he
had visited America twenty years ago when birth-control was disapproved and
now when it is in full swing, he would know that it brings moral deterioration.
But he would not be able to convince anybody of it, for it also brings a
blindness to both moral and spiritual perception that makes it impossible for
its followers to discern with sensitivity along high moral and spiritual lines.
If India follows the West in this it will surely lose two of its most. priceless
and beautiful jewels: affection for little children and reverence for parenthood.
America has lost both—and does not know it. Could you print a statement of
the meaning of brahmacharya? I have been asked about it and while I have an
idea I am not sure enough to attempt to explain it to others. Thank you.

The reader may place what value he or she chooses on this piece
of evidence. I suggest however that such evidence against the use of
contraceptives is worth far more than that of those who claim to derive
benefit from their use. The reason is obvious. The benefit in the sense
that advent of children is often checked is not denied. What is
contended is that the moral harm the use does is incalculable. Miss
Simpson has given us a measure of such harm.
Now for the definition—the meaning—of brahmacharya. Its
root meaning may be given thus: that conduct which puts one in
touch with God.
The conduct consists in the fullest control over all the senses.
This is the true and relevant meaning of the word.
124

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Popularly it has come to mean mere physical control over the
organ of generation. This narrow meaning has debased brahmacharya and made its practice all but impossible. Control over the organ
of generation is impossible without proper control over all the senses.
They are all interdependent. Mind on the lower plane is included in
the senses. Without control over the mind mere physical control, even
if it can be attained for a time, is of little or no use.
Harijan, 13-6-1936

143.WHERE IS THE LIVING GOD?
The following is taken from a letter form Bengal.1
I had the privilege to go through your article2 on birth-control with the
heading ‘A Youth’s Difficulty’.
With the original theme of your article, I am in full agreement. But, in
that article, you have expressed in a line your sentiment on God. You have said
that it is the fashion nowadays for young men to discard the idea of God and
they have no living faith in a living God.
But, may I ask what proof (which must be positive and undisputed) can
you put forth regarding the existence of a God? Hindu philosophers or ancient
rishis 3 , it seems to me, in their attempt to describs the swarupa or reality of
Ishwara have at last come to the conclusion that He is indescribable and veiled
in maya and so on.... I do not dare to deny that a true Mahatma like you or Sri
Aurobindo, or the Buddha and Sankaracharyas of the past, may well conceive
and realize the existence of such a God, who is far beyond the reach of ordinary
human intellect.
But, what have we (the general mass), whose coarse intellect can never
penetrate into the unfathomable deep, to do with such a God if we do not feel
His presence in our midst?...
So, it is not at all surprising that young men of the present day do not
believe in a God, because they do not want to make a supposition of God—
they want a real living God. You have mentioned in your article of a living
faith in a living God. I shall feel highly gratified and I think you will be
rendering a great benefit to the young world, if you put forth some positive,
undeniable proofs of the existence of God. I have the confidence that you will
1
2
3

Only extracts are reproduced here.
Vide “A Youth’s Difficulty”, 25-4-1936
Seers

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

125

not more mystify the already mystified problem, and will throw some definite
light on the matter.

I very much fear that what I am about to write will not remove
the mist to which the correspondent alludes.
The writer supposes that I might have realized the existence of a
living God. I can lay no such claim. But I do have a living faith in a
living God even as I have a living faith in many things that scientists
tell me. It may be retorted that what the scientists say can be verified if
one followed the prescription given for realizing the facts which are
taken for granted. Precisely in that manner speak the rishis and the
prophets. They say, anybody following the path they have trodden
can realize God. The fact is we do not want to follow the path leading
to realization and we won’t take the testimony of eye-witnesses about
the one thing that really matters. Not all the achievements of physical
sciences put together can compare with that which gives us a living
faith in God. Those who do not want to believe in the existence of
God do not believe in the existence of anything apart from the body.
Such a belief is held to be unnecessary for the progress of humanity.
For such persons the weightiest argument in proof of the existence of
soul or God is of no avail. You cannot make a person who has stuffed
his ears, listen to, much less appreciate, the finest music. Even so can
you not convince those about the existence of a living God who do
not want the conviction.
Fortunately the vast majority of people do have a living faith in
a living God. They cannot, will not, argue about it. For them “it is”.
Are all the scriptures of the world old women’s tales of
superstition? Is the testimony of the rishis, the prophets, to be
rejected? Is the testimony of Chaitanya, Ramakrishna Paramahamsa,
Tukaram, Dnyandeva, Ramdas, Nanak, Kabir, Tulsidas of no value?
What about Ramamohan Roy, Devendranath Tagore, Vivekananda—
all modern men as well educated as the tallest among the living ones?
I omit the living witnesses whose evidence would be considered
unimpeachable. This belief in God has to be based on faith which
transcends reason. Indeed even the so-called realization has at bottom
an element of faith without which it cannot be sustained. In the very
nature of things it must be so. Who can transgress the limitations of
his being? I hold that complete realization is impossible in this
embodied life. Nor is it necessary. A living immovable faith is all that
is required for reaching the full spiritual height attainable by human
126

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

beings. God is not outside this earthly case of ours. Therefore exterior
proof is not of much avail, if any at all. We must ever fail to perceive.
Him through the senses, because He is beyond them. We can feel Him,
if we will but withdraw ourselves from the senses. The divine music is
incessantly going on within ourselves, but the loud senses drown the
delicate music which is unlike and infinitely superior to anything we
can perceive or hear with our senses.
The writer wants to know why, if God is a ‘God of mercy and
justice, He allows all the miseries and sorrows we see around us. I can
give no satisfactory explanation. He imputes to me a sense of defeat
and humiliation. I have no such sense of defeat, humiliation or
despair. My retirement, such as it is, has nothing to do with any defeat.
It is no more and no less than a course of self-purification and selfpreparation. I state this to show that things are often not what they
seem. It may be that what we mistake as sorrows, injustices and the like
are not such in truth. If we could solve all the mysteries of the
universe, we would be co-equals with God. Every drop of the ocean
shares its glory but is not the ocean. Realizing our littleness during
this tiny span of life, we close every morning prayer with the recitation
of a verse which means: “Misery so-called is no misery nor riches socalled riches. Forgetting (or denying) God is the true misery,
remembering (or faith in) God is true riches.”
Harijan, 13-6-1936

144. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
[AS AT] WARDHA,

June 13, 1936
MY DEAR AGATHA,

I have your love letter and a longer one from Horace 1 . This is
for you both. I did not mean to suggest that we have not to convert
Englishmen. What I meant and mean even now is that our
contribution must be from this side. We must show that we mean no
harm to England. It is not our fitness which is in dispute. Our
harmlessness is, and rightly. This cannot be proved by any
protestations made by the ablest Indian representative in England. It
can only be proved by our uniform conduct here. But our conduct is
1

Horace Alexander

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

127

by no means uniform. Not every Indian means well by England. And
the best of us do not wish well in the same sense that Englishmen
would have us to. Thus it was very difficult for me to convince the
Lancashire operatives that I meant and wished well even in the act of
preaching the immediate boycott of foreign cloth. 1
Do you see that the non-violent way requires patience and has to
be worked after the style peculiar to it?
This is not to say that it is wrong for any Indian ever to go there.
No doubt chance visits of women like Mrs. Hamid Ali or men like
Bhulabhai2 must be exploited. I can even conceive occasions when
men like Jawaharlal might specially go to remove misunderstandings.
Let us wait for such a time.
C.F. Andrews expected here on 18th inst.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1494

145. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
[AS AT] S EGAON,

June 13, 1936
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

I have written to Mangaldas3 during the free time I now have in
Madras. If there is time Mahadev will enclose a copy. I hope you did
not find the journey difficult. Finish your work soon and come back.
Do keep up the walks.
Blessings from

BAPU
S ARDAR VALLABHBHAI P ATEL
89 WARDEN R OAD , B OMBAY

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 195
1

Gandhiji visited Lancashire on September 26/27, 1931; vide “Talk with
Representatives of Cotton Industry”, 26-9-1931 and “Statement to the Press”,
27-9-1931
2
Bhulabhai J. Desai, leader of the Congress Party in the Legislative
Assembly.
3
Mangaldas Pakwasa, President, Bombay Legislative Council.

128

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

146. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 14, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

We arrived here1 at 8 a.m. The train was late. I have your letter.
My mind is there. But my body must be here till Monday for
Harijan’s sake. If the weather is good, I hope to be with you on
Tuesday morning about 7.30 a.m. I shall have taken milk on the way.
I understand about Lilavati. I do not know who will be with me if any
at all. We shall see. Do not worry. I quite see that till the things have
shaped, you will have to be in Segaon. ‘Be careful for nothing.’If
someone is at the gate to show me the exact way to take, it would be
good. It may be Govind or Dasrath—is that the other comrade’s
name? But it does not matter if no one can be spared.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Some fruits will go with this if the bearer... 2
From the original: C.W. 6348. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9814

147. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 14, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,

Kusum must have reached there by now. I do not remember if I
wrote to you of her wish to have perfect training in music from
Panditji. Alongside, she would like to earn something and undertake
some studies, if possible. Or, she might, for the present, give up the
desire to earn. Talk with her on the subject and then let me know. We
might arrange for her studies, but what is to happen there? You should
consider where, in view of her nature, her own good lies and guide her
and tell me what you propose. She is as tender as her name implies.3
1
2
3

At Wardha.
Illegible
‘Kusum’literally means a flower

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

129

In a single moment I could read her whole self on the day we parted.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.M./II. Also C.W. 8494. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

148. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
WARDHA ,

June 15, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,

We reached here yesterday morning. The weather is superb. The
clouds all the day and a cool breeze, not much rain yet to speak of. I
hope, if there is no rain in the morning, to leave for Segaon tomorrow,
though my hut is not quite ready yet. Things move slowly in villages.
But I know there will be no difficulty about getting a dry corner for
myself.
Rameshwari Nehru is with me. She travelled 3rd class with us all
the way. Of course 3rd class with me is no discomfort except for the
crowds that gather at every station. She had two nights with us in the
train. Her tour in Travancore was quite successful. She will be leaving
Wardha on Wednesday.
Kanti went to Poona and returns on Friday. Navin stayed behind
to learn the art of carving. He expects to be able to carve ivory-goods
like what I have sent you.
Ba had a sandal-wood box sent to her. It was no use to her. I
thought the best use was to send it to you either to sell or keep. It was
left with Navin to send by post.
I hope you are better and the weather has improved. You must
find a better place to go to in summer. From your descriptions Simla
seems to be none too good.
Love.
TYRANT

[PS.]
My weight on leaving Bangalore was 112 lb.!!! B.P. 156/90.
Quite good as the doctor said.
From the original: C.W. 3731. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6887

130

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

149. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
June 15, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,

It is a great thing for a rebel to own defeat. At last you have a
plethora of letters from me! Your humiliation delights me. But you
are not to think of making yourself sick in an attempt to overtake my
letters. Remember you are in Simla having calls on your time which I
have not.
Now to change the topic. You wouldn’t be an idiot if you had
guessed why I had chosen the brooches with flimsy pins. Your dense
head could not see that the purchaser or wearer belonging to the
exploiting class would have a solid gold pin put on in the place of the
flimsy one. The question is: is the carving of the brooch good or not?
Is it neat enough? I gave much time to the selection of the two
brooches. Most were loud. These two I thought might pass Your
Highness’s test.
Love.
T YRANT

[PS.]
It is raining now.
From the original: C.W. 3579. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6388

150. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 15, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

Your note. It is raining here well. I expect therefore that I shall
[not] be able to get out. 1 Yes, I shall bring the bhaji2 . And I can do
without it, too, for a time.
No more till we meet.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6349. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9815

1
2

For Segaon
Leafy vegetable

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

131

151. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
June 15, 1936
CHI. PRABHA,

Kanti is not here today. I saw your letter and opened it. I am
preserving it as you have permitted Kanti to read it. I shall not destroy
it till Kanti and Saraswati arrive on Friday. However, no one else will
read it.
I do not myself fancy Kashi. I gave the advice I did because it is
your duty to please Jayaprakash in such a matter. Now there is no
question of your going there since Harsubabu himself says no and
J.P. does not wish to displease him. Sitab Diyara is your Kashi for the
present, and all that you do there with understanding is of course your
education. Do acquaint yourself with the villagers. Do you pray alone
or do other women join you? It is surprising that there is none in the
village who can sing the Ramayana.
I shall go to Segaon tomorrow. Probably I shall go alone since
my hut is not yet ready. Perhaps Lilavati may accompany me.
My weight at Bangalore was 114 lb. and my blood pressure
156/110, which may be taken as satisfactory. Sardar is at Bombay.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3474

152. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 15, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,

Here are some of my thoughts. We should not run the school
from a rich man’s viewpoint, but have as teachers only those whose
motto is service. They should be satisfied with a maximum salary of
Rs. 15 a month and devote their whole time to it. To start with, there
should be one teacher for just one pupil of whatever age. The teacher
should prepare his own textbook and impart knowledge through the
use of the eyes and the ears and teach the pupil to use his hands for
wielding implements to make things. He should himself do what he
teaches. It would be better to have such a school in some village. As
132

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

for you, you have to make the beginning at the place where you are.
You can start with yourself. Accept pupils from middleclass families if
they agree to your terms. They must pay fees, but one should not
depend on this income while undertaking the work. You may start the
experiment only if you accept the idea whole-heartedly. You should
swallow only what you can digest.
If you understand this, this is what you should do for the
present. Put the thoughts before your associates. It is our dharma to
run the existing school if it pays its way but those parents who can
should pay the full fees.
I have put all these ideas before Nanabhai1 . He likes them but he
is himself so deeply involved that the changes suggested by me are
beyond his power. The help I used to get for Dakshinamurti has now
stopped.
You may ask me time and again whatever you want to. Kanu is
my responsibility. He will be under my supervision whether at Segaon
or at Maganwadi. He has my permission to live at Segaon. Hence if he
continues to stay at Maganwadi, it will have been his own decision.
Now that Kanti has gone to stay with Kaka to attend on him, Mahadev
will be left alone. If, on that account, Kanu is required to be with
Mahadev, that too will be left to his choice.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I have not been giving anything to Kanu.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8495. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

1

Nrisimhaprasad Kalidas Bhatt who conducted Dakshinamurti, an educational
institution in Bhavnagar
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

133

153. MESSAGE TO RAJPUTANA HARIJAN
SEVAK CONFERENCE
[Before June 16, 1936] 1
Hinduism is on trial today. Those alone can become true sevaks
who have faith in dharma and who have love for Harijans and are
prepared to dedicate themselves to the service of Harijans.
[From Hindi]
Gandhiji aur Rajasthan, p. 197

154. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS PODDAR
June 16, 1936
CHI. RAMESHWARDAS,

I want Parnerkar to visit the Delhi and Pilani dairies. He will, of
course, make arrangements about Dhulia before leaving. Anyway,
there the work is already well organized. After all we want to serve the
cow; if we could do it better by Parnerkar’s going to Delhi and Pilani,
it becomes our dharma to let him go. You may, therefore, release him.
The rest he will explain to you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 211

155. LETTER TO J. K. SHARMA
WARDHA ,

June 17, 1936
MY DEAR SHARMA,

You are in a hurry. Your business is to convert many. I am
pursuing the subject. All the letters so far received show that the
restriction is wholesome and necessary. They say khadi does not gain
by being exhibited alongside mill-cloth. It is not intended to
supplement the latter, it is intended to sup-plant it. Khadi has a
mission of its own. It is part of national education and it stands for
new and true economics at least for India.
1

134

The conference was held on June 16 and 17, 1936 at Nareli near Ajmer.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You are hasty in your criticism of khadi workers. They are
working in the light of their experience and for the sole good of the
poor. You should understand their viewpoint and difficulty before
criticizing them.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 88

156. LETTER TO DILIP KUMAR ROY
W ARDHA ,

June 17, 1936
MY DEAR DILIP,

Mahadev Desai gave me your letter and the correspondence
only yesterday. I glanced through the very interesting correspondence
between you and Raihana1 ! I have perhaps a theory of my own about
Krishna. I need not discuss it here as it is of no consequence. I hope
with you that we shall meet some day. Then we can usefully discuss
the Krishna legends and many other things of common interest. And
of course I should listen once more to your music.
Love.
M. K. GANDHI
Golden Book of Dilip Kumar Roy, p. 121

157. FRAGMENT OF A LETTER2
June 17, 1936
For me the whole of philosophy is contained in truth at any
cost.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

1
2

Raihana Tyabji
According to the source the addressee was an American woman.

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

135

158. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
June 17, 1936
BHAI THAKKAR BAPA,

I have the invitation from Palampur.
Send immediately the sum of Rs. 2,000 which Valunjkar has not
yet received. You can always take from him the detailed accounts, etc.,
that you would require. Do not let his work be held up.
The Bharuch matter must have been decided. Karsandas has
thrust on me the responsibility for the building at Vile Parle. A
meeting of the Trustees has to be called. I hope Kishorelal has written
to them. We may hold the meeting on hearing from you about the
convenient date.
I shall of course be going to Wardha for meetings and such
other work, even though I am settled in Segaon.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1159

159. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
S EGAON,

June 17, 1936
CHI. MRIDU,

You have not acknowledged my long letter. I do expect a
detailed letter from you.
I had sent a reply to your telegram. Now you may come over
any time you feel like it. I have returned to Segaon. But that does not
matter in the least.
The occasion for writing this is the enclosed letter. I am under
the impression that you need good women workers. The writer of the
enclosed letter belongs to a good family in Rajkot. She does not have
much education, but she is efficient and experienced. She can be
useful in taking care of the girls and so on. Think about the possible
ways in which you can use her. She is needy. But that is of secondary
importance. Think over it and write to me if she can be useful or not.
Do not think that she has to be absorbed somewhere because I have
136

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

recommended her. As I had to do something for this widow, I am
asking you first because you had asked for women workers.
You must be receiving happy news from Vienna and Oxford.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Write only to the Wardha address.
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11198. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

160. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
June 17, 1936
CHI. VIJAYA,

Well, I am in Segaon, though residential arrangements are yet to
come. The work cannot be completed on account of the rains. I would
be prepared to put you up at Maganwadi or in the Mahila Ashram if
you came over. You can visit me from there. Even Ba has not yet
come to stay with me. You will have to wait if you must stay with me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7061. Also C.W. 4553. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

161. LETTER TO H. L. SHARMA
June 17, 1936
CHI. SHARMA,

I have two letters from you. I am sorry to hear the news from
your family.1 Do treat the patients if you have now gained confidence
in your treatment or leave them to themselves; let them carry on with
the routine treatment.
Come over here to discuss your own future and Draupadi’s2 too.
That I am living away in Segaon should not matter. It is possible to
make daily trips from Maganwadi. The air is pretty cool here, the
rains have been copious and have not stopped even now. What was the
1
2

The addressee’s elder brother’s only son had passed away.
Addressee’s wife.

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

137

total expense of your travels? Did you achieve what you wanted? Is
there still anything else that you might have learnt there? Did you
acquire sufficient knowledge of anatomy-physiology?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsh, p. 253

162. A MESSAGE
June 17, 1936
Every Hindu organization can easily do the following five
things:
1. Root out untouchability, treating it as a sin.
2. Take up the service of the cow, which at present suffers from
slackness due to ignorance, and pursue it with intelligence.
3. Serve Daridranarayana to the extent possible by adopting
khadi.
4. Serve the villagers by buying the goods produced by them.
5. Do away with such bonds of caste as are destructive of
dharma.
M. K. G ANDHI

[From Hindi]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

163. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

June 18, 1936
MY DEAR AGATHA,

This is from my new abode—a proper village which may be
defined as a place with no post-office, no store for food-stuffs of
quality, no medical, comforts and difficult of access in the rainy
season. I could add many more adjectives but these should be enough
for the time being. This is not to say that I am suffering any
discomfort. I have told you this to let you understand the nature of
[the] task before me.
138

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I appreciate all you say about news. Jawaharlal is trying to cope
with the problem. Let us see what is in store for us during the next six
months.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1495

164. LETTER TO MURIEL LESTER
June 18, 1936
MY DEAR MURIEL,

You have overtaken me. When young Kalelkar described his
meeting you, finding you malaria-ridden and asking me to insist upon
your treating yourself decently, I wanted to write at once. And lo and
behold, your first letter came and now second with Dorothy’s.
You are ever before my mind’s eye and often in our talks but
pressing work here prevents my writing as often as I would to friends
and co-workers living away from India.
And how am I to insist on your taking care of yourself? If your
body is the temple of the Holy Ghost and not a den of thieves, you
must rest when the body needs it. ‘Be careful for nothing’is a
wonderful admonition. If we would adopt it in daily life, we would
not, in fearful hurry to achieve results, neglect our bodies and then be
incapacitated for further work. You have no business to have malaria
in England. God be with you.
Well, I am at last in Segaon in the cottage Jamnalalji has built for
me. I do not know what the future has in store for me. But for the
moment my headquarters are in Segaon. The postal address must be
Wardha. There is no post-office here. You cannot but a stamp here as
you cannot but many things.
I dare not write to Dorothy separately: There is no time.
My love to you, her and all the other members of the family.
Kamalnayan, Jamnalalji’s son, will be soon with you. You will
mother him and put him where he will be taken care of.
Yours

BAPU
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

139

[PS.]
Your article1 will receive prompt attention.
From a photostat: G.N. 3807

165. TELEGRAM TO PADMAJA NAIDU
W ARDHA ,

June 19, 1936
PADMAJA NAIDU
C/O PALACE, BOMBAY
PRAYING

SUCCESSFUL

OPERATION.

LOVE.

B APU
From the original: Padmaja Naidu Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library

166. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

June 19, 1936
MY DEAR REBEL,

Your complaint about my faint writing is quite legitimate. Nor
are you the only complainant. I must improve village ink. Village
[ink] and village paper is not a combination I can yet advertise. You
will admit, however, that if I give in, improvement may become
impossible. Rebels like you must persist in their rebellion and you will
soon find that even the tyrant will have to mind his manners. Perhaps I
shall have to give up using this thin paper. Tell me if you were able to
read this without the magnifier
You have certainly done well over your sales. I have answered2
your objection about the shoddy pin for the brooches. If the answer is
not satisfactory, they will, I am sure, exchange the brooches for any
article you may fancy of the same value.
1
“Tissington Well-dressing”, written by the addressee and Dorothy Hogg,
appeared in Harijan, 5-9-1936.
2
Vide “Letter to Amrit Kaur”,15-6-1936

140

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I hope you got the sandal-wood box that was separately sent to
you. You must get out of this chronic overwork even if it is to be by
living in Segaon. I can build you a hut according to your plan. You
can drive straight from the station reaching Segaon at the most in 11 / 2
hours. You should do it in one hour. You must not drive if it is
raining or if it is just after a heavy downpour.
My hut has thick mud-walks, twice the breadth of ordinary
brick-wall. The mud is rain-proof. I think you will fall in love with the
hut and the surroundings.
Mira is quite well.
Love.
T YRANT
From the original: C.W. 3732. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6888

167. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
[June] 1 19, 1936
MY DEAR CHILD,

You are naughty. You will write on all the sides of your letter
without giving any direction as to where you began writing in all the
margins. Why don’t you add one more sheet? But no more of
grumbling. I sent Saraswati and Kanti as I thought you would like to
see them.
Strange! I have a letter from Maria 2 this week. She shows
considerable anxiety about you.
It must be torture to K. that he cannot do just what he thinks is
best for want of funds. We have however to take comfort from the
fact, God does not always allow us to do what we think is the best. I
suppose we don’t always know what is best.
Do not make the children write to me. Let them write when they
are led to do so of their own free will.
I hope you have completely recovered from your illness. How I
should love to see you as hale and hearty as you were when we first
1

From the contents it is evident that this letter was written after the letter to
the addressee dated May 18, 1936; vide “Letter to Esther Menon”, 18-5-1936. On
June 19, 1936 Gandhiji was in Wardha.
2
Anne Marie Petersen.
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

141

met. You were such a picture of health that I had thought you to be
incapable of getting ill.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: No. 138. Courtesy: National Archives of India.

168. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
June 19, 1936
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I was about to send you the enclosed1 for your information
when I got your letter yesterday.
I am glad Ranjit is better. He must take care of himself.
I do not want you to issue any special statement about the
omission of [a] woman from your cabinet.2 I think that this omission
does not stand on the same footing as the inclusion or exclusion of
others. None of us had either the courage or the wish to exclude [a]
woman altogether from the W. C. If this is the correct interpretation of
your attitude, it should be made clear if the occassion offers itself.
As to the others I am sorry you feel still sore about what happened. You swallowed the Bhulabhai pill in the interest of the cause.
And surely at the very first discussion I had said before you had
mentioned the thing that there must be Socialists in the cabinet. I
mentioned also the names. What however I want to emphasize is not
who mentioned whom but that all were actuated by no other motive
than that of serving the common cause.
So far as I remember, what you have sent me is not the statement
I had seen. What you have enclosed I seem to see for the first time.
Please ask Dr. H. if he issued any other. Even the one you have sent
me is at variance with what the Doctor used to tell me. I take no exception to the expression of his views faulty, in my opinion, though they
are. My complaint is that he said one thing to me and said another
thing [for] publication. You are at liberty to show this to Dr. H.
I hope you are well. I was following your Punjab hurricane tour
not without anxiety.
Love.
BAPU
1
2

142

This is not traceable.
Vide “Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru”, 29-5-1936
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[PS.]
If the writing is too faint to read, please throw away the letter.1
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1936. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Also A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 178-9

169. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 19, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,

I have your letter. As for the school, do only what you think
proper. I am in no hurry. I have no doubt about our duty, but there
may be some practical difficulties.
Tell me whether you can now read my writing correctly.
I am enclosing two letters. Kanu sees me every day almost.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8496. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

170. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
June 19, 1936
CHI. AMTUL SALAAM,

I accept the blame for sending Sharma to you. Please forgive
me. I shall not repeat such a mistake. Do you ever listen to anyone’s
advice? Why then should you act upon Sharma’s? Once you revered
him, followed his advice and even used to say that it had done you
good. That you do not now like his advice shows how times are
changing.
I did not suggest to Kanti to go to Kakasaheb. He got ready for
the work because he learnt that Kakasaheb was in need of his services
and assistance. I like his readiness. It will indeed do him good. Kanti
will come to me when Kakasaheb’s work is finished or when Kanti
wishes to come.
1

In the original this is written at the top of the letter.

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

143

I see that you have already written to your brothers and your
brother’s wife. I see no politeness in it. I see in it your stubbornness.
But who can persuade you? A man like me has only to watch helplessly whatever you do. Do come over when you have your holiday.
My health is fine and I am in Segaon. I expect Saraswati has come
today. The letter1 for the children accompanies this.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 338

171. LETTER TO MANGALA PRASAD
AND OTHERS
June 19, 1936
CHI. MANGALA PRASAD, JOGIRAM, BANWARI LAL,

I was glad to read your letters.
Mangala Prasad’s words run into each other, and his writing can
well improve. Jogiram’s is shaky and Banwari Lal’s good. Mangala
Prasad and Jogiram should write better.
All three of you should pay full attention to your studies and
account for every single minute. Live in harmony with each other and
observe simplicity.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1085

172. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
June 19, 1936
CHI. LILAVATI,

Don’t you be in a hurry. Mahadev has personally seen how
difficult it is to accommodate anyone here just now. Should we not at
least have a bathroom and a latrine? These just do not exist. The rains
continue, workmen do not turn up as required, and even the mason
does not appear so that the culvert is half built. Now I doubt whether
we shall have things done within the next month or two. Besides, you
1

144

Vide the following item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have not cured your cough so that you can think of coming over.
This is not good. Are you indulging your taste for chillies and oil? I
have heard a lot about your fondness for tasty foods. Even here, you
missed your spicy things, didn’t you? Conquer this weakness. Things
are difficult here. In such matters you should not go by what Ba does.
That, however, is another thing. Get over your cough by taking salt in
warm water and other things.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9577. Also C.W. 6549. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

173. G. O. M. OF GUJARAT
It was in 1915 I first met Shri Abbas Tyabji. Wherever I have
gone and there has been a Tyabji, he or she has made it a point to
come to me as if I was a member of that great and numerous family. I
do not know what the binding tie specially was, except perhaps that
the distinguished judge to whom the family owe their fame had
befriended me in 18901 when I had come to India from South Africa
as an utterly unknown man, possibly an adventurer as some had
thought. Not so however thought Badruddin Tyabji and several others
I can name.
But I must come back to Abbas Mian of Baroda. As we
embraced each other and I looked into his face, it reminded me of the
late Justice Badruddin. That meeting laid the foundation of a life-long
friendship. I found in him not merely a friend of Harijans, he was
himself one. When at Godhra2 long ago I had, to the surprise of my
audience, invited them to have an anti-untouchability conference in
the evening at the untouchable quarters, Abbas Mian was there taking
as lively an interest in the Harijans as any staunch Hindu. Yet he was
no ordinary Mussalman. He had given lavishly to the cause of Islam
and was supporting several Islamic institutions. And yet he had never
any designs upon Harijans. His Islam had room for all the great
religions of the earth. Hence he looked at the anti-untouchability
campaign with the fervour of a Hindu. And I know that he retained
1
2

Actually 1896; vide “Letter to Jamnalal Bajaj”, 5-5-1936
In November 1917.

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

145

that fervour to the end of his time on this earth.
The fact is he never took up anything half-heartedly. There
were no mental reservations about Abbas Tyabji. At a moment’s
notice he answered the call of the Punjab.1 At his age and for one who
had never known hardships of life it was no joke to suffer
imprisonments. But his faith conquered every obstacle. He put to
shame many a young man by his ability to live with an infectious
smile the simple life of the Kheda peasant, to share their simple food,
travel in all seasons in their rude carts. I have never known him
complain about inconveniences which could have been avoided. “His
was not to reason why, his was to do and die.” He who had once the
power as Chief Judge of imposing the death penalty and exacting
obedience showed an amazing capacity for submitting unquestioningly to discipline. He was a rare servant of humanity. He was a
servant of India because he was a servant of humanity. He believed in
God as Daridranarayana. He believed that God was to be found in
the humblest cottages and among the despised of the earth. Abbas
Mian is not dead, though his body rests in the grave. His life is an
inspiration for us all.
Harijan, 20-6-1936

174. IS KHADI ECONOMICALLY SOUND?
If by the question is meant whether khadi can compete with
Japanese ‘fent’or even with the cloth manufactured by the Indian
Mills in price, the answer must be emphatically ‘no’. But the negative
answer would have to be given about almost everything turned out by
man-power as against labour-saving power. It would have to be so
even with regard to goods manufactured in Indian factories. Cloth,
iron, sugar made in factories require State aid in some form or other
to withstand foreign competition. It is wrong to put the question in
that way at all. In the open market a more organized industry will
always be able to drive out a less organized one, much more so when
the former is assisted by bounties and can command unlimited capital
and can therefore afford to sell its manufactures at a temporary loss.
1
Abbas Tyabji was one of the five Commissioners appointed by the
Congress Sub-committee to study the evidence and prepare a report on the Punjab
disorders in April 1919.

146

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Such has been the tragic fate of many enterprises in this country.
Any country that exposes itself to unlimited foreign competition
can be reduced to starvation and therefore subjection if the foreigners
desire it. This is known as peaceful penetration. One has to go only a
step further to understand that the result would be the same as between
hand-made goods and those made by power-driven machinery. We
are seeing the process going on before our eyes. Little flour mills are
ousting the chakkis, oil mills the village ghani, rice mills the village
dhenki, sugar mills the village gur-pans, etc. This displacement of
village labour is impoverishing the villagers and enriching the monied
men. If the process continues sufficiently long the villages will be
destroyed without any further effort. No Chengis Khan could devise a
more ingenious or more profitable method of destroying these
villages. And the tragedy of it all is that the villagers are unconsciously but none the less surely contributing to their own destruction.
To complete the tale of their woe let the reader know that even
cultivation has ceased to be profitable. For some crops the villager
does not cover even the cost of seed.
With all these deadly admissions, what do I mean by saying that
khadi is the only true economic proposition? Let me then state the
proposition fully: “Khadi is the only true economic proposition in
terms of the millions of villagers until such time, if ever, when a better
system of supplying work and adequate wages for every able-bodied
person above the age of sixteen, male or female, is found for his field,
cottage or even factory in every one of the villages of India; or till
sufficient cities are built up to displace the villages so as to give the
villagers the necessary comforts and amenities that a well-regulated
life demands and is entitled to.” I have only to state the proposition
thus fully to show that khadi must hold the field for any length of
time that we can think of.
The present pressing problem is how to find work and wages for
the millions of villagers who are becoming increasingly pauperized, as
anyone who will take the trouble of going to the villages can testify
for himself and as is amply proved by contemporary expert evidence
that people are becoming poorer economically, mentally and morally.
They are fast losing the will to work, to think and even to live. It is a
living death that they are living.
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

147

Khadi supplies them with work, tools and a ready market for
their manufactures. It gives them hope where but yesterday there was
blank despair.
“Then why has khadi made so little progress if it is such a
hopeful proposition?”—the sceptic asks. The answer is the progress
khadi has made in terms of the millions, though little in itself, is
comparatively the largest of all the other single industries. It
distributes yearly the largest amount as wages among the largest
number of wage-earners in the villages with the minimum of overhead charges and every pice practically circulates among the people.
This can be verified by anyone who would study the figures published
by the A.I.S.A.
Khadi has to work against almost settled prejudices among the
villagers, against unscrupulous competition without State protection,
and against the prevalent opinion of so-called experts in the science of
economics, against even the demand of khadi wearers for
progressively cheaper khadi. It is thus largely a question of the
education of the villagers and the city-dwellers in the true economics
for this land of tears. These transcend all religions. Hindus, Mussalmans and Christians who live in the villages suffer from the same
disease of poverty and want. If there is a difference it is only one of
degree.
I therefore maintain that though yard per yard khadi may be
dearer than mill-made cloth, in its totality and in terms of the villagers
it is the most economic, practical proposition without a rival. Khadi
may be interpreted to include other village industries for the purposes
of a thorough examination of the proposition.
Harijan, 20-6-1936

175. LETTER TO S. AMBUJAMMAL
June 20, 1936
CHI. AMBUJAM,

I have your letter and fruit. I shall certainly write to you when I
need fruit from your end. Generally, Bombay is nearer. But
sometimes oranges are almost unavailable in B[ombay] when sweet
limes of the South are most welcome.
I am glad Father is feeling better.
148

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I know... 1 too needs the hip-baths and sitz-baths. Women are
more easily cured by sitz-baths than men.
I would like you both to join the Kodambakkam Committee. I
would like you as such to visit the Institution at least once a week
when you are in Madras and inspect the work and make inspection
report. You should come in touch with the inmates.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: C.W. 9608. Courtesy: S. Ambujammal

176. LETTER TO N. R. MALKANI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

June 20, 1936
MY DEAR MALKANI,

I have not-heard from you for a long time as it seems to me.
How is the school going? Is Rukmini causing further trouble?
Please pass the enclosed2 on to Thadani. The article gives
another method [of] interpreting the Vedas. Is his theory making any
headway?
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 918

177. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
June 20, 1936
CHI. AMTUL SALAAM,

I have your letter. What can one say to a person with endless
flights of fancy? You would of course want to see Saraswati; that is
why I wrote to you as I did. It was neither to test you nor to tempt
you. I cannot send Saraswati there. It involves a lot of expense. This I
would certainly call moha 3 .
1
2
3

Two words here are smudged in the source
This is not available.
Infatuation

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

149

There would be some sense in your coming to Wardha, but none
in Saraswati going there. She will stay here long if she likes to.
The Harijan children who know the Urdu script should be
encouraged to keep it up.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 337

178. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
June 20, 1936
CHI. LILAVATI,

There was no need to have taken a vow to give up chillies but
now that you have, do keep it. I wish you to improve your speech.
You have formed a habit of uttering thoughtless words. This is not
right. It is better to accept as true that sense which the listener derives
from our words. By this we learn to speak less and that too thoughtfully. I am eager to have you here but I do not want you to suffer the
inconveniences. Moreover, there is another consideration. If I bring
you here on the 24th or 25th and go away on the 27th leaving you
behind, you will not like to spend the week at Segaon without me.
There you have the opportunity to serve Ba if nothing else. Talk
less.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9578, Also C.W. 6550. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

179. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
June 20, 1936
CHI. AMRITLAL,

I have already disposed of your letter orally.
Many persons are now likely to interfere in the kitchen affairs,
but be patient in dealing with them.
Do not try to restrict the group favouring spiced food. Say no to
150

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

none.
Get the required khadi and have it stitched into garments.
By all means refuse to spare time for Manu if you cannot afford
it. It will be right for her to stick to the sitar.
Take care of Bharatan’s food.
Improve your health by taking the diet you need.
I expect Gajanan has recovered. Ask him to write to me about
his health as also about the Sindi work.
Tell Bhanubapa that the Nasik work must not be delayed even
for a day because of laxity on my part. The Government office is a
new unforeseen factor.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10717

180. LETTER TO ATAR SINGH AND OTHERS
June 20, 1936
CHI. ATAR SINGH, PRABHU DAYAL AND JAYAKARAN,

I was glad to have your letters. Write a good hand, work hard
and gain proficiency in the craft.
Atar Singh asks about the benefit of observing silence. It brings
peace, conserves energy and leaves more time for meditation.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
The boys knowing the Urdu alphabet should not forget it.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1083

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

151

181. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

June 22, 1936
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

This is another batch of cuttings 1 , of more importance perhaps
to you than to me. My right hand is resting.
No more, since we meet soon.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1936. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.

182. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
June 22, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,

Three rupees have been paid. You have already had letters from
Segaon which I leave for a week on 27th to be in Wardha for several
meetings.
It has been raining daily off and on. Nothing serious. There was
no damage here or none to be noticeable.
Of course, only an idiot could expect customers to cure their
purchases of defects. I fully expected to make the brooches
presentable to the royalty adding the extra cost entailed in doing so.
However, it is something that you thought at last of the right thing.
I see nothing wrong in your trying to give to Arjan the best of
your knowledge and experience. Ba did not want the sandal-wood
casket. Now for profuse apologies.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3733. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6889

1

152

These are not traceable.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

183. LETTER TO DR. B. PATTABHI SITARAMAYYA
June 22, 1936
DEAR DR. PATTABHI,

You have a brilliant boy, quite like his father. But he does not
seem to have been able to carry the whole joke to you. When I saw
Mrs. P. decked literally from top to toe, I said: “Now I know why
Father was afraid to come to Bangalore.1 For the sin of this barbarity
is more on Father’s shoulders than Mother’s.” Now you may take the
joke as seriously as you like. I quite agree with your philosophy.
Wives and grown-up children must have vacation from their husbands
and parents.
Love.
M. K. GANDHI
Incidents of Gandhiji’s Life, p. 226

184. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
June 22, 1936
BHAI MUNSHI,

I have both your letters. I have not yet been able to read the
articles. I am returning with minor changes the one you wanted. My
idea about the office would be a little different. If you come to hold
the same view it is as well. But if I set out to incorporate it in your
article, the language would be changed and the article would take a
different form. I do not think it necessary. Let your own idea get
around. I am writing my own article and it may be ready by Tuesday.
You may, if you like, withhold the article in question till then. And
after seeing my article if you want to revise it you may do so.
However I see no need for that. Anyway do what you think best.
Consult Sardar if you like.
I understand what you say about Premchandji.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7602. Courtesy: K.M. Munshi
1

Gandhiji and Vallabhbhai Patel, who were in Bangalore some days
previously had asked the addressee to come over. He did not go.
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

153

185. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
June 22, 1936
CHI. PRABHA,

I got your letter just now. You are very clever. There is still
nothing certain about your coming and you ask me about Segaon.
After you have got the leave you can ask me telegraphically or if you
are not impatient you can ask me after you have arrived.
It is not proper that you keep falling ill. You will certainly not
get Father’s disease, provided you take milk and fruit regularly, garlic
with vegetables or curds, regular exercise, hip-bath and friction-bath.
You will never fall ill if you do this.
My letter bore the postmark of the following day because I
wrote it after the clearance of the mail.
I am in good health and take the usual food without any
change. The weight was 112 ib. when I left Bangalore.
I shall be going to Maganwadi on the 27th for a week.
The mail is delivered in Segaon once a week, so you should
address your letter to Maganwadi, Wardha, only. I get my mail every
day from there.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Mirabehn is well. Balwantsinha and Munnalal are with me. Ba is
at Maganwadi.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3475

186. LETTER TO JAYANT E. PATEL
June 22, 1936
BHAI JAYANTBHAI,

If you cannot leave your wife and if you are truly free from lust,
you can be a true teacher to her and make of her an accomplished
woman. If your brahmacharya is only theoretical, then it is better
given up.
154

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I cannot give you more guidance than this.
JAYANTBHAI E. P ATEL
C HAMPAKLAL BROS.
143 P RINCESS S TREET
S AI BHUVAN, B OMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

187. LETTER TO SURENDRA
June 22, 1936
CHI. SURENDRA,

Which of your questions have I not answered? I have the
impression that I did not leave out anything. Maybe, since I didn’t
have your letter before me when I wrote to you, something was left
out. When this happens you should write again. I do not have your
previous letter with me.
Now I have stopped using Nepalese paper. I have yet to solve
the problem of the ink. You must let me know without fail when the
handwriting becomes illegible.
You must observe this rule for the diet. When the body requires
a certain thing you must give it that as a medicine. At that time you
should not count the annas and pies. Milk must be considered
indispensable.
Balwantsinha has decided to stay in Segaon. He will go
anywhere I send him. Let us see whether he will settle down here or
not. I hope he will.
Today I shall be completing a week here. There is no question
of my not liking it, as my mind was always here.
How shall I address you? I cannot write “Mr.” Every Surendra
can be addressed as “Shri’. “Maharaj” was certainly written in jest
but that appellation is being used there, isn’t it? “Sadhu” Surendra
seems good. “Brahmachari” is also all right. Now have your choice.
Mirabehn will go to stay at her chosen place, Varoda, on Wednesday.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

155

188. LETTER TO SHOBHALAL GUPTA
June 22, 1936
BHAI SHOBHALAL,

The test through which Hinduism is passing...1 They alone can
be true servants who have faith in dharma and genuine love for
Harijans and who are prepared to sacrifice themselves in the service of
Harijans.
S HOBHALAL GUPTA
C/ O HARIJAN S EVAK S ANGH
AJMER
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

189. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
June 22, 1936
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

That nature cure is not effective for all ailments is admitted by
all medical practitioners.
I see no need for permitting the use of turmeric and other
condiments unless specifically required although anyone may take
them as medicine.
Unboiled milk cannot be the cause of mucus, but you may start
taking neem leaves; you may also try garlic. Hip-bath is of course
beneficial. You should take it in the morning before eating anything.
Then take a walk and drink milk an hour later.
Sharma’s book is not entirely reliable.
You may certainly go to Europe if it can improve your health.
For my part I have no other interest. But you should follow only the
dictates of your own conscience. Never mind what I think about it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4286
1

156

Omission as in the source
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

190. LETTER TO RAMESHWARI NEHRU
June 22, 1936
DEAR SISTER,

I was awaiting your letter. Although you suffered discomfort in
coming to Segaon, the matters discussed at the end were essential. God
will grant you the strength to follow your duty. Keep writing to me.
You will be glad to learn that Ghanshyamdas’s telegram says he
has had satisfactory interviews with the Maharaja1 . Let us watch
developments.
... 2 must be very happy.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 7983. Also C.W. 3079. Courtesy:
Rameshwari Nehru

191. TELEGRAM TO G. D. BIRLA
WARDHAGANJ,

June 23, 1936
GHANSHYAMDAS BIRLA
GUEST HOUSE
TRIVANDRUM
RECEIVED .

GOD

BLESS

YOU . 3

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 7975. Courtesy: G.D. Birla

1

Of Travancore
A word here is illegible.
3
This was in reply to the addressee’s telegram which read: “. . . Had two
interviews with His Highness. Promised satisfactory results next Birthday
Anniversary.” Vide also the preceding item.
2

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

157

192. LETTER TO G. N. KANITKAR
June 23, 1936
DEAR BALUKAKA,

You did well in writing to me. I know the value as well as the
1
limitations of oil lamps and even
. But I thought that some
patriotic firm might put a dynamo light [in] the place free of charge
or at a trifling cost. I should defend the use of electric lighting if it
can be done on my terms.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G ANDHI
S HRI S EWANANDJI
341 S ADASHIV
P OONA C ITY
From a photostat : C.W. 967. Courtesy : G.N. Kanitkar

193. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

June 23, 1936
CHI. MRIDU,

Our letters crossed. You must have received my letter. I have
destroyed yours. I have read the statement. I do not approve of it. The
language does not describe the actual state of affairs. I do not wish to
make such a remark intentionally. There is no time to analyse it.
Some time, when both of us are free and you are eager, I shall
explain. But it is not as if by issuing this statement you have
disobeyed my order. You were perfectly entitled to issue the
statement. Nor do I think you have intentionally committed any
mistake in doing so. It does not also diminish my love in any way.
You have all the right to seek my advice.
It appears to me from your letter and also from Jawaharlal’s
public statement that there is a difference between what I had told you
and what you have said. If that is so, then let me know so that if there

1

158

A torch or flame.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

is any lapse of memory on my part, I would make amends or reaffirm
what I have said.
Blessings to brothers.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11199. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

194. LETTER TO RAJENDRA PRASAD
June 23, 1936
BHAI RAJENDRA BABU,

I delayed replying to your letter till Ceresole arrived. He tells me
that all the difficulties have been resolved. That is why I did not hurry.
If there are still some loose ends you can tell me on coming here. I
shall leave here on the 27th. I am now using my left hand, having
overworked the right one.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: C.W. 9875. Courtesy: Rajendra Prasad

195. DISCUSSION WITH PIERRE CERESOLE AND
CHRISTIAN MISSIONARIES 1
[ About June 23, 1936] 2
[PIERRE CERESOLE]: Religion which should bind us divides us. Is it not a sorry
spectacle that whilst people of various denominations find no diffculty in working
together all day in hearty co-operation, they must disband when the time for prayer
comes? Is religion then meant to divide us?
Must it be allowed to become an expression of conceit rather than of a desire
to be of service? I want some sort of religious communion between men of different
faiths.

[ GANDHI]: Quite possible, if there is no mental reservation.
1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekely Letter”. Pierre Ceresole, founder
of Service Civil International—a moral equivalent for war—met. Gandhiji at Segaon
with two other missionary women.
2
Ceresole arrived in Wardha presumably on 23-6-1936; vide the preceding
item.
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

159

[P. C .] But a friend of mine, a great humanitarian worker, believes that but for
evangelism he should not have taken up his mission work. He gets the driving power
from communion with Jesus, he says, because Jesus was always in communion with
God.

[ G.] The greatest trouble with us is not that a Christian
missionary should rely on his own experience, but that he should
dispute the evidence of a Hindu devotee’s life. Just as he has his
spiritual experience and the joy of communion, even so has a Hindu.
Dr. Ceresole seemed to have no doubt about this, and he said that the broadest
view of Christianity seemed to him to have been presented by Frank Lenwood; whose
book Jesus—Lord or Leader, deserved to be better known than it is. “He says he has
the greatest respect for the personality of Jesus, but he thought he might respectfully
criticize him.”
[MISSIONARY LADY]: I have not had the time or desire to evangelize. The Church
at home would be happy if through our hospital more people would be led to Christian
lives.

[ G.] But whilst you give the medical help you expect the reward
in the shape of your patients becoming Christians.
[M.L.] Yes, the reward is expected. Otherwise there are many other places in
the world which need our service. But instead of going there, we come here.

[ G.] There is the kink. At the back of your mind there is not
pure service for its sake, but the result of service in this shape of many
people coming to the Christian fold.
[M.L.] In my own work there is no ulterior motive. I care for people, I
alleviate pain, because I cannot do otherwise, The source of this is my loyalty to
Jesus who ministered to suffering humanity. At the back of my mind there is, I admit,
the desire that people may find the same joy in Jesus that I find. Where is the kink?

[ G.] The kink is in the Church thinking that there are people in
whom certain things are lacking and that you must supply them
whether they want them or not. If you simply say to your patients,
‘You have taken the medicine I gave you. Thank God, He has healed
you. Don’t come again,’ you have done your duty: But if you also
say, ‘How nice it would be if you had the same faith in Christianity as
I have,’ you do not make of your medicine a free gift.
[M.L.] But if I feel that I have something medically and spiritually which I can
give, how can I keep it?

[ G.] There is a way out of the difficulty. You must feel that what
you possess your patient also can possess but through a different
160

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

route. You will say to yourself, ‘I have come through this route, you
may come through a different route.’ Why should you want him to
pass through your university and no other?
[M.L.] Because I have my partiality for my Alma Mater.

[ G.] There is my difficulty. Becuase you adore your mother,
you cannot wish that all the rest were your mother’s children.
[M.L.] That is a physical impossibility.

[ G.] Then this one is a spiritual impossibility. God has the whole
humanity as His children. How can I limit God’s grace by my little
mind and say this is the only way?
[M.L.] I do not say it is the only way. There might be a better way.

[ G.] If you concede that there might be a better way, you have
surrendered your point.
[M.L.] Well, if you say that you have found your way, I am not so terrifically
concerned with you. I will deal with one who is floundering in mud.

[ G.] Will you judge him? Have you people not floundered? Why
will you present your particular brand of truth to all?
[M.L.] I must present to them the medicine I know.

[ G.] Then you will say to him, ‘Have you seen your own doctor?
You will send him to his doctor, ask the doctor to take charge of him.
You will perhaps consult that doctor, you will discuss with him the
diagnosis, and will convince him or allow yourself to be convinced by
him. But there you are dealing with a wretched physical thing. Here
we are dealing with a spiritual thing where you cannot go through all
these necessary investigations. What I plead for is humanity. You do
not claim freedom from hypocrisy for the Christian Church?
DR . CERESOLE: Most of us believe our religion to be the best and they have not
the slightest idea of what other religions have revealed to their adherents, Dr..... 1 has
made a careful study of the Hindu scriptures, and he has observed what Hinduism gives
to the Hindus.

[ G.] I say it is not enough for him to read the Song Celestial or
the Koran. It is necessary for him to read the Koran with Islamic
spectacles and the Gita with Hindu spectacles, just as he would expect
me to read the Bible with Christian spectacles. I would ask him: ‘Have
you read the Gita as reverently as I have or even as reverently as I
have read the Bible?’I tell you I have not read as many books on
1

Omission as in the source.

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

161

Hinduism as I have about Christianity. And yet I did not come to the
conclusion that Christianity or Hinduism was the ONLY way.
Gandhiji discussed the instance of Mr. Stokes—now Shri Satyanand—who
was, in his early years in India, nearly killed for preaching Christianity to the
Pathans, but who in a truly Christian spirit secured his assailant’s reprieve, and who
in the later years said to himself, ‘My faith in Jesus is as bright as ever, but I cannot
deliver the message of Jesus to the Hindus unless I become a Hindu. Unless I make the
Hindus better Hindus I shall not,’ he said, ‘be true to my Lord.’1
But then, wondered the missionary friends, what exactly should be
missionaries’attitude?

[ G.] I think I have made it clear. But I shall say it again in other
words: Just to forget that you have come to a country of heathens,
and to think that they are as much in search of God as you are; just to
feel that you are not going there to give your spiritual goods to them,
but that you will share your worldly goods of which you have a good
stock. You will then do your work without a mental reservation and
thereby you will share your spiritual treasures. 2 . The knowledge that
you have this reservation creates a barrier between you and me.
[P.C.] Do you think that because of what you call that mental reservation the
work that one could accomplish would suffer?

[ G.] I am sure. You would not be half as useful as you would be
without the reservation. The reservation means that you belong to a
different and a higher species, and you make, yourself inaccessible to
others.
[P.C.] A barrier would be certainly my Western way of living.

[ G.] No, that can be immediately broken.
[P.C.] Would you be really happy if we stayed at home?

[ G.] I cannot say that. But I will certainly say that I have never
been able to understand your going out of America. Is there nothing
to do there?
[P.C.] Even in America there is enough scope for educational work.

[ G.] That is fatal confession. You are not a superfluity there. But
for the curious position that your Church has taken, you would not be
1
Satyanand Stokes’s letter clarifying his position was published in “Weekly
Letter” in Harijan, 15-8-1936.
2
Italics in the source.

162

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

here.
[P.C.] I have come because the Indian women need medical care to a greater
extent than American women do. But coupled with that I have desire to share my
Christian heritage.

[ G.] That is exactly the position I have been trying to counter.
You have already said that there may be a better way.
[P.C.] No, I meant to say that there may be a better way fifty years hence.

[ G.] Well we were talking of the present, and you said there
might be a better way.
[P.C.] No, there is no better way today than the one I am following.

That is what I say is assuming too much. You have not
examined all religious beliefs. But even if you had, you may not claim
infallibility. You assume knowledge of all people, which you can do
only if you were God. I want you to understand that you are
labouring under a double fallacy: That what you think is best for you
is really so; and that what you regard as the best for you is the best for
the whole world. It is an assumption of omniscience and infallibility. I
plead for a little humility.
Harijan, 18-7-1936

196. ADVICE TO VISITORS1
[After June 23, 1936] 2
To appreciate all the advantages of walking you must read
Thoreau. I have made it a rule that no one, unless he is completely
disabled, should be encouraged to come here in a bullockcart—not
even Jamnalalji with his heavy body. In fact I told him that trudging
to Segaon and back was for him the best possible remedy to reduce
his paunch and to add a few years to his life. And no one should fight
shy of it, seeing that European ladies who have seldom walked on
roads waded through mire with their shoes and stockings on!
Harijan, 25-7-1936

1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”.
Vide the preceding item; the visitors were two missionary ladies who
accompanied Ceresole to Segaon.
2

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

163

197. LETTER TO S. AMBUJAMMAL
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

June 24, 1936
CHI. AMBUJAM,

Perhaps the work of begging from the parties named in the
enclosed is not beyond you. I do not feel like writing to them. I know
you are shy. But you must shed your shyness if you are to render
service for which God has made you. You may take Janammal 1 with
you if you like.
But you will not hesitate to say no if you find the mission
beyond you.
Hope Mother is doing well and Father is keeping up the
improvement.
Love
BAPU
From the original: Ambujammal Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

198. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
June 24, 1936
CHI. PREMA,

There is no harm in undertaking the work for the duration of
the Congress session.2
Your complaint regarding the paper is justified.3 I hope this
paper will satisfy you.
You should go on educating public opinion about flour, rice
and oil. Though these articles cost more, they are cheap in the end.
We are building up a new economics. Conditions differ from country
to country. And, moreover, the rich and the poor have their own
economics. Please, therefore, do not lose heart.
1

Addressee’s niece
The addressee had agreed to organize a women’s volunteer corps for the
Faizpur session.
3
Gandhiji had used inferior hand-made paper and ink. The superior paper
supplied by the addressee had been given away by Gandhiji to another person.
2

164

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I know about bajra. However good the seed may be, if the soil,
water, etc., are not suitable, the seed loses its virtue.
Here is a four-line Foreword. 1
[Be] Khudai Khidmatgar is a book that ought to be translated in
all the languages of India. It has already come out in Gujarati, Urdu
and Hindi. It will probably be translated into other languages also. It
is in the fitness of things, therefore, that a Marathi translation is being
published; and the greater cause of pleasure is the fact that the
translation has been done by a dedicated woman worker. She deserves
compliments for her commendable venture. I hope that the people of
Maharashtra will read with loving devotion the lives of the two Khudai
Khidmatgars or Servants of God.
M. K. G ANDHI2

To be an atheist till one comes to have faith in God is as
reasonable as one’s trying to cremate the body of a man who has
entered samadhi, assuming him dead till one can be sure that he is
alive.
If bhavana 3 and shraddha4 can be distinguished from each
other, one benefits by joining the prayer with a sincere heart even in
the absence of bhavana, in order to acquire shraddha.
If we are living among primitive people, instead of propagating
our religion we should propagate the religion of morality. As and
when the doors of their hearts open, they may choose whichever
religion they like. We shall have given them general information
about all the religions.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10382. Also C.W. 6820. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

1

To Mahadev Desai’s Be Khudai Khidmatgar, which the addressee had
translated into Marathi; for Gandhiji’s “Foreword” to the English original, vide
“Interview to The Natal Mercury”, 30-9-1908
2
The Foreword is in Hindi
3
Feeling of devotion
4
Firm faith
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

165

199. LETTER TO PARIKSHITLAL L. MAJMUDAR
June 24, 1936
BHAI PARIKSHITLAL,

I do not remeber to have told Sardar that the Godhra Ashram 1
was running very well. I told him that the Ashram was working and
had not been closed. However, you certainly did well in informing me
of the situation. Do what you think right.
You do not say whether the decision about Bharuch is correct. I
have not been able to understand the effect of the decision. Is that the
whole resolution, or is there anything more to it?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4038

200. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
June 24, 1936
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

I have your letter. You ought to recover your health. If a course
of injections does it, well and good. You must find out why your wellknit frame broke down. Believe me it is impossible that the observance
of these niyamas2 can affect health; but dangerous consequences do
follow from a lapse in the observance of yamas,3 etc. For example, the
greatest lapses are to be found in the observance of brahmacharya. It
being a bodily penance, the consequences of its faulty observance
must adversely affect the body. The same is true of aswada4 . I
mention these only as illustrations. It is difficult to say where you
might have committed a slip. The detection of your fault, if possible,
can now benefit only to the extent of proving helpful in your
treatment.
1

Harijan Ashram, managed by Vithal L. Phadke
Any self-imposed religious observance, dependent on external conditions
3
Any moral duty or religious observance; the yamas are usually said to be
ten, but their names and given differently by different writers. According to
Patanjali’s Yogasutras, they are ahimsa, truth, non-stealing, brahmacharya and nonpossession.
4
Control of the palate
2

166

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Why is not your mind composed? To one constantly thinking of
non-violence it should be like a myrobalan held in the hand.
Sharda1 may have a change if the climate does not suit her.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.G. 19

201. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
June 24, 1936
CHI. SHARDA,

It is a lame excuse that you had nothing to write about.Many
boys and girls engaged in work which is not to my liking keep on
writing to me.
Your argument is not worthy of your intelligence. You say that
your body being delicate you would like to develop your intellectual
faculties to make a living. But you do not see that mental work can
have an adverse effect on health. It is a lowly idea to acquire
knowledge for the sake of earning money. It is a also a mistaken
notion that you will be a burden. Why don’t you realize that you are
going to be a burden if, in spite of acquiring the highest knowledge,
you have to remain bed-ridden? I would certainly be happy if you
acquired knowledge. I would not grudge it if, like Bal, you studied in
a college and acquired a high degree. But certainly not at the cost of
your health. Your primary duty is to improve your health. This is of
course my view. What matters is your own bent. Now that you have
started, continue writing to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9971. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

1

Addressee’s daughter

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

167

202. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI AND SUMITRA
GANDHI
[WARDHA ]1

June 25, 1936
CHI. NIMU,

I am having quite a good discussion with Ramdas these days. He
is very keen that you should come over to Wardha, look after Kanam
and other children and pursue whatever studies you can. Ramdas
himself will not be able to remain fixed at one place. He will have to
keep moving. You should therefore come over as soon as you can.
You will of course have to stay where Kaka Saheb decides. In no case
at Segaon. Nanavati is with Kaka and so you will feel at home. It will
also help the children. If you stay at Segaon, I should like it very
much indeed. But Wardha is a more suitable place for the work you
have to do. We will be here at least upto July 1. After that nothing is
certain. The visit to the Frontier Province is not quite certain.
Blessings from

BAPU
CHI. SUMI,

Your letter is very good. If you could go walking up to
Mussoorie, 1 would count it as excellent. But if such a long walk is
likely to tire you, do not go. Kanam’s letter is enclosed.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

1

Though the letter is written on a printed letterhead with the address: ‘Birla
House, Mt. Pleasant Road, Bombay’ Gandhiji was at Wardha on this date.

168

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

203. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

June 26, 1936
MY DEAR REBEL,

The length of the kerchief is 13 / 4 of the length of this paper and
width 1 1 / 2 . I have no measure-tape or rod here.
Yes, you were free to keep the sandal-wood box for yourself. Ba
had expected as much.
There is not likely to be heavy rain at the end of July. If there is,
you will walk part of the way. It will be perfectly pleasant. It is only a
certain class of people who die many times before their death. Thank
heaven you do not belong to that class. Are you not the lion brand?
No more today.
Love.
TYRANT

[PS.]
Mira went to her hut on Wednesday at Varoda, 1 1 / 2 miles from
here.
From the original: C.W. 3580. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6389

204. LETTER TO NAN MENON
June 26, 1936
MY DEAR NAN,

I had hoped to send you a long chatty letter but I never got the
time. Now Esther sends me a reminder. So here is this note to tell you
that though I cannot write, I can never forget you. I hope both of you
are happier than before.
Love and kisses to both of you.
BAPU
My Dear Child, p. 122

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

169

205. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
June 26, 1936
CHI. MARY,

Your letter. The receipt of the cheque and the credit-note for
£800 disturb me. I do not know how to overtake this work. God will
open the way.
I know Margaret was looking forward to the Assam work.
The Christian sadhu must be a real sadhu. You will tell me more
about him, if there is more to tell me.
You must fight this terrible reduction in weight. You should
discover the cause and remove it, even if it means another vacation.
Are you taking balanced diet? Do tell me what it is.
I am glad you have stumbled upon weavers.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Mira is now in Varoda, 11 / 2 miles from here.
From a photostat: G.N. 6064. Also C.W. 3394. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

206. LETTER TO G.V. KETKAR
June 26,1936
DEAR FRIEND,

I have just finished reading your note.
I do not remember the incidents referred to by you.
If you do not strain the meaning of whatever I said, your
interesting research does not affect my general position. But if there is
in your opinion a real conflict between my remark and your
discovery, I have no hesitation in saying that your discovery should be
170

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

preferred to my remark
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
G.V. K ETKAR
‘MARHATTA ’OFFICE
568 NARAYAN P ETH , P OONA 2
From a photostat: G.N. 7866. Also C.W. 983. Courtesy: G.V. Ketkar

207. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 26, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,

After I had half torn up Prema’s letter, which I am enclosing, I
remembered that I should be sending it to you. Hence I joined the
pieces.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8497. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

208. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
June 26, 1936
CHI. AMTUL SALAAM,

What do you want me to withdraw? You say, “You should not
have sent Sharma at all. I am not going to follow his instructions.”
But I committed the mistake of sending him. Should I not now ask to
be forgiven for my mistake? I wrote1 “You used to revere Sharma”;
and you say, “ I worship no man.” Now tell me how we should
manage to agree with each other. I, on my part, revere everyone,
including you. I thought you revered Kanti, you worshipped
Draupadi. What will the worshipper of God do if he does not worship
His creation? Will not one holding me in reverence revere my Kanti?
But how can I cope with you? You presume to be a veritable
storehouse of knowledge. What do you care for my grace or
anybody’s? It is doubtful if you would care for His grace.
1

Vide “Letter to Amtussalaam”,19-6-1936

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

171

To be stubborn means ‘to refuse to be persuaded’. Neither by
the mother, nor by the brother, nor by a companion, nor even by a
poor adopted father like me. Now tell me, who is merciless? You or I?
You do not discard your own pride and kiss Bapu’s feet. Only when
you sincerely reduce yourself to zero and think that not you but God
is the Doer of all things, will your self reveal itself to you. At present,
however, your pride has been leading you away. Why don’t you
persuade yourself that the work you have is enough and be content?
Why should you take up any new work that Bapa might entrust to
you? Your agreement with me is that you will do only what I tell you
to do. When did you have my permission to take up new work?
Give the enclosed letter1 to Lilavati when she returns from BadriKedar. Krishnan Nair will learn in due course. The letter 2 for the
students accompanies this. Saraswati has gone to the Mahila Ashram.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 378

209. LETTER TO DEVNANDAN AND OTHERS
June 26, 1936
CHI. DEVNANDAN, RAMEHAR, RAMSWARUP, SHRIRAM AND RAMVRIKSHA,

I have your letters. You did well in writing. Out of the four3 the
best handwriting is Devnandan’s, the worst Ramvriksha’s. The least
the learners can do is to perfect their handwriting. If the handwriting
does not improve now it will be extremely difficult to improve it later.
I write a wretched hand and it can hardly be improved in my old age.
And just as we should maintain a neat and tidy hand, so should
we keep our heart good and pure. This is the easiest thing to attain.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1084
1

This is not traceable.
Vide the following item.
3
A correction in the original suggests that the fifth name was added as an
afterthought.
2

172

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

210. LETTER TO SHANNODEVI
June 26, 1936
CHI. SHANNO DEVI,

What can I say to you? Your energies will certainly be misspent
on the daily.
From being a teacher you what to become an editor. Although I
am your well-wisher, how can I give my blessings to a venture which
does not interest me at all?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

211. BARBAROUS IF TRUE
A correspondent sends me the following paragraph 1 from The
Hindu’s own correspondent dated 8th June at Ramnad:
At a meeting of the Devacottah Panchayat Board held on Saturday at the
Board’s office,... the usual procedure was adopted, viz., the Harijan member
entered the meeting hall, signed his signature in the attendance register,
receded to the exit door of the meeting hall, and stood all the while till the
close of the meeting...

I take the following2 from his letter enclosing the cutting from
The Hindu:
I am sending herewith a cutting from The Hindu....
The Panchayat Board referred to is in the heart of Chettinad and is
supposed to be composed of Congressmen or men who had been elected quite
recently on the Congress ticket to advance through local boards and
panchayats the aims and objects for which the great Indian National Congress
stands.
It is shocking to read that a body like this should in this twentieth
century has the audacity to compel a Harijan member to stand out of the
meeting hall in spite of the fact that he is himself a member of that body duly
1
2

Of which only excerpts are reproduced here.
ibid

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

173

elected and representing a section of the community and thereby enjoying all
the privileges to which such a membership entitles him...

I do not know whether my correspondent is correct in saying
that the Devacottah Panchayat is composed of Congressmen. If it is, so
much the worse for the Congressmen concerned, for apart from the
manifest injustice of the conduct adopted by the Panchayat towards its
Harijan members, Congressmen are pledged opponents of
untouchability. But whether the Panchayat is composed of Congressmen or not, the conduct of the Board can only be characterized as
barbarous, even as it would be of the Legislative Assembly if it made
its member Rao Bahadur Rajah stand in a corner whilst its proceedings
were going on.
But The Hindu correspondent lets the public know that the
procedure is usual for the Devacottah Panchayat. It is to be presumed
that the occasion for noticing the usual event has been supplied by the
fact that untouchability just now looms large especially in the South.
Even if the practice of making Harijan members stand in a corner by
certain panchayats is usual, public opinion should make it impossible
of repetition. Evidently, however, the paragraph does not appear to
have caused any public stir. The editorial columns of the Southern
Press seem, too, to have taken no notice of the incident which is ugly
enough to demand strong condemnation. Thanks are therefore due to
my correspondent for lifting The Hindu paragraph from oblivion.
Not only is the practice barbarous, I think it is also illegal. The
Harijan member has a legal right to demand a seat side by side with
his fellow members. It would be no answer to the charge that the
Harijan member was party to his own insult. I can well understand
poor Harijans in remote parts of India being too timid to assert their
rights. And for Harijans, Devacottah is unfortunately remote enough.
Anyway, it is the duty of the Provincial and the local Harijan
Sevak Sanghs to investigate the matter and take such steps as may be
proper to avoid a repetition of the insult offered not merely to the
Harijan member but the whole society, if it is jealous of the rights of
the least among its members equally with the greatest.
Harijan, 27-6-1936

174

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

212. HARIJANS AND ELECTIONS
The talk I had on my return journey from Bangalore, with Shri.
A. Kaleswara Rao and Shri V. Kurmiah, a Harijan lawyer, has been
published in The Hindu. Friends have written to inquire whether the
correspondent of The Hindu has correctly reported the conversation.
They also ask me to give my opinion in my own language.
The Hindu correspondent’s version is substantially correct so far
as it goes. It omits the preliminary part of the talk. In answer to Shri
Kurmiah’s question I said I adhered to the written advice I had sent to
Shri Gavai of Nagpur, M.L.C. “But what are we to do if we are not
one undivided party, and if individuals or groups are not strong
enough to act unaided?” asked Shri Kurmiah.
“Then,” I said, “naturally you will ally yourselves to that party
which gives you the greatest advantage. “In my opinion such a party
is undoubtedly the Congress. It is pledged to the removal of
untouchability root and branch; the largest number of Congressmen
are to be found among workers engaged in doing anti-untouchability
work. But you will do well not to participate in any council boycott or
civil resistance campaign, if the Congress is driven to any such thing
in the pursuit of its clearly defined goal of complete independence.
And this I say, if only because the vast majority of Harijans are hardly
equipped for such a fight. Your immediate goal is to vindicate your
status of absolute equality which is denied to you in the sacred name
of religion by the so-called sanatani Hindus. You ask as if you were
only an isolated individual. But all Harijans are not like you. An
ocean separates you from the fellow-Harijans in education and
understanding. If I am true to you, I must speak only in terms of the
vast mass of illiterate Harijans in whose name Harijan members of
councils will speak.”
This is the purport of the conversation and it represents my
considered opinion. The reader will be interested to know that this was
the advice I tendered Harijans even when I launched on the first civil
resistance campaign and prevented Ashram Harijans from either
joining the campaign or the exodus from the Ashram.
Harijan, 27-6-1936

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

175

213. LETTER TO N. R. MALKANI
WARDHA,

June 27, 1936
MY DEAR MALKANI,

My whole heart goes out to you. You ought to tear yourself
away from Rukmini for a time and [rest your nerves a bit.]1
I fancy that the trouble with Bapa is partly due to the tension
under which you are living.
Why should you worry about boys from Delhi or the provinces.
If you succeed in training the boys you have so that they become
good citizens and wage earners, your fame will spread and you will
have to reject applications for want of space.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 922

214. FRAGMENT OF A LETTER
June 27, 1936
My Europe is in Segaon. It is difficult even to wait till
September. 1
The Hindu, 1-7-1936

215. LETTER TO A HARIJAN WORKER23
June 27, 1936
Hinduism is not opposed to humanism. Untouchability being a
disease peculiar to Hinduism, our work in this regard should be
confined to Hindus alone. There can be no such expression as a
Muslim untouchable. The problem you have to face is due to the
peculiar local conditions. If someone who was a Harijan yesterday is a
Christian today, we need not take note of such conversion. To us he
1

The portion in square brackets is very faint in the source.
A correspondent from Calcutta had enquired whether the Press report about
Gandhiji’s sailing in September for Europe was correct.
3
Of the Punjab
2

176

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

remains a Harijan so long as he receives help from us. Of course if a
person is educated it is a different matter. For instance, if someone is
getting aid for his college education he ceases to be entitled to it on
his conversion.
Yours,

M. K. G ANDHI

[From Hindi]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

216. TALK WITH A FRIEND1
[About June 27, 1936] 2
We all know that conditions of life in a village are particularly
hard in the monsoon. Why then should I not begin with that rich
experience and wait until conditions were better? I had been nursing
the thought of going to live in a village ever since I had heard of the
experiences of Timappa Naik and his friends, and I tell you that now
that I am there, I grudge having to come here even for a single day. I
came this week because it would have been too much to expect all the
members of the Working Committee and other friends to tramp to
Segaon in this weather. But I may tell you that though I am here, my
mind is there.
Harijan, 11-7-1936

217. LETTER TO GITA BAJAJ
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

June 28, 1936
3

CHI. GITA ,

You should live up to your name. Widowhood and the married
state are not of our choosing. No one has control over life and death.
1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
From the reference to the Working Committee meeting it is evident that the
conversation took place at Wardha where Gandhiji had gone to attend the meeting on
June 27 and stayed on for a week.
3
Widow of Girdharilal, Jamnalal Bajaj’s nephew who had met with an
untimely death
2

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

177

Hence remain calm and dedicate yourself to service. I just got the
news from Jamnalalji. Write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Gandhiji aur Rajasthan, p. 204

218. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 29, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

This is merely a love letter. Nothing to say except that I am
praying for your relief. Do not make any experiments is the lesson to
be learnt from this new experience. 1
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6350. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9816

219. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM BAVISHI
WARDHA ,

June 29, 1936
BHAI BAVISHI,

Unless I write this postcard, writing to you may be delayed. God
will surely lead you to where your mind is fixed. You will find no one
to advance you money until your experiments succeed. The Bhangi
quarter incident is surprising.
To you both,
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 126. Also C.W. 4751. Courtesy:
Purushottam Bavishi

1

In Bapu’s Letters to Mira, Mirabehn says: “As far as I can remember, I had
tried eating a wild plant panwar, as vegetable, which the villagers had recommended.”

178

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

220. LETTER TO PYARELAL
W ARDHA ,

June 29, 1936
CHI. PYARELAL,

Today is a silence-day. And then there is your letter. I have not
been able to see all the letters. I have glanced through your original
letter. I had been waiting for your letter every day. I had intended to
write you a letter of reprimand. But I could not find the time. Then
your letter came and I was relieved of the anxiety.
Is it clear to you that my letter did not mean what you had
understood it to mean? I shall know this when I read your letter in
full. I shall read the papers enclosed with it and shall write you
another letter if necessary. I must have your letters regularly.
I have understood about Sushila. Only God knows to what
extent I can win her heart. I will certainly try. I have always tried to
draw her to me. As in the case of others, in Sushila’s case also my
attempt has been to be a mother and a father. But I was not aware that
she had greater need of a father. In my future efforts I shall
remember this. I shall be willing to keep her at Segaon if she can
carry on there, and I shall take work from her to my heart’s content.
This is of course my aspiration and yours. But there is no question of
my imposing my aspiration and yours on her. Let her do only as
much as she wishes. I shall be ready from my side.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I shall definitely go to Segaon on the 6th if not on the 5th.
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

221. LETTER TO BALWANTSINHA
June 29, 1936
CHI. BALWANTSINHA,

Your letter was up to my expectations. Munnalal should have
got well by now. He is not very restless, is he? I am sending a bottle of
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

179

milk. He should drink as much as he can and you can drink the rest
or make it into curds. Do return the bottle. I shall send some milk
tomorrow, too.
I understand what you say about the well. Let us be patient. All
will be well.
Your work is indeed progressing splendidly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1885

222. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 30, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

If there is no satisfactory clearance, why not castor oil or Epsom
salt. If you need any other opening medicine, I can send it. Shall I
send any vegetable from here?
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6351. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9817

223. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
WARDHA ,

June 30, 1936
CHI. PRABHA,

I destroy your letter, but why does it need to be destroyed?
Your time-table shows that you sleep very little. Why can’t you
sleep soon at night? Do you worry about anything? You should go to
bed uttering Ramanama. I see that you don’t sleep during day-time
either. You should have some sleep during the day also. It will be
good if you take more milk. I follow your point about Patna. It seems
to be your destiny not to be able to live with Jayaprakash and serve
him. At Segaon either Balwantsinha or Munnalal cooks for me. Both
of them insisted on living there. My food continues to be what it was,
i.e., what you used to cook. I continue to take garlic and onions. The
weight is 112 lb. At the moment I am in Wardha and shall go to
Segaon on Saturday or Sunday. Mirabehn is at Varoda. It is a mile
180

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and a half from Segaon. She is alone. When I go this time Lilavati
might perhaps accompany me. My programme at Segaon so far has
been writing letters and seeing visitors. I dispense medicines to the
patients who turn up. How can I say what will happen next? We have
there a goat and a cow. Cow’s milk is for Mirabehn.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3477

224. LETTER TO BALWANTSINHA AND
MUNNALAL G. SHAH
June 30, 1936
CHI. BALWANTSINHA AND MUNNALAL,

I shall find some other remedy for the worms. All my thoughts
are with you.
I am again sending the milk today. It is no trouble. Yesterday
too I sent it of my own accord. I have not met Kanchan 1 so far; she
might come today.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]

2

You may use Jamnalalji’s portion, and Nanavati may use Ba’s.
Hurry up with the weaving shed as soon as the skies are clear. What
more need I say in the matter? Fill up the vacancy that might occur.
Here too there is sure to be some vacancy. The person who has to do
the work should find out what must be done.
From a photostat of the Hindi: C.W. 6995. Courtesy: Munnalal G. Shah. Also
G.N. 8299

1
2

Munnalal’s wife
The postscript which is in Gujarati is written on the reverse of the letter.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

181

225. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
July 1, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

Yours is a good report. It is raining here. I am going to try to
come on 5th. 6th is the real date.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6352. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9818

226. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
WARDHA ,

July 2, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

Do not try to come here unless you feel quite up to the mark
and the day is fine. Mohanlal is going to the bazaar to get bhaji for
you and if it is available it will be sent. If the bearer does not bring
bhaji from here, try Segaon.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6353. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9819

227. LETTER TO NARAYAN SWAMI
July 2, 1936
DEAR FRIEND,

Pressure of work has prevented me all these days from thanking
you for all the care with which you attended to the arrangements of
our stay in Nandi and Bangalore. While I am thankful to the State for
the generous hospitality extended to me and my party, I know that
our comfortable stay had not a little to do with your careful
stewardship.
Yours sincerely,

NARAYAN S WAMI
BANGALORE
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

182

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

228. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
[July] 1 2, 1936
CHI. MUNNALAL,

See that Balwantsinha does not fall ill. For the present, follow
Mirabehn’s instructions.
I understand the trouble caused by the strap. Only wait and
watch where you can do nothing. Diwanji may help if he can. We shall
see what can be done when I come. I am sending the milk.... 2
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Kanchan, Hiramani3 and Bhai4 came to see me today.
S JT. M UNNALAL
S EGAON
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8602. Also C.W. 6994. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

229. MESSAGE TO “INDIAN OPINION”
July 2, 1936
The Editor of Indian Opinion asks me to send a message for the
Diwali number of the paper. How can there be any Diwali—festival of
lamps—for one who has a Holi—an all consuming fire—burning in
his heart? How can one celebrate Diwali when one’s ears are filled
with the sighs of the millions of the living dead in this country? All I
can think of saying to the readers of Indian Opinion is this: Celebrate
Diwali by all means, but don’t forget the skeletons in India. Set apart
a share for them first.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4853
1

The source has “June” which obviously is a slip. It is evident from the
contents that this was written after the letter to the addressee dated June 30, 1936;
vide “Letter to Balwantsinha and Munnalal G. Shah”, 30-6-1936
2
The source is damaged here.
3
Addressee’s brother’s daughter
4
Addressee’s brother
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

183

230. LETTER TO MUNNALAL SHAH
[Before July 3, 1936] 1
CHI. MUNNALAL,

This man will bring sulphur if available. Smoke away the
sulphur for about an hour. I am sending a spray pump and also some
liquid Flit if available. You may be knowing how to use Flit. If not, we
will use it when I come there. And then, what right have I to advise
you when you are prepared to put up with the pest. But I will certainly
go there and find some remedy for the irritation. It should be easy for
you to discover a remedy. Have you not studied chemistry?
Why have you stopped taking milk? At present both of you
should take it. Reduce the quantity of cereals.
There is nothing about the Mahar affair in today’s letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 8601

231. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
WARDHA ,

July 3, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

I hope you found everything in order in Segaon. I am making a
desperate effort to reach Segaon on Sunday. Yes, I read Mrs. Sanger’s
speech. Most leaders have gone. It was an anxious time.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6354. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9820

1

184

From the contents; vide “Letter to Munnalal G. Shah”, 3-7-1936
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

232. LETTER TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
July 3, 1936
MY DEAR SUBHAS,

I have just received your letter. I hope to be able to write to you
as frequently as I hear from you. I know what it means to prisoners or
detenus to receive letters from friends.1
I am asking Mahadev to see that Harijan is sent to you every
week.
If it is of any use, you may inform the authorities that any views
you may express on non-political matters, I have no desire to publish
unless permission is given thereto.
Love.
M. K. GANDHI
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

233. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
July 3, 1936
CHI. MUNNALAL,

I am sending the milk as usual, as also sulphur, a Flitsprayer and
a bottle of Flit. We shall use the sulphur when I come but use the Flit
right now. Climb on a ladder or a pile of planks and spray it into the
thatch twice or thrice a day. Send back the bottle when the liquid is
used up. We shall fill it again.
Ba will not come; Lilavati may. Most probably I shall come on
Sunday if there is no rain. But then as He wills.
I understand what you say about the Mahar. Have the labourers
started coming?
To you both,
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8600. Also C.W. 6996. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah
1

The addressee was in Darjeeling jail.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

185

234. LETTER TO PYARELAL
W ARDHA ,

July 3, 1936
CHI. PYARELAL,

I am sending you this brief note in order not to keep you
without a letter. I have received your letter only today. But I am so
deep in work that I have not yet found the time to read your letter.
Perhaps I shall be able to read it only when I go to Segaon. A lot of
people are coming and going. Do I not know your feelings? Do not
think that your dreams will never become a reality. You must proceed
on the assumption that they will come true.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

235. FOR KHADI-WEARERS
Here are two extracts 1 from a longish letter from a Bihar
correspondent:
I have a complaint against you. I am a habitual khadi-wearer. I have been
using khadi since its first appearance.... If I ever be obliged to give up khadi
due to my poor circumstances, I shall be much pained. And the present
unexpected increase in its prices without proportion will, I fear, drag me to
that verge.... This will, I think, bring about the total collapse of the khadi
movement.
I am told that you desire to pay more to the poor spinners... But from
whose pockets?... It will certainly be death to poor khadi-wearers if they are
obliged to give up an ideal for which they stood and bravely fought... Your
present decision is a great blunder. I fear by this you mean to give the
movement a decent burial.

The following2 is taken from a U.P. correspondent:
...Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru has so much minimized the importance,
necessity and utility of khadi that many staunch khadi-wearers are placed in a
1
2

186

Only excerpts are reproduced here.
Only excerpts are reproduced here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

fix and the weaker believers have got a secure shelter behind Panditji. The
Congress has also relaxed the rigidity in the use of khadi and you seem to be
finding solace in your determined silence. Would you just guide us and let us
know our duty under the present circumstances ? Another difficulty lies on
account of the existing organization of the supplying source of khadi, the AllIndia Spinners’Association. Under the present conditions khadi is becoming
dearer and dearer and its supply is growing less and less. The independent and
individual khadi producers have been almost debarred from producing even a
yard of khadi. The rules and restrictions seem, firstly, unreasonable, secondly,
almost impossible to be followed, and thirdly, they are applied in an
objectionable way and not in the spirit they might have been stipulated by
you... How do you justify the restrictions imposed on the private khadi
producers who have been compelled to abandon their production?

There is a similar complaint from C.P. National Scouts. Pandit
Jawaharlal Nehru was, as has been made clear by him, misreported. 1
In common with the other believers in khadi, till the country has
attained its freedom he thinks khadi to be a vital necessity. His doubt
about its economic value has a place, if at all, only when independence
is achieved and industrialization on a vast scale takes place in the
country. Surely no wise man will give up khadi now for fear of its
being overwhelmed by industrialization which may or may not
envelop India in the far-off future. The restrictions on private
producers are intended as well in the interests of artisans, especially
the spinners, as the buyers. If they are removed the market will be
flooded with spurious khadi resulting in spinners being put out of
work and the buyers being deceived. If there is irregularity in the
working of the regulations, attention of the Secretary should be drawn
to it and it will be set right without delay.
The increase in prices is the only question that demands satisfactory answer. It should be remembered that when khadi was not half
as good as it is now and when there was much less variety, it was much
dearer than under the new scale and there was hardly any complaint
against the prices then ruling. Whilst the buyers have been benefiting
all these many years, the spinners had till now practically no benefit
whatsoever in the shape of rise in wages. They were dumb and
helpless. They could not declare a strike against the Association. In
the very nature of things, they could not combine, being so scattered
for the betterment of wages or anything else. They were in such need
1

Vide “A False Alarm”, 6-6-1936

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

187

of even PIES that they could not make any effective protest. If now the
conscience of a few of us has begun to rebel against the wretchedly
low wage given to the spinners, we deserve help from the buyers who
have hitherto enjoyed the privilege of reduction in prices. The
difficulty of poor buyers is obvious. But the value of khadi lies in its
social and moral value. If the khadi buyers understand the
implications of khadi, they will not complain of rise in prices, if and
when it is conclusively shown, as it can be in the present instance, to be
due to the increase in the wages of the spinners concerned. If they
have the will they will discover many ways of making up for the
increase they might have to bear in the purchase of khadi. But this
they will do if they have burnt their boats and resolved never to use
any other cloth but khadi so long as they are in India. If they leave an
escape-door, they will make use of it on emergency. Invention comes
generally from necessity. If the correspondents had made up their
minds that for them there was no other cloth but khadi, they would
not have written as they have done but, like the very large number
who are no whit better off than these correspondents, they would have
accommodated themselves to the slight increase that has taken place in
the price of khadi.
At the same time let me comfort the correspondents by giving
them the assurance that every care is being taken to make the increase
as slight as possible for the poor lovers of khadi. Let them too peruse
the reports from Rajendra Babu and the Secretary, A.I.S.A., Tamil
Nad, on the great success that is attending the new experiment in
giving unsolicited increase to spinners in their wages. If khadi-lovers
will have patience, they will find that, if the price of khadi has slightly
increased, there has been corresponding improvement in the quality
and durability of khadi.
Harijan, 4-7-1936

236. INFANTICIDE OF GIRLS
It is difficult to believe that even today a cruel inhuman custom
like infanticide of girls is prevalent in this unfortunate country. But,
the letter that lies before me forces me to believe it. In the village
Amarpur, in Bhagalpur District, Bihar, an association to oppose such
infanticide among Rajputs has been formed. The secretary of this
188

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

body has written a very sad letter in this regard. A few excerpts1 from
it are given below.
Dharma teaches us that all souls are one. Plurality, being
momentary, is only an illusion. Nationalism, too, teaches us this same
lesson. We do not think of ourselves as Rajputs, or Biharis, Punjabis
and so on. We consider ourselves Indians and we believe ourselves to
be one nation and persuade others to believe so. Therefore whether
from the point of view of religion or of patriotism we are one; the
responsibility of the misconduct of any one falls on all of us. For this
reason we are all responsible for the infanticide of girls among
Rajputs, whether we are Rajputs or from any other community. Had
we not been indifferent to one another’s faults and troubles,
infanticide of girls could not have continued to this day. There is no
religious excuse and no need for this. There might have been a time
when the life of a Rajput was insecure and therefore the birth of girls
was considered calamitous. Today this excuse does not exist. It cannot
be said that the lives of Rajputs are less safe than those of the others.
War no longer threatens the Rajputs. Today a Rajput does not have to
sleep with his sword by his side. There is still a Rajput community, no
doubt, but there is nothing like the special dharma of the Rajputs.
Why then this infanticide of girls? Why should girls be a burden? The
burden certainly is on those who buy husbands for their daughters
and have to pay such exorbitant prices that they are all but ruined. It
is God’s mercy that they have not reached the stage of killing their
daughters. I am not aware if any excuse is put forward for the
infanticide of Rajput girls. If there is any such excuse, it is the duty of
this new association to throw light on the subject.
But even if there is a cause, it is our duty to remove it. No
excuse can be accepted for the continuance of this barbarous custom.
Public opinion must be mobilized to abolish this custom soon. The
burden of mobilizing public opinion must fall on the Rajput Kanya
Vadha Virodhini Sabha. This endeavour will not bear fruit by long
speeches nor by passing resolutions. A little of both these will be
needed. But the most important thing is a complete picture of the
facts. You should prepare a chart which should tell at one glance
where the infanticide of girls takes place and the number of girls
killed in the previous year. It may be difficult to obtain the number of
girls killed, it may even be impossible. The point is that all available
1

These are not translated here.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

189

information must be gathered and the Sabha’s message conveyed to
every home where there is a possibility of such an incident. Mere
publishing of the resolutions in newspapers will have no effect on the
parents who resort to this practice. It is important for the workers of
the Sabha to remember that they should not exaggerate facts in any
way. By ceaseless, sincere and peaceful efforts success in this cause
can be attained soon. This is what I think and believe.
[From Hindi]
Harijan Sevak, 4-7-1936

237. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
WARDHA ,

July 4, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

I still entertain the hope of coming tomorrow. No more just
now. I am in the midst of a meeting.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6355. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9821

238. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
July 4, 1936
CHI. MUNNALAL,

I am sending the milk and the Flit. I expect to reach there
tomorrow when I shall go into the Mahar problem.
Blessings to you both from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8599. Also C.W. 6997. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

239. LETTER TO KANU GANDHI
July 4, 1936
CHI. KANU,

Only half the work has been done. As you spoke to me of seven
annas I mentioned the same amount to Govind. He promptly gave me
190

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

four annas and will be giving the three now. I shall send the money
there. Debit it to the expense account and credit it on getting it from
there.
Ramjilal may take his meals there as he pays for his board.
Never mind the Flit tin. I shall enter it into the accounts here.
You may change the time for the recitation of the Ramayana
though we shall revert to the existing practice after I come... 1 it is
good to have accounts which suit the convenience of all.
Send the pair of tongs which was set apart exclusively for my
use, as also the griddle, and the saucepan if they have come back after
welding. They get Marathi newspapers there; please send one or two
of them. I should now have a red pen. For Munnalal a letter pad of
ordinary unlined paper. Enclosed please find [letters] for Krishnadas,
Kaka, Shambhu Dayal....2
I hope you are in very good humour.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Tell Mahadev, if he is there when you get this, that I don’t need
fruit.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXI

240. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
July 4, 1936
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I had not told Mahadev to write to you about the museum. I had
instructed him to write only about the other buildings. You might
remember that when I talked to you about my requirements I had
stated the need of Rs. 1,00,000 for the purpose of erecting the other
buildings. Later I included among them also the schools already
constructed although at the time of mentioning one lakh I had
excluded the school, for I had planned to use the amount for the other
buildings only. But the construction of the school has involved a
heavy expenditure which the Sangh is unable to meet fully. I had an
impression that you had already transferred some funds out of the
1
2

Illegible in the source
ibid

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

191

one lakh to Bachcharaj and Co. Now I learn that nothing has been
deposited there to this account. Hence I sent you a letter 1 at
Trivandrum which probably did not reach you. If any sum can be
drawn now from this amount it may be done.
You must have got the copy of my letter 2 to Dr. Moonje. What
has been settled with Parnerkar?
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 8020. Courtesy: G.D. Birla

241. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 6, 1936
MY DEAR REBEL,

Having returned to Segaon last evening I can deal with
correspondence.
How can a young man of 67 say from experience whether men
(for women I won’t be allowed to speak) become obstinate on old age
creeping in?
Yes, I would gladly forgo the pleasure of having Idiot talk to
me by post when she is attending to Malaviyaji who needs considerate
listeners like you. How I would love to see him rest for a year!But he
won’t. He will die-in harness. God bless him. Nevertheless he departs
from œ◊¸ dharma in refusing to rest when both mind and body need
to. You and I must not imitate him, though you are inclined always
like him to overdo things. You must recognize it as an unpardonable
weakness.
I shall find work for you in Bezwada if I know definitely when
and how many hours you will be there.
You must impose silence on yourself to give your poor throat
some rest. Do you know that a specialist has enjoined on Jawaharlal a
week’s complete silence on pain of having a complete breakdown.
Not even a whisper allowed. Will you listen? Or will you prove the
idiotic obstinate princess who will listen to no one? You will give me
1
2

192

Not traceable
ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the definite date of your coming. Mira is happy in her cottage. Her
village instinct is a marvel to me.
Love.
TYRANT

[PS.]
Encl. for Malaviyaji.1
From the original: C.W. 3581. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6390

242. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
July 6, 1936
CHI. MARY,

This is by return post. Nothing wrong in your getting registered
as a voter.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 6065. Also C.W. 3395. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

243. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
July 6, 1936
DEAR HENRY,

This will be presented to you by Kamalnayan Bajaj, the eldest
son of Jamnalalji. However much we may fight Great Britain, London
is increasingly becoming our Mecca or Kashi. Kamalnayan is no
exception. I have advised him to take up a course in the London
School of Economics. Perhaps you will put him in touch with prof.
Laski who may not mind guiding young Bajaj. Muriel has undertaken
to mother him.
Please treat this also as acknowledgment of your letter received
some time ago. I am trying to become a villager. The place where I
am writing this has a population of about 600—no roads, no postoffice, no shop.
Love to you all.
BHAI
From a photostat: G.N. 3053
1

This is not traceable.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

193

244. LETTER TO KAMALNAYAN BAJAJ
July 6, 1936
CHI. KAMALNAYAN,

I am sending herewith three letters of introduction which will
serve the purpose. Woodbrooke is in Birmingham. It is an excellent
institution. You should establish contact with these persons quite soon.
As I am writing this, I think I should send you a letter addressed to
Prof. Horace Alexander also. That makes four letters1 . Prof.
Alexander belongs to Woodbrooke. Write to me regularly. Listen to
everyone, but do what you consider best and what agrees best with the
hopes you raised in us when you went. There is no end of temptations
out there. Live up to your name 2 and, recalling its qualities, remain
untouched by the mire although surrounded by it, as does the lotus.
Then all will be well. Don’t delve beyond your depth and don’t
compete with anybody. Your potentiality will develop to its best if you
make good use of every moment. Study deeply the Ramayana and
the Gita, reading them every day. You will of course read the Gita in
the original but also keep with you a copy of Edwin Arnold’s Song
Celestial.
Blessings from
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3052

245. LETTER TO HORACE ALEXANDER
July 6, 1936
MY DEAR HORACE,

This will be presented to you by young Kamalnayan Bajaj, the
eldest son of Jamnalalji. I have advised him to join the London School
of Economics. But if you think of anything better, please guide him
likewise. In any case, I have asked him to put himself in touch with the
Woodbrooke school of thought. The rest I leave to you.
Love to you, Olive and all other friends.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1425
1
2

194

Of these only two are available; vide the preceding and the following items.
Kamalnayan literally means “lotus-eyed”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

246. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
July 6, 1936
CHI. AMTUL SALAAM,

I have your telegram and the two letters. In the matter of
Saraswati, I did what Kanti had suggested. I wired to you at Kanti’s
instance as you could have returned after seeing her although I was
afraid you would not be able to come. There was no question
whatever of Saraswati or Kanti going there. We shall now see what to
do when Saraswati returns.
What you write about Mahila Ashram is not at all proper. The
institution has been growing day by day and girls have had to be
refused admission. It is not right to say that Saraswati cannot stay just
because Rajkishori, for instance, could not. The reason for Saraswati’s
not staying was quite different. I don’t have the time to explain all
that.
I like the idea of your going through the operation during the
holidays. Viyogi Hari will tell you more. Kanti and Saraswati left only
yesterday for Trivandrum. Lilavati is with me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 339

247. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
July 6, 1936
CHI. NARAHARI,

I forgot to speak to you of one thing that I had intended. Nimu
wants to go and stay there. Here she has no opportunity for studies.
Besides, Sumitra would thus be under her supervision. The subjects
she wants to learn are English, Arithmetic, History, Geography (i.e.,
through Gujarati), as also vocal music and the sitar. I would send her
to the Vidyapith if you thought she could study there and she would
not in any other way add to your inconvenience.
She should do her own cooking and of course pay the rent, etc.
She should give one hour to service of Harijans. She can teach
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

195

tailoring, music (elementary) and Gujarati (elementary). You are [not]
to accept her for my sake. I inquire about it as I would be glad to
fulfil her wish if it could be done without difficulty.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9095

248. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
July 6, 1936
BAPA,

At Wardha I can hardly lift my head and read letters, and if I
manage to read them I cannot reply to them. And what is more, if I
am to live long, I must avoid working till late at night, or in the small
hours of the morning.
Do call a meeting of the Committee in August to discuss the
subjects you suggest. Obtain Jamnalalji’s consent. I shall be occupied
between August 10 and 12.
I have followed the point regarding contributions. It is
surprising that you had no success in Bombay. I do not think we
should cut down on work everywhere, though all the provinces should
certainly become self-supporting.
In accepting conditional Government aid for Kodambakkam I
can see nothing but ruin. I had mentioned to the Rao Bahadur very
strong reasons and I thought he had been convinced. I now see I was
mistaken. The chief reason of course is that if the money is not
forthcoming from the Hindus even for this small institution, the Sangh
or the Hindus cannot take the credit for running it. Of course if you
say we are concerned with the end and not with the argument, then I
shall have nothing to say. But even so I shall insist that considering the
origin of the Sangh, if nothing else, our ideal should be not to
shoulder any burden that the Hindus would not share. The rest is a
matter of method or means. If it is somehow worth while running it
even with Government aid, why should not the Committee run it on its
own independently of the Sangh? I would be interested in keeping the
Sangh’s foundations firm and strong, though the range of my
understanding is limited to Segaon. Hence the correct decision would
196

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

be the one that the Committee takes after they have listened to me.
My Malaya or whatever you call it is Segaon, at least for the
present. If God lets me spend three seasons here, I would deem it great
favour of the Big Brother. But what flattery can work with Him?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1163

249. LETTER TO K. NATARAJAN
WARDHA ,

July 7, 1936
Mahadev has just sent me your letter. The editorial you have
sent me from Unity is extraordinary. The views attributed to me and
reproduced in inverted commas were never uttered by me and, what is
more, they have never been held by me. 1 From nothing that I have
heard from Jawaharlal’s lips have I ever even suspected that he
contemplated the use of violence for the attainment of India’s
independence.2 It is surprising how Dr. Holmes has allowed himself to
be duped into thinking that I had ever made the remarks said to have
been made by me. You can make whatever use you like of this letter
and to save time you may pass on this letter to Dr. Holmes if you
think it proper.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

250. LETTER TO KHURSHEDBEHN NAOROJI
July 7, 1936
Your statement contains a statement of eternal truth. But your
previous letter contained a definite complaint which you had a perfect
right to make. Indeed it was your duty to do so. Do you not owe it to
me [that you should tell me] who were the culprits and what they had
done? After all we approach eternal verities only by tackling details in
terms thereof. Anyway, whatever glimpses I may have of truth I owe
Vide “Are We Rivals?”, on or before 22-7-1936.
The report in Unity inter alia said: “Elected President of the Indian National
Congress at its recent meeting at Lucknow, Nehru came out for a use of violence in the
struggle for independence, and is reported to be planning a movement to shake
British rule in India.”
1
2

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

197

principally, if not entirely, to attention to the minutest details, always
keeping the supreme objective in view. Do please therefore help.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

251. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 8, 1936
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I have just received your letter1 . I was seeking time to be able to
write to you on the events in Wardha. Your letter makes it difficult. I
would however just like to say that the letter of withdrawal does not
bear the meaning you put upon it when it was given to you. It was sent
to you after I had seen it. The sending of such a letter in the place of
resignation was my suggestion. I wish that you could take a juster view
of that letter. In any case I am firmly of opinion that during the
remainder of the year, all wrangling should cease and no resignations
should take place. A.I.C.C. will be paralysed and powerless to deal
with the crisis. It will be torn between two emotions. It would be most
unfair to spring upon it a crisis, in the name of democracy, which it
has never been called upon to face. You are exaggerating the
implications of the letter. I must not argue. But I would urge you to
consider the situation calmly and not succumb to it in a moment of
depression so unworthy of you. Why should you not allow your
1

Of July 5, in which the addressee had complained about the attitude of some
of his colleagues of the Working Committee with whom he had differences of
opinion. At the meeting of the Working Committee held at Wardha on June 29, these
differences had come into such sharp focus that seven members of the Working
Committee, namely, Rajendra Prasad, C. Rajagopalachari, Jairamdas Doulatram,
Jamnalal Bajaj, Vallabhbhai Patel, J.B. Kripalani and S.D. Deo, found it necessary to
submit their resignation from that body, which on Gandhiji’s suggestion they later
withdrew. Rajendra Prasad, however, sent a personal letter to Jawaharlal Nehru on
July 1, explaining in detail the reasons which had impelled him and the others to send
their resignation letter. All the three documents, viz., the letter of resignation dated
June 29, Rajendra Prasad’s letter to Nehru dated July 1, and Nehru’s letter to Gandhiji
dated July 5, not reproduced here, are to be found in A Bunch of Old Letters.
The differences in the Working Committee, which had become apparent at the
Lucknow Session itself, at which Nehru was elected President, revolved round the
question how far the Congress could commit itself to socialism in its programme.
“The President,” Pattabhi Sitaramayya says, ‘was out of tune with the majority of the
Working Committee.”

198

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

humour to play upon the meetings of the W. C.? Why should it be so
difficult for you to get on with those with whom you have worked
without a jar for years? If they are guilty of intolerance, you have
more than your share of it. The country should not be made to suffer
for your mutual intolerance.
I do hope you have accepted the very sane advice of the
German doctor.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1936. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Also A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 191-2

252. LETTER TO GLADYS OWEN
July 8, 1936
DEAR GLADYS,

I am glad you have accepted a year’s appointment from the
Rajghat Theosophical School1 . Anyway it will enable you to gain
some experience of Indian students and you will certainly be able to
give something to the boys or girls who may be under your charge.
Yes, Abbas Tyabji is the one of Baroda whom you had intended
to see and who, alas, is no more. He was one of the noblest of men I
had the good fortune to meet, and you should still nurse the desire of
meeting the members of his family. They are all chips of the old
block, and especially Raihana, one of the daughters of the deceased.
She is not only most accomplished but she is also deeply spiritual.
Love.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 6192

253. LETTER TO ATULANANDA CHAKRABARTY
July 8, 1936
DEAR FRIEND,

I had your letter. I wish you would appreciate my own
difficulty. My method of approach to the question is unfortunately
1

At Varanasi

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

199

different from yours. I would therefore at least for the time being
suggest that you serve according to your own line. If your method
ever commends itself to me I should have no difficulty in accepting it
and for any organized efforts I would not do otherwise than to refer
you to the Congress. Do not expect any paragraph from me. You will
presently find that if I am to do the village work on which I am bent, I
should have to cease correspondence at least for the time being.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G ANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 1475. Courtesy: A.K. Sen

254. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
July 8, 1936
CHI. PRABHA,

What a strange letter! It won’t do if you keep falling ill time and
again. Why do you not ask leave of everybody and come away here if
you never keep fit there? Being ill, you will not be serving but taking
service from them all. I could write to Jayaprakash if you wish. Why
don’t you say boldly what you have in your mind? You talk brave
things to me but, I am afraid, you secretly worry all the while, which is
not going to help in any way. Jayaprakash saw me. He writes that in
Patna you will be living together. The Banaras proposal seems to have
blown over completely. It seems he has already taken a house at
Patna. He told me that the place was good. I think you know all this.
Kanti has gone to Trivandrum, taking Saraswati with him. His
address is: C/o G. Ramachandran, Harijan Sevak Sangh, Trivandrum.
He will return in a month.
Wire about your health as soon as you get this.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3478

200

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

255. LETTER TO JIVANJI D. DESAI
July 8, 1936
I have gone through the Glossary 1 . I presume the meanings
given are just the ones given in Anasaktiyoga2 . It looks quite all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9943. Also C.W. 6918. Courtesy:
Jivanji D. Desai

256. TELEGRAM TO LADY FAZL-I-HUSSAIN
[July 10, 1936] 3
PRAY

ACCEPT

MY

CONDOLENCES. 4

RECOLLECTIONS

OF

MANY

DISTINGUISHED

HUSBAND.

HAPPY

I

HAVE

NOTHING

INTERVIEWS

I

HAD

BUT

PLEASANT

WITH

YOUR

The Hindu, 13-7-1936

257. LETTER TO NARASINHRAO B. DIVATIA
July 10, 1936
SUJNA BHAISHRI,

If Gokulbhai were not to give me the news of the passing of
your life companion, then who else would? He is one of your many
admirers. Where is the need for offering condolence to you? I had
been hearing about your illness. I did not know anything about
Sushilabehn. Truly God tests his devotees. You have passed through
many ordeals. You have to pass all the tests. To those whom God tests
He seems to give strength to bear suffering. Your faith in God will
make even an atheist a believer. May you always succeed.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
1
2
3
4

Gitapadarthakosha
Gandhiji’s Gujarati translation of the Bhagavad Gita.
Vide footnote 1, “Letter to Kanu Gandhi”, 10-7-1936
The addressee had lost her husband on July 9.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

201

[PS.]
No need to acknowledge this.
NARASINHRAO BHOLANATH
MARINE VILLA
14TH R OAD , K HAR [BOMBAY]
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

258. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
July 10, 1936
CHI. PRABHA,

I have your letter and follow what you say. I don’t mind how
long you stay there provided you preserve your health. You can do
much work while there. Meditate on what the verses of Chapter II1 say
and try to live accordingly. Be cheerful, concentrating your attention
on the duty facing you at a given time. Try to live on milk, curds,
vegetables, fruit and rotli2 . Don’t touch dal.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3467

259. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
July 10, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,

I have your letter. I shall certainly make use of the figures you
have given, and I have made a note of the corrections you have sent
me. It is good that you are constantly thinking of khadi. That is as it
should be. Swadeshi is one of our eleven vows. And from the
beginning khadi has been considered the core of swadeshi. Even so,
we have very few people giving constant thought to khadi. That is why
the khadi activity is not as widespread as it ought to be.
There is chaos in national education, too. There are many who
talk about it, few who understand it. Those who understand it seldom
put it into practice. But there is no doubt that true national education
is as I have described it. Therefore, just as we cannot permit any
1
2

202

Of the Bhagavad Gita
Chapati
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

adulteration of khadi whether it succeeds or not, so, too, we cannot
permit adulteration of national education. And if, without our
adulterating it even one student pursues it with love, I will say that
national education is going on, its future is bright.
But I would not say that national education was flourishing
merely because a number of children pursued what passed for
national education but which was not really national education. This
view of mine notwithstanding, you should go on doing what you can
to the best of your ability. Do not derive any meaning from my
words, other than that you will have my co-operation when you are
fed up with adulteration and seek to introduce basic changes. You
once asked me regarding Kanu’s clothing. I do not remember if I
replied to you. If I have not, all that I have to say is that you need not
worry.
Getting used to as little clothing as possible helps towards a
healthy body. I do, therefore, take care of Kanu’s clothing to the
extent of preserving his health. At the moment it would seem his
training, too, is proceeding fast though the credit may not go to
Mahadev. As neither Navin nor Kanti is here, I have to take from
Kanu alone the work the two of them would be doing. So Kanu is
getting his fill of training in the process. But this is the impression I
get. The impression that Kanu gets should be the correct one. For the
present I see very little of him and so have not been able to ask him
about it. He remains deeply immersed in work and has no errands to
run for Mahadev.
It seems Manju1 is progressing well. Is Kusum2 keeping fit? Did
she gain or did she lose from her recent travels?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8498. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

1
2

Daughter of Vrajlal A. Gandhi
ibid

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

203

260. LETTER TO KANU GANDHI
July 10, 1936
CHI. KANU,

There used to be two nozzles with me, of which one has come
here and the other is left behind. Send it over if you find it. I need my
takli box, which has not come.
The letter to Narandas contains a reference to you. If I am
correct, write so to him; write to me also whether it is correct. I enclose
the text of a telegram 1 . Please despatch it immediately. The letters to
be posted are there as usual. Today you have to bear the whole
burden single-handed! Won’t you shoulder the work by yourself
when it comes to you some day for good? Won’t you prove equal to
it?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I am sending a cheque for Rs. 40 with my endorsement. Send
me one or two small bottles which can hold an ounce or two, with
corks if you have them there or without.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

261. LETTER TO HARIBHAU UPADHYAYA
Unrevised

July 10, 1936

BHAISHRI HARIBHAU,

I have had exhaustive talks with L.2 and S. 3 L. has nothing in
her. She did not impress me favourably. S. did. He admitted that they
had both been infatuated with each other and remained so. The
situation even now is the same. According to S. the infatuation arose
out of blameless service. L. kept mum on the point. She was willing to
undergo medical examination but I seriously doubt whether she
would stand before a doctor if she was really taken to one. S. assured
me that the two of them did not reach the last stage of intimacy as
they thought of you and me. I saw L.’s father at Beawar. From his
1
2
3

204

Presumably this was the telegram to Lady Fazi-i-Hussain.
The name has been omitted.
ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

talks I inferred that he had no knowledge of this illicit relationship
and I also did not think it necessary to put him wise about it. Her
father did not impress me at all. From one of your letters I gathered
that you were satisfied that he was really not L.’s father. But another
letter of your seems to show that you have now changed your
opinion. According to L. he is indeed her father. Having examined
the whole thing I, have given this decision:
(1) L. should go to M.1 and live as his wife.
(2) If she does not wish to do so and can remain free of passion,
she should observe brahmacharya.
(3) If she cannot control her passion she should marry some
other young man.
She should have kept her relations with S. pure untill marriage.
Both claim that they have been pure. I, therefore, do not think it is
proper for them to associate with each other. However, if they cannot
live without each other’s intimate company, they should do so openly.
But in that situation, they cannot expect my blessings. They can then
stay neither in the Ashram nor in an institution with which I am
closely connected. I fear L. cannot live without S. It is my opinion
that she is suffering from hysteria caused by sexual desire. S.’s
contact is tainted with passion and aggravates the hysteria.
Now you may do what you think proper.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Haribhau Upadhyaya Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

262. DR. AMBEDKAR’S INDICTMENT—I
The readers will recall the fact that Dr. Ambedkar was to have
presided last May at the annual conference of the Jat-Pat-Torak
Mandal of Lahore. But the conference itself was cancelled because Dr.
Ambedkar’s address was found by the Reception Committee to be
unacceptable. How far a Reception Committee is justified in rejecting
a President of its choice because of his address that may be objectionable to it is open to question. The Committee knew Dr. Ambedkar’s
views on caste and the Hindu scriptures. They knew also that he had in
1

The name has been omitted.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

205

unequivocal terms decided to give up Hinduism. Nothing less than the
address that Dr. Ambedkar had prepared was to be expected from
him. The Committee appears to have deprived the public of an
opportunity of listening to the original views of a man who has carved
out for himself a unique position in society. Whatever label he wears
in future, Dr. Ambedkar is not the man to allow himself to be
forgotten.
Dr. Ambedkar was not going to be beaten by the Reception
Committee. He has answered their rejection of him by publishing the
address at his own expense. He has priced it at 8 annas. I would
suggest a reduction to 2 annas or at least 4 annas.
No reformer can ignore the address. The orthodox will gain by
reading it. This is not to say that the address is not open to objection.
It has to be read if only because it is open to serious objection. Dr.
Ambedkar is a challenge to Hinduism. Brought up as a Hindu,
educated by a Hindu potentate, he has become so disgusted with the
so-called savarna Hindus for the treatment that he and his have
received at their hands that he proposes to leave not only them but the
very religion that is his and their common heritage. He has transferred
to that religion his disgust against a part of its professors.
But this is not to be wondered at. After all one can only judge a
system or an institution by the conduct of its representatives. What is
more, Dr. Ambedkar found that the vast majority of savarna Hindus
had not only conducted themselves inhumanly against those of their
fellow religionists whom they classed as untouchables, but they had
based their conduct on the authority of their scriptures, and when he
began to search them he had found ample warrant for their belief in
untouchability and all its implications. The author of the address has
quoted chapter and verse in proof of his therefold indictment—
inhuman conduct itself, the unabashed justification for it on the part
of the prepetrators, and the subsequent discovery that the justification
was warranted by their scriptures.
No Hindu who prizes his faith above life itself can afford to
underrate the importance of this indictment. Dr. Ambedkar is not
alone in his disgust. He is its most uncompromising exponent and one
of the ablest among them. He is certainly the most irreconcilable
among them. Thank God, in the front rank of the leaders he is
singularly alone and as yet but a representative of a very small minority. But what he says is voiced with more or less vehemence by many
206

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

leaders belonging to the depressed classes. Only the latter, for instance
Rao Bahadur M.C. Rajah and Dewan Bahadur Srinivasan, not only do
not threaten to give up Hinduism but find enough warmth in it to
compensate for the shameful persecution to which the vast mass of
Harijans are exposed.
But the fact of many leaders remaining in the Hindu fold is no
warrant for disregarding what Dr. Ambedkar has to say. The savarnas
have to correct their belief and their conduct. Above all, those who are
by their learning and influence among the savarnas have to give an
authoritative interpretaion of the scriptures. The questions that Dr.
Ambedkar’s indictment suggests are:
1. What are the scriptures?
2. Are all the printed texts to be regarded as an integral part of
them or is any part of them to be rejected as unauthorized interpolations?
3. What is the answer of such accepted and expurgated
scriptures on the question of untouchability, caste, equality of status,
inter-dining and intermarriages?
(These have been all ably examined by Dr. Ambedkar in his
address).
I must reserve for the next issue1 my own answer to these
questions and a statement of the (at least some) manifest flaws in Dr.
Ambedkar’s thesis.
Harijan, 11-7-1936

263. LETTER TO A. DONALD MILLER
WARDHA ,

July 11,1936
DEAR MR. MILLER,

Your letter of 3rd July to Mahadev Desai. Thank you for the
letters you have been contributing in connection with the terrible
leprosy in India.2 I know from personal experience of village workers
of the increasing number. Only this morning Mirabehn who, as you
know, has now for nearly 18 months settled down to village life,3 was
1
2
3

Vide “Dr. Ambedkar’s Indictment—II”, 18-7-1936
Vide “The Leprosy Problem”, 6-6-1936
At Varoda, a village near Wardha

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

207

telling me how many lepers have been coming in contact with her,
hoping to find some remedy for their disease. I know that she will
derive much help from your letters. And now that I have just begun
the village life, I am already making use of the instructions which you
have given in your letters.
Needless to say your fifth letter will be published. Of course the
readers of Harijan should know fully what missionary effort has done
to alleviate the suffering of lepers. It would be churlish of me or
anybody to ignore the medical work of the various missions in India
and elsewhere. My complaint is that that work is not done without an
alien motive behind it. I could not give you an adequate conception
of the barrier that this motive erects between them and the thousands
who would gladly take advantage of medical and other help that
missionaries could render. You will probably rejoin that missionaries
are not deflected from the call which they consider to be divine, by
knowledge of the barrier. Persons like me who believe in the essential
truth of all religions feel on the contrary that the proselytizing effort
prevents so many Indians from benefiting by the unadulterated
teachings of Jesus which ennobles life in spite of their not believing in
him as the only begotten Son of God.
I hope you will not regard this paragraph of my letter as in any
way qualifying my gratefulness for your articles. I felt that it would
not be complete if I did not let you know that my view on proselytization could not in any way affect my recognition of the good that is
done by the mission, apart from their proselytizing attempt. I need
hardly say that this little discussion of my view is not meant as an
invitation to a debate on the subject. This letter itself does not call for
any reply. It is merely meant to be one of thanks and nothing more.
You may expect questions on leprosy as may be prompted by
personal contact with lepers which will probably be my daily lot.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G ANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers Courtesy: Pyarelal

208

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

264. LETTER TO SAHEBJI MAHARAJ
July 11,1936
1

DEAR SAHEBJI MAHARAJ ,

I know you have supplied the Karachi Harijan Tannery a
competent tutor for shoe-making and so you have for the Harijan
Colony in Delhi. We have in Wardha also a tannery to which a few
young men are devoting their time principally for their love of
Harijans! But we are feeling the want of a competent teacher for shoemaking and other leather manufacture. If we can teach shoe-making
to the Harijans and others in village-tanning, they will have an
additional capacity for earning and we would be able to have more
men if we can add manufacture to finished tanning. If you have such
a teacher to spare, could you please lend one for six months? The idea
is that the teacher will prepare from among the students a promising
young man as a teacher. If you can send such a person you will please
tell me when he can come and what he will expect to be paid.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G ANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 2163

265. LETTER TO UMADEVI BAJAJ
July 11, 1936
CHI. OM,

I want you to send me little Marathi books that may be with you,
Madalasa, or anybody else and are not of immediate use there, since I
wish to set up a small library here and need Marathi books. They
should be textbooks as well as books for general reading. The books
will be returned to their owners if my scheme does not work. These
should be lent for six months at least. And those books which can be
given away are to be given away for good. Send me a list of the books
that may be given away. I don’t propose to have a library costing
more than ten rupees. This will give you an idea of the kind of books
I want. If anybody preserves Marathi newspapers I would like to have
1

Head of a Radhaswami Sect in Dayalbagh, Agra

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

209

them, too, after they are read there. This is not asking for any big
donation. Nor do the seniors need be disturbed. However, some
persons like you can easily undertake such work if they have a
thought for the villagers. Do this job with your heart in it. If you do
not find interest in it, say no, so that I may plead with someone else.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 343

266. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
July 11, 1936
CHI. VIJAYA,

You yourself will write whenever you fancy, and I am expected
to reply by return of post. Nor will you apologize for your laxity!
Where did you have all this training? I am settled in Segaon all right
but I have no facility to accommodate you. You may go to the Mahila
Ashram if you wish. Ba has not yet come. She is still at Maganwadi.
There is within us divine going on constantly; it is, no doubt,
beyond the perception of sense-organs, but we can believe in it on the
strength of our faith. Moreover, just as we have sense-organs, so too
we have the atman within us, don’t we? Hence the atman may
experience it, being itself beyond the senseorgans. I experience every
moment the presence of the atman and therefore I occasionally catch
the echoes of the divine music. With effort you, too, can hear the
music if you wish. It is not the music that another can help one hear.
One can communicate to another only that which is perceptible to
sense-organs. About the atman, the atman alone can know.
Wait if you wish to stay nowhere but with me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7060. Also C.W. 4552. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

210

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

267. LETTER TO D.B. KALELKAR
July 11, 1936
CHI. KAKA,

I have gone through Rameshwardas’s letter. Since you have
offered no comments I do not know what you desire. I shall explain
as I see the situation.
Parnerkar will not give up responsibility for the Dhulia Goshala.
He well keep an eye on it. He has not gone there to take up any other
work for Rameshwardas. He cannot involve himself in Rameshwardas’s domestic affairs, though there has been some interference on
his part. This was natural since he has been staying with the family.
Both the husband and wife are foolish and though they do not get
along well together, Rameshwardas cannot do without Gangabehn
even for a moment and quarrels are inevitable. What can anyone do in
this situation? Neither of the two can make use of Shivaji who stays
there. Gangabehn cannot put him to any good use; though she would
certainly misuse his presence if she could. So awful is the situation. If
you can see the situation differently please ignore my letter. If your
view is much the same as mine, give any advice that you think fit after
considering my view. Perhaps the better course might be for you to
see Vinoba and advise me as you two decide. But this is only what
occurs to me on reading the letter. You should do as you may have
decided.
I am returning the letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7700

268. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 12, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,

I have your letter. Do not strain to write to me. You must not
thin away. Do not waste your energy. Your letters to me must be a
pleasure and a recreation or they must not be written at all. We shall
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

211

not come closer by reason of letters. Absence of them can’t separate
us or create coolness. Why should you become a chronic invalid?
Your sense though of an idiot evidently led you aright. For your
Simla khadi experiment seems to be succeeding beyond expectations.
I suppose I must call it a mere accident. Idiots can’t design good
things !
The cottage here is a picture. I have just now a young sadhu. 1
He is a great bhajani, singer of bhajans of his own composition. He
will be with me for a month. I occupy one corner, he occupies
another, the third is occupied by Munnalal, a co-worker. The first
accommodates a plank bedstead which you have seen. That corner
will be taken up by Ba, if she comes, and you. So, you will prepare
yourself for the proper village life. No privacy except in the bathroom
which you will share with me. You must shudder to think of the fate
that awaits you. You will enjoy the newness. There is no noise in spite
of the seemingly crowded state of the room. All round is open and
beautiful. Fresh breeze blowing throughout the day. It is quite cool.
Perfect walks all over. When you come for two nights you will tell me
what changes you will want.
You are there perhaps much more crowded than you are likely
to feel here. All of us sleep under the sky without a roof separating us
from it. Nevertheless you should bring your mosquito net and the
cork for your thermos which you have made mine. I am managing
with the one which is now almost all eaten away.
Agatha2 expects to attend the Ceylon Conference which you
have tabooed for yourself.
This is the newest sample of Maganwadi paper. You will have
this in an envelope of Maganwadi make.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3582. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6391

1
2

212

Tukdoji Maharaj: vide the following item.
Agatha Harrison
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

269. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
July 12, 1936
CHI. GANGABEHN,

Cooking and washing clothes are no small service. There is an
idea abroad these days that only the educated can do public service
and the value of cooking and similar work has gone down very much.
But did you not see that at Sabarmati the responsibility of the kitchen
was entrusted only to a mature and experienced Ashram worker?
When the Ashram was first established at Kochrab, I had in the
beginning assumed the responsibility myself. Subsequently it was
passed on to Vinoba, Kaka and others, and a worker like Vrajlal1 lost
his life while attending to the washing of clothes. Even when he
joined, he had asked to be allowed to do all the clothes-washing,
though he could do accounting and possessed a handwriting beautiful
as a string of pearls. At a time of difficulty once, the charge of the
store had to be entrusted to him. Without such workers we can never
hope to win swaraj.
What I have said above doesn’t mean, however, that you may
not increase your knowledge of letters when you get the opportunity
to do so or that you should not encourage others in their desire to
learn. All that I mean is that anybody who hankers after education,
neglecting the dharma that has fallen to his lot unsought, is
committing an error.
Do come to Wardha before going to Bochasan. Gomati will try
to drag you to her place. Besides, there are Maganwadi and Mahila
Ashram also. Janakibehn is there, too, and, if you wish, you can come
to me at Segaon and even stay with me, though we have only one
room here for all of us. Only lately Tukdoji Maharaj has come and
has been assigned one corner. The room is large enough, 29 x 14,
with a 7’verandah running all round. In one corner of the verandah is
a small kitchen and in another a bathroom for me. The walls are made
of mud. The entire building is constructed with purely local materials.
All around in this season our eyes rest on green fields.
1

Vrajlal Gandhi who had descended into a well to bring up someone’s water
pot which had fallen in. While climbing up he slipped and was drowned
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

213

Mirabehn lives by herself in a hut smaller than this room, about
a mile and a half from here.
It is very essential that Bachubhai does not ignore any of the
restrictions regarding food or exertion.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—6: G.S. Gangabehn, pp. 91-2. Also C.W. 8832. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

270. LETTER TO PYARELAL
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

[July] 1 12, 1936
CHI. PYARELAL,

Now that I have given the first priority to your letter, I cannot
give it up. Hence I am sending this letter at my earliest. But Sushila’s
letter is still lying unanswered because I am still waiting for a free
moment. I want to make it a beautiful letter. Where should I send it?
You may go wherever you please, but please understand that
you will be most welcome whenever you come here. I am in a hut
here. There is shortage of space. But surely you are not bothered by
that? You have seen the dharmashala at Maganwadi, have you not?
This little place is becoming just like that. I like it. There is peace.
Right now Tukde Maharaj is keeping me company. He will be staying
for a month. He has an endless treasure of bhajans. All of them sound
beautiful. Come if you feel you want to listen to them. For the rest I
am just getting acquainted with him. I see that much service can be
had from him. People have great faith in him.
Others living with me at present are Munnalal, Balwantsinha and
Lilavati. Ba is planning to come. Now that Devdas has gone to Delhi,
1
The source bears the date “12-6-1936”, evidently a slip, for Gandhiji was in
Bangalore on this date. Further, from the contents of the letter it is clear that it was
written on July 12;vide also “Letter to Amrit Kaur”, 12-7-1936

214

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

she may come.
What is your diet?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

271. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
July 131, 1936
CHI. PRABHA,

I got your wire yesterday evening and was very glad. I will not
tolerate your falling ill as it would put you and me to shame. Why
should one who has learnt from me the key to health fall ill? Take
only the food that agrees with you, breathe fresh air and take regular
exercise. Take hip-bath whenever you need it. Do not worry under
any circumstances. This anyone can do. You should never work
beyond your capacity.
Ba came here last evening with Manu. A sadhu also has come to
spend a month with me. We are all in the same hut. The sadhu is
known by the name Tukdoji Maharaj.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Kanti is at Trivandrum.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3473

272. LETTER TO SHRIMAN NARAYAN AGRAWAL
S EGAON,

July 13, 1936
BHAI SHRIMAN,

Your letter I could read only just now. I am unable to read the
whole mail as soon as it arrives.
I am sending Roti ka Raga. Return it to me after Kakasaheb
does his writing on it. In fact I had understood that my opinion was
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

215

required solely for your own satisfaction. But now I cannot find
anything to write which can go into print. All the same let us see what
can be done. You may come over whenever you wish to. You are not
going to take my time, are you? Do whatever work Mahadev asks you
to do for Harijan.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 239

273. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Unrevised by me

S EGAON,

July 15, 1936
DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

(1) I hope you got my wire about The Times of India letter. I
procured it yesterday and read it through. Nobody has ever written to
me about the subject-matter. My reading of the letter confirms my
view that you should take legal notice of the libel.
(2) If you will not misunderstand me, I would like you to keep
me free of the Civil Liberties Union. I do not like for the time being
to join any political institution. And there is no meaning in a
confirmed civil resister joining it. Apart however from my joining or
not joining the Union, maturer consideration confirms me in my
opinion that it would be a mistkae to appoint Sarojini Naidu or for
that matter any civil resister as President. I am still of opinion that the
President should be a well-known constitutional lawyer. If that does
not commend itself to you then, you should have an author of note
who is not a law-breaker. I would also ask you to restrict the number
of members. You need quality, not quantity.
(3) Your letter is touching. You feel to be the most injured
party. The fact is that your colleagues have lacked your courage and
frankness. The result has been disastrous. I have always pleaded with
them to speak out to you freely and fearlessly. But having lacked the
courage, whenever they have spoken they have done it clumsily and
you have felt irritated. I tell you they have dreaded you, because of
your irritability and impatience of them. They have chafed under
your rebukes and magisterial manner and above all your arrogation
216

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of what has appeared to them your infallibility and superior
knowledge. They feel that you have treated them with scant courtesy
and never defended them from socialists’ridicule and even misrepresentation.
You complain of their having called your activities harmful.
That was not to say that you were harmful. Their letter was no
occasion for recounting your virtues or your services. They were fully
conscious of your dynamism and your hold over the masses and the
youth of the country. They know that you cannot be dispensed with.
And so they wanted to give way.
I look upon the whole affair as a tragi-comedy. I would
therefore like you to look at the whole thing in a lighter vein. I do not
mind your taking the A.I.C.C. into your confidence. But I do want
you not to impose on it the unbearable taks of adjusting your family
quarrels or choosing between them and you. Whatever you do you
must face them with accomplished things.
Why do you resent their majority being reflected in all
subcommittees, etc.? Is it not the most natural thing? You are in office
by their unanimous choice but you are not in power yet. To put you
in office was an attempt to find you in power, quicker than you would
otherwise have been. Anyway that was at the back of my mind when I
suggested your name for the crown of thorns. Keep it on though the
head be bruised. Resume your humour at the committee meetings.
That is your most usual role, not that of a care-worn irritable man
ready to burst on the slightest occasion.
How I wish you could telegraph to me that on finishing my
letter you felt as merry as you were on that New Year’s Day in Lahore
when you were reported to have danced round the tricolour flag.
You must give your throat a chance.
I am revising my statement. I have decided not to publish it till
you have seen it.
I have decided that nobody should see our correspondence,
besides Mahadev.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1936. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

217

274. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
July 15, 1936
CHI. PRABHA,

I have your letter. Don’t fall ill again. What was the cause of the
last illness? Do you take hip-baths? In no case should you give it up.
Kanti is still at Trivandrum. Nimu is going to join Ramdas in
Bombay. Manu will come to stay at Segaon. Lilavati is already here.
So here, too, we shall be congested.
I seem to be keeping good health, and the food, too, continues
to be as usual. For the present, Tukdoji Maharaj is here to spend a
month with me.
I have written to you about the talk with Jayaprakashji. 1 When
will you be going to Patna?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3479

275. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
July 15, 1936
DEAR DAUGHTER AMTUL SALAAM, 2

I have your letter today, and I am sending the reply with Kanu
so that it might be carried by the morning train.
The operation 3 can certainly be performed at Delhi and I shall
arrange for it. I shall let you know the names of the doctors when I
learn them.
Why should you believe what others say to you about my
displeasure? Would I not express my displeasure myself? What a
daughter you must be to believe what others say about your father!
Haven’t I told you that you should have from me the money to
meet your needs? You will take from me the money for coming
1
2
3

218

Vide “Letter to Prabhavati”, 8-7-1936
This is in Urdu.
For nose trouble
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

over here.
I had a bit of a letter from Kanti. He is happy. He will return in
a month.
Have your nose examined by someone there. Consult Devdas.
I think I have answered the questions in your letter. There is no
time to write more.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 340

276. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 16, 1936
MY DEAR REBEL,

There are tyrants and tyrants. You will see on 22nd how you
feel. If the night is fine, the roads dry and you do not feel fatigued,
drive to Segaon after having your food. I shall be ready to give you a
shake down at Segaon. If the fates are not propitious, you will sleep at
Maganwadi and walk or drive, as you will, to Segaon in the morning.
You must not be tired out in any way. You may brave all kinds of
experiences, subject to the tyrant’s will, on your return when you are
expected to stay for a period.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3583. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6392

277. LETTER TO HORACE ALEXANDER
July 16, 1936
DEAR HORACE,

Your letter was most welcome. You will get a note 1 from me
through Kamalnayan Bajaj. But that is a mere introduction. Only it
was written before the receipt of your letter.
1

Vide “Letter to Horace Alexander”, 6-7-1936

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

219

I anticipated you about Agatha. I cabled approval of her
plan.1 Her expenses in India can certainly be found but, on principle,
her passage to India and back should be found from your end. That is
what I have generally followed.
I quite agree with you that such visits are helpful. Therefore if
the Heaths2 can come it would [be] a good thing.
Jawaharlal is tirelessly preaching his message. He has an
unconquerable faith in his mission.
Love to you both.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1424

278. LETTER TO KHURSHEDBEHN NAOROJI3
July 16, 1936
When did the pilgrimage become due? If you are merely
referring to Khan Saheb’s manifesto, it contains no such message for
me. The incident is too trivial for me to notice. My undertaking with
the Brothers is that I am not to rush without a call from them, unless I
have an irresistible urge. I have none of the latter.
Saints are both real and false. The real ones never want any
noise round them but it does become their hard lot. The false ones
cannot live without noise.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

279. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
July 16, 1936
CHI. AMRITLAL,

I got your note well in time. It is easy to say, ‘May you live a
hundred years.’ However, It is for you to make the effort. It is enough
1

The cable is not available. Agatha Harrison was to attend the Ceylon
Conference. Vide “Letter to Amrit Kaur”, 12-7-1936
2
Presumably Carl Heath, a Quaker, and his wife
3
The addressee had informed Gandhiji that there was a call for him from the
Frontier to go there silently and had also remarked. “Can’t saints do anything without
noise?”

220

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

if we regard our body as a trust held in behalf of God and use it
accordingly. Take care of your body. Take up no more burden than
it can carry.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10718

280. LETTER TO J.P. BHANSALI
July 16, 1936
CHI. BHANSALI

I have your note. I cannot help feeling anxious. You have to
become a model for others. You ought to preserve your health in
good condition. You cannot get up without assistance. Why this sign
of old age? I want you to do this: Live on unboiled milk alone, or eat
any flour and almonds, or take coconut, gram and lemon. It is
possible to keep the vow of abstaining from cooked food. True
discipline would lie in this: You should eat nothing to indulge the
palate. By way of medicine, you may take any food in the prescribed
measure. Your weakness and night blindness must disappear.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

281. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
[July 16, 1936] 1
CHI. NARAHARI,

I have your letter. Nimu [is going] 2 to Bombay. Ramdas insists
that she should now stay with him. He is now engaged in the
. . .3 .business.
I follow your point about Ramji. Do not give up your firmness
in any case. Service of the cow we shall entrust to Vinoba.
. . .4
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9096
1
2
3
4

From the S.N. Register
Illegible
ibid
ibid

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

221

282. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
July [16] 1 ,1936
CHI. KANTI,

You have been proved right and I wrong. What misuse and
misinterpretation of a quite innocent statement of mine!Even so, why
should it touch you? I have explained to you that you should not be
touchy. Our letters crossed; yours reaching Wardha the day I sent
mine from Segaon.
I don’t think there is anything particular in Saraswati asking
leave to stay on for two months. What comment did my letter evoke?
And who made it?
You say nothing about your health. Where had you been to? I
have not understood what Saraswati writes.
Nimu is leaving today to join Ramdas. Kanam2 will be here. Ba
and others have gone to Wardha to see Nimu off. She will return
tomorrow. She comfortably works from Wardha to this place and has
the courage also to walk back the same day. Manu too will come here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7302. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

283. TELEGRAM TO PYARELAL
WARDHAGANJ,

July 17, 1936
PYARELALJI
KHADIPRATISHTHAN
15 COLLEGE SQUARE
CALCUTTA
WIRE

HEALTH.

WRITING

FULLY

TODAY.

BAPU
From a photostat: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1
The source has July 26, which apparently is a slip as Nirmala went to join
Ramdas on July 16; vide “ Letter to Manilal and Sushila Gandhi”, 18-7-1936
2
Son of Ramdas Gandhi

222

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

284. LETTER TO PYARELAL
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 17, 1936
CHI. PYARELAL,

I received your letter only last night. It is painful that your
health should be spoilt. You must have received the telegram I sent
you today. If you have not committed yourself to go to Utkal, come
to Segaon. There is plenty of work waiting here. Only in this jungle
can we have a couple of hours to ourselves. Therefore my wish is that
you should now settle down only with me. Who knows about October?
We shall see when that time comes. “Enjoy the present moment, who
has seen the morrow?”
I had then and there read the note you had sent in a small cover.
I have not been able to read your article. I have kept it safe. I shall
read it when I find some time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

285. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
WARDHA ,

July 17,1936
CHI. NARANDAS,

I have corrected the note1 you sent me and am now returning it
with my endorsement. It would be proper not to expect a visit from
me at present. If you persist in your request to Sardar, he will, I
expect, try to come, though no one can say if that will be on the 12th2
exactly. I have struck out those names as things are all uncertain. It
would of course be admirable if people joined purely out of love of
khadi; otherwise what does it matter if we get or do not get a little
1
2

Vide the following item.
Gandhiji's birthday according to the Vikram calendar

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

223

more khadi? How long can we sustain their enthusiasm for them?
However, you many publish the names if in course of time you can
ascertain who will be coming.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8499. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

286. LETTER TO KHADI WORKERS
July 17, 1936
Before this was printed a draft was sent to me. I know
Narandas's love of khadi so I cannot refuse his request for my
signature under it. The more khadi we produce with a pure heart the
nearer comes swaraj for all. What Narandas asks of the readers is as
good as nothing; it should therefore be complied with without reserve.
1

MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8500 Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

287. TALK WITH JAIRAMDAS DOULATRAM
AND DEVDAS GANDHI2
[Before July 18, 1936] 3
I am very happy that you have come here, but, I hope, not to see this
dignified hut of mine. I am responsible for little of the planning here,
and I have given to it none of my art or my labour. But I wonder if
you saw on you way Mirabehn's hut. It was worth while coming all the
way to see her hut certainly. That is really and truly HER hut. This
1

It was a note on the programme for Gandhiji's sixty-eighth birthday which
was revised by Gandhiji. It read: “ If a spinner wishes to use for himself the yarn spun
by him, he will get it back as prasada; if not, it will be used to promote khadi
activity.
It is not too much to hope that everyone will understand the significance of
this occasion and give an impetus to khadi activity.”
2
Extracted from Mahadev Desai's “Weekly Letter”
3
Devdas Gandhi had reached Delhi by July 18; vide “Letter to Manilal and
Sushila Gandhi”, 18-7-1936

224

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

is a hut built FOR me, not MY hut. Here is her own hut, planned and
built by herself (of course with other people's labour). But it is not
merely a hut. It is a poem. I studied it in detail only yesterday, and I
tell you I had tears of joy as I saw the villager's mentality about
everything in it. You know I often have my quarrels with her, but let
me tell you that no one from amongst us can claim to have the real
rural-mindedness that she has. Did you study the position of her little
bath-room and the inside of it? She has utilized every stone that the
blasting of the underground rock in her well, made available to her.
The seat for the bath is all one stone fixed to the ground. Next to the
bathroom in the same little hut is the latrine. No commode or wooden
plank or any brickwork. Just two beautiful stones, half buried in the
ground, and with two halves of kerosene tins between the stones. Any
villager can do this, but never does it. All the water naturally runs to
carefully made beds for plants and vegetables. And look at the care
with which she has built the little stable for her horse, on the grooming
and feeding and keeping of which she lavishes all her love and
attention. Her love of animals is a thing to learn from her. Even whilst
she is sitting and working in her hut; the stable is so arranged that she
can give an occasional look to the horse. And now let us see the inside
of the hut—all mud and split bamboo and wattle of palm-branches.
You note every little article in the hut and the place given to it. Her
chula (fire) is all made with her own hands, and though she has learnt
it from us no one can beat her in the art. Then see the bamboo
mantelpiece (if you will give it that big name) on which she keeps her
earthen cooking utensils. Then see the little doorless windows and
bamboo bookshelf and note the palms and peacocks over the
windows, moulded in relief by herself. Also note her little kitchen and
the carding room. The village where she works is about two to three
furlongs from the hut. All the women and many of the men in the
village know her, and the women confide to her many of their
household secrets and look to her for advice and guidance—not
always an easy matter, but always unfailingly for solace and comfort.
She looks like one of them. Well, if you have not studied her hut
carefully I would like you to go there again on your way back.
Harijan, 25-7-1936

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

225

288. DR. AMBEDKAR'S INDICTMENT—II
The Vedas, Upanishads, Smritis and Puranas including
Ramayana and Mahabharata are the Hindu scriptures. Nor is this a
finite list. Evey age or even generation has added to the list. It follows,
therefore, that everything printed or even found handwritten is not
scripture. The Smritis, for instance, contain much that can never be
accepted as the word of God. Thus many of the texts that Dr.
Ambedkar quotes from the smritis cannot be accepted as authentic,
The scriptures properly so called can only be concerned with eternal
verities and must appeal to any conscience, i.e., any heart whose eyes
of understanding are opened. Nothing can be accepted as the word of
God which cannot be tested by reason or is not capable of being
spiritually experienced. And even when you have an expurgated
edition of the scriptures, you will need their interpretation. Who is the
best interpreter? Not learned men surely. Learning there must be. But
religion does not live by it. It lives in the experiences of its saints and
seers, in their lives and sayings. When all the most learned
commentators of the scriptures are utterly forgotten, the accumulated
experience of the sages and saints will abide and be an inspiration for
ages to come.
Caste has nothing to do with religion. It is a custom whose
origin I do not know and do not need to know for the satisfaction of
my spiritual hunger. But I do know, that it is harmful both to spiritual
and national growth. Varna and ashrama are institutions which have
nothing to do with castes. The law of varna teaches us that we have
each one of us to earn our bread by following the ancestral calling. It
defines not our rights but our duties. it necessarily has reference to
callings that are conducive to the welfare of humanity and to no other.
It also follows that there is no calling too low and none too high. All
are good, lawful, and absolutely equal in status. The callings of a
Brahmin—spiritual teacher—and a scavenger are equal, and their due
performance carries equal merit before God and at one time seems to
have carried identical reward before man. Both were entitled to their
livelihood and no more. Indeed one traces even now in the villages the
faint lines of this healthy operation of the law. Living in Segaon with
its population of 600, I do not find a great disparity between the
earnings of different tradesmen including Brahmins. I find too that
real Brahmins are to be found even in these degenerate days who are
226

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

living on alms freely given to them and are giving freely of what they
have of spiritual treasures. It would be wrong and improper to judge
the law of varna by its caricature in the lives of men who profess to
belong to a varna whilst they openly commit a breach of its only
operative rule. Arrogation of a superior status by any of the varnas
over another is a denial of the law. And there is nothing in the law of
varna to warrant a belief in untouchability.(The essence of Hinduism
is contained in its enunciation of one and only God as Truth and its
bold acceptance of ahimsa as the law of the human family.)
I am aware that my interpretation of Hinduism will be disputed
by many besides Dr. Ambedkar. That does not affect my position. It
is an interpretation by which I have lived for nearly half a century and
according to which I have endeavoured to the best of my ability to
regulate my life.
In my opinion the profound mistake that Dr. Ambedkar has
made in his address is to pick out the texts of doubtful authenticity
and value and the state of degraded Hindus who are no fit specimens
of the faith they, so woefully misrepresent. Judged by the standard
applied by Dr. Ambedkar, every known living faith will probably fail.
In his able address, the learned Doctor has over-proved his case.
Can a religion that was professed by Chaitanya, Jnanadeva, Tukaram,
Tiruvalluvar, Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, Raja Ram Mohan Roy, Maharshi Devendranath Tagore, Vivekanand and a host of others who
might be easily mentioned, be so utterly devoid of merit as is made
out in Dr. Ambedkar's address? A religion has to be judged not by its
worst specimens but by the best it might have produced. For that and
that alone can be used as the standard to aspire to, if not to improve
upon.
Harijan, 18-7-1936

289. NOTES
HARIJAN SEVAK SANGH AND MUNICIPAL GRANTS.
The Secretary of the Harijan Sevak Sangh writes:
The Government auditors have raised objection to the grant made to the
Harijan Sevak Sangh by the Dhulia Municipal Borough during the last year, on
the ground that the work of Harijan uplift is not an educational object and the
Municipal Borough cannot spend for it. Here is a serious question to be
tackled.
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

227

It is also contended that hostels of students are not educational
institutions. This is an astounding interpretation and unless set right at an
early date will adversely affect the work of the Sangh and other institutions as
well.

If what is stated here is true, there must be some misunderstanding. It may be debatable whether Harijan uplift can be classed
as an educational effort, but when a school is conducted for Harijans
or a hostel run in the interests of students surely both are educational
efforts, and as such there should be no objection to a municipal
borough financing such institutions. I hope, therefore, that the
remarks said to have been made by the Government auditors are due
to a pure misunderstanding of the position. It may be that the Dhulia
Board voted a grant for 'Harijan Uplift’and if it has no power to make
grants except to educational institutions, Harijan uplift as such might
not be classified under grants to education. The matter requires
further elucidation. Any futher comment must be withheld till all the
facts of the case are known.
A VILLAGER 'S HUMANITY

The reader will be glad to see the following two pictures sent by
Miss Mary Barr of Khedi of what I have called “ A Villager's
Humanity”.
1. Yesterday I found an old woman sitting in the wet with her calf. I
asked her why she did not sit in the verandah (meaning the verandah of Miss
Mary Barr's Cottage) with the rest of her party and keep dry. (They were some
wandering people who had asked leave to camp for 24 hours on the verandah)
She replied, 'I am sitting by this ’ëøÊ (calf). Its mother is dead.'
2. This afternoon I found two donkeys had come on to the verandah out
of the rain and my first instinct was to 'shoo’them off as they would spoil the
floor. They obediently ‘shooed’and I immediately felt ashamed remembering
yesterday's old woman and invited them back. They came.
I am sure Tara would be glad to know that
kinds of men and beasts during these wet days.

HER

verandah is sheltering all

The reference to Tara, i.e., the late Mary Chesley, entirely bears
out what I knew of her, and now that her numerous intimate friends
have come to know about her premature and unexpected death, I have
been receiving touching letters about the qualities of her heart and
head. From those I copy the following.1
1

228

Only extracts are reproduced here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Polly (Miss Chesley) was built of the stuff from which martyrs are made.
She never knew fear. She was keen pacifist and persuaded me to take the post
left vacant at her mother's death as Superintendent of Peace and Arbitration in
the W.C.T.U. for Cananda... Polly and I worked together to gather money for
the Russian and Chinese famines, getting ten thousand dollars..... We also
collected one thousand dollars for German children's relief.

A C ORRECTION

With reference to my note ‘Barbarous If True'1 the President of
the Panchayat Board, Devakottai writes: 2
... There has been no objection raised at all at any time by myself or any
other member of the Board to the Harijan member taking his seat alongside the
other members. On the other hand he has been repeatedly requested during each
and every meeting to take his seat. He has complied with our request during a
few of the meetings that were held during the last four months.
... The Harijan member was questioned about the alleged treatment and
he has issued a statement... that he was never objected to by anybody in the
Board in taking his seat, and at times when he hesitated to take his seat along
with others as per age-long custom, he has been promptly cheered up by the
President to take his seat and advised not to get disheartened.
... Finally I wish to inform you that the Harijan member is no doubt
sitting along with other members during the whole of the meeting now, and I
want to assure you that all facilities are accorded to him by me so that his
rights and privileges are duly enjoyed by him.

I gladly publish this letter. I am gladder still to find that the
statement published was wholly untrue. In these days of suspicion and
ferment among Harijans, it is necessary for correspondents to be
accurate about the information they give. It is worth while knowing
how the correspondent came to make the statement which appears to
have been without any foundation whatsoever.
Harijan, 18-7-1936

1
2

Vide “Barbarous if True”, 27-6-1936
Only excerpts are reproduced here.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

229

290. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 18,1936
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,

I got your letter. For some time past I have not been able to
attend to your letters regularly.
There is nothing special concerning Harilal for the present. He
goes about talking at random.
Sushila seems to think that I am insisting on your coming over
here, but I don't remember having suggested such a thing in any of
my letters. I do not think that you need come over if you are
comfortably settled there. I would of course wish you not to feel
helpless. Do what you both think right.
Ba, Manu and Kano came over to stay with me yesterday.
Lilavati is here already. I may say we are now cramped for space.
I think I have told you earlier that there is just one room.
Ramdas has set himself up very well for the present. Let us now
see how he fares. Nimu went to join him two days ago.
Devdas and Lakshmi had been here and have now reached
Delhi. Chhaganlal and Kashi continue to stay at Wardha.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4854

291. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 18, 1936
CHI. MRIDU,

The bulletins arrived two days after your letter. You have strong
shoulders and they will bear the burden of this work. But if you pass
some of that burden on to my shoulders, I am afraid they will be
crushed. What more can I say or do beyond giving you the empty
blessings that God may grant you glory in the gigantic task you have
undertaken. My strength is limited and every single movement of
230

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

mine is taken up by my rural but nevertheless new work. Even so I
have spared the time required to read your bulletins. I have made the
necessary comments which you will receive along with this letter.
I had a long letter from Jawaharlal in which he writes that you
have become a matter of controversy between him and me. When will
you write to me about this? I am awaiting the letter. I am trying to get
to the root of this problem.
Give the enclosed letter to Mummy.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original; C. W. 11200. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

292. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 18, 1936
CHI. NIMU,

I received Sumi’s letter...1 I have written today. She must have
reached the place. Kanam is fine. Write to me in detail.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papars. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

293. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
S EGAON,

July 19,1936
CHI. MIRA,

You need not attempt to come here for the statement. There is
no hurry. I cannot even give time, today being Harijan editing day.
And of course you were right in postponing the statement to the
plants which in village life take the prior place.
Love.
BAPU
From the original:C.W. 6356, Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9822
1

Some words here are illegible in the source.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

231

294. TALK WITH STUDENTS OF VILLAGE
WORKERS’ TRAINING SCHOOL1
[July 19,1936] 2
He3 does not talk like me; he simply sings bhajans and preaches
and teaches through them. I must needs talk as I can neither compose
nor sing.
After the entertainment... the talk began with a light banter of a student who
believes in growing long hair. Gandhiji asked him:

Is this just for show, or for the sake of health? If it is for no
particular purpose, why not get rid of it?
Well, don't you run away with the idea that one can do village
work by just going and sitting down in a village. To be a real villager
is to serve them, and you may remember that to be a real villager is
more difficult than to obtain a graduate's degree. I have been talking
of villages and villagers for the past thirty years, but have been able to
come to stay in a village only today. And that too is just the stay and
no work. We eat unpolished rice and hand-ground flour, but how can
we compel the villagers to do likewise? Even if we had the power to do
so, we should not exercise it. We have to convince them by patient
persuasion.
Q.

Without power, can we really achieve much?

A.

Did I not say that even if we had it, we should not use it? We
have to convert them to our way of thinking. We have to bring to bear
on them moral pressure.
Q.

If you take such a desperate view, where are we?

A.

I am far from taking a desperate view and it would be wrong
to suppose that potentially you are weaker than I. Physically of course
there may be considerable difference between you and me, and the
spiritual power in you may be dormant in your case, active in my
case. But this is no task where one could do things as if by magic.
What magic is there in merely staying in a village? Even six
months’stay in a village may not by itself achieve anything. Much
1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai's “Weekly Letter”, 25-7-1936
According to Mahadev Desai the conversation took place on a Sunday. The
Sunday prior to July 25 fell on July 19.
3
Tukdoji Maharaj
2

232

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

depends on the spirit in which one goes to stay there. We stay for
years in cities without affecting the life around us. We have to go there
as their voluntary servants. They come and labour for us in cities for a
wage. We have to go to villages and labour for them without a wage.
Q.

I see. Do the village folk come to see you?

A.

They do, but not without fear, and perhaps even suspicion.
These also are among the many shortcomings of villagers. We have to
rid them of these.
Q.

How?

A. By gently insinuating ourselves into their affections. We must
disabuse them of the fear that we have gone there to coerce them, we
must show them by our behaviour that there in no intention to coerce,
nor any selfish motive. But this is all patient work. You cannot quickly
convince them of your bona fides.
Q. Don't you think that only those who work without any remuneration or
allowance can inspire confidence in them, i.e., those who accept nothing whether
from any association or from the village?

A.

No. They do not even know who is and who is not working
for remuneration. What does impress them is the way in which we live,
our habits, our talks, even our gestures. There may be a few who
suspect us of a desire to earn; we have to dispel their suspicion no
doubt. And then do not run away with the feeling that he who accepts
nothing from an association or from the villages is by any means an
ideal servant. He is often a prey to self-righteousness which debases
one.
Q.

You teach us village crafts. Is that to give us a means of earning our
livelihood or to enable us to teach the villagers? If it is for the latter object, how can
we master a craft in the course of a year?
A. You are being taught the ordinary crafts, because unless you
know the principles you will not be able to help people with
suggestions. The most enterprising among you would certainly earn a
living by following a craft. Now here you see I had a hut ready made
for me, thanks to Jamnalalji and thanks to my 'Mahatmaship'! But you
will have to build your own hut, unless of course you also get a friend
to build it for you—in which case I will say you were old and decrepit
like me!
Q. Shri Rajagopalachariar who was here the other day told us that it was no use
our going to villages without mastering a craft, for then we should not be able to

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

233

teach them anything. You must be better agriculturists than they are, he said, better
cobblers, better weavers, and so on.
A. What he said is true. But we have no agricultural course here,
because mastery of agriculture would take a century. And the things
we teach here are such that you are likely to be able to bring to the
villagers better knowledge of them. We have improved grinding stones
and rice-husking stones and oil-presses. We are carrying on experiments in improving our tools and we have to take the improvements to
them. Above all there is truth and honesty in business that we have to
teach them. They adulterate milk, they adulterate oil, they will
adulterate truth for petty gain. It is not their fault, it is ours. We have
so long ignored them and only exploited them, never taught them
anything better.. By close contact with them we can easily correct their
ways. Long neglect and isolation has dulled their intellect and even
moral sense. We have to brighten them up and revive them all along
the line.
Q.

What about the Harijan problem here?

A.

It is as acute as anywhere else.

Q.

There is untouchability as amongst the Harijans?

A. Of course. A Mahar would keep a Bhangi at arm's length.
Here is a well belonging to Jamnalalji, no public well. After
consultation with the man in charge of the estate, we decided to
declare it open to all the Harijans and invited Mahars, Chamars,
Bhangis and others to use it. They would not do it. They hesitated.
One or two Mahars then came forward, a Bhangi also came. That
created an uproar. The Harijans stopped using the well, and the tumult
has ceased. But there it is. It is like an armed truce. But it is no use
blaming them. What are we doing? I have heard with horror the
incident from Rajputana where Harijans would not be suffered to
cook their food in ghee and to prepare sweetmeats, and that, because
of the perversity of the savarnas, the situation reached such a pass that
firing had to be resorted to and three savarnas were killed. It is a
tremendous problem. Now, can we who have not cast out
untouchability expect the Harijans to cast it out from their midst in a
moment?

Harijan, 25-7-1936

234

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

295. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
July 20, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

No one understands what message the bearer has brought.
Lilavati is too careless to understand. I cannot speak. Munnalal is half
dead. B. threatens to follow suit. In these circumstances, it is better to
write out what you want. This has become a confused household
instead of a hermitage it was expected to be. Such has been my fate!! I
must find my hermitage from within.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W.6357. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9823

296. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
WARDHA ,

July 20, 1936
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I have your letter. Even if somebody offers a big donation, do
not spend money received from outside on the sanitation work. I have
forbidden the spending of even a single rupee in the village here
where sanitation work is being carried on, for then people miss the
education. We should work as hard as we can but must not spend
money. Let the work remain incomplete till the people themselves are
prepared to pay for it. We may ourselves do the sweeping, remove the
night-soil and bury it. But until the people put up latrines with their
own money, let them relieve themselves in the open. We may instruct
people in the ways but they must themselves find the means. The
Taluka Board may find the money. It may not cost more than ten or
twenty rupees. If you do not follow all this, ask me again.
Have no doubt that sanitation work and educating the people
with regard to a healthy diet is the only real medical service. Why
should not Shamalbhai, Shivabhai and the other men staying there
join the sanitation work? It will be enough to devote one hour daily.
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

235

You should set out every morning like the Bhangis with brooms,
spades and baskets.
You may ask me anything you wish to.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—6: G.S. Gangabehnne, p. 93. Also C.W. 8835. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

297. LETTER TO PANNALAL JHAVERI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 20, 1936
CHI. PANNALAL,

I have your letter. You have given a good account of your
activities. May they bring you credit. I have neither the desire nor the
strength to write anything beyond what I write for the Harijan. I
would certainly reply to the questions that someone like you may ask.
I was indeed surprised when I saw your name on the Reception
Committee and Sardar showed me the speech of the Chairman of the
Committee. I thought the Chairman’s speech was impudent and
devoid of truth. I did wonder how you could lend support to such a
speech. But what can I say to anyone today? Is Dinkar any different?
He has given up all sense of decency. There are other similar
examples also. As far as you are concerned, I know that you would do
only what you thought was proper. No one has a right to expect more
than this from anyone. If someone expected more even from me, I
would feel he was being unfair to me.
All of you who act in adherence to truth are bound to prosper.
But I am forgetting the main thing. I will certainly send
Walunjkar. He will be getting his railway fare from there, won’t he?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Manavtana Prahari—Pannalal Jhaveri, p, 32

236

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

298. LETTER TO NANIBEHN JHAVERI
S EGAON, W ARDHA .

July 20, 1936
CHI. NANIBEHN,

Your letter came in all right. I would certainly like to settle down
in Gujarat in the midst of all of you. But my sadhana has to be at
Segaon for the present. My coming in October will be as good as not
coming. We shall of course have the satisfaction of seeing each other.
I hope you and Gangabehn are keeping yourselves fit. I shall
not ask about your minds.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Ba, Manu and Kanu, Prabhavati, Balvantsinha are doing well.
[From Gujarati]
Manavtana Prahari—Pannalal Jhaveri, p. 28

299. LETTER TO BABURAO D. MHATRE
S EGAON,

July 21, 1936
DEAR MHATRE,

Shoorjibhai1 sends the message that the absence of mention of
your name in Harijan2 has been felt by you. I assure you that it is not
intentional. As you know I am sparing in my compliments. I should
have mentioned you when Shri Kar was mentioned. Only at that time I
had not your name before me. I know your valuable services too well
to underrate them. But I am not going to make an opportunity for
mention. It will come in the natural course.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G ANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 9824. Courtesy: B.D. Mhatre
1

Shoorji Vallabhdas
Presumably this is a reference to Gandhiji's speech published in Harijan,
4-4-1936; vide “Speech at Khadi And Village Industries Exhibition, Lucknow”,
28-3-1936
2

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

237

300. LETTER TO PYARELAL
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 21, 1936
CHI. PYARELAL,

I have your telegram and letter. I had to wait for your reply to
my last letter. But I am writing this because I have read your articles in
the mean time. The articles are good. I shall publish them in the
Harijan in four parts.1 More could be written about the remedies. You
can still do so if anything further occurs to you.
I hope your health is in perfect shape. If you decide not to
come here, it must be after careful thought. You should not need any
time to decide to come. If there is any doubt the benefit of it should
be in favour of coming.
Let me know if you had any talk with Haribhau about which I
should know.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

301. LETTER TO CHAND TYAGI
July 21, 1936
BHAI TYAGI,

I cannot read the whole of your letter. It is sad news that Balvir2
has contracted tuberculosis. How is he now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 6097

1

The articles appeared under the title “The water they drink”, in six parts in
the Harijan issues of the 8th, 15th, 22nd ant 29th of August and the 5th and 12th of
September 1936.
2
Addressee's son

238

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

302. LETTER TO RAJKISHORI
July 21, 1936
CHI. RAJKISHORI,

Your letter. Stay wherever you find peace.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 6638. Also C.W. 4286. Courtesy: Chand
Tyagi

303. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
July 21, 1936
CHI. AMTUSSALAAM,

I hope you have received my letter. I am enclosing letters to
Tyagi1 and Raj2 and also one3 to the students.
Return the letter to Rammehar4 noting on it all the facts. Ask
Malkaniji5 why he had to be relieved.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 341

304. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 21,1936
CHI. NIMU,

Your fears about Kanu came true. Since you have written to me,
I am sending him with an escort. I am no doubt unhappy about it but
feel that at the moment God wills it that way.
The snake that bit Satyavan was not a snake in the physical
sense; the snake was lust. Savitri got the venom out by her purity and
1
2
3
4
5

Vide the preceding two items.
ibid
This is not traceable.
Inmate of the Harijan Ashram, Delhi
N.R. Malkani

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

239

love. That is the mystry of the story of Savitri. A person whose purity
can overcome lust in another can overcome anything. You should
thus by your purity and by your love become fit to overcome the
threefold afflictions of Ramdas. That is my wish.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Nirmala Gandhi Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library.

305. ARE WE RIVALS?
[On or before July 22,1936] 1
I have had two typical cuttings sent to me giving altogether false
news about relations between Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and myself.
Remarks said to have been made by me have been reproduced in
quotation marks. Thus I am reported to have said, “My life-work is
ruined” (i.e., by Jawaharlal's programme); “not even the firmness
and repression of the British Government have harmed my work as
much as the policy outlined by Nehru.” 2
I have never said anything of the kind nor uttered one single
remark attributed to me in the two articles sent to me. What is more, I
have not even entertained the opinions contained in them. So far as I
am aware, Jawaharlal has come to the conclusion that India's freedom
cannot be gained by violent means and that it can be gained by nonviolent means. And I know for a fact that he did not in Lucknow
“come out for the use of violence in the struggle for Independence”. 3
No doubt there are differences of opinion between us. They
were clearly set forth in the letters we exchanged some years ago, and
in reply to correspondents I hope at an early date to bring our
differences up to date. But they do not affect our personal relations in
any way whatsoever. We remain the same adherents to the Congress
goal that we have ever been. My life-work is not, cannot be, ruined by
Jawaharlal's programme, nor have I ever believed for that matter that it
1

The report in The Hindustan Times carrying this item is dated July 22,1936.
This was reported in the Literary Digest.
3
This was reported by Unity; vide footnote 2, “Letter to Amrit Kaur”,
18-11-1935
2

240

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

has been harmed even by “the firmness and repression of the British
Government”. My philosophy, if I can be said to have any, excludes
the possibility of harm to one’s cause by outside agencies. The harm
comes deservedly and only when the cause itself is bad, or being good
its champions are untrue, faint-hearted, or unclean. The article in
question refers to “Gandhiji’s secret plans”.1 If I know Gandhi at all
I can vouchsafe for it that he never had any secret plans in his life.
And if beyond what the readers of Harijan know there is no plan that
I can disclose, it is because I know none myself. Then one of the
articles presents Jawaharlal and me as rivals. I cannot think of myself
as a rival to Jawaharlal or him to me. Or if we are, we are rivals in
making love to each other in the pursuit of the common goal, and if
in the joint work for reaching the goal we at times seem to be taking
different routes, I hope the world will find that we had lost sight of
each other only for the moment and only to meet again with greater
mutual attraction and affection.
Harijan, 25-7-1936

306. LETTER TO SAHEBJI MAHARAJ
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 22, 1936
DEAR SAHEBJI MAHARAJ,

Many thanks for your prompt attention to my letter.2 Do please
send the mistry as soon as he can come. I may mention that we have
no tools save nine casts, one simple sewing machine and a village awl.
Whatever tools may be needed should be brought by the mistry. If
they are within our means we shall buy them. If they are not they may
go back with him when the time for return arrives. Rs. 60 per month
1
The Literary Digest had reported: “As anxious as India's 350,000,000
people to prove Gandhi's secret plans is the Marquess of Linlithgow,... Facing a
turbulent Nationalist Party, Linlithgow next year will institute India's new British
made Constitution, which provides for a Parliamentary Government by a series of
compromises in favour of India's minorities, mostly the sixty million Moslems... To
placate Moslems, who fear Hindu dominance, the Constitution grants them almost as
many seats in the Federal Legislature, which will exercise no control in India's
foreign and defence affairs.... Knowing that neither Gandhi nor Nehru's Nationalists
cherish the new Constitution, Lord Linlithgow is watchful of the two rivals’next
move.”
2
Vide “Letter to Sahebji Maharaj”, 11-7-1936

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

241

will be paid from the day he reaches Wardha or, if you prefer, from
the day he leaves Agra. Will you please also let me know what will be
expected of us for his accommodation? The tannery is situated in the
open about 1 1 / 2 miles from the post-office. We can place at his
disposal two rooms in the tannery.
I appreciate your kind wish that I should revisit Dayal Bagh if it
be only to see your new dairy. I should love to do so. But my present
sadhana lies in not leaving Segaon. I want to feel my feet in this little
village and be constantly in it for 3 seasons. I know that there will be
at least 3 breaks during the time. I do not want to add to the list. But I
can say this that I need no inducement to go to Dayal Bagh.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G ANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 2164

307. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
July 22, 1936
MY DEAR AMRIT,

You are not to venture out tonight. Come as early as you can
tomorrow morning but without disturbing your rest. And on your way
look in at Mira's cottage.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W.3734. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6890

308. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
July 22, 1936
CHI. PREMA,

I have your postcard written on your birthday. You did right in
taking my blessings for granted. In order to be a Mahatma's disciple
you will have to imagine one yourself. The person who is called
Mahatma is not one at all, though he is certainly able to take the place
of father to many and is content with that. He would be fully satisfied
242

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

if most of them testified to his being a good father.1
I hope your work is going on well.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
With me at present are Ba, Manu, Lilavati, Balwantsinha and
Munnalal.
Tukde Buva also is staying with me these days.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10383. Also C.W. 6821. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

309. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
July 22, 1936
CHI. NARAHARI,

After all Bhaskarrao2 did not come up to the mark. Nothing can
add to my grief. What does it matter to the ocean if the number of
rivers emptying themselves into it is one more or one less? But then
don't we sing in our daily prayers that misery is not really misery and
happiness is not really happiness? A mountain of misery will confront
us when we forget Narayana.
Bhaskarrao is a man who does not subscribe to this view. I have
also informed Vinoba today.
I have understood what you write about Ramji.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarait: S.N. 9097

1

The addressee insisted on calling Gandhiji 'Mahatmaji’ unlike others who
called him 'Bapuji', arguing that she would not call anyone else father as long as her
own father was living and that a name ought to denote only one person.
2
Bhaskarroa Behere
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

243

310. LETTER TO VIJAYABEHN GANDHI
July 22, 1936
CHI. VIJAYA,1

I have your little note. You do not write with an open heart still.
I am glad that Jamna 2 has asked for a copy of the Gita with the
Sanskrit text and printed in large type for your use. I have asked for
one and shall send it to you both.
The third chapter of the Gita which you have learnt is very
useful to us. Its effect is true to its heading3 . It interprets (in the
highest sense) yajna as body labour. However, I have described
fetching water, grinding corn, sweeping and the process connected
with spinning as the panchamahayajnas.4 How many of them do you
perform?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

311. CABLE TO KAMALNAYAN BAJAJ
July 23, 1936
KAMALNAYAN BAJAJ
INDIAN C ONTINGENT
OLYMPIC VILLAGE
BERLIN
ENGAGEMENT5 MADE

ANNOUNCED.

GOD

BE

WITH

YOU. LOVE.

BAPU
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad; p. 290
1

Wife of Purushottam Gandhi
Wife of Narandas Gandhi
3
Viz., “The Yoga of Karma”
4
The five great sacrifices traditionally enjoined on the householder are
svadhyaya, homa, balivaishvadeva, pindakriya, atithipujan.
5
Of the addressee with Savitri, daughter of Laxmanprasad Poddar; vide the
following item.
2

244

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

312. TELEGRAM TO LAXMANPRASAD PODDAR
July 23,1936
S ETH LAXMANPRASADJI P ODDAR
2 HASTINGS PARK R OAD
ALIPORE, C ALCUTTA
BOTH

KAMALNAYAN

MAY
AND

THIS
FOR

CONNECTION

AND
BE

SAVITRI

HAVE

FRUITFUL

OF

MY
GOOD

BLESSINGS.
FOR

THEM

COUNTRY.

GANDHI
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 267

313. NOTE TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
[After July 23,1936] 1
1. The marriage should not be solemnized in less than four
years or before Kamalnayan completes his studies.
2. Whatever education Savitri wants to have, she should have
only in India. After they are married the two of them may travel for
sight-seeing or for work.
3. Kamalnayan and Savitri should have full freedom to
correspond with each other. I do not see why such correspondence
need be secret.
4. Even before marriage, Savitri should from time to time visit
Wardha or any other place where Janakibehn, etc., may be staying.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3054

314. LETTER TO ELENI SAMIOS
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 24, 1936
2

DEAR SISTER ,

Your book had escaped me till Mirabehn showed a letter from
1

Vide “ Cable to Kamalnayan Bajaj”, 23-7-1936
Widow of the Greek author Nikos Kazantzakis. She had written a book
entitled The Holy Life of Mahatma Gandhi and sent a copy to Gandhiji.
2

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

245

Mons. Jean Herbert. I am sorry I was never able to have the whole
book read to me. I hope that those for whom you took the trouble of
writing the book will profit by it.
Yours sincerely

M. K. G ANDHI
From a photostat: C. W. 11075. Courtesy: Eleni Samios, Nicosia

315. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 24, 1936
CHI. KANTI,

I have your letter. How can I relieve your depression? You are
so sensitive that one never knows when you might take offence. First,
this is in your nature and secondly, you are at present unhappy. You
cannot forget Harilal, so you are unhappy over everything that you
either do not find pleasant or do not understand. In this, God alone
can help you and He will. May those bhajans which you sing with
such relish be your shield, since they are the balm to soothe all your
burning.
I cannot at all see why Ramachandran and Paparamma are
angry. Explain it to me if you have understood it.
We shall discuss the question of Harilal when you return. I
understand from Ramdas's letter that Harilal is perpetually in a
drunken stupor. When Ramdas spoke to him about the unrestrained
language of his Rander speech, his reply was that it was their way of
propaganda. You have been sent a copy of the speech of course.
I destroyed Paparamma's letter. It contained nothing special
about you. On the contrary, from beginning to end it was full of
praise for you. You are a sadhu, you are clever, Saraswati got you on
account of great punya 1 , and so on. So I wrote: “May your hopes be
fulfilled!”
You certainly ought not to extend your stay beyond a month
notwithstanding their importunity. You may obtain Kakasaheb's
permission and stay on if you are very keen but it does not look well
1

246

Spiritual merit
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to ask for such permission unless the need is very great. You should
yourself consider if it is necessary.
I have not understood the telegram from Devdas. You don't
have to think of it.
Build up your health well while you are there.
I am enclosing a letter for Saraswati.1
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7301. Courtesy; Kantilal Gandhi

316. LETTER TO SARASWATI
S EGAON,

[July 24, 1936] 2
CHI. SARASWATI,

I did get a letter from you at long last. Keep it up.
You are not like what? Did you not say that you wished to
marry the same day if it were possible? What is wrong with it? Yours
was a childlike wish. I fail to understand Mama's and Mother's anger.
What a smart girl you are! I let Kanti go for a month and now
you ask him to stay for two. Don't do it. Do not detain Kanti beyond
one month.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 6153. Also C.W.3426. Courtesy: Kantilal
Gandhi

317. AVOIDABLE MISERY
From a correspondent's long letter of wail I take the following.3
This letter is one out of many such. The majority of letters are
written in Hindi. But we know that English education has made things
1

Vide the following item.
Vide the preceding item.
3
Not reproduced here. The correspondent, a father of seven daughters, had
dwelt on his straitened circumstances and sought Gandhiji's help in meeting the
expenses of one of his daughter's marriage.
2

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

247

no better for parents of daughters. In some cases they have become
worse in that the market price of possible young men who would suit
an English-educated daughter of an English-educated father suffers
an appreciable increase.
In a case like the Bengali father's the best help that can be
rendered is not a loan or a gift of the required sum, but it should
consist in persuading and strengthening the parent to refuse to
purchase a match for his daughter but choose or let the daughter
choose one who would marry her for love, not for money. This means
a voluntary extension of the field of choice. There must be a breach
in the double wall of caste and province. If India is one and
indivisible, surely there should be no artificial divisions creating
innumerable little groups which would neither inter-dine nor
intermarry. There is no religion in this cruel custom. It would not do
to plead that individuals cannot make the commencement and that
they must wait till the whole society is ripe for the change. No reform
has ever been brought about except through intrepid individuals
breaking down inhuman customs or usages. And after all what
hardships can the schoolmaster suffer if he and his daughters refused
to treat marriage as a marketable transaction instead of a status or a
sacrament which it undoubtedly is. I would, therefore, advise my
correspondent courageously to give up the idea of borrowing or
begging and to save the four hundred rupees he can get on his life
policy by choosing in consultation with his daughter a suitable
husband no matter to what caste or province he belongs.
Harijan, 25-7-1936

318. IN WATERLESS SALEM
The Secretary, Salem District Harijan Sevak Sangh, writes:
The District is dry and the Harijans are not allowed to take water from the
wells owned by caste Hindus. The Gandhi Ashram has provided wells in two or
three villages. In the village of Avangier the Harijans are now depending on
the visit of the railway engine to the railway station for their drinking water
supply. The engine driver doles out some water and the villagers have to be
content with that. There is another place called Managalapuram where water
scarcity is severe.

This reveals a shocking state of affairs. No private organization
can ever cope with this terrible distress. As it is, Salem District has a
248

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

perpetual scarcity of water. And when to this is added scarcity of
common fellow-feeling on the part of a large part of its inhabitants,
the distress becomes unbearable as it has become in the case of
Harijans in Salem District. Is it not the first duty of the District Board
to ensure a regular supply of water for the Harijans--the most
neglected and yet the most useful servants of society? And now that
the Government of Madras has a department dealing with difficulties
of such classes as Harijans, one may hope to hear less and less of
scarcity of pure water for Harijans. But this is not to mean that Harijan
sevaks are to relax their vigilanice or that private charity need not
concern itself with water supply to Harijans. Aid must reach Harijans
in the shape of water no matter from what source it comes. And it will
come only when all sources combine to cope effectively with the
distress.
Harijan, 25-7-1936

319. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
S EGAON,

July 25,1936
CHI. NIMU,

This time your going away pricks me a lot. I liked your staying
with me. The next place I would have liked is Sabarmati. But your
dharma clearly is to go to Bombay and serve Ramdas. So go there,
look after your health, be happy, remain cheerful and, as Ramdas
wants, become his teacher. I have already explained to you what it was
Savitri saved Satyavan from, haven’t I? Save Ramdas in the same way.
Do not worry about Kanam. Keep on writing to me regularly at least
once a week.
A letter for Ramdas is enclosed. I could not at all find time to
write to him earlier.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Nirmala Gandhi Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

249

320. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 25, 1936
CHI. NIMU,

Kanu left with Jamnalalji just yesterday. Ba went to see them off.
For me it was. . .1 I ardently looked forward to being able to help him
advance. I did not realize my limitation. And so this happened. I see
that his spoon, dish and bowl are still here. I do not know why Ba kept
them back. She is at Maganwadi. Send for whatever you want from
among the things lying here or at Maganwadi. Write to me a detailed
letter. Never be tardy in writing to me. What was forgiven in Ramdas’s
case, will not be forgiven in yours.
With Tukdoji Maharaj, Kano had come to feel at perfect ease.
Write to me and tell me all about yourself and Sumi.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

321. LETTER TO M.C. RAJAH
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 26,1936
DEAR RAO BAHADUR,

I have no difficulty about giving general endorsement to your
letter to Dr. Moonje. 2 I do not at all understand Dr. Moonje's or Dr.
Ambedkar's position2 . For me removal of untouchability stands on a
1

A word here is illegible.
&3 Dr. B.S. Moonje's proposal, accepted by Dr. Ambedkar, was as follows: “
If Dr. Ambedkar were to announce his decision that he and his followers are prepared
to embrace Sikhism in preference to Islam and Christianity, and that he shall
honestly and sincerely cooperate with the Hindus and the Sikhs in propagating their
culture and in counteracting the Moslem movement for drawing the Depressed Classes
into the Moslem fold, the Hindu Mahasabha will be prepared, in view of their having
agreed to remain within the Hindu culture, to make an announcement that it will not
object:
(I)
To the conversion of the Depressed classes to Sikhism
(ii) To the inclusion of the neo-Sikhs in the list of the Scheduled Castes; and
(iii) To the enjoyment by the Depressed Classes of the political rights of the
Poona Pact by free competition between the non-Sikh and the neo-Sikh Depressed
Classes as provided for under the Poona Pact.” For Gandhiji's views, vide” Letter to
B.S. Moonje”, 31-7-1936
2

250

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

footing all its own. It is to me a deeply religious question. The very
existence of our religion depends on its voluntary removal by savarna
Hindus in the spirit of repentance. It can never be a question of barter
for me. And I am glad you take nearly the same position1 that I do.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 7787. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

322. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
July 26, 1936
CHI, CHHAGANLAL,

Today I must write to you. I very much wished to write to you
all these days, but could get no time at all.
Enclosed is a letter from the Bhangis of Bhavnagar. I have
written to them and advised them that they should seek and follow the
advice of the local branch of the Sangh. I am sending the letter2 only
for your information. Read it and take whatever action, if any, may be
necessary.
I often think about what you wrote in your personal letter.
These are troubled times and it is difficult to keep one's moorings at
such a time. Be sure about this: that reason without moral sense is like
a prostitute who may be outwardly attractive, may dance and sing and
cast a spell on one, but who will ruin a man. I see the prostitute reason
doing that to many people at the present time.
See that you yourself do not abandon even the smallest of the
Ashram rules.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: B.N. 5539

1

In his letter the addressee had challenged the position of Moonje pointing
out that there was a difference between religious conversion and communal migration
such as he was advocating and declared that he could not be a party to the political
manipulation proposed by Moonje.
2
Not available
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

251

323. LETTER TO TARA N. MASHRUWALA
July 26,1936
CHI. TARA,

I wanted to reply to your letter immediately and with a long
letter, but it could not be. Now, however, I must reply. Do continue
Dr. Gauri's treatment.
You must write to me regularly.
You should try to stay at Mahila Ashram, if you are not certain
that it is your duty to stay at Akola. There, you may, if you wish,
increase your knowledge of English. Besides, you will be able to see
me from time to time if you are in the Mahila Ashram. Kishorelal and
Gomati are also there, and Jamnalalji, too, will generally be there.
I have lent you a helping hand but it remains to be seen how
long you will let me help. I shall not tire of it, nor should you. I want
to lead you just as far as your mind and your heart can take you. You
are therefore safe with me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7527. Also C.W. 5003. Courtesy:
Kanubhai N. Mashruwala

324. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
S EGAON,

July 27, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

I had prepared myself for the news, especially when I found that
you had not come. Will you have Manu or Lilavati? You will tell me
when I come in the evening. Whether germ or chill, let us hope you
will be free tomorrow. I shan't negotiate the hillock tomorrow but
walk straight to you. I wish you will take an earth bandage for the
head. The ache will go. Take soda with hot or cold water. More when
I come.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W.6360. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9826

252

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

325. LETTER TO UTTAMCHAND
July 28,1936
What are you referring to when you say that there has been
silence observed at this end about your drops as you call your
donations? I assure [you] in the forlorn causes I handle, every drop is
an ocean. Your latest cheque is most welcome.
I appreciated your caution about Kamala Memorial. There are
trustees behind it who will control it. I am hoping that it will be a
home for ailing women and children.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

326. LETTER TO MANDY MACCARTHY
July 28, 1936
I have received your articles with much interest. But before I
publish them in Harijan, I would like to know much more about you
than you have said in your postcard. What is your occupation, what is
your age, what led you to India, what led you to adopt an Indian
name1 , what is your faith, how do you support yourself? I hope you
will not consider these questions to be impertinent. Generally we take
in Harijan articles from those whom we know and who try to live up
to what they write. I have observed over the past 50 years that the
simplest writings of earnest persons are effective when brilliant
writings of mere clever people fall flat. Words seem to take the vitality
of their writers or speakers.
And if I am to use your articles, I should have your full
permission to cut them about always taking care not to change the
sense.
Yours,

M. K. G.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

1

Tandradevi

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

253

327. LETTER TO EFY ARISTARCHI
July 28,1936
It is ages since I wrote to you. So you have lost your uncle. For
seekers of God every loss is a gain. Separation is purely nominal and
temporary. Death is a deliverance for all without exception. But you
need no sermon form me. Since I wanted to write on your uncle's
death, I could only give you my innermost thoughts long held on
death.
I dare not give myself the time to write to you about things
going on in this little village.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

328. LETTER TO RAJARAM R. BHOLE
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 28, 1936
DEAR RAJARAM,

Pray don’t expect me to answer all your letters. I have but
limited time for such work now.
I still retain the opinion that the d. c. should retain independence of action. But the position changes, when some of them go to
the Parliamentary Board and seek assistance and advice. The
P. B. may not put them off. You see the distinction.
Yours,

BAPU
From the original: R. R. Bhole Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

254

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

329. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
S EGAON,

July 28, 1936
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

You have been suffering much indeed. You must have got
yourself operated upon by now.1
The revelation about... 2 is a serious one. But such corruption is
not to be found in the States People's [Conference] only. It is a widespread evil. There are a great many people like... 3 among us...'s4 sin
has been discovered. Let us see what he does now.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Take complete rest. It will not matter if you cannot come here. I
am in excellent health.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 196

330. LETTER TO LAKSHMI NARAYAN GADODIA
July 28, 1936
BHAI LAKSHMI NARAYAN,

I am happy to see the signatures of you both.5 My hipbaths still
continue. There is no need of steam-baths as I perspire enough as it is.
I am not using the mud-pack at night. I am not used to a sitz-bath. I
shall now see about it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5625
1

The addressee was operated upon for septum of the nose at a polyclinic on
July 30,1936.
2
Omissions as in the source
3
ibid
4
ibid
5
Presumabbly the addressee and a hakim who practised nature-cure
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

255

331. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 29,1936
BHAI SATIS BABU,

There is little likelihood of Chandranath following your advice
if he does not wholly believe in truth and non-violence.
Why does Hemprabha keep worrying?
How are matters with the Harijan Sevak Sangh? And how is
Arun 1 ?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1627

332. LETTER TO PYARELAL
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 29/30,1936
CHI. PYARELAL,

I am awaiting your letter. I have of course received the
post-card. You will have fully recovered by now.
I understand about the articles. You must hurry about whatever
further you want to write.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Your letter has just reached me. 1 shall write after reading it.
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

256

Addressee's youngest son
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

333. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 30, 1936
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

How I wish you would put down your foot on ‘insane’ programmes and save your energy for the common good.
All will be well if you will never lose your humour and make up
your mind to stay out your period, trying to push through your
policy as much as you can through the present team. Time has arrived
to think of the future, i.e., next year's plans. Whatever happens, you
must not be in opposition. That is my confirmed opinion. When like
Father you feel that you are ready to take sole charge of the Congress,
I think that from the present company you will find no opposition. I
hope you will have plain sailing in Bombay.1
Kamala Memorial is disturbing me. I do not know what is
happening about the collections or the scheme. If Khurshed or Sarup2
or both are concentrating on the thing, it is well. Please tell Sarup I
expect her to keep me informed of her doings in this connection.
I won't discuss here the question of socialism. As soon as I
finish revision of my note, you will have the draft before it goes to the
Press. My difficulty is not about the remote future. It is always the
present that I can concentrate upon and that at times worries me. If the
present is well taken care of, the future will take care of itself. But I
must not anticipate.
I hope you are keeping really well.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
You will see the correspondence between Jenkins and myself. I
too hate legal proceedings. But this seems to me to be a case where
action is called for.
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1936. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

1
2

At the A.I.C.C. meeting scheduled to be held on August 22 and 23
Vijayalakhmi Pandit

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

257

334. DRAFT OF APPEAL FOR FUNDS1
[July 30, 1936] 2
An appeal is respectfully made for at least Rs.... on behalf of the
Harijan Sevak Sangh. Gandhiji cannot be expected to tour as he did in
1933-34 for collections and stirring public conscience. There is no
cause other than the Harijan cause that can claim greater support from
caste Hindus who believe that untouchability is a blot on Hinduism.
The only question therefore for the public to consider is whether the
Harijan Sevak Sangh is the organization that is enough to discharge
the trust it has undertaken.
The Appendix gives enough details to enable the public to
judge this for themselves. And if they are satisfied about the fitness of
the institution, we hope that a generous response will be made to this
appeal.
From a photostat: G.N. 10503. Also C.W. 7976 b. Courtesy: G.D. Birla

335. ENDORSEMENT OF APPEAL FOR FUNDS
July 30, 1936
I heartily endorse this appeal3 . Removal of untouchability is a
matter of change of heart. Hearts are not changed by expenditure of
money however wise it may be. The change will come when we have
enough selfless spiritually-minded workers. Monetary contributions
will be an effective test of the existence of such persons. For one of
the results of the change of heart should be incessant work among
Harijans. This cannot be done without plenty of funds. Schools and
hostels cannot be opened nor can wells be dug without ample funds. I
hope therefore that this appeal will receive liberal support from both
the rich and the poor according to their means.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N.10503. Also C.W. 7976 a. courtesy: G.D. Birla
1

This was drafted by Gandhiji; vide “Letter to S.R. Venkataraman”,
30-7-1936
2
ibid
3
Vide the preceding item.

258

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

336. LETTER TO S.R. VENKATARAMAN
July 30, 1936
DEAR VENKATARAMAN,

In accordance with Shri Birla's wish, I have drafted the appeal1
for funds. I enclose also my endorsement 3. I have not the time to
make a fair copy for facsimile reproduction. If shri Birla's conception
is different from mine, the draft should be altered as he wishes. I am
of opinion that the appeal should not be issued unless some support is
guaranteed and arrangements made for collections throghout India.
Yours truly,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 10503. Also C.W. 7976. Courtesy: G.D. Birla

337. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
July 30, 1936
DEAR DAUGHTER AMTUL SALAAM2 ,

I have with me two of your letters to answer. There is no harm in
your being operated upon there. I shall do through Devdas whatever
is possible. Moreover, there will be Brajkisan when he comes. Give the
accompanying letter3 to Devdas.
I have understood your point about Rukmini. And now she has
after all gone. It was just the proper thing that Malkani should have
gone to leave her at Hyderabad.
I shall ask you to come after your operation. Meanwhile look
after your health carefully. Do send for anything that you need. You
should freely ask Devdas for anything that you need if you truly
regard him as your brother.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 342
1
2
3

Vide the preceding two items.
ibid
Not traceable

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

259

338. LETTER TO ANANDSHANKAR B. DHRUVA
July 30, 1936 1
SUJNA BHAISHRI (PROF. DHRUVA) 2 ,

I have carefully gone through both your letters to Mahadev.
What I want is not something for the learned but something which
Harijans and workers can understand and put into practice. I do not
want you to make a fresh study, but only that form your wide knowledge you should send me something which you can write in... 3 hours
or at the most in eight hours.
I had already written to you that I liked your book on Hindu
religion very much. I will certainly read it again. But I do not
wantextracts from anything. For a moment imagine yourself among
Harijans in a village, converse with the old men, women and children
and teach them religion. I want whatever is available in this way and it
should have your stamp. Mahadev won't even translate it into English.
The testimonial you give him is deserved, but first he hasn't the time
and then I want your language. It is not beyond you to write simple
English and finally you will grant the two of us the right to make
some suggestions. Won't you? The suggestions will be put into the
writing only if you approve of them.
Now about your programme. Going through it I am scared. At
the moment Gujarat or Hindu religion does not require scholarship.
That will not save either religion or India or Gujarat. I do not mean to
say that there is absolutely no need for scholarship. There are many
who will give us scholarly writings. But there are very few religious
enthusiasts who would make themselves one with the people. I have
believed that you are one of them. You have given quite a big share of
your scholarship to the scholars and the educated. But what have you
given to the villagers and persons like me? A person like me would
steal something from what you have given to the educated. But that
does not amount to giving. Do what Tolstoy did. In his old age he had
before his eyes the unknown peasants of Russia and the literature he
produced for them will live for ever. Can't I expect something like that
from you?
1
2
3

260

The source has Ahmedabad in the date-line which is obviously a slip.
1869-1942; Sanskrit scholar and Gujarati man of letters
The source is illegible here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Be that as it may. I have said whatever I wanted to. I did not
want to write so much. Accept whatever appeals to you and throw
away the rest. I won't feel unhappy. Why should a beggar feel shy?
Donors will only give according to their wishes and means.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a copy of the Gujarati: Payarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

339. LETTER TO KANU GANDHI
July 30, 1936
CHI. KANU,

I am sending six letters with this. Keep copies of the letters1 to
Jugalkishore and Gangabehn. The rest may be posted straight away.
Make a copy of the letter2 to Satyanand Bose also.
In this way you are getting closer to Mahadev's place.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II.

340. LETTER TO SATYANAND BOSE3
[July 30,1936] 4
DEAR SATYANAND BABU,

I quite agree with you that the Congress has to respond to
variations in public opinion. Pandit Jawaharlal is wide awake and
handling the questions as they arise. My work is strictly limited to
advising those who find it necessary to refer certain matters to me.
I would therefore like you to pass on your views to Pandit
Nehru.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

These are not traceable.
ibid
3
Although it is explained in the footnote on p. 184 that the letter to the
addressee referred to in the text is not traceable, it is possible that this is the letter
meant, a copy of which became available after the volume was sent to the press.
4
Pyarelal has kept this letter with those of 1936.
2

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

261

341. LETTER TO JAYANTI N. PAREKH
July 30, 1936 1
CHI. JAYANTI2

I had always sought and got news about you. I am glad that you
wrote to me. I do not have to say anything about the change in your
views. May you go on making progress in your thinking and do
fearlessly whatever you feel is right. Your good lies in that.
As you were bound by pledge it was your duty before violating
it to meet the leader of your batch and acquaint him with your
dilemma. You have not done that. A soldier's duty is not easy. If all
the eighty soldiers interpret the pledge as they like, what will the
leader do? Can the country's work be done like that? But the milk that
has been spilt cannot be collected again. This is to be remembered for
the future.
I know ill-feeling prevails in Gujarat. It is difficult to say who is
to blame for it. But I have seen that socialists in Gujarat do not
discriminate bteween truth and untruth. There are some among them
of whom I would not have believed it. I do feel unhappy about it. I do
hope that you have not accepted diplomacy as your dharma.
You had been to see me. I was happy to know that both of you
brothers are doing very well financially.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

342. LETTER TO H.L. SHARMA
July 30, 1936
BHAI SHARMA,

We are looking for Babbitt3 but it has not been found so far.
How much was the yarn 4 ? The corresponding length of khadi of the
same count will be sent. I am looking for the fine yarn; it simply
slipped from my mind. You know my attitude to going to the villages.
1

The source has Ahmedabad in the date-line which is obviously a slip.
An Ashram immate who later become a communist.
3
Principles of Light and Colour by E.D. Babbitt, obtained by the addressee in
Switzerland
4
The yarn spun by the addressee for his own kurtas
2

262

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Do not incur heavy expenditure. Draupadi and the child are well, I
hope. Do keep writing to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsh,
facing p. 258

343. LETTER TO B.S. MOONJE
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

July 31, 1936
DEAR DR. MOONJE,

R.B.M.C. Rajah has sent Seth Birla and me copies of your
correspondence with him on the Yeravda Pact1 for such use as we may
wish to make. But the correspondence on your side is marked
confidential. My own opinion is that the subject-matter admits no
confidence. But before I can avail myself of the Rao Bahadur's
permission, I would like to have your consent to the publication of the
correspondence. Meanwhile you will permit me to say that your
proposal2 is subversive of the spirit of the Yeravda Pact and wholly
contrary to the object of the anti-untouchability movement.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C.W. 7788. Courtesy: G.D. Birla

1
Vide Appendix, “Agreement between depressed classes leaders and caste
hindu Leaders”, after 17-10-1932.
2
Vide footnotes 1 and 2, “Letter to M. C. Rajah”, 26-7-1936

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

263

344. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
July 31, 1936
CHI. KANTI,

At this place one needs the tools every moment. I tried to obtain
country-made tools, but could not. They are now being made at
Bangalore. Meanwhile I sent for your kit as it was not needed at
Maganwadi.
It seems some of the tools are missing. Whatever that may be, I
have made a list of those that came to hand. You will find it on the
reverse. Let me know which ones you remember having been lost. I
shall arrange to search for them.
From the handwriting on the reverse you will see that Rajkumari
is here. She came last evening. You will now admit that my place has
become similar to your dharmashala—one corner to me, another to
Rajkumari, a third to Tukdoji Maharaj and a fourth to Munnalal. In
the centre are Ba, Lilavati and Manu; and Tukdoji includes himself
and his followers who stream in all day long. Have you heard of him?
He had come to see me at Nagpur.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7303. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

264

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

345. A TALK1
[Before August 1, 1936]
Now, you must see that I am being compelled to grow a beard!
“But my husband is ready to come whenever you summon him!”, says the
woman.

That I know, but will he shave the Harijans?
I do not know that, Maharaj; but he is quite prepared to shave you.

But how can I have his services when my Harijan brothers
cannot have them?
Harijan, 1-8-1936

346. A TALK2
[Before August 1, 1936]
So, Patil, I must remain without the services of the barber?
No, Mahatmaji, he is ready. Shall I send him?

I know you can send him. But what about my Harijan son? You
must know that I have a family here and Govind is my son. How can I
have the barber's services if he will not allow Govind to go near him?
What would you do if you were in my position? Tell me. Supposing
you were invited to a place from where your son was deliberately
excluded. Would you go there?
“ Now, there, Bapuji, don't you touch him on the raw”, says Jamnalalji, who
has known the old Patil for years. “If someone could assure him that he would go
straight to swarga (Heaven) if he were to cast off untouchability, he would do so. But
he wants a reliable assurance, and he would not accept ours.” And the room resounds
with laughter in which the old Patil joins. “ Everything is permissible to a Mahatma
like you, but not to folks like us,” he says and returns.

Harijan, 1-8-1936
1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter” The headman of Segaon
had made clear to Gandhiji that he would not co-operate with him on the question of
untouchability and for that reason the local barber was prevented from rendering his
services to Gandhiji. For Gandhiji's talk with the headman, vide the following item.
2
Extracted from Mahadev Desai's “Weekly Letter”
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

265

347. DISCUSSION WITH VISITORS1
[Before August 1, 1936]
The sadhu or the Buva 2 who is for the moment a member of the family has for
visitors a number of devotees. They are frankly surprised that the sadhu is not only
associating with the Mahatma but eats under his roof food cooked by a Harijan
boy....They come and argue, sometimes the sadhu cannot solve their doubts and
difficulties and they turn to Gandhiji.
[A VISITOR:] But, even the lower creation observes untouchability, Mahatmaji,
and you would have even man to shed it!

[ GANDHIJI:] Now that's something novel. Let me understand.
Donkeys don't associate with dogs; a crow would not touch a pigeon's eggs.
Every species has its own sphere, its own place, its own use in God's creation.

But cows, donkeys and dogs will gladly remain under the same
roof if you feed them and own them. And do you hold that there is
the same difference between you and an untouchable, as there is
between a cow and a dog?
Don't we shun wild animals?

You shun lions and tigers and snakes, because they are
untouchable? Absurd! You shun them because you fear them. You
would fain tame them if you could, and crowds flock and attribute
miraculous powers to one who can domesticate them.
But we don't touch pigs because they are dirty, and not because we are afraid of
them.

Well, then, supposing a man in cleaner clothes looked upon you
as dirty and regarded you as an untouchable, you won't mind? And
what of your women who do all the dirty jobs for your children?
They are the mistresses of the family. Why so?
Well, then, supposing the so-called untouchables were dressed as
well as you, and washed themselves clean after doing the dirty jobs for
you, and for which you should thank them rather than despise or shun
them, would you touch them? Supposing they ate clean food and did
not touch beef or carrion, would you touch them? I tell you there are
numerous so-called Harijans in India who satisfy all these conditions,
who live cleaner and purer lives than we do and yet we regard them as
1
2

266

Extracted from Mahadev Desai's “Weekly Letter”
Tukdoji Maharaj
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

untouchables. How will God forgive this heinous sin of ours?
But you want us to admit them to the temples too! How can people doing dirty
jobs be admitted to temples?

Have I ever asked them to go to temples with baskets of filth on
their heads? Have I not said that they would satisfy all the conditions
about bath and cleanliness that the other Hindus satisfy? According to
you all surgeons and all nurses are unfit to go to our temples!
Harijan, 1-8-1936

348. DISCUSSION WITH A FRIEND1
[Before August 1, 1936]
[FRIEND:] Why do you insist on eight hours’manual work a day? Is it not
possible in a well-ordered society to reduce the working day to two hours and leave
the citizen ample leisure for intellectual and artistic pursuits?

[ GANDHIJI:] We know that those who get all that leisure—both
the working and the intellectual class—do not make the best use of it.
In fact we too often find the idle mind being turned into the devil's
workshop.
No; he would not be idling away. Supposing we divided the day into two
hours’physical labour and six hours’intellectual labour; would it not be good for the
nation?

I do not know that it would be feasible. I have not mathematically calculated it, but if a man will do the intellectual labour only
for profit and not for the nation, I am sure that the scheme will break
down; unless of course the State pays him amply for the two
hours’labour and compels him to do other work without paying him
anything. That would be a fine thing, but it cannot be done without a
kind of State conscription.
But take for instance you. You cannot in the nature of things do eight hour's
physical labour, and have to do eight hours’or more intellectual work. You do not
abuse your leisure?

It is compulsory work and leaves no leisure, as for instance it
would if I was going out to play tennis. But I tell you even taking my
case that I am sure our minds would have been infinitely better if we
1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai's “Weekly Letter”

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

267

laboured with our hands for eight hours. We would not have a single
idle thought, and I may tell you that my mind is not entirely free from
idle thoughts. Even now I am what I am because I realized the value
of physical labour at a very early stage of my life.
But then if physical work has such inherent virtue, our people have been
working more than eight hours a day, not with any appreciable effect on the purity or
strength of their minds.

Physical labour by itself is not an education even as mental
labour is not. It has been with our people deadly drudgery without
their knowing this, and that deadens one's finer instincts. That is where
I have my strongest complaint against the savarna Hindus. They have
rendered work for the proletariat a task of hard drudgery, from which
they have no pleasure and in which they have no interest. If they had
been considered members of the society enjoying the same status as
they, theirs would have been the proudest position in life. This is
supposed to be the Kaliyuga. In the Satyayuga, or golden age,
whenever it was, the society I dare say was better ordered than today.
Ours is an ancient land where civilizations have come and gone, and it
is difficult to say what exactly we were like in a particular age. But
there is no doubt that we are where we are because we have long
neglected the Shudras. Today's village culture, if culture it can be
called, is an awful culture. The villagers live as worse than animals.
Nature compels animals to work and live naturally. We have so
dabased our working classes that they cannot work and live naturally,
If our people had laboured intelligently and with joy, we should have
been quite different today.
Work and culture cannot be separated, then?

No. They tried to do it in ancient Rome and failed miserably.
Culture without labour, or culture which is not the fruit of labour,
would be 'Vomitoria’as a Roman Catholic writer says. The Romans
made indulgence a habit, and were ruined. Man cannot develop his
mind by simply writing and reading or making speeches all day long.
All my reading I tell you was done in the leisure hours I got in jails,
and I have benefited by it because all of it was done not desultorily
but for some purpose. And though I have worked physically for days
and months for eight hours on end I don't think I suffered from
mental decay. I have often walked as much as 40 miles a day and yet
never felt dull.
But you had this mental equipment.

268

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

No fear. You don't know how mediocre I was at school and in
England. I had never the courage to speak at debating society
meetings or even in a gathering of vegetarians. No. Don't you run
away with the thought that I was blessed with any extraordinary
powers. God, I think, advisedly did not give me then the power to
speak. You must know, among us I am the least read man.
Harijan, 1-8-1936

349. DISCUSSION WITH STUDENTS OF VILLAGE
WORKERS’TRAINING SCHOOL1
[Before August 1, 1936]
Q.

How to dipossess people of ill-gotten gains which is what the Socialists are

out to do?
A. Who is to judge what gains or riches are ill-gotten or wellgotten? God alone can judge, or a competent authority appointed
both by the 'haves’and the 'have-nots’can judge. Not anyone and
everyone. But if you say that All property and possession is theft, all
must give up property and wealth. Have we given it up? Let us make a
beginning, expecting the rest of follow. For those who are convinced
that their own possessions are ill-gotten, there is of course no other
alternative but to give them up.
Q. What is the root of violence? Does it not take place to prevent injustice and
humiliation?

A.

Hardly. The root of violence is selfishness, anger, lust, etc.

Q. I have not made myself understood. I see in front of me terrible wrong being
done and I am provoked to violence. Is not the wrong at the root of it?

A.

No, anger is at the root of your violence. Whether your
violence is justified or not on such an occasion is another question,
but there is no doubt that anger is at the root.
Q. How to deal with beggars? How can we turn them away when we see they are
famishing?

A. Beggars must be distinguished from famishing people.
Beggars are often enough sturdy. Some are theives. There is nothing
like a right to beg, there is certainly a right to ask for work. And whilst
1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai's “Weekly Letter”

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

269

you may not give alms, it is your duty to give work to those who ask
for it.
Q. But how are you going to do it when you have work for four and eight turn
up? Will you engage all the eight?

A.

No, because I must recognize my limitations.

Q.

Then they will beg rather than starve?

A.

They shall not beg. They must do some work. I have not yet
settled down in Segaon. When I do so I shall see that no one goes
away for want of work. I will have spinning wheels and chakkis for
those who being in want of work ask for it.
Q. When we go to villages we are bound to come up against opposition. For
instance, they are opposed to sanitation work. What are we to do?

A.

We have to put up with the opposition.

Q.

They boycott us, they will not allow us to use their wells.

A.

They may; we will use other wells, but we shall not fight them.
We will not provoke them, but argue with them until they understand.
We have to face all kinds of difficulties.
Q. My difficulty is that if my sanitation work scares people away, if they will
not attend the prayers, if they will not do even spinning, must I persist?

A.

It depends on the spirit in which you have sat down there. If
you have gone there principally for sanitation work, you will certainly
not give it up, whatever happens. After all we will certainly do our own
sanitation, keep our own surroundings clean. But it is open to one to
begin with spinning, night classes, etc., and go on to sanitation if one
thinks that would enable one to do one's work easier.
Harijan, 1-8-1936

350. A COBWEB OF MISUNDERSTANDINGS
I have before me a number of cuttings from various Urdu
papers severely and even bitterly criticizing the proceedings1 of the
recently formed Bharatiya Sahitya Parishad and thereanent Babu
Rajendra Prasad, Babu Purushottamdas Tandon, Pandit Jawaharlal and
me. They attribute motives and designs to which, I know, we are all
strangers. The writers have not taken the trouble of even
understanding what was said or done by us or at the Parishad. Thus
1

270

At Nagpur; vide “Speech at Akhil Bharatiya Sahitya Parishad”, 24-4-1936
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

they think that the design at the bottom of the Association is to push
Hindi at the expense of Urdu, and so to Sanskritize Hindi as to make it
almost impossible for Mussalmans to understand it. They also infer
from a speech of Babu Purushottamdas Tandon delivered at
Allahabad at the time of the opening of the Literary Museum of the
Hindi Sahitya Sammelan that he distorted facts when he claimed that
there were nearly 23 crores of Indians who spoke or at least
understood Hindi. There are in these writings other innuendoes which
I need not notice, my purpose being simply to remove if possible the
misunderstandings that have led to the innuendoes.
To take the last first. If the writers had the whole speech of
Tandonji before them they would have known that in the 23 crores he
deliberately included the Urdu-speaking Hindus and Mussal-mans. He
therefore included Urdu in the use of the word Hindi. This will be
clear if it is borne in mind that Hindi according to the resolution
adopted at Indore in 1935, 1 to which Tandonji was party, meant that
language which was spoken in the North by Hindus and Mussalmans
and was written either in Devanagari or Urdu scripts. If the writers had
known this definition, surely they would have had no complaint on
any account unless they objected to the very name Hindi. If they did,
it was deplorable. Hindi is the original word for the language of the
North. Urdu, as is well known, was the name specially given for a
special purpose. The script was also a graft for the convenience of the
Muslim rulers. If that is the historical sequence, there ought not to be
any opposition to the use of the word 'Hindi’so long as it is used
inclusively. In any event at the most the difference, if there must be
any, narrows itself down to the use of one word or the other for
signifying the same thing.
The complaint about Sanskritizing has some justification in that
some writers of Hindi insist on unnecessarily introducing Sanskrit
words in their writings. A similar charge can justly be brought against
some Urdu writers who insist on equally unnecessarily introducing
Persian or Arabic words. And what is worse, they even alter the
grammar of the language. These extremes are bound to disappear in
course of time because they would never be adopted by the masses. A
speech that is beyond the comprehension of the masses has but a brief
existence.
1

At the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan held from April 20 to 23; vide “ Two Good
Resolutions”, 4-5-1935
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

271

As for the Bharatiya Sahitya Parishad, it aims at making through
Hindi as above defined available to the whole of India the best
thought in the provinces. Surely there is in this nothing sinister or
communal, as suggested in some writings.
The adoption of 'Hindi-Hindustani’was at my instance. It was
adopted in order to bring out in a compound word the meaning of the
definition of Hindi. Moulvi Abdul Kadar Sahib had suggested the use
either only of Hindustani or Hindi-Urdu instead of Hindi-Hindustani.
I should personally have no objection to either course, but the
Bharatiya Sahitya Parishad could not ignore its own origin. The idea
was born at the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan at Indore and took a definite
shape at Nagpur under its aegis. The retention of the word 'Hindi’was
therefore necessary in the nature of things. The substitution of Urdu
would have been bad for the reasons I have already stated. But as I
have endeavoured to show, Hindi, Hindustani and Urdu are synonymous terms and refer substantially to the same language.
Harijan, 1-8-1936

351. A CRIMINAL TRIBE
Perhaps there are not many places on this globe where crime is
the profession of tribes as it is in India and it flourishes under the garb
of religion. We have therefore in this country a law called the Criminal
Tribes Act. The Aheris of Hissar District are supposed to be one of
such tribes. On 7th June a conference of Aheris was held in the village
of Gangan Kheri under the presidentship of Lala Thakurdas
Bhargava. It was attended by over 1,000 Aheris and over 200 savarna
Hindus. From the report before me it appears that the Aheris were told
by some persons that if they embraced Islam they would be helped to
become free from the application of the Act and the stigma of being a
criminal tribe would no longer attach to them. Therefore the Aheris
assembled declared their 'undying faith’in Hinduism and appealed to
the Government to free them from the application of the Act.
In these days of ferment mere conferences and resolutions will
not prevent appeals for conversions against material inducements nor
bring the freedom sought. The only way to avert danger of defection
and to procure freedom from special hardships is self-purification and
selfless continuous service of the depressed people by the savarnas.
Criminal tribes and untouchable castes are a scourge upon Hindu
272

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

society for its godless treatment of its own members in the sacred
name of religion. You cannot have a diseased limb without the whole
body being affected. Therefore the only effective method is reform
from within. If the whole society is purified, it will be immune from
external attacks, no matter how fierce they are. Conversely, no battling
against external attacks can prevent internal disintegration. Indeed the
energy expended in repelling external attacks must result in further
exhaustion and therefore speedier destruction. I hope that the responsible savarna Hindus who attended the Conference will continue the
work begun at the Conference and direct their energy in constructive
channels.
Harijan, 1-8-1936

352. LETTER TO RAFI AHMED KIDWAI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 1, 1936
MY DEAR KIDWAI,

To ask for a message from me is like drawing... 1 live tooth and
then too for a meeting such as you are describing.
Surely at a meeting at which Mr. Jinnah presides and which
Jawaharlal opens any message would be superfluous.
Yours sincerely,

MOULVI R AFI AHMED KIDWAI
4A R UTTLEDGE R OAD
LUCKNOW
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

353. LETTER TO BAL D. KALELKAR
August 1, 1936
CHI. BAL,

From my experiments in cooking I have come to the following
conclusions: By cooking for oneself one saves money, improves
health, becomes more enthusiastic and improves general knowledge.
1

The source is damaged here.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

273

One also automatically gains knowledge of the science of nutrition
and becomes more efficient in serving food to others.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

354. LETTER TO KIKABHAI LAVAJI
August 1, 1936
BHAI KIKABHAI,

I have received your letter. We can say that Yeravda Pact is for
all. If it finds appeal, everything will be all right. I see no need for
reprinting it now. If it is necessary, I shall certainly have it reprinted.
We must put up with whatever Dr. Ambedkar says. One who is
born a Hindu would not give up his religion because of the misdeeds
of other Hindus. We can very well say that Harijans are unhappy
because of their deeds. But a person like me would not forget that the
ill-treatment by the so-called savarna Hindus adds to their
unhappiness. If the savarna Hindus mend their ways and repent of
their deeds, then very soon the seeming faults of Harijans will be on
the wane even if they do not go root and branch.
Drinking will certainly increase with the increase in the number
of mills.
BAPU
KIKABHAI LAVAJI
P ATTHAR KUVA
AHMEDABAD
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

355. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
August 1,1936
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

It is good that you got the operation done: If it proves
successful, you will have permanent relief.
You must have received the copy of my reply to Rajaram. 1 If
you have not replied yet, I suggest this: “Your letter contains no fresh
1

274

The letter is not traceable.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

point which calls for a reply. I have, therefore, nothing to add to my
previous letter.”
Do not be in a hurry to leave the hospital and do not resume
work without taking complete rest.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 196-7

356. LETTER TO GANGABEHN B. JHAVERI
August 1, 1936
CHI. GANGABEHN,

After a long time I did receive your letter. I cannot form any
opinion about the new school. I cannot swallow the views of its
manager which are destructive of morality. However, treat this view of
mine as of no consequence. Consult Pannalal and, having heard him,
do what you wish.
If you have not read everything pertaining to socialism, then
take a decision only after reading something more about it. Socialism
is one thing and Jawaharlal is another. There has always been a
difference between individuals and ideology.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

357. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 1, 1936
CHI. NIMU,

I received your letter. Do not fail to relieve Ramdas of the
burden of writing to me. The children must have got well. Send for
Kanam’s things which may be required. Do not postpone writing to
me. Write to me in time and give all the details.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

275

358. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
August 1, 1936
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

Your letter. You will fall and rise, fall again and rise again and
by thus falling and rising attain success. Never give up your efforts.
You must certainly write to me but you may not expect a reply from
me as I have no time to spare. If I have I shall scribble a couple of
lines.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4287

359. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 2,1936
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,

This time Manilal did not write to me. I am writing this with my
left hand as the right one is tired. Let those who want to brag about
Harilal's action do so with pleasure. Here at any rate they have almost
forgotten him and he is always under the influence of drink. The fault
must lie somewhere in my own method of bringing him up. Mine has
been a life of wanderings and it has had a number of vicissitudes. It is
quite obvious that I could not manage it all.
Manu is with me at present, enjoying herself. And of course Ba
and Lilavati are also with me. Sushila ought to control her palate and
improve her health. Indulging the palate is not limited to eating
starchy foods and sugar alone. You can get so much fruit there that
you can very well maintain your health. Milk and fresh fruit must
improve your health. Moreover, you must never miss your daily walk.
Ramdas, one may say, has now settled down. Nimu too has gone
to join him. Devdas and Lakshmi are in Delhi.
Kishorelal went to Akola and from there to Bombay.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4855

276

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

360. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI M. PATEL
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 3, 1936
CHI. RAOJIBHAI,

Your letter. You may take it that Andrews has left Fiji. All the
same I shall make inquiries.
It would be nice if you could procure good ghee. On my part, I
have been insisting on producing it at Maganwadi, where we now have
an expert. At Segaon, too, I am having a cow.
Your work seems to be going on well. Write to me from time to
time.
Blessings from

BAPU
S JT. R AOJIBHAI
P.O. P ETLAD via ANAND
B.B. & C.I. RLY .
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9008

361. LETTER TO B.K. DIWANJI
S EGAON, W ARDHA , C.P.

August 4, 1936
DEAR DIWANJI,

It cannot be desirable for Indians to act as agents of foreign
concerns whose traffic is detrimental to the moral or material interests
of the country. This covers all your questions but I may add that
acceptance of advertisements, Indian or foreign, whose object is to
advertise things which are contrary to the policy advocated by the
newspapers cannot be defended.
The medical profession is a noble profession only when medical
men practise it for service, not for money, and if they give
predominant place to prevention rather than cure, and accept the
limits to their remedial measures so that they are not contrary to
humanness towards non-human life.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G ANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers: Courtesy: Pyarelal
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

277

362. LETTER TO K.M. MUNSHI
August 4, 1936
BHAI MUNSHI,

Since he1 insists on starting another magazine, why should we
retain Hans? Why not write to him:
“Since you contemplate another magazine you must keep
Hans. Parishad can easily manage with other title.”2
You may carry out your suggestion if you do not think this
right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7604. Courtesy: K.M. Munshi

363. LETTER TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
S EGAON WARDHA ,

August 5, 1936
MY DEAR SUBHAS,

You may be late replying but I must reply per return. I know
what it means for a prisoner to hear from friends.
I share your regret that we cannot freely exchange views [even]
on absolutely non-political questions.
I am surprised that you are not getting your copy of Harijan. I
am inquiring.
Yes, my dietetic experiments continue unabated. Just now I am
trying to find jungly edible leaves. and I have succeeded beyond
expectations. I am not having any fresh vegitables from outside
Segaon. The second thing I am doing [is] to use lemons and gur [as]
an effective substitute for fresh fruit.
After many experiments I have come to the conclusion that cow
milk, fresh green vegetables (including leaves and fruit of plants),
onion and garlic, wheat or any other grain, gur and any juicy
fruitmake a perfect diet. Generally I recommend avoidance of pulses
1
2

278

Munshi Premchand
This paragraph is in English
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

for brain workers—vegetable protein is not so easy to digest as
animal protein. I have mentioned onion and garlic. They are both
strongly recommended by many medical men.
Yours sincerely,

S HRI S UBHAS BOSE
C/ O S UPERINTENDENT OF P OLICE
DARJEELING
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

364. LETTER TO SAHEBJI MAHARAJ
August 5, 1936
DEAR SAHEBJI MAHARAJ,

Many thanks for your letter. We shall await the mistry on the
12th. He will be paid his travelling expenses to and fro and the pay
will begin as from the date of his departure from Agra.
I am expecting much out of this experiment.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 2165

365. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
August 5, 1936
CHI. GANGABEHN,

Why need you fall into despair? Why do you feel that you have
wasted fifty-seven years? Ever since I have known you, I have
observed that you are always striving. God has given man only the
strength to strive and nothing more. If we ever remain absorbed in
doing our duty without lethargy, we have no reason to feel despair.
Ramibai seems to be very unhappy. Can anything be done to
1

Vide letter to the addressee, “Letter to Sahebji Maharaj”, 22-7-1936

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

279

help her? I understand about Bachubhai.
Blessings from

BAPU
S MT. G ANGABEHN VAIDYA
R AMBAG, B ORIVLI
B.B. & C.I. RLY .

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—6: G.S. Gangabehnne, p. 94. Also C.W. 8834. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

366. LETTER TO PANNALAL JHAVERI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 5, 1936
CHI PANNALAI,

Shri Walunjkar will be starting from here on the 19th and thus
reaching there on the 21st morning. He will be put up at the Harijan
Ashram, I suppose. He has to reach Wardha latest by the 26th. Send
me a telegram if this date is not suitable.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Manavtana Prahari—Pannalal Jhaveri, pp. 32-3

367. LETTER TO N. C. KELKAR
S EGAON WARDHA ,

August 6, 1936
DEAR MR. KELKAR,

You are reported to have said: “When he (Gandhi) openly says
that his object is to run down the Tilak school of politics, etc., etc.” If
you have said it, will you kindly let me know when I did so? I have no
280

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

recollection of ever having said any such thing and how could I when,
as you rightly say, I have “carried forward the work of Mr. Tilak”?1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G ANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 3120. Courtesy: Kashinath N. Kelkar

368. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 7, 1936
CHI. MRIDU,

I am pleasantly surprised to see that you are able to find time to
write such long letters. You are taking upon yourself so much work
that even a person like me shudders. May God grant you the strength
to attend to all your tasks.
I do not know what you would be able to do in the Women’s
Conference to be held at Ahmedabad. 2 I have no clear idea of that
organization and what little I know is only through Rajkumari3 . I have
not formed the impression that it can do anything for village women.
Rajkumari herself is very keen to serve in the villages. It remains to be
seen how far she can carry her other friends with her.
You are greatly mistaken if you think that there are no
Hindu-Muslim distinctions among women. There certainly are. They
have not found extreme expression because women do not come out
in public very much. When they come out like men and they are
awakened, they too will be found making these distinctions to a
considerable extent. They will become conscious in a few years. But
the possibility of Hindus and Muslims uniting in the mean time is
remote. Nevertheless it is your duty as well as mine to carry on the
work on the assumption that those distinctions do not exist among
1

In his reply the addressee said: “The work of Tilak which you have carried
forward is the work intensive political agitation, but by the Tilak 'school' of politics
I mean Tilak's philosophy and methods and in respect of these, you and he vastly
differ.”... “Your open insistence on non-violence, truth and non-co-operation was
taken to imply that the school of political thought you superseded favoured the
antithesis of these three....” Vide also “Letter to N.C. Kelkar”, 24-8-1936.
2
The All-India Women’s Conference commenced on December 23 and was
presided over by Margaret Cousins.
3
Amrit Kaur, Secretary of the All-India Women’s Conference
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

281

women. Among the avoidable things I have enumerated the measures
you suggest are of course included. But at that place I had to stress
one point only. Other things were irrelevant there.
Now about giving recognition to the Jyoti Sangh1 . Your
arguments are interesting. I would only say that for the moment you
do everything you are doing, but give up any talk about recognition.
Citing the instance of tailors, etc., is not proper because the Sangh
does not recognize them. It provides them work. Till now they had
even been given by the mills the work of dyeing and washing. I
stopped it only recently. Your arguments befit those who are
indifferent to khadi. But you are a khadi volunteer. You believe in the
power of khadi. How can you bend in the face of difficulties? But you
say that you are ready to come if it is necessary. If you are not
convinced by all this from me, come over at your earliest. At least we
can meet under that pretext.
I hope Mummy is well. The letter for Suhrid2 is enclosed.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11201. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

369. LETTER TO G.D. BIRLA
S EGAON WARDHA ,

August 7, 1936
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I read both the letters. Other things later. Parnerkar has not
come to me so far.
The interview3 was all right but I see nothing hopeful in it; he
will not be able to do a thing. Their policy and ours are poles apart. I
firmly hold that no further overtures should be made to him. It is not
correct to say that I had made any promise. Whatever I did was all
worth doing. This is the reason why it was done and not because of
any promise of mine. It was not in the public interest to proceed any
further. I write all this in order to make things clear for the future.
1
2
3

282

An institution in Ahmedabad for socially oppressed women
Addressee’s brother
The addressee had met the Viceroy Lord Linlithgow on August 5, 1936.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

What can I do in connection with the elections? Yes, I can try to
avoid friction within the Congress; in fact I am already engaged in
this.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 8021. Courtesy: G.D. Birla

370. INTERVIEW TO PAULA LECLER AND Y.S. CHEN1
[Before August 8, 1936]
In reply to several questions Gandhiji said:

On the political programme you should go and visit Pandit
Nehru who, though he is busier than I, might give you a useful half
hour. I am no authority on politics, and having retired from the
Congress for two years now, I am a kind of a back number.
But may it not be that you have retired to give the other people a chance, and
in the conviction that after they have had their chance they are bound to come back to
you?

That is not my way. I am a votary of truth. I meant it cent per
cent when I retired from the Congress and the so-called politics of the
country. My mind and body are buried in Segaon. What the future
has in store for me God alone knows.
[Y. S.

CHEN:]

Your body is here, but your spirit travels over the whole world.

Yes, but not my political spirit. What I am doing today, i.e.,
living in a village, I might have done in the beginning of my career.
lnstead I am doing it in the evening of my life.2
The American lady wanted... him to... give a message to the
distracted world as to how best to get out of the trouble and chaos.
I am off talking. I can give you no message. You can see what I
am doing if you will stay in this village. How to help the world out of
1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai's “Weekly Letter”. Paula Lecler was an
American woman and Y.S. Chen a member of the Cotton Industry Commission of
China.
2
Paula Lecler here quotes Gandhiji having said: “You may be sure I am living
now just the way I wish to live. What I might have done at the beginning, had I more
light, I am doing now in the evening of my life, at the end of my career, building from
the bottom up. Study my way of living here, study my surroundings, if you wish to
know what I am. Village improvement is the only foundation on which conditions in
India can be permanently ameliorated.”
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

283

chaos is a vast question which cannot be answered at a moments’s
notice. But if there is an answer it is this: ‘By waiting on God.’
I want to transmit to America a picture of the faith and light you have.

I could not give it by word of mouth. I am not in a talking
mood.
But you have your faith?

Oh yes, I have.
Then could you not put it in a few words?

How can I impart it in words?
Then you can just say a few words of prayer, i. e., what is your innermost
desire. You can just pray audibly.

No, I cannot possibly do so. Is it not enough for you to know
that I am trying to live a simple village life as simple villager? When I
succeed in it. I shall have achieved my ambition.
And what happens to your children, the people of India?

They are in the villages. I live with them. They will live with me.
Are you happy?

Ah! I can answer that question. I am perfectly happy.
More happy that you were outside the village?

I cannot say, for my happiness is not dependent on external
circumstances.
[Y. S.

CHEN:]

wanted to know something about our social programme.

I have no doubt that untouchability is going. It can go quicker,
but we have not got a corps of social workers adequate to the task. It is
social work indeed, but more than that it is great spiritual effort. If
untouchability remains, Hinduism perishes and with it Hindu culture.
And if that calamity comes, the whole face of India will be changed.
The ruining of Hindu culture is fraught with incalculable harm for the
general culture of India. But I am firm in my faith that untouchability
is bound to go, it is going. Here you will see I am surrounded by
untouchables. We have, for instance, for our cook an untouchable
boy. He never knew cooking, certainly he did not know how to cook
hygienically. He is now learning it. He is a fine boy, eager to learn,
and hard-working. This process is going on throughout India. The
best of our workers are trying to work amongst the untouchables in
this fashion. That is the complete reform. We have to obliterate all the
284

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

differences of social status. That is the essence of this part of our
social reform.
I want to correct the impression that has got abroad in America that Mr.
Gandhi is sulking....But what is the truth about the supposed antagonism between
you and Nehru?

You must see my disclaimer.1
I have seen it.

I have said that it was an absolute travesty, an absolute
falsehood.
What is your feeling about Nehru?

My feeling about Nehru is nothing but that of love and admiration. We are not estranged from each other. I hear from him nearly
twice a week.2 There are things on which I do not talk the same
way.There are obvious differences in outlook, but in spite of them our
affection has not diminished. And these differences are not new. He
has never kept from me whatever he has felt from time to time. Even
what he said in Lucknow was not new. It was a summary of views he
had stated in different places on different occasions.
But you don’t see the truth entirely his way?

I don’t. But it is one thing to say that I do not sympathize with
some of his views and quite another to say that he had ruined my lifework! It is a lie. There is no other name for it.3 I have never had even
the suspicion that Jawaharlal’s policy has ruined any part of my work.
Because the truth you stand for is still there?

That is a truism. I am not talking from that higher philosophical
point of view. I am just talking in mundane terms. I want to say that
he has taken no such steps as would ruin my programme or my work.
If he had said: ‘You have blundered all along. You must retrace your
steps. You have taken the country back a century’, as some have
certainly said, he, because he is he, would embarrass me. But he has
1

Vide “Are We Rivals?”, 22-7-1936
Paula Lecler quotes here: “Jawaharlal Nehru and I are friends. It is true our
beliefs may differ in some ways. But to say there is enmity between us, that is a lie.
Even when he is travelling around the country on speaking tours, as he has been doing,
I hear from him at least twice each week. There is no rivalry in work like ours.”
3
Paula Lecler reports here: “They quoted me: ‘My life-work is ruined... not
even the firmness and repression of the British Government have harmed my work as
much as the policy outlined by Nehru.’ But much as I dislike to use so strong a word,
it is an absolute lie. I never said anything like that nor do I think it.”
2

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

285

said nothing of the kind. Also, it is not wholly true to say that I do not
sympathize with his programme. What is he doing today with which I
cannot sympathize? His enunciation of scientific socialism does not
jar on me. I have been living the life since 1906 that he would have all
India to live. To say that he favours Russian communism is a travesty
of truth. 1 He says it is good for Russia, but he does not give an
unequivocal certificate to it even about Russia. As for India, he has
said plainly that the methods to be adopted in India would have to
answer India’s needs. He does not say that there must be class war,
though he thinks it may be inevitable;2 and only recently he declared
emphatically that there should be no confiscation without compensation. There is nothing in all this which I oppose. Nevertheless there
are differences of method; but to say that they make us opponents or
rivals is a caricature.3
There is nothing he believes, nothing in his programme today
about which I can say, as I certainly would if I felt that way: I oppose
this tooth and nail. I would not present the same thing in the same
way. Certain methods I adopted Jawaharlal would not adopt.
Are you fond of him?

Yes, as I am fond of you. But that is not saying anything much.
Do you approve of him for India?

Yes.
This our friend had got the impression in Karachi that your own internal
cleavages were far worse than outside tyranny, and that was the impression she was
going to fly off with to America.
That remark of hers elicited one sentence of withering criticism from Gandhiji:

If I did not believe in human nature, I would say that to give
you that impression was a diabolical plot to blacken India’s name.
Asked if he would emerge from his retirement to lead his people if they again
needed him, Gandhiji replied firmly, with a quick look from under irregular eyebrows
at his interrogator.
1

Paula Lecler reports: “To say he favours communism on the Russian model
is doing a grave injustice to Jawaharlal.”
2
Paula Lecler adds here: “I believe he thinks a class war may be inevitable,
but he is doing his best to avert one.”
3
The paragraph that follows is from Paula Lecler’s report reproduced in The
Bombay Chronicle.

286

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

That depends upon God. I never decide beforehand but wait for
the contingency to decide. Planning ahead for myself, even for a few
years, is opposed to my principles.
Harijan, 8-8-1936, and The Bombay Chronicle, 7-3-1937

371. TWO PEN-PICTURES
Babu Hara Dayal Nag, the G. O. M. of Bengal, is never weary of
well-doing. In the constancy of love of his country he is not to be
excelled. The reader will appreciate the following instructive
description1 of his village as he saw it in his youth and as it is today.
Harijan, 8-8-1936

372. PROPAGANDA BY VILIFICATION
A correspondent sends me a proselytizing pamphlet, being a
Gujarati version of the original in Urdu. The Gujarati translator and
publisher is Shekh Umarbhai Mohmedbhai and the pamphlet is
printed in Ahmedabad. I take the following2 from the correspondent’s
letter.
Permit me to send you a copy of a pamphlet published...with a view
to induce Harijans for conversion to Islam and create hatred among them
against Hindus. This pamphlet is full of such remarks about the Hindu
religion and the Hindu rites as are not only false but are likely to intensify the
communal tension....
You will kindly...suggest the course to be adopted so that these poor and
illiterate Harijan people may not be entrapped by such false and

inflammatory pamphlets.

I had the pain of going through the pamphlet. It is as
mischievous as it has been described by the correspondent. It is in the
form of a dialogue between two Harijans, father and son. At the
instance of the father the son reads Hindu scriptures and ridicules
them. Everything held sacred by Hindus is caricatured so as to excite
disgust towards Hinduism and savarna Hindus. Even the sacred name
of Swami Shraddhanandji has been dragged in the discussion and
words have been put into his mouth which I hold him to be incapable
1
2

Not reproduced here
Only excerpts are reproduced here.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

287

of having uttered. Here is a sentence which no gentleman would write
of his fellow-men: “Some Hindus sit in squares smeared with cowdung as if they were sitting to evacuate themselves. Cursed be such
eaters.” the pamphlet is full of distortions. And it holds out material
hopes to Harijans which can hardly be fulfilled especially about the
mass of Harijans if they are ever tempted to forsake their ancestral
faith. Thus the Moulvi who is responsible for the conversion of the
Harijan’s son is represented to be a convert from being a Chamar and
having married a girl belonging to a noble Muslim family. The new
convert drinks from the same cup as the Moulvi and the remains of
the water are drunk by the company. He is treated to a feast at a
Munshi’s palatial house. The feast fills the dining hall with fragrance.
“Every morsel was a nectar, every potion the water of life,” and
this erstwhile Harijan is treated to the inhalation of a hookah which
goes the round of the whole company.
It is tragic to see that religion is dragged down to the low level
of crude materialism to lure people into which the most cherished
sentiments of millions of human being are trodden underfoot.
I hope that the pamphlet has no support from thoughtful
Mussalmans who should read it to realize the mischief such pamphlets
can create.
My correspondent asks me how to deal with the menace. One
remedy I have applied, viz., to bring hereby the vilifying propaganda
to the notice of the responsible Muslim world. He himself can claim
the attention of the local Mussalman leaders to the publication. The
second and the most important thing to do is purification from within.
So long as the poison of untouchability remains in the Hindu body, it
will be liable to attacks from outside. It will be proof against such
attacks only when a solid and impregnable wall of purification is
erected in the shape of complete removal of untouchability.
Harijan, 8-8-1936

373. NOTES
WHEELERS, N OT S HOULDERS

Shri C. Tejpal has for years been conducting a campaign in
favour of using light vehicles instead of shoulders for carrying dead
bodies. He knows that he has to fight against a sentiment cherished by
millions of Hindus and Mussalmans from times immemorial. Persons
288

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

vie with one another in giving their shoulders for carrying the dead.
The carrying of corpses on human shoulders is an impressive sight.
So at any rate we have been used to think. But apart from sentiment
there is nothing to recommend the practice. Where the burial ground
or the crematorium is some distance from the place where death
occurs, carrying on shoulders becomes a trying task. Again when a
caste has only a few members, or it is a poor man who has lost a
relative, no matter how near the place of disposal is the question
assumes serious proportions. And we know that in times of plague and
famine corpses are often left in the streets to rot or to be food for
vultures. There is no doubt, therefore, that there is much to be said in
favour of carrying corpses on carts. Shri Tejpal has constructed a cart
which costs a little over 100 rupees. In a poor country like India a
hundred rupees is a consideration not to be lightly dismissed. But if
village Mahajans1 and municipalities were to own such carts and hire
them out at a trifling charge, the question of expense can be eliminated. And local enthusiasts who appreciate the reform may popularize the practice in their surroundings. Shri Tejpal informs me that the
Municipality of Ahmedabad keeps one such cart and so do Mahajans
or Seva Samitis in Surat, Baroda, Jamnagar and Porbandar. The
Prarthana Samaj of Bombay is also reported to have one. It will be
interesting to know the extent to which the reform has made headway
in the places where such carts are kept.
HAND -GINNING

Like the wheel, the carding-bow and the hand-gins have been
undergoing progressive improvements though not to the same extent
as the wheel. But the processes anterior to spinning are just as
important as spinning itself. Evenness, strength and speed depend
upon good cotton, good picking, good ginning and good carding. If
any of the processes are defective, they tell upon the quality and the
quantity of yarn turned out in a given time. Experiments are therefore
being conducted by Shri Radhakrishna Bajaj in Wardha in finding out
the possibility of improvement in the hand-gin. If there are khadi
lovers who have made improvements, they should correspond with
Shri Radhakrishna and send him specimens if any.
Harijan, 8-8-1936
1

A representative body of responsible citizens

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

289

374. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
August 9, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

Yes, it is well for you not to come. I am sending more milk. If
not wanted, let Motibehn bring it back.
Love .
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6358. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G. N. 9824

375. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 9, 1936
CHI. KANTI,

How you have hurt me like a thorn!1 Since I had this news, your
face has been present before my mind’s eye, and I have been
brooding constantly. What is this that has happened and why did you
do it? But how could you help it? Who could overcome his nature?
And it is quite proper that you should not curb your nature, as this
would only lead to hypocrisy. It is thus I console myself. I am
considering what I can do, within my limits, to help you fulfil your
ambition.
I shall send you a dhoti if you write to me the length and the
width you want. Or, you may yourself cut it out when you come here.
I have three rolls with me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 7304. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

1

The reference is to the addressee wanting to have formal education and a
degree; vide “Letter to Manilal and Sushila Gandhi”, 16-8-1936.

290

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

376. LETTER TO PYARELAL
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 9, 1936
CHI. PYARELAL,

I see that our views are divergent. You still appear to have faith
in outward effort. I have given up outward effort altogether. I depend
only on the grace of God. The reason for my asking you to come is
that it is here that your sadhana has to be, not in Bengal or Utkal.
Your natural place is also here with me and perhaps it is here that you
can be most useful. This therefore is my advice to you. If my writing
strikes a chord in your heart, do come.
What you write about Khan Saheb is correct. He came yesterday
to stay with me. He is occupying a corner of the room at the moment.
I like this dharmashala. How wonderful it would be if you could also
join! Still a small room has been built for Khan Saheb. You can also
make use of it. He is not using it. Maybe he will not use it at all.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

377. LETTER TO KANU GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 9/10, 1936
CHI. KANAIYO,

Tell Chhotelal to send me two vessels each big enough to hold
five to seven seers of milk. They should preferably be tin-coated brass
ones. Zinc vessels will do if they are cheaper.
Send me some mustard oil.
A few letters accompany this.
I want hand-made paper for making note-books, etc.
Blessings from

BAPU
P. T. O.
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

291

August 10, 1936
On the reverse I wrote yesterday.
But it got left behind. I find, however, that it was not very
urgent. I am now sending some letters and an article. I propose to
send some more later. I want the enema things we have here. If they
are needed there, new ones have to be bought for this place.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M. M. U./II

378. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
August 10, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

I hope the progress will continue. If there is any complication,
you will at once let me know.
Love
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6359. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Aslo G. N. 9825

379. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 10, 1936 1
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

Khan Saheb has received the usual notice to attend the meetings2
in Bombay. He has no desire to attend them and I do not want to press
him. And in Bombay he will be asked to attend meetings and
functions at which he would be called upon to speak. I do not want
him to do so just now. I want him rather to pass the year with me. And
he is none too strong nor invulnerable to attacks of illness. Will you,
therefore, please excuse him from attendance?
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1934. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library
1

In the source this letter is placed among 1934 papers and the same year is
assigned to it in A Bunch of Old Letters. This however is a mistake as Gandhiji shifted
to Segaon only in 1936.
2
Of the A. I. C. C.

292

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

380. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
August 10, 1936
CHI. PREMA,

I had a reason for not being content with a three-pice postcard.1
I didn’t get your rakhdi2 . I would certainly have worn it had I
received it. Since you sent one, however, you have had the joy and
earned the merit of sending it.
You seem to be picking up knowledge of a good many subjects.
I shall at any rate glance through the book sent by you.
I can certainly enlarge the area of experience in Segaon, but not
just now. I have neither the time nor the inclination. The experiences
don’t seem to me worth communicating to anybody.
Man’s speech has a conventional meaning but in addition each
utterance also has a specific meaning intended by the speaker which
can be known from the context. Nobody has known truth in its
perfection and, therefore, each person describes a thing as he sees it
and that is the truth for him, even though as a matter of fact his view
might be false.
In like manner man’s view of a thing changes from age to age
and the view held in a particular age is the truth for that age. This is
the meaning or idea in asato ma sadgamaya3 .
Where the notion of high and low has disappeared I see no harm
in the Shudras serving the other three varnas.4 [Nobody] 5 is compelled
to be a Shudra. [If, then, service is the natural bent of mind of a
Shudra,]6 why should he change that calling for another? If the
Brahmin and the Bhangi both get just enough for their sustenance,
1

The addressee had enquired why Gandhiji had used an envelope for his letter
dated July 22, 1936, when the matter could have been fitted in a postcard.
2
The thread tied by a sister to her brother’s wrist symbolizing the brother’s
obligation to protect her
3
Lead me from untruth to truth.
4
The addressee had maintained that the whole tradition of the saint-poets of
Maharashtra had more or less acknowledged the idea of high and low as inherent in
the varna system; how then could they look upon all with equality?
5
This sentence is incomplete in the source.
6
ibid
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

293

what is the difference between the two? Nobody will prevent a Bhangi
from becoming a jnani1 . In the varna system of my conception, no
varna will have the monopoly of knowledge. Think over the verses in
the women’s prayer. 2 What are the common dharmas of the four
varnas? Maybe you will find some utterances of Jnanadeva3 and others
which seem to support the distinction of high and low. But nobody
should be judged in this way by a few isolated sayings of his. I know
what you wish to say regarding Ramdas 4 . Even if those examples
could be shown to be inapplicable, my argument remains untouched.
I cannot accede to your request, for you have given no thought
as to its propriety. You have just been carried away by the present
tide. You, I and all others are cast in the moulds inherited from our
parents. There is as much sense, or lack of sense, in rejecting it as
there is in forgetting the fact and claiming ourselves to be different.
We can remain in the old mould and still make many changes. That is
growth or progress. To assume a completely new appearance will
mean a total revolution or a new religion altogether. Does Hinduism
have no definite mould in any respect? Children daily trace new letters
in water which disappear the moment they are formed, but they enjoy
the game. It seems you wish to do the same. But do you think you can
lure an old man of 67 who has grown up in the old mould, and
interest him in drawing circles in water? Standing on the bank, I watch
the play of such as you. In the next issue of Harijan, you will see
something having a bearing on this in my comments on a letter. 5
You have discovered my ignorance all right. If you search more,
you will discover still grosser ignorance. But I hope you will not
desert me when you have discovered all my ignorance. If you promise
me that, I will confess that I don’t know anything at all, for I have not
made such a study.
I have read enough about communism to satisfy me. What we
shall need in swaraj I can tell only when I see the swaraj. Any opposition from me that you may notice will be concerning the question of
1
2
3
4
5

294

A spiritually enlightened person
Vide “Letter to Prabhavati”, 15-12-1930
Jnaneshwara, saint-poet of Maharashtra
Samartha Ramdas Swami, Shivaji’s guru
Vide “ Varna v . Caste,” 15-8-1936
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

truth-untruth and violence-non-violence.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10384. Also C. W. 6822. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

381. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
August 10, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,

I am enclosing Prema’s letter. Lilavati does not wish to move
out of this place, though you have been inviting her and, on my part, I
have gladly given the permission. She is very unsettled in her mind
and wants to try and see if she can steady herself with a year’s effort.
And she believes that going there might disturb her. There is some
truth in it, no doubt.
I therfore recommend that you manage without her if you can.
Yesterday she told me that she was going to write to you.
Kanaiyo comes often to see me. I see he is in a very happy
mood.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8501. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

382. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
August 10, 1936
CHI. NARAHARI,

Have you ever extracted juice from a dried lemon? If you say
‘no’, how will you squeeze out of me a lesson for your series of
readers? I went through your circular request. It is good, but not for
me. I would stop all writing if I could have my way. Don’t ask for
anything new. Go ahead with your work, taking me as gone.
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

295

Maruti1 desires to build a house. The land should be from the
Harijan Ashram. What happened to Avantikabai’s2 plot? Can we give
him that or some part of it? Or he might keep with us the sum he
wishes to invest and so long as he does so he might put the land to his
use and enjoy ownership rights of the house. If it does not suit us, we
may return his deposit after estimating the current value of the
property. I am saying all this on the supposition that Avantikabai’s
land might not be available or that the Ashram land might not be sold.
For my part, I have no objection whatever to selling it. Think over the
whole matter and do what seems proper.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9098

383. LETTER TO H.L. SHARMA
August 10, 1936
CHI. SHARMA,

Your letter. I feel ashamed that Babbitt’s book has not yet been
found though I am sure it will be found. The yarn got mixed up with
the other yarns. You should accept the khadi form me.... 3
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsh,
facing p. 259

384. LETTER TO PYARELAL
August 11, 1936
CHI. PYARELAL,

I started reading your letters in detail after writing to you. I see
that you suffered from bleeding. That also is a sign that it would be
unwise for you to go to Utkal and that you should come here. I have
always been telling you that it is your duty to make your body
healthy. I was pained to hear about the squalor in the College Square.
1
2
3

296

Husband of Lakshmi, a Harijan girl adopted by Gandhiji
Avantikabai Gokhale
The last sentance is illegible, the original having been damaged.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Have you drawn Satis Babu’s1 attention to it? Do let me have news of
your health if you are not coming immediately.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

385. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 12, 1936
BAPA,

You have made a pretty full miscellany of a single letter. I hope
Devdas’s presence causes no distraction to life there.
I had a long letter from Malkani whose plight is indeed pitiable.
The question constantly occurs to me whether to call Rukmini a shrew
or an absolutely foolish person.
What shall we do about Satis Babu? On the one hand he has
made a great sacrifice and, on the other, he is very suspicious by
nature. Of course we shall be able to keep him as long as we wish to.
Ramachandran has caused me a surprise. Let me know if any
difficulty concerning him arises.
Surely, some day you are going to look at things at Segaon.... 2
Tukdoji occupies the corner in front of me, Khan Saheb the one
beside me; Munnalal by Tukdoji’s side. Rajkumari’s bed is between
me and Tukdoji. On the wooden stand before her rests a rustice
medicine box which is nothing but a used fruit-case and other odds
and ends. Ba, Lilavati and Manu accommodate themselves where they
can. Again, we have quite a different scene at night. Isn’t ‘houselessness’ one of the distinguishing characteristics of a bhakta? At any
rate, am I not indulging in all sorts of pranks, trying to play the
bhakta? Whatever it may be to others, Segaon is to me an
inexhaustible source of joy. Yesterday the last corner fell vacant—for
the present at least. Munnalal’s of course is permanent.
I expect you are doing well.
BAPU
1
2

Satis Chandra Das Gupta
A word or two are illegible here.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

297

[PS.]
I had very little time even to scribble this silly stuff. But
shouldn’t I rather relax in this way? I have only followed you.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1169

386. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 13, 1936
CHI. KANTA,

I was glad to have your letter, though late. Doubtless you had to
do what your father wanted. But surely he did not tell you to bedeck
yourself in finery. He would never ask you to array yourself in
ornaments. And even if he did, he must have left it to your wish. He
got you married, but surely he would not run your household. But I
do not wish to write a long letter. Be straightforward, simple and good.
Be a good worker and serve. Fulfil at least some of the hopes you
have aroused. Preserve your health—physical, mental and spiritual.
Blessings from

BAPU
SHRI CHANDRAKANTA
BHAKTI BHAVAN
SIGRA
BENARES CITY

From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

298

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

387. LETTER TO MANGIBAI
S EGAON,

August 13, 1936
CHI. MANGIBAI,

I have just heard of your husband’s death. Why should we
grieve over the death of our loved ones. In the long run death spares
no one. This too should be regarded as one of God’s blessings. Now
be calm and devote yourself to service.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 172

388. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
WARDHA ,

August 14, 1936
MY DEAR SISTER,

This is to acknowledge your letter to Bapu of the 9th inst. I assume that you
are still in Khedi though Dr. Baretto told me that he was expecting you on Tuesday
last. Evidently his date did not suit you and you asked for another, otherwise you
should have been here by now.
In your letter too, you do not say when exactly you are arriving here.
Bapu likes very much your idea of taking a brief holiday in England. We will
discuss the details about your travel after you arrive. In the mean time he wants me to
tell you that much as he likes the idea of your getting England to take a bigger share
in helping India’s poor, you must not think that you are not giving to India more
than you are taking from her. You must dismiss the thought from your mind that you
have ever been a burden or are ever likely to be one. Whilst you may ask for support
from English friends, it will not be in order to find the wherewithal for your
livelihood, but in order to help our work here. You are a member of the family and are
entitled to wage as much as the rest of us.
More when we meet.
Yours sincerely,

MAHADEV
MISS MARY BARR
KHEDI SAOLIGARH
DISTT. BETUL, C.P.

From a photostat: G. N. 6066. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

299

389. TALK WITH A PATIL1
[Before August 15, 1936]
The old Patil... went one evening to Gandhiji saying, “I am ready to have the
barber’s services...immediately after he has served Govind.” 2

[ GANDHIJI: ] What then is the difficulty?
[PATIL:] But now he is asking of me a thing I cannot give.

[ GANDHIJI:] What is that?
[PATIL:] It is that I should once go and feed at his place. With God as witness,
Maharaj, I say I have never in my life of about four score years had tea or any kind of
refreshment in a hotel. How does he expect me to go and feed at his place?

I quite appreciate what you say, but why does he insist on your
feeding at his place?
Because he thinks his castemen might boycott him, and he wants to make
assurance doubly sure by having me in his place to eat. Now, Maharaj, is that part of
your anti-untouchability programme?

Certainly not. I am satisfied if you have conquered the prejudice
of touch. Inter-dining is no part of the anti-untouchability programme, though as you know I am having Govind to cook for me. But
that is what I would expect every Harijan sevak to do, not you.
Harijan, 15-8-1936

390. TALK WITH A BARBER 3
S EGAON,

[Before August 15, 1936]
One morning when I went to Segaon, I found Gandhiji busy pulling to pieces a
hair-cropping machine, in order to clean and oil it. That done, he began having a crop
with his own hands with a mirror in front of him.
At the same moment one of the devotees of the sadhu came in, and he happened
to be a barber. “Bapuji,” shouted the sadhu from the opposite corner, “Let Bhima crop
your hair. He knows the art.”
1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”, 15-8-1936
The barber for fear of being boycotted by the village Patil and others had
refused to shave Govind, a Harijan boy.
3
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
2

300

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[ GANDHIJI:] But how does he know it?
He is a barber by profession.

Ah, that is very good. Come along then.
But as soon as Bhima began the operation, Gandhiji asked him:

But I hope you have no prejudice against shaving our Harijan
brethren. Have you?
He slightly hesitated, and said: “I have in my heart no prejudice against
Harijans.”

That I can believe. But will you shave a Harijan on the same
terms as you would shave me?
Again he hesitated. Thereupon Gandhiji said to the sadhu:

I thought you had ascertained from him this thing before you
asked me to have his services.
“I am sorry,” said the sadhu, “that aspect had for the moment escaped me.”

Then I shall have to consider whether I should stop in the
middle of the crop and dispense with Bhima.
But Bhima said: “No, though I do not usually do it, I promise from now to
serve Harijans on the same terms.”

Harijan, 15-8-1936

391. MORE COBWEBS
A seeker of truth cannot afford to write or speak to please
anybody. During my long search after truth in all things which have
come my way, I know that I have hardly ever succeeded in convincing
all of the correctness of my position regarding the matters then in
question. In the matter of Hindi propaganda, if I have displeased
certain Muslim friends I have no less displeased Hindu friends. But
unless my critics convince me of my error, they should not expect me
to change merely because they want me to. Thus a correspondent
actually says that although my position is logically and historically
correct, I should change it to suit the Muslim critics who would have
me either to advocate the adoption of the expression ‘Hindi-Urdu’ or
merely ‘Urdu’ to denote the same common speech, the objection
being not to the speech but the name which it has hitherto carried.
Now there is a letter before me which quarrels with my address to the
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

301

Hindi Prachar Convocation recently held at Bangalore1 from another
standpoint. It is a long letter from which I quote below the most
relevant extracts:
In your convocation address at Bangalore you have asked the 11 million
men and women of Karnatak to learn Hindi in order to establish contact with
them. You have not even restricted the appeal to those who are already
educated in the mother tongue. Even taking for granted that all are educated in
the mother tongue, it is neither possible nor desirable, though possible, nor
natural that the masses should learn a language other than their mother tongue.
Only all India national workers, business men and other people who come in
daily contact with the people of North India can and should learn Hindi.
Necessity will make them learn the language even without any propaganda.
Though you say that Hindi does not supplant but supplements the
provincial languages, in effect it is not so. The bulk of the intellectuals of
Tamil Nad today don’t think nor even feel in Tamil but in English. They have
completely neglected Tamil. You can understand to what depths of cultural
slavery they have fallen when you know that they are even proud of declaring
in public meetings and other places that they cannot speak or write well in
Tamil but they can do both fluently in English. Now some of them have taken
to the study of Hindi more with the help of English than with the help of
Tamil. The result is going to be the same. They will begin to think in Hindi
instead of English. If a Gujarati tells you that he can write a beautiful essay in
Hindi but not in Gujarati, you will be only sorry for him and think that our
country is far from attaining purna swaraj. Many have begun to say in Tamil
Nad that they know Hindi better than Tamil.
One should not learn any language even though it be the language of the
gods, to the detriment of one’s own mother tongue. In this connection I used
to cite your own example to the Hindi fanatics. Though you declare that Hindi
is the common language of India you have not written either your
Autobiography or Satyagraha in South Africa in Hindi but in Gujarati. If you
had written them in Hindi many more people would have known what you say
in your own words. But you preferred to write them in Gujarati. Though your
teaching and personal example differ in this matter, I hold your action to be
correct and proper. Therefore I want people to follow not what you say but
what you do.
Swaraj should not mean the imposition of one language over those who
speak different languages. Primary importance ought to be given only to the
1

On June 12, 1936; vide “Convocation Address at Hindi Prachar Sabha,
Bangalore”, 12-6-1936

302

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

mother tongue. Only secondary importance can be given to Hindi, the
common language of India. Real inspiration and elevation can come only
through the mother tongue.
Let me come to the question of script. In Harijan dated 4-5-1935,
writing on the resolution passed by the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan held at Indore
you show a partiality for the Urdu script which passes my understanding. In
your convocation address at Bangalore also you show the same partiality for the
Urdu script. You want to destroy the scripts of all Indian languages derived from
or largely influenced by Sanskrit and substitute Devanagari for them for the
sake of those who want to learn the various languages. You want to preserve the
two scripts, Devanagari and Urdu, for one and the same language spoken by
Hindus and Muslims. Others, who also number millions and who have the
misfortune of speaking different languages, should allow their scripts to be
destroyed and displaced by Devanagari, learn Hindi-Hindustani and also learn
Urdu script in order to understand and come into contact with 130 million
Hindus and 70 million Muslims! Does this not sound ridiculous and represent
the highest from of tyranny? The logical conclusion of this policy would
inevitably be the abolition of all languages except Hindi with both of its
scripts, for the Devanagari script would have been adopted for all the languages,
all would have learnt Hindi and all the important works in the mother tongue
would have been translated in [to] Hindi. I want you to reflect for a moment
whether this consummation would be desirable in the best interestes of India,
our common land of birth. Before you propose to destroy the various scripts,
should you not attempt to destroy one of the scripts, Devanagari and Urdu, for
one and the same language? Why should Muslims and Hindus speaking the same
language use two different scripts?

I do not know that I asked all 11 million men and women of
Karnatak to learn Hindi-Hindustani. I should be more than satisfied if
all those who ever have to come in contact with the people from the
North would learn Hindi-Hindustani. But I would certainly not only
not deplore, as my correspondent would have me to, on the contrary I
would welcome, all people of all the non-Hindi provinces learning
Hindi. Why is it not desirable or natural for all India to know an allIndia speech in addition to every province knowing its own language
and in addition knowing All-India speech? Why should such
knowledge be the privilege of the cultured few and not of the masses?
It will surely show a very high degree of culture for a whole nation of
over 300 million souls to know two languages. That such an event is
highly improbable is unfortunately too true.
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

303

What, however, would be most unfortunate would be for any
province to neglect its own language and to prefer another speech as
the correspondent complains is happening in Tamil Nad. My frequent
travels in Tamil Nad have confirmed the opinion expressed by my
correspondent. But latterly I have noticed a change for the better in
that province. And the process of preferring the provincial speech to
every other where the choice is possible will be hastened without an
effort as the educated in every province recognize more and more the
necessity of seeking and establishing contact with the masses.
The correspondent incidentally touches the eternal rivalry
between English and Hindi-Hindustani to be the common speech. I
have held and declared, ever since I have entered public life, the
definite opinion that English never can or ought to be the all-Inida
speech and that it can only be Hindi, i.e., Hindustani, the speech
spoken by the millions of Hindus and Mussalmans of the North. The
attempt to treat English as such is to establish a permanent bar
between the masses and the English-educated classes and to retard the
progress of the country to its destination. I have repeatedly explained
that English has a definite place in our culture. In order to understand
the rulers and the whole Western world and to bring to India the best
that the West has to give, a few of us must learn English which is the
most widely known speech of the West. But a thousand times more
Indians have to know Hindi-Hindustani if the illiterate masses are to
be one with the educated classes.
The correspondent is wholly ignorant of my opinion when he
thinks that I have even been guilty of advising preference for Hindi
over the provincial speech. There is no hiatus between my principle
and my practice in this connection. I heartily endorse the proposition
that primary importance should be given to the mother tongue.
On the question of script my correspondents’s fear is justified,
nor do I apologize for the opinion I hold. Different languages
descended from or intimately connected with Sanskrit ought to have
one script and that is surely Devanagari. Different scripts are an
unnecessary hindrance to the learning by the people of one province
the language of other provinces. Even Europe which is not one nation
has generally adopted one script. Why should India, which claims to
be and is one nation, not have one script? I know I am inconsistent
when I tolerate both Devanagari and Urdu scripts for the same
language. But my inconsistency is not quite foolish. There is Hindu304

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Muslim friction at the present moment. It is wise and necessary for the
educated Hindus and Muslims to show mutual respect and toleration
to the utmost extent possible. Hence the option for Devanagari or
Urdu scripts. Happily there is no friction between provinces and
provinces. Hence the desirability of advocating a reform which means
a closer knitting together of provinces in more ways than one. And let
it be remembered that the vast mass of the people are wholly illiterate.
It would be suicidal to impose on them different scripts for no other
reason than a false sentiment and laziness to think.
Harijan, 15-8-1936

392. VARNA V. CASTE
Shri Sant Ramji, of the Jat-Pat-Torak Mandal of Lahore, wants
me to publish the following:
I have read your remarks 1 about Dr. Ambedkar and the Jat-Pat-Torak
Mandal, Lahore. In that connection I beg to submit as follows:
We did not invite Dr. Ambedkar to preside over our conference because
he belonged to the Depressed Classes, for we do not distinguish between a
touchable and an untouchable Hindu. On the contrary our choice fell on him
simply because his diagnosis of the fatal disease of the Hindu community was
the same as ours, i.e., he too was of the opinion that caste system was the root
cause of the disruption and downfall of the Hindu. The subject of the Doctor’s
thesis for doctorate being caste system, he has studied the subject thoroughly.
Now the object of our conference was to persuade the Hindus to annihilate
caste, but the advice of a non-Hindu in social and religious matters can have no
effect on them. The Doctor in the supplementary portion of his address
insisted on saying that that was his last speech as a Hindu, which was
irrelevant as well as pernicious to the interests of the conference. So we
requested him to expunge that sentence, for he could easily say the same thing
on any other occasion. But he refused and we saw no utility in making merely a
show of our function. In spite of all this, I cannot help praising his address
which is, as far as I know, the most learned thesis on the subject and worth
translating into every vernacular of India.
Moreover I want to bring to your notice that your philosophical
difference between caste and varna is too subtle to be grasped by people in
general, because for all practical purposes in the Hindu society caste and varna
are one and the same thing, for the function of both of them is one and the
1

Vide “Dr. Ambedkar’s Indictment- I”, 11-7-1936

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

305

same, i.e., to restrict intercaste marriages and inter-dining. Your theory of
varnavyavastha is impracticable in this age and there is no hope of its revival
in the near future. But Hindus are slaves of caste and do not want to destroy it.
So when you advocate your ideal or imaginary varnavyavastha they find
justification for clinging to caste. Thus you are doing a great disservice to
social reform by advocating your imaginary utility of division of varnas, for it
creates hindrance in our way. To try to remove untouchability without striking
disease or to draw a line on the surface of water. As in the heart of their hearts
dwijas 1 do not want to give social equality to the so-called touchable and
untouchable Shudras, so they refuse to break caste, and give liberal donations
for the removal of untouchability, simply to evade the issue. To seek the help
of the Shastras for the removal of untouchability and caste is simply to wash
mud with mud.

The last paragraph of the letter surely cancels the first. If the
Mandal rejects the help of the Shastras, they do exactly what Dr.
Ambedkar does, i.e., cease to be Hindus. How then can they object to
Dr. Ambedkar’s address merely because he said that that was his last
speech as a Hindu? The position appears to be wholly untenable
especially when the Mandal, for which Shri Sant Ram claims to speak,
applauds the whole argument of Dr. Ambedkar’s address.
But it is pertinent to ask what the Mandal believes if it rejects the
Shastras. How can a Muslim remain one if he rejects the Quran, or a
Christian remain Christian if he rejects the Bible? If caste and varna
are convertible terms and if varna is an integral part of the Shastras
which define Hinduism, I do not know how a person who rejects caste,
i.e., varna can call himself a Hindu.
Shri Sant Ram likens the Shastras to mud. Dr. Ambedkar has
not, so far as I remember, given any such picturesque name to the
Shastras. I have certainly meant it when I have said that if the Shastras
support the existing untouchability I should cease to call myself a
Hindu. Similarly, if the Shastras support caste as we know it today in
all its hideousness, I may not call myself or remain a Hindu since I
have no scruples about inter-dining or intermarriage. I need not
repeat my position regarding the Shastras and their interpretation. I
venture to suggest to Shri Sant Ram that it is the only rational and
correct and morally defensible position and it has ample warrant in
Hindu tradition.
Harijan, 15-8-1936
1

306

The twice-born
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

393. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
S EGAON WARDHA ,

August 16, 1936
CHI. MANILAL, SUSHILA,

I have your letters. There is no need at all for you to come here
if you are happy where you are. No matter where we are we should
render whatever services we can, and regard the people wherever we
are as members of our own family. The true meeting is that of hearts,
and they are quite close though we are millions of miles apart. If the
hearts of two prisoners in the same cell are not one their physical
proximity is meaningless. Hence, I do not long to have you come here
to see me. You may live there permanently if you find your peace
there.
Now a surprise for you both. Kanti’s mind is now set on getting
formal education and obtaining a degree. However one may try, he
cannot possibly be deterred. I tried hard, but without success. Now, the
question of the expenses for his education remains. Kanti, too, agrees
that it cannot be paid from the public funds and that it would be a
crime to take anything from his mother’s sisters who have already
spent a good deal on him. Hence, either you three brothers should
pay his expenses or he must earn and learn. In my opinion, you three
should share the burden, which is likely to be Rs. 75 to Rs. 100 a
month, though I do not know about it. It is enough if you give your
share of Rs. 33. Start sending the sum if you agree with the proposal.
Manu and Ba are with me. We are getting on quite well.
I got a letter from Harilal, his first after his conversion. He asks
for a copy of the Golden Number1 and wants to see me. I have written2
to him, saying that he may come provided he agrees to my terms for
the visit.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4856

1
2

Of Indian Opinion
The letter is not traceable.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

307

394. TELEGRAM TO KASTURBHAI LALBHAI1
[On or before August 17, 1936] 2
THE

NOTICES

ARE

FRAUGHT

ARE
WITH

AGAINST
SERIOUS

THE

PRINCIPLE

OF

ARBITRATION

AND

CONSEQUENCES .

The Bombay Chronicle, 18-8-1936

395. LETTER TO N.R. MALKANI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 17, 1936
MY DEAR MALKANI,

You did well in pouring out your heart to me. You should
ignore what others may say. Thakkar Bapa has often made mistakes in
judging people. And he writes letters often without careful thinking.
But it is idle to expect him at this time of life to change his ways. We
must take him as he is and love him for his sacrifice, single-minded
devotion to the poor and the oppressed. I never attached any value to
his remarks over the visit of the lady. It was undoubtedly wrong to
have written at all about the incident and written in the way he did.
You did well in leaving Rukmini in Sind. You will have to be
firm with her for her own sake. She must not be allowed to make life
miserable or interfere with your work.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 919

396. LETTER TO SUMANGAL PRAKASH
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 19, 1936
CHI. SUMANGAL,

I have your letter after a long time. I have been keeping myself
informed about you. What can I write? I shall not give up hope of
you. Some day your mind will become steady. Please note that should
1

President of the Mill-owners’ Association. According to The Bombay
Chronicle the telegram was addressed also to Chimanlal Parekh who had put up the
wage-cut notices in his mill.
2
The report bearing the telegram was dated August 17, 1936.

308

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you wish to lead a married life there would be nothing wrong in it. No
one can transgress the bounds of his nature.
Write whenever you feel inclined.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: Sumangal Prakash Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

397. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 19, 1936
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

You should have written earlier but better late than never. You
seem to have made yourself unhappy for some things without any
reason. But what wisdom can I give you from this distance? For, you
showed wisdom in not calling over Kashi. Our family is where we live.
We should be content with what help they give.
I still advise you not to work beyond your strength. We are not
omnipotent like God that we can help all people in all their troubles.
We may go only as far as our strength permits. The baby is not likely
to derive much benefit from glucose. As for cod-liver oil, I do not like
it at all. If, however, you are very keen on it, you also may do as
others do. You yourself have taken it. So have Kusum and Navin. It
may possibly help.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32997

398. LETTER TO S. AMBUJAMMAL
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 20, 1936
CHI. AMBUJAM,

So, you can’t be satisfied without letters written by me. You
shall have them
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

309

You must be composed whatever happens. You should not
worry over Kichi’s indifferent health. God protects us all and we may
not distrust Him when things do not go as we wish or when our dear
ones get ill. So I am glad to see that you say you have resigned
yourself to God. Let that resignation be from the heart and not merely
mechanical. For often we utter these truths without their finding a set
in our hearts.
My food is just now milk, pumpkin or any vegetable obtainable
in Segaon or surrounding villages, a little garlic and fruit when there is
any. I do not find the need for fruit as I used to before.
I hope you have recovered your strength and that Father and
Mother are also well.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: C.W. 9609. Courtesy: S. Ambujammal

399. A LETTER
August 20, 1936
Your letter makes me think. If all the principal relatives have no
objection, if... 1 is free to retain her own faith and does as a matter of
fact retain it, and [her] future partner is likewise and does as a matter
of fact retain his own faith and both have equal regard for each
other’s faith and practices, so far as I can see now, I should have no
difficulty in blessing the union.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

400. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
August 20, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS ,

Could you give Kumi some work at the school or elsewhere, if I
arranged an allowance of Rs. 15 a month for her from this place? To
put the question differently, does she in your opinion have the
disposition to be entrusted with some work?
Will a copy of the Gita with the words split up and with their
meanings, do for Purushottam and Vijaya? They had asked for only a
1

310

Omission as in the source
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Sanskrit text. I now learn that there is such an edition in large type
and with meanings. There will of course be no difficulty in getting the
bare Sanskrit text.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8502. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

401. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 21, 1936
CHI. PRABHA,

A letter from you after many days. I had been waiting for it day
after day. I very well understand the reason why you could not write.
It would be enough to write out a postcard when under such a stress.
Who am I to worry on you account? And after all how would my
worrying avail? God alone worries and protects us all. May you have
the faith that He is the Lord of every breath we take ! Everything will
then go well. Otherwise you are being fully put to the test and you are
sure to pass it. Do nothing beyond your capacity. Do manage to take
milk and fruit. You will not then have to worry about the rest of your
food. Who stays there? This is all I am writing today.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3480

402. LETTER TO H.L. SHARMA
August 21, 1936
CHI. SHARMA,

. . . 1 Give me the full title of Babbitt’s book. You may not mind
the loss of the book but I cannot help feeling upset till it is found.
How can a book disappear like this? And the same goes for the khadi.
1

Omission as in the source

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

311

However, I do not feel as bad about it as about the loss of Babbitt. I
still hope I shall find it.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsh, p. 260

403. A LETTER1
[Before August 22, 1936]
I see that you do not know the origin of the word ‘Harijan’ as
applied to the so-called untouchables. Hindu literature and, so far as I
know, even Christian literature is full of the idea that the despised of
the earth are favoured children of God; and so we have a proverb in
daily use which means that God is the help of the helpless. Who could
be better fitted to be called Harijans in this sense than the millions
whom the insolence of men has made the outcastes of society? It
would be a different thing if the untouchables themselves said, ‘We
are Harijans because we are without sin’—but can any man born of
woman say ‘I am without sin whether he has experienced what you
call ‘new birth’ or not?
Harijan, 22-8-1936

404. DISCUSSION WITH A PANDIT2
[Before August 22, 1936]
A Pandit was one of the visitors to Segaon the other day. He was introduced as
one learned in the Shastras and as one who gave regular discourses on the Gita.
Gandhiji asked him if untouchability had the sanction of the Gita. It seemed to
depend, according to him, on how one defined an untouchable. He said:
1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”. The addressee, a
missionary, had enquired: “Does it not indicate that to be really and truly Harijans we
must have the experience of a new birth, a spiritual regeneration, which the ordinary
man can have no very great understanding of, so long as he is in the unregenerate
state? Instead of designating the poor villagers who are still ‘dead in trespasses and
sins’ as ‘sons of God’, would it not be better to call them all men and women who
might become true sons of God?”
2
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”

312

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

An untouchable is he who thinks evil thoughts, speaks foul language, does
evil deeds. Such a one would be an untouchable according to the Gita.

But at that rate every one of us would be an untouchable. Who is
there amongst us who is without sin? Let me ascertain. Tukde
Maharaj, are you without sin?
No, by no means.

Then, Khan Saheb, what about you?
The same thing. Who can claim to be perfect?

Which means that we are all untouchable. Anyway, it is better
that we regard ourselves as less pure than others, for we know
ourselves better than we do others, and we may judge none. That is
why saint Surdas sang: “There is none so wicked and base as I.”
“But then one needs the help of the Shastras to purge onself of evil thoughts?”
said the Pandit.

Yes, but I refuse to accept the authority of a Shastra which
supports untouchability, i.e., which condemns a certain class of
people, by reason of their birth, as untouchable. Such a Shastra, far
from purging us of sin, adds to our load of sin.
Harijan, 22-8-1936

405. DISCUSSION WITH A SADHU1
[Before August 22, 1936]
Another sadhu, a header of the Harijans, one day came in with a curious poser:
“How can we serve God when we do not know God?”

[ GANDHIJI:] We may not know God, but we know His creation.
Service of His creation is the service of God.
But how can we serve the whole of God’s creation.

We can but serve that part of God’s creation which is nearest
and best known to us. We can start with our next-door neighbour. We
should not be content with keeping our courtyard clean, we should see
that our neighbour’s courtyard is also clean. We may serve our
family, but may not sacrifice the village for the sake of the family.
Our own honour lies in the preservation of that of our own village.But
we must each of us understand our own limitations. Our capacity for
service is automatically limited by our knowledge of the world in
1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

313

which we live. But let me put it in the simplest possible language. Let
us think less of ourselves than of our next-door neighbour. Dumping
the refuse of our courtyard into that of our neighbour is no service of
humanity but disservice. Let us start with the service of our
neighbours.
Harijan, 22-8-1936

406. A DANGEROUS PROPOSAL
Rao Bahadur Rajah has rendered public service by publishing
the correspondence between himself and Dr. Moonje.1 There was no
breach of confidence in the publication. Privilege of confidence is
surely not available for proposals which the receiver may regard to be
dangerous or harmful to a cause as the Moonje-Ambedkar proposal
most undoubtedly is. That neither Dr. Moonje nor Dr. Ambedkar
regards his proposal as dangerous does not make it less so in the
estimation of those who disapprove of it. What else was R.B. Rajah
todo if he intended by all legitimate means to thwart it? He entered
into correspondence with some of those who were parties to the
Yeravda Pact, and when he saw that not one of them favoured the
proposal he promptly released the correspondence for publication.
One may hope that we have seen the last of any bargaining between.
Dr. Ambedkar and savarna Hindus for the transfer to another form of
several million dumb Harijans as if they were chattels.
The Pact is between one large section of Hindus and another. It
frustrated the attempt to cut the Hindu body into two and gave the
opportunity to savarna Hindus to make reparation to those millions
whom they had ill-treated for centuries.
Dr. Ambedkar wants to scourge the savarna Hindus as he has
every right to do, but he may not expect the latter to be party to it. He
has every right to be impatient. But prejudices and superstitions
centuries old do not die in a moment. No one who has at all cared to
study the reform movement will deny that every attempt humanly
possible has been and is being made to bring home to the savarna
Hindus the message of the anti-untouchability movement. If Dr.
Ambedkar’s proposal were accepted, the reform movement would
receive a setback which might mean death to it in the end. For it
1

314

Vide “Letter to M.C. Rajah”, 26-6-1936
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

contemplates a paper but legal transfer of Harijans from the Hindu
fold to some other, no matter by what name the latter is called. It must
mean fratricide. Harijans themselves will be cut up into two rival
sections, and if they are both classified as Harijans within the meaning
of the Pact their state then will be worse than it is today, and it will be
an evil day for unhappy India if such a calamity descends on her.
It is futile to argue that although there will be nominal change
of religion, there won’t be a real one, and if there is any, it would not
be so bad as if Harijans were called Christians or Muslims. If it is a
change of religion, it matters little under what label they are classified.
Only if they are said to belong to another religion and still remain
Harijans, an additional cause of internecine quarrel would be created;
and all this to satisfy the desire to punish savarna Hindus. If in his
anger or impatience Dr. Ambedkar refuses to see the obvious result,
surely Dr. Moonje ought to.
And who are we, the self-constituted leaders, to barter away the
religious freedom of Harijans? Has not every Harijan, however dull or
stupid he may be, the right to make his own choice? It is one thing for
Dr. Ambedkar and those who wish to change over to some other
religion to do so, and wholly another for political or other parties to
assume such change for the mass of Harijans and to base thereon legal
and other consequences of a farreaching character.
If the leaders of different religions in India ceased to compete
with one another for enticing Harijans into their fold, it would be well
for this unfortunate country. I have the profound conviction that
those who are engaged in the competition are not serving the cause of
religion. By looking at it in terms of politics or economics they
reduce the religious values, whereas the proper thing would be to
esitmate politics and every other thing in terms of religion. Religion
deals with the science of the soul. Great as the other forces of the
world are, if there is such a thing as God soul force is the greatest of
all. We know as a matter of fact that the greater the force the finer it is.
Hitherto electricity has held the field among the finer physical powers.
And yet nobody has seen it except through its wonderful results.
Scientific speculation dares to talk of a force finer even than that of
electricity. But no instrument devised by man has been able to know
anything positive of soul force or spiritual force. It is on that force
that the true religious reformer has hitherto relied and never without
hope fulfilled. It is that force which will finally govern the welfare of
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

315

Harijans and everyone else and confound the calculations of men
however gifted they may be intellectually. The reformer who has
entered upon the duty of ridding Hinduism of the disease of
untouchability has to depend in everything he does on that force and
nothing else.
Harijan, 22-8-1936

407. LETTER TO MEHERCHAND AHLUWALIA
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 22, 1936
DEAR FRIEND,

My agreement is general. I have never advocated nor do I now
advocate class war of class hatred. I do not believe the former to be
inevitable. But I have never said nor believed that capitalist help is
necessary for the Congress cause.
Yours sincerely,

S HRI MEHERCHAND AHLUWALIA
R AJPURA
N.W.R.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

408. LETTER TO MEHRABEHN ZABWALA
August 22, 1936
DEAR SISTER,

I have your nice letter. There is no direct relation between
Harijan workers and khadi. Even those who wear foreign clothes can
serve Harijans. Therefore keep on doing social work without paying
any heed to the criticism.
But you are also a devotee of Daridranarayana. Daridranarayana means thousands of starving villagers. Those who serve them
can certainly bear the weight of khadi. It is enough that you do all
that is possible for you. May I give you one suggestion? You are able
to spin very fine yarn. If you do that you can get a very light sari
made for five or six rupees. Many poor women do the same.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

316

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

409. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 23, 1936
BAPA,

I do not remember the talks regarding the Sevak Mandal of
South India. For the present at least, I form an opinion about each
situation as and when it is represented to me. I see no objection if
deserving workers can be found for the South India Mandal and the
expenses are met from the South itself. The centre cannot give any
aid.
I hope Amtul Salaam is not, on the whole, a source of worry to
you. She is preparing to return. You have to accept payment from
here for Nilam’s expenses. The burden is not to be thrown on you
there. Most probably Jamnalalji will pay her expenses or as a last
resort my purse is always there.
Valunjkar will need more money. I have already written to you
to accept his hundi. He has been working under my supervision and
consults me in all matters.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1165

410. LETTER TO N.C. KELKAR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 24, 1936
DEAR MR. KELKAR,

I am late acknowledging your letter.
Do you not think your statement 1 was based on very flimsy
evidence? You might have referred Swami Satyadev’s article to me for
confirmation. If I had the time I would love to enter into
correspondence with him and find out the names of parties to whom I
was supposed to be talking. But I have neither the time nor the
inclination to pursue the matter any further. Truth stands.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 3119. Courtesy: Kashinath N. Kelkar
1

Vide “Letter to N. C. Kelkar”, 6-8-1936

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

317

411. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
August 24, 1936
MY DEAR REBEL,

Time only to send you love in abundance for two wires. Thank
God thumb well.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3735. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6891

412. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
August 24, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

Here is Sitaram Sastri’s letter for you to deal with. You forgot
the sandals. I wonder if you got your own pair. If not, you should
procure a pair there or write to Valunjkar at once.
I hope you are well and well settled.1 I am looking forward to
your first letter after settling down to the new life. Do not make any
time-table.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6362. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9828

413. LETTER TO B. G. KHER
August 24, 1936
MY DEAR KHER,

Having little time, I have delayed acknowledging your important
letter. 2 This is no question of anybody becoming a Buddhist. The
temple is meant to be one dedicated to Buddha as temples are
dedicated to Rama, Krishna and the like. There is no proselytizing
1

The addressee had moved to Betul.
Wherein the addressee had written: “Shri Dharmanand Kosambi told me that
you would like to look into the way the amount given by Birlaji for the Naigaum
Vihar is spent. I will do so; until the building is ready I shall see to the application of
this amount. Thereafter I do not know what I could do, being today identified with the
Harijan Seva Sangh. How am I to work on a Buddhist Vihar committee? Are they all
going to become Buddhists? Where is the need?... ”
2

318

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

taint about this movement. At the most it is to be a Hindu temple of an
advanced type in which a very learned man will be keeper or pujari.
That is how I have understood the whole scheme of Prof. Kosambi.
You may share this with the Professor, and if he endorses my position,
with Shri Natarajan, so that there may be a common understanding
about the temple.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G ANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 7977. Courtesy: G.D. Birla

414. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
August 24, 1936
CHI. MANILAL, SUSHILA,

I have your letters to me and have also read the one to
Kishorelal. The idea of having share-holders does not seem right.
Where there is a field ready for share-holders, one for customers and
expert workers can well be assumed. Having share-holders does not
mean having subscribers or expert workers. In my opinion, there may
be difficulty in getting men in spite of a flow of funds. Plainly
speaking, the subscribers to Indian Opinion are not exactly its readers
but rather patrons. This is a pitiable situation. You should stop
running around and find another honest trade which can support both
of you. You may pay the loss in running Indian Opinion or those
who desire its continuance should give a guarantee to bear the loss.
You should close down Indian Opinion if this cannot be done. The
insistence on continuing it could be right only up to a point. You
ought to have the ability to support yourself by means of some other
trade in case Indian Opinion cannot run. You should also be
equipped to support yourself solely on agriculture. You ought to
think over all this patiently. Very little help can be had through
exchange of ideas across this distance. You alone know the present
condition there. It may, however, be right to inform me before taking
a final decision. If there is no time for it there is no harm in deciding
independently. In any case do observe these conditions:
(1) Incur no debts.
(2) Transact no business on credit.
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

319

(3) Take up no business in forbidden goods such as selling
bidis.
(4) Don’t engage in a business to get rich quickly.
I am pained to read about Sorabji. Sheth Rustomji’s fears about
him seem to be proving true. After all things must go the destined way
and one’s understanding follows the same way.
Perhaps I have already written to you about Kanti, who too is
drawn into the current of examinations and degrees. He would not be
satisfied without it. Now I recollect that I even asked you to help him.1
It seems Devdas has offered him some help which would reach here in
two or three days when I expect to learn more about it. Ramdas writes
to say that he will not be able to help.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4857

415. A DISCUSSION WITH MAURICE FRYDMAN2
[On or before August 25, 1936] 3
[ GANDHIJI:] So that is Frydman. You have come to study the
spinning-wheel. But you will not win the Rs. 100,000 prize, as the
prize has been withdrawn.
[Maurice Frydman] joined heartily in the laughter and said, “Oh, no, I do not
want the prize, my only aim is to give you the wheel you want.”
He again asked a number of questions about the wheel, discussed various
improvements and left for Wardha.4
He inquired if Gandhiji’s aim was just humanitarian in sitting down in the
village, just serving the villagers as best he could !

I am here to serve no one else but myself, to find my own selfrealization through the service of these village folk. Man’s ultimate
aim is the realization of God, and all his activities, social, political,
1

Vide “Letter to Manilal and Sushila Gandhi”, 16-8-1936
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”. Maurice Frydman was a
Polish engineer, interested in village reconstruction movement, who had met
Gandhiji earlier at Nandi Hill. He was given the name Bharatanand.
3
According to the source the discussion took place on a Tuesday. The Tuesday
before 29-8-1936 fell on 25-8-1936.
4
The discussion which follows took place on a subsequent visit.
2

320

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

religious, have to be guided by the ultimate aim of the vision of God.
The immediate service of all human beings becomes a necessary part
of the endeavour simply because the only way to find God is to see
Him in His creation and be one with it. This can only be done by
service of all. And this cannot be done except through one’s country.
I am part and parcel of the whole, and I cannot find Him apart from
the rest of humanity. My countrymen are my nearest neighbours.
They have become so helpless, so resourceless, so inert that I must
concentrate on serving them. If I could persuade myself that I should
find Him in a Himalayan cave, I would proceed there immediately.
But I know that I cannot find Him apart from humanity.
But some comforts may be necessary even for man’s spiritual advancement.
One could not advance himself by identifying himself with the discomfort and
squalour of the villager?

A certain degree of physical harmony and comfort is necessary,
but above a certain level it becomes a hindrance instead of help.
Therefore the ideal of creating an unlimited number of wants and
satisfying them seems to be a delusion and a snare. The satisfaction of
one’s physical needs, even the intellectual needs of one’s narrow self,
must meet at a certain point a dead stop, before it degenerates into
physical and intellectual voluptuousness. A man must arrange his
physical and cultural circumstances so that they do not hinder him in
his service of humanity, on which all his energies should be
concentrated.
What then was the secret of his concentration on the village?

I have been saying that if untouchability stays, Hinduism goes;
even so I would say that if the village perishes, India will perish too. It
will be no more India, Her own mission in the world will get lost. The
revival of the village is possible only when it is no more exploited.
Industrialization on a mass scale will necessarily lead to passive or
active exploitation of the villagers as the problems of competition and
marketing come in. Therefore we have to concentrate on the village
being self-contained, manufacturing mainly for use. Provided this
character of the village industry is maintained, there would be no
objection to villagers using even the modern machines and tools that
they can make and can afford to use. Only they should not be used as
a means of exploitation of others.
Harijan, 29-8-1936

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

321

416. TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
WARDHAGANJ,

August 25, 1936
R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
MANORVILLE
S IMLA
WIRE EXACT CONDITION BODY INCLUDING THUMB AS MEDICALLY CERTIFIED.
LOVE.

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3736. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6892

417. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
August 25, 1936
MY DEAR AMRIT,

What have you done? Shummy says you “return an ill woman”
and naturally he says he “feels very disappointed all round”. You
shall not be cross with him for having told the truth. The wire
distresses me. What could be wrong with you? I have sent you a
peremptory wire.
I hope you will not leave me in suspense and will give me a
faithful report. Why is Shummy disappointed all round? You will
enlighten me. You told me not to write to Shummy. But I could not
ignore the wire. I have sent him a brief note.1
I do hope there is nothing seriously wrong with you. More when
I know the whole truth.
Yes, Mira left for Betul yesterday and Puri2 occupies her hut.
Your corners are vacant ! And the bathroom? All the playthings
gone ! But how can you return to me if you cannot keep good health
here?
Love.
BAPU
1
2

322

This is not traceable.
Anant Ram Puri
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[PS.]
You dare send me a blank sheet when you leave not a blank
corner on your written sheet!
B.
From the original: C.W. 3737. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6893

418. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
August 25, 1936
CHI. MARY,

Your letter1 does you credit and draws me nearer to you if that is
possible. We do need to have scrupulous regard for truth. The fact is
that I inquired only to know whether you were disturbed. I did not
want you to respond to the bell. Even for the few who are with me in
Segaon, I am not rigid. They are free not to attend the morning
prayer. The moral is never do anything to please people, even the
dearest, unless the doing of it pleases you also. This broad proposition
does raise side issues. But you know what I mean.
Give my love to Moti. I am glad she likes her life there. I hope
she is keeping quite well.
Mira has gone. Let us hope she will be comfortable there. If she
is not, she must return. I could easily have sent her to another but a
distant place. She was disinclined to go far.
Mahadev will be inquiring about cargo boats.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 6067. Also C.W. 3397. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

419. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
August 25, 1936
CHI. BRAJKISHAN,

The replies to your letters have been overdelayed. The reason is
nothing but lack of time. Even today I am writing just at bedtime.
1
In this the addressee had written that she had told Gandhiji “practically an
untruth” when she had given an excuse for not getting up for prayer at Segaon while
she had not intended to get up at all.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

323

You ask me who lives with me. The three were already here.
Among others are Ba, Manu and Khan Saheb. I stop those whom I
can from coming here. What do we stand to gain by allowing you to
come? You never keep well here.
Give up the village industries work if you cannot find any help.
But do write to me if you do not keep well there.
BAPU

[PS.]
I had not finished my letter with this. I wrote the last sentence
half asleep, the pen slipped out of my hand and I promptly fell asleep.
I am now writing this after I awoke from my nap and had some hot
water. This is no sign of any ailment or weakness; if at all, it is a sign
of good health. Give up the longing to live with me and live there or
at any other place where you can engage yourself in some occupation
and earn not more than you spend. Why not join some khadi
bhandar? Or go to live at Narela and work with the help of others. It is
not good to sit idle. Consult Devdas. Take it that the reason you
attribute to my not writing is an utter impossibility. How can I ever
forget you?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2445

420. LETTER TO R.S. PANDIT
WARDHA ,

August 26, 1936
CHI. RANJIT,

Why are you keeping indifferent health? Sarup writes that now
you are a little better. You must make your body as strong as steel
even if it requires some effort. One can certainly make a boat to cross
the Ganga. The real achievement would be to make a boat to cross the
waters of slavery. But you cannot do this with a hollow chest. You
should be strong enough not to let the oar slip from your hands.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

324

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

421. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
[Before August 27, 1936] 1
DEAR DAUGHTER,2

I have your two letters. You ought to have faith in what Dr.
Bharadwaj tells you. Dr. Ansari would have done the same. You are
therefore going to clean your nose and carry out whatever else he has
recommended.
I am enclosing Nilam’s letter3 . I would certainly have sent for
you had it not been for Nilam’s illness. I shall show both your letters
to Kanti and shall permit him to go if he wishes. I also do not like the
step he proposes to take, but I do not wish to suppress him either.
I have no more time now, so I stop here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 603

422. TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
WARDHAGANJ,

August 27, 1936
R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
MANORVILLE
S IMLA WEST
YOUR

WIRE.

THANK

GOD.

WIRE

CONDITION

DAILY.

LOVE.

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3738. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6894

1

From the reference to Kantilal Gandhi’s proposed visit to the addressee; vide
letter to the addressee, “Letter to Amtussalaam”, 27-8-1936
2
This is in Urdu.
3
This is not available.
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

325

423. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 27, 1936
CHI. AMTUL SALAAM,

Let me see what great feat you perform, now that Kanti has gone
there. Do not pick quarrels. Persuade him sweetly if you wish to. As
far as I can tell, it is now impossible to stop him.
Carry out Dr. Bharadwaj’s instructions. While you have been
advising others, you yourself need to look after your own health. Do
not expect any long letter from me for some time now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 343

424. LETTER TO PARIKSHITLAL L. MAJMUDAR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August [27, 1936] 1
BHAI PARIKSHITLAL,

I have your letter. You should clearly write so to Bapa if you
feel that he has made a mistake. I wrote to him nothing since I had not
read everything fully. However, I am quite aware that a judge’s
function is over with the delivery of his decision, and that he is not
even entitled to interpret his judgment. However, I have not written to
Bapa even to say that if both the parties approach him again with a
representation he might take it up, because I am so much immersed in
work that many such things are left out. You may send this to Bapa if
you now write to him. Now that I have written so much to you I feel
like writing to him also, but where is the time?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4037

1

326

From the G.N. Register
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

425. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

[About August 27, 1936] 1
CHI. PRABHA,

You must have got my letter to the Sitab Diyara address though
you have gone to Patna. Now obtain milk and fruit there and improve
your health. Look after the household properly. You have now the
opportunity to take full care of Jayaprakash’s food. I do not write
here about your questions since I have replied to them earlier in
detail. Tell me about the house you live in and about other things I
should know. How is the climate, for example? Do take regular walks.
My weight as recorded yesterday was 109 lb.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Mahadevi and others have returned from Badrinarayan. Nilam,
one of the party who fell ill, is with Amtul.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3464

426. TELEGRAM TO AMTUSSALAAM
WARDHAGANJ,

August 28, 1936
AMTUSSALAAM
S EVAK
DELHI
YOU MUST COMPOSE YOURSELF. GET WELL QUICK. AM LOOKING AFTER
KANTI.

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 344

1

From the reference to Nilam’s illness and her stay with Amtussalaam; vide
“Letter to Amtussalaam”, 27-8-1936
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

327

427. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
WARDHA ,

August [28] 1 1936
MY DEAR REBEL,

I am writing this at J.’s in the early morning to catch the train.
I can’t give you the assurance that I am without anxiety. How
can I be when you act so rebelliously? You were docile in the
presence of the tyrant. Behind his back the rebellious spirit breaks
out. Therefore the only way to free me from anxiety is for you to get
quickly well and, if fish-eating would restore you, you should
unhesitatingly take it.
But I can give you this assurance that nothing that Shummy can
say will affect me in the least. His great anger is the measure of his
love for you. Brought up as he is, he has every right to accuse me of
having ruined your health and otherwise disturbed the even tenor of
your life. How can he feel otherwise? I had told you that much was to
depend upon your returning to Simla in a first-class condition. You
did not, you could not. We would settle accounts after you have got
well and look better than ever before. You would continue to write
and wire daily while the illness lasts. You must not take up any work
till you are completely restored. I hope you had my wire2 yesterday.
I came to Wardha yesterday. I walk back this evening.
Mira is returning today from Betul.
Love to you and Shummy.
TYRANT
R OBBER
BAPU, etc.
From the original: C.W. 3584. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6393

1
The source has “29-8-1936”, but below it someone has written “Really”,
28-8-1936”, which is confirmed by the postmark.
2
Vide “Letter to Amtussalaam”, 27-8-1936

328

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

428. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
S EGAON,

August 28, 1936
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

Our conversation of yesterday has set me thinking. Why is it that
with all the will in the world I cannot understand what is so obvious to
you? I am not, so far as I know, suffering from intellectual decay.
Should you not then set your heart on at least making me understand
what you are after? I may not agree with you. But I should be in a
position to say so. Yesterday’s talk throws no light on what you are
after. And probably what is true of me is true of some others. I am
just now discussing the thing with Raja. I should like you to discuss
your programme with him if you can spare the time. I must not write
at length, having no time. You know what I mean.
Love.
BAPU

429. NOTES
UNCERTIFIED V. C ERTIFIED

The difficulty that cropped up in the Tamil Nad on the
introduction of the new scale of wages for spinning has arisen in other
places and specially in Andhra, as appears from several letters I have
received from that part of India. Correspondents complain bitterly of
the harm uncertified dealers of khadi are doing to the cause of the
poor women who have no chance of earning an additional pice. I do
not know whether the uncertified dealers will listen to my exhortation
not to be so selfish as to snatch the pice from thousands of poor
spinners. I hope they will. But the real remedy lies in the hands of the
khadi-buying public. If they will not buy khadi except from the
bhandars certified by the A.I.S.A., the uncertified bhandars will
haveto close down. The public should realize that there can be no
khadi if there is no A.I.S.A. Until khadi becomes current coin and has
found general favour in the villages, it must be nursed by a vigilant
body having the capacity for performing the onerous duty. Such a
body is the A.I.S.A. The public know or ought to know that it is a
purely philanthropic institution having no interest save that of the
millions of poor women spinners of the villages of India. As its name
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

329

implies, all its activities are intended to subserve their interest.
Economic salvation of the villages is impossible, unless the millions of
women who have no occupation for nearly six months in the year
have a steady and profitable occupation fitted to their constitutions.
There is no such universal occupation as hand-spinning. I have been
obliged to restate this oft-told truth in order to emphasize the
necessity of the public patronizing certified khadi bhandars to the
exclusion of uncertified ones, even though the latter sell khadi at less
than the Association rates. The public should know that the
Association rates alone make it possible to pay higher wages to
spinners.
HUTS WITHOUT MONEY
Last year I had 60 Harijans accommodated in the village of my future abode.
The question of building huts for them was ticklish. But it was solved for me by
Harijans themselves. When I went to the village a month after their settlement, I
found 12 huts already erected evidently without the cost of a pice. The walls were made
of palm branches or stalks of juari, cotton or tuver; the roof of split stalks of juari,
knitted into chatais 1 and those were covered with leaves of khakhra. The ropes were
made from the fibres of khakhra roots.

Thus writes an enthusiastic agriculture graduate who is keen on
settling down in a village. Where labour is not exploited and where it
has free access to the material that Nature produces in abundance and
which is generally allowed to go to waste or sold for a trifle, poor
Harijans have no difficulty in getting for themselves comfortable
cottages and other amenities of life. But orthodox prejudice makes it a
sin or a crime for Harijans to touch even its wells ! ! !
Harijan, 29-8-1936

430. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 29, 1936
MY DEAR AMRIT,

I hope you got my letter of yesterday. I am writing this in
Segaon; therefore this can’t go by late fee post. Your daily telegrams
and letters giving cent per cent truth are absolutely necessary for the
peace of my mind. Why must you send vegetables too? Surely that is
repugnant to the village sense. Trust me to ask for what I need from
you.
1

330

Mats
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

There is no hurry about the surgical instruments. I can wait till
Shummy is himself again. You have to make up your mind to win him
back. It is sheer nonsense for you to talk of running away from the
home. It is so unlike you. ‘Love is patient and long suffering.’ And
what are you if not embodiment of love? Your precious association
with me is not going to make you less loving and less lovable. If you
have not been able to give satisfaction to the family by showing better
health, surely it is within your power to show an equable mind and a
love that will quench the fieriest anger. Do wire to me that you have
reconquered Shummy. I tell you the thought of his pain over your
illness haunts me all the day long. I do not know how I can appease
him except by your unmistakably showing him that you have not lost,
but if possible gained by your contact with me, in all that counts.
Mira came back yesterday. The appointments in Betul were too
dirty for her.
Love to both of you.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 3585. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6394

431. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

August 30, 1936
MY DEAR AMRIT,

You are good. You are sending me full letters and wires. I
needed them all. Your letters are also cheerful. But whilst I do not
worry in the sense you do. I must confess that your illness has given
me a rude shock and Shummy’s estrangement has proved unbearable.
You must walk to his room and stoop to conquer. Bathe him with
your tears. I want his wire that he has forgiven me from his heart. It
hurts me to think that I should be the cause of estrangement between
you and him.
Here you were perfect in your obedience. I want you to obey
me in this from your heart. Voluntary obedience always carries its
own conviction. And I know that your obedience will restore the
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

331

harmony of the household. The exact, method of winning over
Shummy I must leave to you.
When you are entirely restored, I shall discuss with you and
Shummy, if he is then composed, my own opinion about the cause of
your painful collapse.
It may be well for you to reduce the quantity of milk rather than
giving up eggs. The heaviness need not be looked for in that direction
first. And if the doctor agrees, you should take a little garlic always. I
cannot vouch for it but I am inclined to think that onion oil should be
good for eczema.
I was not amused over Subhas’s fear. There is much truth in
what he says. If you were feigning strength however unwittingly,
under the impulse of your enthusiasm and your intense love for me,
naturally the separation would produce a collapse. You alone could be
the judge of the condition, which [you] can fathom by introspection.
No more tonight.
Love
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 3586. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6395

432. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
August 30, 1936
CHI. PRABHA,

This time your letter is late. You must fix a day for writing. For
my part, I have never been lax. I reply to you as soon as I get your
letter. Your last letter reached me yesterday and today I am writing
this reply. I hear that Jayaprakash is reaching Wardha today. I have
not known the reason. Are the letters henceforth to be sent to the new
address? Are letters to the Searchlight address delayed? How did you
get the cough? You should regain your strength quickly if milk is
now available.
You should shoulder only as much responsibility as you can
bear. One does not have to repent if one takes up service in
proportion to one’s capacity.
I am just told that Jayaprakash has arrived.
332

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

In your letters you make mistakes of gender. I am returning
today’s with the corrections. Ask me if you don’t follow them.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 3481

433. TELEGRAM TO G. D. BIRLA
WARDHA ,

August 31, 1936
GHANSHYAMDAS
C ARE LUCKY
BOMBAY
COME
WIRE

AS

SOON

AS

POSSIBLE.

VALLABHBHAI

WAITING

FOR

YOU.

REPLY.

BAPU
From the original: C. W. 7979. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

434. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
S EGAON,

August 31, 1936
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I forgot to discuss three points with you.
What happened in the case of Babarao Harkare? I think it is
good to send him Rs. 25 every month.
If his brother deserves more, he should be paid more.
Shankarrao Tikekar seems to be in a pitiable plight. A summons
to pay Rs. 1,500 has been served on him, and he is unemployed. Have
you thought of doing anything for him?
You are better placed to think over all these matters.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 2983

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

333

435. A TALK1
[Before September 2, 1936] 2
It was interesting one morning to watch a number of urchins collected in the
verandah of Gandhiji’s hut....Their eyes were fixed on a snake in a glass jar....Though
the place cannot... be said to be infested with snakes, a fair number of snakes are to
be found there during the season. There must therefore be a fair number of cases of
snake-bites, and in all cases the villagers kill the snakes at sight. Explaning the
presence of the exhibit Gandhiji said:

That is hardly proper or necessary. We cannot tell a poisonous
from a non-poisonous snake and therefore we kill all without
discrimination. The bulk of them are non-poisonous, and in many
cases it is the fright that kills the victim of snake-bite. The snakes have
their place in the agricultural economy of the village, but our villagers
do not seem to realize it. They perform a particularly useful function,
in that they clear the fields of rats, vermin and other pests. It is best
therefore to know the elementary principles of snake-lore and to teach
them to the villagers. They must know how to distinguish between a
poisonous and a non-poisonous snake, they must know that it is not
necessary to kill all snakes, which although they may be poisonous do
not usually bite unless they are trodden upon or mishandled, and they
must also know that certain snakes at least are useful. With that
purpose in view I have decided to have here snakes alive or dead to be
shown to the villagers. This one in the jar was caught alive by an
inmate of our household. We have a simple device with which it is
easy to catch snakes alive without doing them physical injury, and this
one was found clinging to a roof in the farmyard over there. I decided
to send it on to the Civil Surgeon for examination. He was good
enough to examine it. He found that it was a Krait, one of the most
poisonous varieties, and so he killed it and sent it back. I decided to
preserve it and sent for a glass jar with rectified spirit. We had to wait
several hours for the jar to come, and when it did come we found on
opening the basket that the snake was alive. It seems to be particularly
tenacious of life, and so it lingered on until the third day, when we
decided to end its pains by immersing it in water. The fact was that the
1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
This and the subsequent interviews evidently took place before Gandhiji was
hospitalized on September 2, 1936.
2

334

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Civil Surgeon had smashed its brain and stunned it, and as he
explained later its spinal cord was intact and therefore it had remained
alive. I have now got a cage to keep live specimens in. As you see, the
little urchins are already being attracted. I have begun to study snakelore and hope to place before the villagers the broad facts regarding
these creatures.
Harijan, 5-9-1936

436. DISCUSSION WITH TEACHERS1
[Before September 2, 1936]
A group of school teachers went to Segaon one morning with that old Platonic
problem—Knowledge is virtue—and asked if it was true. Why was it that though we
knew very well indeed that a particular course of action was morally wrong, we could
not avoid it? Replying to them Gandhiji said:

Human life is a series of compromises and it is not always easy to
achieve in practice what one has found to be true in theory. Take this
very simple case. The principle is that all life is one and we have to
treat the sinner and the saint alike, as the Gita says we have to look
with an equal eye on a learned pundit and a dog and a dog-eater. But
there I am. Though I have not killed the snake, I know I have been
instrumental in killing it. I know that I should not have done so. I
know, besides, that snakes are kshetrapals (guardians of the field); and
therefore too I should not have helped in killing it. But as you see I
have not been able to avoid it. But it is no use my thinking that I
cannot avoid it. I do not give up the principle which is true for all time
that all life is one, and I pray to God that He may rid me of the fear of
snakes and enable me to achieve the non-violences necessary to
handle snakes and as we handle other domestics. Take another
instance, again a very simple one. I know that as a villager and as one
who has made it his business to promote village crafts, I must use a
village-made razor, but you see that I am using a foreign one.2
I might have got a village-made razor, if I had written to friends
to procure one for me. But I thought I must help the village barber,
no matter what kind of razor he used. I therefore decided to cultivate
him, and put up with his dirty clothes and uncouth instruments. But
on one thing I could not possibly compromise. He said he would not
1
2

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
Gandhiji was having a shave when the teachers arrived.

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

335

shave Harijans on the same terms as he was prepared to shave me, and
I had to do without his services. Now you find me having a shave with
a foreign razor, though it is open to me to procure a village-made
one. Here there is obviously an indefensible compromise. And yet
there is an explanation. I have been sticking on to a set of shaving
tackle given me by a loving sister, whose gift I could not resist and
whose feelings I could not hurt by rejecting the foreign razor and
insisting on having a village-made one. But there it is, the compromise
is there. I do not commend it for imitation. We must be prepared to
displease the dearest ones for the sake of principles.
There are eternal principles which admit of no compromise, and
one must be prepared to lay down one’s life in the practice of them.
Supposing someone came and asked you to give up your religion and
to embrace another at the point of the sword, would you do it?
Supposing someone were to compel you to drink wine or eat beef, or
tell a lie, would you not rather lay down your life than yield to the
coercion? No. A principle is a principle, and in no case can it be
watered down because of our incapacity to live it in practice. We have
to strive to achieve it, and the striving should be conscious, deliberate
and hard.
Has not our Poet sung for all time that fearless striving is the
very condition of freedom?
Where the mind is without fear, and the head is held high,...Where tireless
striving stretches its arms towards perfection;...
Into that heaven of freedom, Oh Father, let my country awake. 1

Harijan, 5-9-1936

437. TALK WITH BHARATAN KUMARAPPA 2
[Before September 2, 1936]
I have no heart in this correspondence, no zest in it. I am
actually tired of it and feel like asking people not to write to me at all.
I long to wander among the villages around us rather than go to
Wardha where so many friends are coming and I may have to go. But
I feel it a wrench to be torn from my work. It is, if I may call it, my
sadhana, and I would, if I could, not let anything interrupt it. I have
1
2

336

Gitanjali , 35
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

two or three engagements which I accepted long ago and I shall have
to keep them, though I would love to find some excuse to put them
off or avoid them. I would like to walk out every morning to the
villages in our neighbourhood. I am doing practically little physical
work now, and I am longing to do it. We have taken a couple of cows
and are trying the experiment of making our own ghee. Now I should
like to look after the cow myself, look after her feed and her general
upkeep. My idea is to show these villagers that a cow can easily pay
for her feed and the charges of her upkeep. Then look at the number
of ailments these villagers suffer from, and how they will try all kinds
of quack remedies but will not do the simplest things they must do.
All this is slow work, and it is no use expecting startling results
as those of the Five Year Plan in Soviet Russia. We have to realize that
we are eating the salt of the poor, and we have to make an adequate
return to them. Never mind if you do not get agents for this difficult
work. If we have only one genuine agent, I should be satisfied. Indeed
I should not worry even if we had none. Our acid test is: Have we
organized any single village according to our programme? Have we
introduced food reform there? Are their roads and their lanes clean
and perfect? Have we revived any industries? Have we tackled the
problem of drink and vice? If we could do this successfully even in
one village, I should think we had achieved a good deal. From
individuals you may get a response but I should not call it making
headway. Making headway is touching one whole village. Jajuji1 was
wondering if we might not have a wider scheme. No, we cannot have
it. It is not one item of work like hand-spinning for instance. It is
whole village-work, and today our work centres round three or four
things I have mentioned. It may centre round thirty things some day,
but not today.
Harijan, 5-9-1936

438. TELEGRAM TO AMTUSSALAAM
WARDHAGANJ,

September 2, 1936
AMTUL S ALAAM
C ARE S EVAK
DELHI
YOU

CAN
1

GO

INDORE

PATIALA

BOMBAY

WARDHA

FOR

IMPROVING

Shrikrishnadas Jaju

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

337

HEALTH.
DEVDAS
WORRY.

KANTI JOINED VAKIL’S
SCHOOL
BOMBAY. WHEN
BA I
DO
NOT
WORRY
IT
IS
WRONG
FOR
YOU
TO

BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 345

439. MESSAGE TO WORLD PEACE CONGRESS1
September 2, 1936
NO

INDIAN

GOING

ON

CAN
IN

HELP

WESTERN

SYMPATHIZING

WITH

PEACE

EFFORT

COUNTRIES.

The Bombay Chronicle, 3-9-1936

440. TELEGRAM TO AMTUSSALAAM
WARDHAGANJ,

[September] 2 3, 1936
AMUTUL S ALAAM
C ARE S EVAK
DELHI
SARASWATI
POSSIBLE.

GOING

TRIVANDRUM

MONDAY.

COME

BEFORE

IF

BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 346

441. TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
WARDHAGANJ,

September 4, 1936
R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
MANORVILLE
S IMLA
YOU
MUST
BEHAVE
YOURSELF
ILLNESS.3
NO
FEVER
YET.

AND
NOT
LOVE.

GRIEVE

OVER

MY

BAPU
From the orginal: C. W. 3739. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6895
1
2
3

338

The message was sent through Sarojini Naidu.
From Bapuke Patra—8: Bibi Amtussalamke Naam,. The original is damaged.
Gandhiji was down with malaria; vide also the following item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

442. MESSAGE FOR AMRIT KAUR1
September 4, 1936
Tell her she must be content with a letter from you, at least for
two or three days. Also tell her my prophecy about the thermos was
correct; it is broken, and that she has now to replace it.
From a copy: C. W. 10100. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur

443. GOD OF LOVE, NOT WAR
The Statesman of Delhi has devoted four articles to an
unmeasured condemnation of the no-war movement led by Canon
Sheppard and other earnest Christians in England. The paper has
dragged into its support the authority of the Bhagavad Gita in these
words:
Indeed the true but difficult teaching of Christianity seems to be that society
must fight its enemies but love them.
Such, too,—will Mr. Gandhi please note—is the clear teaching of the
Bhagavad Gita, where Krishna tells Arjuna that victory also goes to him who fights
with complete fearlessness and is utterly devoid of hatred. Indeed on the highest plane
the argument between the conscientious objector and the knightly warrior is for ever
settled in the second book of that great classic. We have little space to quote and the
whole poem deserves to be read not once but many times.

The writer of the articles perhaps does not know that the terrorist
has also used in his defence the very verses quoted by him. But the
fact is that a dispassionate reading of the Bhagavad Gita has revealed
to me a meaning wholly contrary to the one given to it by the
Statesman writer.
He has forgotten that Arjuna was no conscientious objector in
the sense the Western war-resisters are. Arjuna believed in war. He had
fought the Kaurava hosts many times before. But he was unnerved
when the two armies were drawn up in battle array and when he
suddenly realized that he had to fight his nearest kinsmen and revered
1

This was conveyed by Mahadev Desai to Amrit Kaur in a letter which, inter
alia, read: “[Gandhiji] deliberately went to the hospital in order that the doctor may
not have to be troubled over and over again. He is being properly looked after and is
progressing well. There was no fever until 2.30 [p.m.] Even if it does come, I am sure
it will be mild. He is taking complete rest . . . .”
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

339

teachers. It was not love of man or the hatred of war that had actuated
the questioner. Krishna could give no other answer than he did. The
immortal author of the Mahabharata, of which the Gita is one—no
doubt the brightest—of the many gems contained in that literary
mine, has shown to the world the futility of war by giving the victors
an empty glory, leaving but seven victors alive out of millions said to
have been engaged in the fight in which unnamable atrocities were
used on either side. But the Mahabharata has a better message even
than the demonstration of war as a delusion and a folly. It is the
spiritual history of man considered as an immortal being and has used
with a magnifying lens a historical episode considered in his times of
moment for the tiny world round him but in terms of present-day
values of no significance. In those days the globe had not shrunk to a
pinhead, as it has today, on which the slightest movement on one spot
affects the whole. The Mahabharata depicts for all time the eternal
struggle that goes on daily between the forces of good and evil in the
human breast and in which though good is ever victorious evil does
put up a brave show and baffles even the keenest conscience. It shows
also the only way to right action.
But whatever the true message of the Bhagavad Gita may be,
what matters to the leaders of the peace movement is not what the Gita
says but what the Bible, which is their spiritual dictionary, says and
then, too, not what meaning the Church authorities give to it, but what
meaning a prayerful reading of it yields to the reader. What matters
most of all is the objector’s knowledge of the implications of the law
of love or ahimsa, inadequately rendered in English as non-violence.
The articles of The Statesman are perhaps a fair challenge to the
objectors. I am sorry I do not know enough of the movement to give
a definite opinion. My opinion need have no weight whatsoever with
the objectors. But it has, inasmuch as I know intimately some of them,
who even correspond with me. And now they have gone a step further
in that they have adopted alomst as their textbook Mr. Richard
Gregg’s book called The Power of Non-violence which is claimed by
its author to be a Westen interpretation of what non-violence as I
interpret it stands for. It may not therefore be presumptuous on my
part if I set down without argument the implications and conditions of
success of non-violence. Here they are:
(1) Non-violence is the law of the human race and is
infinitely greater than and superior to brute force.
340

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

(2) In the last resort it does not avail to those who do not
possess a living faith in the God of Love.
(3) Non-violence affords the fullest protection to one’s
selfrespect and sense of honour, but not always to possession of land
or movable property, though its habitual practice does prove a better
bulwark than the possession of armed men to defend them. Nonviolence in the very nature of things is of no assistance in the defence
of ill-gotten gains and immoral acts.
(4) Individuals or nations who would practise non-violence
must be prepared to sacrifice (nations to the last man) their all except
honour. It is therefore inconsistent with the possession of other
people’s countries, i.e., modern imperialism which is frankly based on
force for its defence.
(5) Non-violence is a power which can be wielded equally
by all—children, young men and women or grown-up people—
provided they have a living faith in the God of love and have
therefore equal love for all mankind. When non-violence is accepted
as the law of life it must pervade the whole being and not applied to
isolated acts.
(6) It is a profound error to suppose that whilst the law is
good enough for individuals it is not for masses of mankind.
Harijan, 5-9-1936

444. WHAT A GIRL NEEDS
A fair correspondent writes: 1
Your article “Avoidable Misery”2 seems to me to be incomplete....If
parents were to educate their daughters as they educate their sons, so as to
enable them to earn an independent living, they would not have to worry
themselves over the selection of husbands for their daughters.... When girls
have had the opportunity of developing their minds fairly and are able to
support themselves in a dignified manner, they have no difficulty, when they
are desirous of marrying, in being suitably matched... What I plead for is a
training of girls in useful knowledge and some calling that would make them
fully confident about their ability to face the world and not to feel dependent
upon parents or their future husbands.... I wish you could emphasize this
1
2

Only excerpts are reproduced here.
Vide “Avoidable Misery”, 25-7-1936

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

341

aspect of the question in considering the difficulties of parents having on their
hands daughters of marriageable age!!

I heartily endorse the sentiments expressed by my
correspondent. Only I had to deal with the case of a parent who had
made himself miserable not because he had an incompetent daughter,
but because he and perhaps even his daughter wanted to restrict
themselves, in the choice of a husband, to their own little caste. The ‘
accomplishment’ of the girl was itself a hindrance in this case. If the
girl was illiterate, she could have accommodated herself to any young
man. But being an accomplished girl, naturally she would need an
equally accomplished husband. It is our misfortune that the
sordidness of exacting a price for marrying a girl is not regarded as a
decided disqualification. An altogether artificial value is put upon
English collegiate education. It covers a multitude of sins. If the
definition of ‘accomplishment’ was more sensible than it has become
among the classes whose educated young men exact a price for
accepting marriage proposals on behalf of girls, the difficulty of
selecting suitable matches for girls would be much lessened, If not
entirely removed. Whilst, therefore, I commend the proposal of my
fair correspondent to the attention of parents, I must insist on the
necessity of breaking down the highly injurious caste barriers.
Breaking down the barriers will widen the range of choice and thus in
a great measure prevent exactions.
Harijan, 5-9-1936

445. TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
WARDHAGANJ,

September 5, 1936
R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
MANORVILLE
S IMLA
COMPLETELY FREE FOR SIXTY HOURS. QUITE
ACCEPT MEMORIAL1 AGENCY FOR JULLUNDUR

HAPPY.
ONLY.

YOU

SHOULD

BAPU
From the original: C. W. 3740. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6896

1

342

Kamala Nehru Memorial
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

446. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
WARDHA ,

September 6/7, 1936
MY DEAR REBEL,

All these few days I was in no mood to play. Hence I had
forgotten that you were a Rebel, Idiot, etc., etc. Now I am somewhat
composed. You have still to send me the news that there is
reconciliation between you and Shummy. If you have not gone to
him, you must do so at once.
I told you I did not like that eruption on the thumb. You must
not doctor it yourself. You should see a competent doctor, if Shummy
will not attend to you. Nor can I guide you from here as to your food
except in a general way. The bath is all right. You are right in raising
its temperature. It is enough to have it is at least 5 degrees below the
temperature of the body.
I must tell you later what I consider was the cause of your
breakdown. This is being written after 8 p. m. So I must not write
more.
Mahadev has kept you fully posted about my health. Hence I
need say nothing more except that I am A 1.
Please thank Shummy for the book on snakes of which I saw
some beautiful live specimens yesterday.
Much love from
R OBBER

September 7, 1936
[PS.]
My door can never be shut in your face.
From the original: C. W. 3587. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6396

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

343

447. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
WARDHA ,

September 7, 1936
DEAR DAUGHTER,1

For three days there has been no temperature and so it can be
said that I am rid of the fever. I am writing this from my hospital bed.
Kanti’s letter accompanies this.
It is not right for you to worry about him. Can your relationship
be deeper than Ba’s and even mine? Can the measure of your love be
greater? Be reasonable and calm down.
You do not care to improve your health; this is not good. You
must have got my wire 2 , but there is no reply from you. How cruel
you are!
Send me a full report and take a final decision.
It is foolish of you to be afraid of a visit to Wardha. However, I
don’t insist. Go wherever you can improve your health.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Is Chitre there?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 347

448. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
September 7, 1936
CHI. KANTI,

I have been thinking of you every day, only my indifferent
health would not let me write to you. But I cannot postpone writing
today. I have no fever. I have written for Harijan, so why should I not
write to you? I have your letter. I was certainly pained beyond
measure. The edifice of my trust collapsed in a moment. You
suddenly drifted away from me. Ba’s grief is greater than mine;
andpoor A.’s the greatest. You have justified the epithets I gave you.
1
2

344

This is in Urdu.
Vide “Telegram to Amtussalaam”, 2-9-1936
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You are a tyrant, you are treacherous. You stole A.’s heart and then
you spurned her. Can you think of an act of greater cruelty? In your
curriculum you will have occasions to drive needles into living beings
and dissect them. Remember this letter then. You have started your
lessons by torturing a living human being. But I am not at all angry at
your strange sacrifice. What could you do? How far can you get over
your nature? You have been carried away by the current of the
prevailing atmosphere as well as by your own mental makeup. This
happens more or less to everyone. May you be blessed. One thing
hurt me very much. In the evening you came to me with a certain
resolve. Next day you changed it altogether. You did not even think it
necessary to discuss it with me. What kind of conduct is this? Do you
regard your own word as absolutely worthless? It was a severe blow.
You made me cry so much. You could have desisted from this act
without difficulty. Well, one cannot collect spilt water. It will be
enough if you learn to value your own word after this regrettable
episode. Remember knowledge without a moral basis has no worth
whatsoever. It is like a two-pice bit of copper coated with mercury to
look like a rupee.
Take good care of your health. Don’t reduce yourself to a
skeleton by overwork. Don’t exhaust your brain. I have no doubt that
you will pass all the tests.
Write to me regularly.
I am still in the hospital. The fever may be said to have gone.
Mirabehn’s bed is by my side. She is still running a temperature. The
third patient is Ba who is suffering from cough.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C. W. 10707. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

449. LETTER TO JUGAL KISHORE BIRLA
WARDHA ,

September 7, 1936
BHAI JUGAL KISHOREJI,

I was about to have an attack of fever when your letter of 26th
August reached me. I am now free from fever but am still confined to
the hospital bed. Even then I should write to you. Thinking on objects
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

345

of sense is a delusion. I have not received any divine message. If what
I say does not appeal to you, you must never listen to me. If I cannot
hope to persuade you by this letter and in my present condition of
health, I shall certainly try to do so when we meet. Perhaps I shall
succeed.
Today I will only say that to me Sikhism is a part of Hinduism.
But the situation is different from the legal point of view. Dr.
Ambedkar wants a change of religion. If becoming a Sikh amounts to
conversion, then this kind of conversion on the part of Harijans is
dangerous. And that too with a stroke of the pen and without the
Harijans being consulted. Conversion as well as change of community
can only be a personal matter. It is not so in this case. If you can
persuade the Sikhs to accept that Sikhism is a part of Hinduism and if
you can make them give up the separate electorate, then I will have no
objection to Harijans calling themselves Ramanujis or Sikhs.
More when I have the time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

450. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
September 8/9, 1936
CHI. MUNNALAL,

I am having good news from you. I got your note just now at
seven in the morning. It was painful for me that your hearts could not
be one. Not only that, it obstructed our work too. Let us hope that the
[harmony] 1 now restored will never crack.
I understand what you say about Govind. You should visit him
and the other patients from time to time.
I am sending the newspaper.
Send here the brass barrel for honey which is there, and also the
lid of the white metal box to be used in the cooker. The box sent to
Radhakisan cannot be put to full use because its lid got mixed up and
another came in its place.
Ask Puri to send me a report of his health and his work.
1

346

Illegible in the source
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am having no fever at all and the weakness is disappearing
gradually. I am still on milk and fruit. It seems the doctor will take
some time to discharge me. Mirabehn had an attack of fever
yesterday. She was given a purge. She is well now. She too is on milk
and fruit.
Ba still has cough, but it looks like subsiding now.
Rajendra Babu, Brajkishore Babu and Jayaprakash are still here.
R. Babu and J. are unwell and B. Babu has stayed behind to nurse J.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I have detained Prahlad for the day. The needle will be
extracted. We shall know only tomorrow where the needle is lodged.
[September 9, 1936]
After all this could not go yesterday. Prahlad is being operated
upon just now at 10 o’clock. The needle has been located.
At 10.30 1
Mirabehn and I went to watch the operation. The needle has
been extracted. [Prahlad] is all right.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 8598. Also C. W. 6998. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

451. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
September 9, 1936
CHI. MUNNALAL,

I got your letter, but here at the Hospital. Indeed, I forget the
other newspapers. Now I can send for them only tomorrow. Today I
am sending only The Bombay Chronicle and Harijan. The lid seems
to have been returned to you; if so, send it tomorrow.
Prahlad has been progressing well. He asks for food. But today
he will be on milk only.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8597. Also C.W. 6999. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah
1

This is in Hindi.

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

347

452. LETTER TO BALWANTSINHA
WARDHA HOSPITAL,

September 10, 1936
CHI. BALWANTSINHA,

I have had three letters from you which I have acknowledged in
my letter to Munnalal. I got the letter from Ramniklal too. I have also
sent you my congratulations. I hope to reach there probably the day
after tomorrow.
I am almost recovered.
I do not send for Munnalal now but I shall try to send Dr.
Mahodaya. In the mean while he should subsist on milk only. If he
does not have clear motions he may take castor oil and at least ten
grains of quinine. Of course you are looking after him.
Neither Gangabehn’s nor Munnalal’s letter has reached me. Do
not send milk for Prahlad or anyone else unless asked for. Prahlad
was given milk yesterday as well as today from Maganwadi. He is
quite comfortable. He will have to stay on for at least ten days. I shall
not write to Puri today.
More tomorrow. Two bottles are being [returned]1 today. The
rest I shall try to send tomorrow.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1886

453. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
September 10, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,

I had the physical capacity to write to you all these days. But I
have been so busy talking things that I have not been able to do any
writing except on Monday. I hope you got my letter2 written that day.
Now too I am writing this before retiring for the night.
1
2

348

Illegible in the source
Vide “Letter to Amrit Kaur”, 6/7-9-1936
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Yes, I had a good letter from Shummy. I do not agree with you
that Segaon climate had nothing to do with my malaria. Indeed
Segaon is noted for its malarial climate. It is for me to conquer it and
not shun it. I hope to be there on Saturday. The plate 1 will be taken
tomorrow. It will decide my fate.
Your letters, received with extraordinary regularity, have been a
rich treasure. You must not trifle with your eczema or the eruption on
the thumb. You must put yourself under a competent doctor and do as
he tells you. So long as you take eggs, I do not think anybody will
insist on your taking meat. I would like you to wire to me saying you
have called in skilled assistance. Consult Shummy on the point. You
must not be obstinate on the point.
No more just now.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3588. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6397

454. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
WARDHA HOSPITAL,

September 10, 1936
CHI. LILAVATI,

I understand from Mahadev that you have developed a dislike
for Segaon, and whenever you think of the place you become
miserable. You have lost your peace of mind. Since you had taken a
decision, you want to spend a year somehow with me. I had known
this all along. Now it is all the more clear. I must consider now what
my duty is. For me to seek forgiveness from children is nothing new.
The most recent example is that of Kusum. If you do not know about
it ask her. Perhaps even Mahadev can tell you. If I had reason to ask
Kusum’s forgiveness, I have still more reason to ask your forgiveness.
I thought I was protecting you like a flower. Whether you were aware
of it or not, despite all the harsh words I threw at you, I was protecting
you against attacks from others. But I set no store by it. What has
value is the impression made on you. Judging by that standard, I
acknowledge my failure. Forgive me for the unhappiness I caused
you. I shall not let such a situation be repeated. But now I have lost
self-confidence. You do not have to ask your freedom from me. But
you have to free yourself of me. Or, say, I have to give you your
1

X-ray

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

349

freedom. Only a few can learn from me by being physically near me.
Countless persons have been able to do that while being away from
me. You are one of them. If you wish to learn something from me
while being away, I am willing to teach you regularly through letters.
Your coming to Segaon is going to benefit neither you nor me. I shall
have to be constantly on my guard if I take you with me. You would
not like me to be in such a pitiable state. The situation in which
parents have to guard themselves from children is always to be
avoided. So you should give up your insistence on coming to Segaon.
There is no reason to be unhappy about it. There is no reason for you
to feel ashamed as you are not giving up Segaon. In despair I am
making you give up Segaon. Respect this wish of mine in good cheer.
It is my duty and yours to avoid a situation in which you may break
down at the end of a year and your heart may be filled with contempt
for me. How can I explain this better? I particularly wish that you
should go to Rajkot and help Narandas. You have hardly any place
now at Maganwadi. The kitchen is being discontinued. What would
you do in that event? There is no provision at all at Maganwadi to
accommodate women. Of course, you may stay in the Mahila Ashram.
But Mahadev will guide you in this regard. I urge you once again that
you should forget the unhappiness you have suffered at Segaon.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

455. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH AND
BALWANTSINHA
September 11, 1936
CHI. MUNNALAL AND CHI. BALWANTSINHA,

I have your letter. In any case the Doctor is surely coming
today. Moreover, he is from Burhanpur like you. Tomorrow he will
not come. He may examine the patients, if any, today. Prahlad is fine.
What you write is likely to have happened to Balwantsinha’s letters.
For my part, I have an impression that I had acknowledged his letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8597. Also C.W. 7000. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

350

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

456. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
September 11, 1936
CHI. AMRITLAL,

Who is taking up the responsibility for milk and other things
from now on? Send the khakhari1 for Mirabehn if they have prepared
it, and butter. Keep the butter being sent herewith and send me
another lot. The salt bottle is sent for refilling. Send ten tolas of flour,
a small griddle, rolling-pin and board if the khakhari is not ready.
You may send a bill for such of these articles as have to be taken from
the new kitchen. Send dal, rice and vegetables for Prahlad. It does not
matter if the three are put together.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10719

457. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
[ Before September 12, 1936] 2
CHI. AMRITLAL,

I extracted two lovely bits of hair from today’s curds besides the
once that I may have swallowed. They were Mother goat’s hair. So the
carelessness may be traced to the person who strained the milk. The
curds were very sour. If the morning milk is curdled, I can take it
now. If you send it I shall want garlic. No garlic if you send milk.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10720

458. WHAT IT IS LIKE
The recent debate between Dr. Sokhey and Dr. Mangaldas
Mehta on the ever-green topic of birth-control emboldens me to
disclose the opinion of the late Dr. Ansari of revered memory
1

A thin crisp chapati
The addressee has placed this letter in August/September, 1936. It appears
to have been written from the hospital in Wardha where Gandhiji’s food used to be
sent from Maganwadi; vide the preceding item. Gandhiji was discharged on
September 12.
2

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

351

supporting Dr. Mangaldas’s position. It was now nearly a year ago I
wrote to the deceased asking him whether as a medical man he could
endorse the position I had taken up on the vexed question. Much to
my agreeable surprise he wrote heartily supporting it. When I was in
Delhi last, I had a brief discussion with him on the subject and he
promised at my request to contribute a series of articles showing by
facts and figures from his own experience and that of other medical
men how the practice had hurt both men and women who were party
to it. He gave a graphic account of the condition to which the men
were reduced after they had mated for some time with their wives or
other women who they knew were using contraceptives. Freedom
from the fear of the natural consequence of coition had made them
reckless in self-indulgence leading to an inordinate craving for seeing
women which ended in dementia. Alas! he died just when he was
about to write the promised series.
Bernard Shaw is reported to have said that coition accompanied
by the use of contraceptives was nothing less than sexual masturbation. A moment’s reflection would show how accurate the description
is.
I receive almost daily piteous letters from students and sometimes even from teachers complaining how they had become slaves to
the habit and were being gradually reduced to loss of manhood.
Recall, too, the correspondence1 published in these columns from the
principal of the Sanatan Dharma College, Lahore, bitterly complaining of teachers practising unnatural vice on their pupils and the
consequences of the practice on their health and character. The
deduction I draw from these examples is that even the union between
husband and wife bereft of the possibility of its natural consequence
must cause the same ruination that invariably attends masturbation or
unnatural vice.
It is the philanthropic motive that no doubt impels many birthcontrol reformers to a whirlwind campaign in favour of the use of
contraceptives. I invite them to contemplate the ruinous consequences of their misplaced philanthropy. Those whom they want to
reach will never use them in any appreciable numbers. Those who
ought not to use them will, without doubt, use them to the undoing of
themselves and their partners. This would not matter in the least if the
use of contraceptives was incontestably proved to be right physically
1

352

Vide “A Growing Vice”, 27-4-1935
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and morally. Dr. Ansari’s opinion, if my testimony about it is
accepted, is a grave warning to the reformers and would-be reformers.
Harijan, 12-9-1936

459. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

September 12, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,

Well, I am at last in dear old Segaon without Ba, Lilavati and
Moti. Amtul Salaam is here for a few hours and she goes back to
Wardha. Lilavati is in Maganwadi under discipline and Ba has
remained there out of sympathy. All is quiet here and looking nice. In
front of me are two live snakes in the cage caught yesterday. Your
green soap bit is there in its place. It will give a few day’s work still.
You will be glad to learn that your thermos was broken to pieces
after giving a night’s good use. The door of the cart suddenly opened
and the thermos fell out. You are not to replace it any more. I must do
the best I can with improvised things. You know by this time that I am
shameless enough to ask for things I need. And such a thing is a real
good magnifying glass. But this at your leisure and not by post. Tell
me what was the cost of the thermos broken today. It is pure curiosity
that prompts the question.
I hope you have listened to me and taken expect advice about
your eczema. It is a thing not to be lightly treated.
You won’t be anxious about me. I shall take every care of
myself.
Mira is now in her cottage.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3589. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6398

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

353

460. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
September 12, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

Puri has sprung a surprise on me. He says you do not want him,
his presence will be a tax on you. You want to be left alone. If so, P.
Must go. He too says he won’t come up to your expectations.
Balwantsinha will follow with milk. You will take what service you like
from him. Who will sleep there? You must not put any strain on
yourself. I wish I could come over to you and see you face to face.
But that cannot be just yet.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6363. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9829

461.

LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
September 12, 1936

CHI. PREMA,

I have your letter.
What service of a Mahatma means you can realize only if you
become one yourself. At present you can only follow your
imagination as far as it takes you. If a Mahatma gets a boil, the whole
world talks about it. If, on the contrary, an ordinary man gets even
fistula, it is given no more importance than a boil. Nobody would
know about it. That is the way things happen.
I left the hospital only today and have returned here. I am still
weak, but I hope to regain strength here.
It seems now it has been raining on your side. Here it has been
raining much in excess of our needs.
Your other descriptions were enjoyable. You are going ahead
with your work. Let the result be what it will.
I have no wish to criticize your writing activity.1 You must put
your God-given gift to good use.
1
The addressee had taken to writing articles, stories and even books after
going over to Sasvad. She was afraid Gandhiji might not approve and had sought his
opinion.

354

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Lilavati’s case is certainly a very difficult one. My first attempt
has failed. I am now making another. I will of course not admit defeat
so easily.
Your question is correct. But I wish to bring swaraj. Why should
I die before my time?
What you write about Mirabehn is also correct. She just cannot
live away from me. Let us see what happens now.
I may not write more today.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10377. Also C.W. 6823. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

462. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September 12, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,

Prema’s letter accompanies this. You must be getting news of
my illness from time to time. Neither Sardar nor Jamnalalji will be
able to go there. Whom else do you expect?I would advice you not to
bank upon anyone but be satisfied with whatever you can do there.
You should look upon my effort as absolutely independent.
The contributions raised for the spinning fund you may use for
famine relief if a state of famine prevails. But then this is only a
suggestion.
Today I put my signature in the copy of the Gita required for
Purushottam and Vijaya’s use.
I returned from the hospital to Segaon today. Ba and Lilavati
stayed back at Maganwadi.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8504. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

355

463. LETTER TO RAMNIKLAL MODI
September 12, 1936
CHI. RAMNIKLAL,

I must be content with writing to you only a postcard. I have not
yet regained full strength. Why should you believe that you are
drifting away from me? The right thing is for everyone to work
according to his capacity. This alone is truth. How far can we strain
ourselves or work out of a false sense of shame? If for the present
Tara 1 fails to influence the Patel women, she need not feel defeated.
We should render whatever service they accept and be satisfied. Tell
Surendra that I have no doubt made a note of writing to him but a
number of obstacles come in the way. I write only to reassure you.
Blessings from

BAPU
S JT. R AMNIKLAL
C/ O BHAILALBHAI
HARIJAN S EVAK S ANGH
BORIAVI, B.B. & C.I. RLY .
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4183

464. FRAGMENT OF A LETTER
September 12, 1936
...She should begin by reading and pondering the verse: “Thou
mournest for them whom thou shouldst not mourn for.” 2 She should
not squabble with Ba. She should not cry before her or anyone else.
She should not dwell on her woes.
She should think of whatever good qualities she may have
observed in Munnalal, Balwantsinha and Mirabehn and worship them
for those qualities. She should not think of their shortcomings and if
she is reminded of them she should show forbearance.
No more today. She should make a copy of this and send it to
me. If anything further occurs to me I shall let you know.
1
2

356

Addressee’s wife
Bhagavad Gita II. 11
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

If the letter to Rajkumari cannot be posted today, then post it
tomorrow with late fee paid.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
You will have got the bullock-cart by now.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9579. Also C.W. 6551. Courtesy:
Liavati Asar

465. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
September 13, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

I have your cheerful letter. Had it been a dry path I would have
walked up to you. You must not exert yourself. Patiently train Puri.
Do not despair of him quickly.
Have you my torch?Have you the falka1 ?
I hope you have all you need.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6364. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9830

466. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

September 13, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,

As you want me to destroy your letters at once, I have always to
write from memory. Yes, Shummy wrote a sweet letter which I am
going to a acknowledge, though he does not want me to.
Here is my diagnosis of your illness. You left in the midst of
nature treatment. As it was not completed, there was a reaction in a
radically changed climate. It would be called a healthy reaction if it
could be treated a la nature-cure method. This [is] not merely hipbaths. There are steam-baths, light-baths, etc. But this was not to be. I
1

A kind of frame for winding yarn

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

357

was not alarmed over the reaction but over the just resentment in the
family. They cannot sympathize with nature-cure methods.
Have I made myself clear? Thank God, now there is peace in the
family.
But you must not trifle with your eczema. I would certainly treat
you if you were with me. But that cannot be, certainly not for cure.
You have to go through the orthodox method. The quicker the better.
Yours is a departure from the orthodox routine. You may not
therefore resent the criticism of the family. You will justify your
rebellion only by your large-hearted charity, ever-increasing inner
joy, equableness and possession of good health. Rebellions can only
be justified by success. If you will therefore be patient and wise in
your changes, all will be well.
Please give my love to Tai, if she is still there.
You need not now give me daily letters if you are pressed for
time or too lazy to write. Writing to me must be no tax on your mind
or body.
Cartloads of love.
R OBBER
From the original: C.W. 3741. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6897

467. LETTER TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
September 13, 1936
MY DEAR SUBHAS,

I hope you were given my wire in reply to your kind enquiry.
My fever—an attack after twelve years of freedom—was the cause of
the lateness of my reply to your questions.
(1) Tea or coffee I do not consider to be essential to health.
They often do harm. They may remain harmless, if tea is weak and
straw colour and coffee drunk with plenty of milk with only a
spoonful or two of coffee.
(2) If received fresh from the udder well cleaned and from a
healthy cow, milk drunk fresh unboiled unwarmed is the best food.
Next best is pasteurized milk. For some stomachs sweet curds are the
best. They having the yeast obviate even the use of fruit.
(3) Leafy vegetables must always be taken, better if taken as
salads. All leaves are not edible in the raw state. Onion, pumpkin with
358

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the skin, pandora, brinjal, lady’s finger, turnips, carrots, parsnips,
cabbage, cauliflower are good additions to leaves. Potatoes and
starchy tubers should be taken sparingly.
(4) Dates are a fine food for a healthy stomach. Raisins are
more digestible. I can take both freely but all cannot. All can take
raisins and sultanas.
(5) Garlic and onion in a raw state are strongly recommended in
the West. I take raw garlic regularly for blood pressure. It is the best
antitoxin for internal use. It is also recommended for tubercular
patients.
I think the prejudice against these two harmless vegetables is
due to the odour which is the essence of them and it arose with the rise
of Vaishnavism. Ayurveda sings the praise of both unstintingly. Garlic
is called poor man’s musk and so it is. I do not know what villagers
would do without garlic and onion.
(6) Yes, lemons and gur or honey are a good substitute for sweet
oranges.
I think this answers all your questions. I hope you are well. I
would like to know the result of Drs. Sircar’s and Roy’s examination.
Love.
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

468. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAMDAS THAKURDAS
September 13, 1936
DEAR SIR PURUSHOTTAMDAS,

You will please explain to the South African delegation my
sincere regret over my inability to welcome them in person. 1 Apart
from convalescence it is difficult for me to tear myself away from my
new home Segaon.2 I pray to God that this visit may result in
removing cobwebs of misunderstanding and bringing the two
countries closer together.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G ANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1
On the arrival of the delegation in Bombay on September 19, 1936. The
addressee handed over this letter to J.H. Hofmeyer, the leader of the delegation.
2
The Bombay Chronicle, 20-9-1936, has: “my new love—Segaon”.

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

359

469. LETTER TO SYED MAHMUD
WARDHA ,

September 13, 1936
MY DEAR DR. MAHMUD,

Bapu has your affectionate letter of the 9th inst. He is very happy to hear all
that you say about wife and children and he is glad that you told her that unless she
gave up purdah it was not possible for her to expect Bapu’s welcome.
The fever has left Bapu very weak and he might take some time to recover all
his lost strength. The doctor wanted him very much to stay in Wardha for some time,
but his heart was in his village where alone he could get his peace.
It is quite like you to write in the way you have done about Harilal’s so-called
conversion. You are one of the very few Muslim friends who has written in this behalf
with such warmth and sympathy and understanding. Misguided Muslims do not know
how very much they are lowering the name of Islam by going on in the way they are
doing. Of course Bapu saw the newspaper cutting that you have referred to but to beat
everything else, an Urdu newspaper in Lucknow has given the news to the world that
Bapu has become a Muslim. It is based on an interview supposed to have taken place
with Bapu in the course of which he eulogized Islam, denounced Hinduism and declared
that he was repeating Kalma every day. No such interview every took place. This
precious piece of news has been copied by dozens of Urdu papers and has now been
translated into Gujarati and Marathi by Muslim papers in Gujarat and Maharashtra.
What do you say to all this? I do hope you are now completely restored. The three
Bihari leaders, Rajendrababu, Brijkishorebabu and Jayaprakash Narayan have
converted Jamnalalji’s guest-house into a hospital. All the three took suddenly ill on
arrival here. Luckily they are progressing now.
Yours sincerely,

MAHADEV
DR. SYED MAHMUD
CHAPRA
BIHAR

From a copy: Dr. Syed Mahmud Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library; also G.N. 5088

360

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

470. A LETTER
September 13, 1936
DEAR FRIEND,

With reference to your letter, I am powerless to help you. You
may know that for the moment I have retired from active public life.
But the public bodies in India and particularly the National Congress
have been expressing their opinion in no uncertain terms.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

471. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
September 13, 1936
CHI. PRABHA,

I have of course asked Mahadevbhai to write to you. I returned
to Segaon yesterday. Except for a feeling of weakness I am all right. I
am still in a diet of milk and fruit only. Mirabehn has gone to her hut.
Ba is not here at present. She will probably go to Devdas at Delhi.
Lilavati is at Maganwadi. Manu is with Gomati. She might now go
with Ba. This leaves Balwantsinha, Munnalal, Pyarelal and Khan Saheb
here. Very probably, Nanavati will come over. Several persons are in a
way free because the Maganwadi kitchen has been merged with the
students’ Moreover, the place is no more crowded.
Amtul Salaam has come and most probably she will leave for
Bombay in the evening.
I showed your telegram to Jayaprakash, but he is not a person
whom I or anyone else can stop from following his own bent. He may
have left today. Father is here. He had a severe attack of fever. A
doctor is going to examine him. The particular ailment which
Jayaprakash suffered from has abated. Rajendra Babu will however
stay on for the present.
Kanti has gone to Bombay for his studies.
Tell me now, haven’t I given you plenty of news?
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

361

How are you? What is you diet? Do you suffer from headaches?
Are you able to get milk? What about fruit?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I just read your letter of 2-9-36. How could it be that you had
no letter from me for 22 days? It is true that I could not write during
my illness, but that was a matter of 10 days. I have not at all received
the letter sent through Kanti. How could I be angry with you?Or, why
should I be displeased with you? I remember no occasion when you
ever gave me cause for anger or annoyance. It may be that letters go
astray or that I am unable to write because of the pressure of work, but
never think that I refrain from writing because I am annoyed with
you. That I weigh 108 lb. after the fever should be regarded as a good
sign. Instead of writing to Kanti’s address, write now directly to me.
Kanti’s address is: Satyagraha Camp, Vile Parle, B.B. & C.I. Rly.
Drive away your melancholy. Write to me regularly. My birthday
[according to the Vikram calendar] falls on October 12.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3454

472. LETTER TO K.M. MUNSHI
September 13, 1936
BHAI MUNSHI,

“It’s good that we are out of the snare; we can easily reach
Shrigopal.” 1 We are not going to keep Hans or its successor going by
paying a security of Rs. 1,000. A hans2 will feed on milk alone.
Kakasaheb’s suggestion seems to be correct; but wouldn’t a quarterly
need a security? If it does, we may not have that either. I expect you
are both doing well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7605. Courtesy: K.M. Munshi
1
2

362

These lines are from a bhajan by Narasinh Mehta.
Literally ‘swan’
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

473. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
S EGAON,

September 14, 1936
CHI. LILAVATI,

I have from Nanavati the painful news that you have been
weeping like mad. You will postpone your coming to Segaon so long
as, while there, you do not do as I say. I had been expecting a letter in
your beautiful handwriting but what I have is only bad news! What is
this? Be reasonable and do as I tell you. I am helpless if you must
persist in hurting me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9344. Also C. W. 6619. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

474. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
September 14, 1936
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

You had an attack of fever, and now it is my turn. Let us see
what happens next. My diet consists only of milk or curds, musambi
and garlic.
It is a pity that you have lost faith in spinning. It is such a great
yajna; but I shall not argue.
You may, if you wish, take the vow of brahmacharya once
again; but please understand that it is almost impossible to observe it
strictly unless the palate has been conquered. There is no need of
your coming to Wardha, I rarely go there. You may not come to
Segaon with the intention of staying.
Recoup your health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 4288

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

363

475. LETTER TO H. L. SHARMA
September 14, 1936
CHI. SHARMA,

I have your letter. I do not have anyone of the kind you want.
You must yourself find such men.
Your idea of staying in a village does not appeal to me in the
least. At the moment we cannot spend so much money for
propaganda work among the villages. Do not expect any help from
me in this programme. Even now I would suggest that you start your
work without any money, settle down in a village and assess your
ability. But I find you have your head in the sky, while I am a creature
of the earth and do not want to move my feet away from the earth. It
seems, therefore, that our paths at present are different.
What will you gain by going to Satis Babu’s?
His... 1 I am persuading him to reduce it still further. From 42 I
am trying to get it reduced by another 12.
It is obvious that you do not know the villages. How will you
learn midwifery from the books? Still, you may send me the list. I will
then send you the books.
I am sorry that I am not able to give you a satisfactory reply.
But isn’t it better that I tell you what I feel.
I had gone to the hospital after leaving behind my fever. took
quite a large quantity of quinine.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

476. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

September 15, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,

I am glad your thumb seems to be quite restored. But I shall
wait. The oozing must be stopped, not merely suppressed. Please do
1

364

Illegible in the source
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

not trifle with it. I do not mind your feeling lazy and not taking up
routine work. But you must not deceive yourself and imagine yourself
to be well when you are not.
How I wish you could keep Tai there for some time. My love to
her.
I have not yet read. the Statesman article. It is with me. I shall
see what I can do with it.1
I have sent a longish letter 2 to S[hummy]. Do not worry over
letters to me. Write daily, if it pleases and relaxes you. No strain,
please. I shall not imagine all sorts of evil when I do not hear from
you, now that I know you are free to miss a day or two.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 3742. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6898

477. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
September 15, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

I had expected to meet you at where we met yesterday and tell
you why no rengi 3 was brought. I wanted to inspect the site when it
was possible to walk there. Let us see what happens tomorrow. Are
you prepared to make your own dahi 4 there? You need not, unless
you wish.
Hope you and Puri are getting on famously.
The rains are now ruining everything. God’s will be done.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6327. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G. N. 9793

1
2
3
4

Vide “The Law of Our Being”, 26-9-1936.
This is not traceable.
Small bullock-cart
Curds

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

365

478. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
September 15, 1936
CHI. LILAVATI,

You are still a bad girl. You would not shoulder the little burden
placed on you. This shows the stuff you are made of. I have told you
that you may give me a pleasant one hour, You should not create a
scene with me. Know that the more you persist in your ways, the
further you push your coming to Segaon. You know best if all this is
but a trick to avoid coming. How heartless of you that even for the
sake of my peace you would not agree to stay five miles away!
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9345. Also C. W. 6620. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

479. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
September 15, 1936
CHI. KANTI,

I received your postcard only today. I am well. There is only a
little weakness, which will pass.
Amtul Salaam has left Rs. 150 for you. This I have credited to
her account, for she hasn’t a cowrie of her own. She makes merry at
the cost of her brothers, who spend all that they earn. But even if she
has her own money, why should you beg of her? When we adopt
someone as our mother, is it to serve her or to serve our own interests?
I do not like your selfish attitude. It would be good if you got out of
it. It is not right that while Devdas pays your expenses you should go
about begging like this. For my part I have told you to put in some
effort and earn while you learn. Why do you lose heart? Amtul
Salaam has gone there. She had forbidden me, so I said nothing to
you. However, it would be good if you could say to her: “Thinking
further on the matter I feel that I ought not to accept any money
either from you or from anyone else except Devdas. Therefore, I will
not take money from you.” But if it does not come out of your heart,
then don’t say it. Do not scold A. S. or feel constrained. Even while
366

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

doing what you want to, don’t give up courtesy and humility. She is
much hurt.
Put in as much work as you wish while taking care of your
health. It is not trouble cooking one’s own food. Find the necessary
time and eat satisfying meals. Keep writing to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 7304. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

480. LETTER TO JETHALAL G. SAMPAT
September 15, 1936
CHI. JETHALAL,

I have a vague impression that I did dictate a reply to your letter
of the 7th August. I have returned here after being discharged from
the hospital. I feel weak. Some things I write myself, some things I
dictate. Since Nanavati has come to live here, dictating has become
convenient also. I shall not write more about my illness as you will
know about it from Harijan or Harijan Sevak or Harijanbandhu.
Your letter regarding the tools is encouraging. The important question
for me is whether in ordering heavy implements from you the
transport charges might not be as great as the price. I have been
carrying on here the same experiment that you have been trying
there. We have a solitary blacksmith in this village. He, too, poor man,
is not very intelligent. Only recently I got him to make three knives
from an old file. I paid him whatever he charged. But this is not
enough for me. Let me have a list of the items you wish to sell outside
along with their prices, the freightage to Wardha, and so on. I need
hardly assure you that I will help you in the sale of your articles, if
possible. you mention a detailed letter. I have not yet received it.
Write it now. Who else are there at present and what are your
activities?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 9856. Courtesy: Narayan J. Sampat

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

367

481. LETTER TO CHAND TYAGI
September 15, 1936
BHAI CHAND TYAGI,

Your letter has been lying in front of me for many days but I
could not attend to it till now. You have given me good news about
Balvir. I cannot send for him as I am striving hard to live a village life.
I do not have enough accommodation in this village nor do I want to
add to the family here. I have now neither the strength nor the
inclination to do what I could do in places like Sabarmati, etc. My
aspiration of leading a village life can be realized only if I maintain a
limited family. God alone knows the future, assuming that the thread
of my life is to stretch farther. Rajkishori seems to have completely
forgotten me. She does not even write to me. What does she do? How
much does she spend?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 6633. Also C. W. 4281. Courtesy: Chand
Tyagi

482. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

September 16, 1936
CHI. AMALA,

You seem to have deserted me. How so? Do tell me all about
yourself.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

483. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
September 16, 1936
CHI. MIRA,

The dinner bell has gone. You will not stir out today. I am
368

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

coming. You shall come to Segaon tomorrow.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6365. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G. N. 9831

484. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
September 16, 1936
CHI. LILAVATI,

I have your letter. If you have not understood even after so
many letters from me, how am I going to make you understand now?
Read all the letters again and act accordingly —joyfully. I do not
know how much and what kind of’ persuasion you want from me.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I have written this in great haste.
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

485. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

[Before September 17, 1936] 1
BAPA,

Kakalbhai brought your letter while I was still thinking of
writing to you. Of course, I have not seen Kakalbhai or Balwantrai.
Just now I can’t see anyone, nor am I in a hurry about it. I am only
slowly disposing of the arrears of work. The fever came on swift as a
horse but my strength is returning at an ant’s pace. This is not a
complaint against God who alone knows what He has in store. He is
the giver of strength; why then may He not withdraw it, too?
Why should I go to Almora to effect a reconciliation between
Kakalbhai and Amritlal? Water cannot be parted by hitting at it with a
lathi. The two were reconciled but is Amritlal reconciled with himself?
I am not impatient to drag him back into public life; I am impatient to
1

From the date of receipt recorded on the letter

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

369

see his mind purified. That is why I wrote to him as soon as I heard of
the matter. He will not remain in Almora if he has regained purity.
For my part I make no difference between public life and private life.
However accomplished a man, if he is immoral the splashes from the
mud of his immorality are bound to stain public life. That we cannot
see the evil splashing does not mean that it is not doing so. I am,
therefore, firmly of the opinion that those who wish Amritlal well,
those who wish public life to advance, ought to let Amritlal cleanse
himself. Only harm will be done to him and to public work by luring
him into a hasty come-back. That is my view.
I fear I have not been able to make you see my point about
Valunjkar. The question is only of giving to him the amount which I
have promised from among the funds standing in my name. I believe
that in doing so the Council’s approval is not necessary. Isn’t that
right? Please correct me if my memory is failing me. I have of course
no objection to the matter going before the Council. But on what basis
would the Council generally sanction such amounts?
Rukmini is mad of course. Every fault, the famous Lombroso 1
has said, is a symptom of madness. But when is a kubharya2 properly
so called? It is a different matter if we dismiss the word altogether. My
sympathy is with Malkani, and the pity I feel for Rukmini is of a
different kind.
Do you want Amtul Salaam to return?You should not hesitate to
warm me if, in spite of her good intentions, she proves a nuisance
there. It was God’s grace that Nilam survived. I shall await the figures.
I have made the letter long enough.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 1170

486. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
September 17, 1936
CHI. LILAVATI,

That you have no reed pen is a good excuse. I am sending a pen
herewith. I am sending a copy of the Gita, such as I could find; I do
not know which copy you call your own. Kanaiyo knows how to
1
2

370

Cesare Lombroso, the Italian physician and criminologist
Shrew
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

make a reed pen. Learn it from him. You have written out the verses
well enough, but what about their meanings?
You are expected to use hand-made paper. What’s the idea of
having a hand-made pen and mill-made paper? I shall feel satisfied
only when you are completely calm. Send over your dilruba1 for
Nanavati’s use if you are not playing on it. If you are, there is no
need at all to send it.
You have to make out a copy of the instructions I have written
to you,2 and send it to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9580. Also C. W. 6552. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

487. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON,

September 18, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,

Just a line only. Your apples have been eaten by all with relish.
Not an invitation to send more.
Khan Saheb was most grateful for the attention given by you to
the girls.3 He wants you to go out of your way to befriend them and
direct them the right way. Here is his letter.
I am glad Shummy is now attending to you. You will now get
well quick. Obey him willingly like a good idiot that you are.
Cartload of love.
TYRANT
From the original: C. W. 3590. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6399

1
2
3

A stringed musical instrument
Vide “Fragment of a Letter”, 12-9-1936
Mehrtaj and Mariam, Abdul Ghaffar Khan’s daughter and niece respectively

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

371

488. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
[September 18, 1936] 1
CHI. KANTI,

I liked your letter. Ten o’clock of Friday morning has passed
by. It is four now. I will wait for Yamaraj2 at ten at night. 3 You do
know that as it is I am always ready to welcome him.
I will certainly pay the photographer’s Rs. 50. Where shall I
send it?
About the other things, I have understood whatever you have
written. However unhappy I may have felt about your going, 4 I have
certainly not given up hope of you.
I have destroyed your letter.
You certainly know more about Amtul Salaam. If you want to
write to me something in particular, do so. About the money I wrote
whatever she told me. Now I believe every word of what you say.
I understand about Saraswati. I am sure you will not do
anything blameworthy. May God give you strength.
I shall not expect a long letter from you from time to time. But
you will write me a postcard every week, won’t you? Write a long
letter, too, occasionally.
Ba and Manu will leave for Delhi tomorrow.
This will be enough for now as it is time for the post.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 7388. Courtesy; Kantilal Gandhi

1

From the reference to Manu and Kasturba going to Delhi which they did on
September 19. Vide “Letter to Amrit Kaur”, 20-9-1936 Also, the letter was written
on a Friday and September 18 was a Friday.
2
Lord of Death
3
Vide “ Letter to Amrit Kaur” , 21-9-1936
4
For studying medicine. Vide, “Letter to Kantilal Gandhi”, 7-9-1936

372

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

489. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
8.25 p.m., September 18, 1936
CHI. LILAVATI,

I am alarmed by your last sentence. If you think of going to a
school after a year, the worth-while thing is to begin now. One may
start one’s studies any time, but it ought to be painful to you as well as
to me if you have to flee Segaon in disappointment and join a school.
Search your heart and shake off your folly. Satisfy your hunger for
learning. At Segaon, what can you have except the drudgery and my
temper? I cannot help fearing that you will not find your stay here
bearable. I spend a good deal of my time thinking of your welfare.
Not that I grudge it. But it should be intolerable for both you and me
if in the end you have to give me up in disappointment. If you must
come to Segaon, it is for you to determine how soon it can be done.
Read my instructions again and again and carry them out cheerfully.
Remove all ill will from your mind. If you resent someone with
whom you have to deal every day, how will you be happy with me?
How shall I be at peace? Isn’t this quite easy to understand? There is
never any shame in doing the right thing.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9346. Also C. W. 6621. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

490. NOTES
ABOUT TARABEHN MARY C HESLEY

Almost every foreign mail, letters are being received from the
late Mary Chesley’s relatives and friends extolling her many virtues
and telling me of the benefactions received by most of them from her
and of promises of help made by her and even a will or wills left by
her. Though Mahadev Desai has been giving these correspondents
such detailed information as he can during the limited time at his
disposal, it is necessary to make a public announcement for the
benefit of all concerned that the will made by her in my favour just
before her lamented death does not, in the opinion of legal friends,
appear to be valid according to the Indian Succession Act. Even if it
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

373

can be proved, I have no desire whatsoever to use her property, except
with the concurrence of her relatives and friends, for the sake of the
Indian village industries work, which was her latest and last love for
which she slaved and died heroically. If the property came into my
hands, of which there is very little chance, I should examine all her
commitments and promises in the West and try to satisfy them before
making use of anything left by her undisposed of in her lifetime. I
have cheques coming from her Bank which lie with me uncashed. My
advice to her cousins, of whom I see there are many, is that the nearest
of them should take out letters of administration and send me legal
authority to part with whatever is in my hands or Miss Mary Barr’s. I
possess the uncashed cheques and the latter her papers and trinkets.
The deceased had so reduced her personal wants in India that there is
hardly anything left which can be converted into money. All she
received during her lifetime was generally made over to me for village
work. I hope this gives to all concerned such information as is in my
possession about the affairs of the deceased humanitarian.
MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING?

Two friends write to me deploring my attitude in the
Ambedkar-Moonje proposal.1 Their argument may be summed up as
follows:
Surely you are making much ado about nothing. Guru Nanak was a Hindu
reformer like the others who have founded Hindu sects. Sikhs are Hindus to all
intents and purposes. Their culture is the same as of the Hindus. If Harijans
declare themselves as Sikhs, why do you call it change of faith?

The objectors seem to be alone in their opinion. Some time after
1915 when I returned home from my self-imposed exile of fourteen
years, I happened to go to the Punjab. Addressing a meeting of Sikhs,
I had said they were in my opinion Hindus belonging to a sect of
reformers. A well-meaning Sikh friend spoke to me aside and said I
had unwittingly offended Sikhs by calling them Hindus. Ever since
that caution, I have never described them as Hindus. What they believe
matters, not what I or a few individuals do. Sikhs have a separate
electorate. Dr Ambedkar does not regard Sikhs as Hindus. He
definitely wants a change of faith. If Sikhs were a Hindu sect, no
change in the Pact would be necessary. It is open to any Hindu to
change his sect and still remain a Hindu. Moreover, neither Dr.
1

374

Vide “A Dangerous Proposal”, 22-8-1936
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Ambedkar nor R. B. Rajah nor anyone else can change even the sect
of a whole mass of Harijans by a stroke of the pen. Religion is
essentially an individual matter which each one has to decide for
himself. No one who believes in religion as a sacrament can therefore
be party to the proposal put forth by Drs. Ambedkar and Moonje.
Harijan, 19-9-1936

491. OF MY RECENT ILLNESS
I would not tax the reader about my recent malaria fever except
for the fact that friends are involved in the decision I have prayerfully
made and which I hope God will let me fulfil.
It went against the grain for me, a confirmed believer in naturecure methods, to go to Wardha and seek admission to the hospital.
Left entirely to myself, I would have treated myself in accordance with
nature-cure methods as far as possible. But I could not do so without
offending the friends who happened to be near me at the time. I knew
that Jamnalalji too had a special responsibility, in that I had settled in a
village near Wardha, his permanent place of residence. With the choice
of the village he has had nothing to do. It was entirely Mirabehn’s
and it was made because Segaon was predominantly a Harijan village
and far enough from Wardha and yet not too far. I was drawn to the
village in accordance with a certain declaration I had made when
Mirabehn went to Segaon. Jamnalalji to an extent and Sardar
Vallabhbhai altogether were against my settling in a village as yet and
then in Segaon. But I bore down their opposition when I told them
that I was bound by the declaration to which I have referred to settle
down in Segaon. No doubt the promise was agreeable to me for my
heart was in the village. Having gone to Segaon it was my intention
not to stir out of it for full three seasons, i. e., one year. Unfortunately
there are obligations undertaken before the decision to settle in
Segaon, which I shall have to fulfil and which will disturb the
unbroken year’s stay. I urge friends, therefore, not to make further
inroads upon the period. For me it is my sadhana. I set the greatest
value upon the village problem. It may not be put off except at the
cost of our very existence. India lives in her villages, not in her cities. I
am supposed to guide and direct the village industries movement to
which at Bombay an autonomous existence was given by the
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

375

Congress.1 I am incapable of guiding any movement in which I do not
plunge myself actively and directly. Maganwadi, though a village,
being a large village,2 was not good enough for my instruction and ins
piration. I needed to be in a real village presenting the problems that
face one in generality of villages. Segaon is one such village.
If then I may not leave Segaon in order not to interrupt my
instruction and first-hand experience, I may not also leave it for health
reasons. Segaon like most villages has its full share of malaria and
other diseases which villagers suffer from. Of its population of 600
there is hardly anyone who has not suffered from malaria or
dysentery. Of the record of nearly 200 cases that have come under
my observation or Mirabehn’s, most are those of malaria and
dysentery. The simple remedies at our disposal with dietetic control
have served their purpose effectively. The villagers do not go to
hospitals, they cannot even go to dispensaries. They usually resort to
village quacks or incantations and drag on their weary existence. I
claim to have some workable knowledge of common ailments. I have
successfully treated myself often enough without the assistance of
medical friends though they have been ever ready to help me in my
need. If I was not a ‘Mahatma’, so-called, no one would have known
anything of the recent attack of malaria. I rarely have fever. The last
attack I had was nearly 12 years ago and I had treated myself. There
is all the greater reason for me now, if I have another attack of malaria
or another ailment, not to stir out of Segaon in search of health; and if
I must have medical assistance, I must be satisfied with what I can get
without fuss and without having to leave Segaon. I am fatalist enough
to believe that no one can put off the hour of death when it has struck.
Not the greatest medical assistance available has saved kings and
emperors from the jaws of death. One like myself struggling to
become a humble village servant surely ought to be satisfied with
remedies easily accessible to villages. By leaving my village in search
of health or the like I deny myself the opportunity of knowing what
village life can be when one’s health is in peril.
My malaria has quickened my resolve to study the problem of
making Segaon malaria-proof. All round me the fields are waterlogged. The crops are rotting. The ground is unwalkable unless you
are content to wade through knee-deep mud. Fortunately a pukka
1
2

376

In October 1934
The source has “in being a large village”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

road was built for my convenience through Jamnalalji’s fields which
keeps Segaon somewhat accessible to people from Wardha. The road
has proved a great convenience for man and beast. If I had listened to
friend’s advice to postpone settling in Segaon till after the rains, I
would have missed the rich experiences I have gained during the
heavy rains of the past two months. Everything I have seen hitherto
therefore convinces me that, if I am to make any approach to the
village life, I must persevere in my resolve not to desert it in the hour
of danger to life or limb. And I ask all the friends to help me in
carrying out the resolve and pray with me that God may give me the
strength to do so.
Harijan, 19-9-1936

492. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON,

September 20, 1936
MY DEAR REBEL,

You are in danger of losing caste even with Tai, if you persist in
defending my non-violence so long as it has not become your very
own. That the savage in us may get the better of us when we are tried
does not affect our position, if we even while we are savage know that
we are doing wrong. The fact is that in this age of doubt, we are never
sure of our ground. Some attractive argument which we cannot answer
baffles us instead of humbling our pride in our intellect. These
questions of non-violence, birth-control, and the like are eternal
problems. So it might be better for you in the long run, never to seek
to defend my views. When it is your own views, I know [you] are more
than able to hold your own. I do not want your great ability to be
discounted because of your association with me. Rather would I like it
to be said that neither your body nor your mind had suffered decay
after you began to come to Wardha.
I am glad Shummy is now treating your eczema. You must not
be touchy about the feet. Is it not better that what is in is now coming
out. The only thing is to have a remedy that results in elimination, not
suppression.
I hope you will have no difficulty in deciphering the leaf 4. You
will have none if you will treat this as part of it. You know what I
mean.
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

377

Even among closest relatives some can be shameless. I belong to
that class. Therefore don’t send me a thermos till I call for it. I assure
you I am getting hot enough drinks. On that score you need not
worry.
I entirely agree with you that women are better nurses and more
attentive to details than men. Whether it is so for modern women or
not you can speak with greater authority than I can.
Your recent letters make me feel uneasy. You seem to be
overdoing things again. Learn to say “No” when you are physically
or mentally too tired.
Ba and Manu went to Delhi yesterday. And Lilavati is still at
Maganwadi. Mira has no temperature today as yet though this is the
day for it.
Your apples were eaten with great relish by Khan Saheb and me.
Sufficient for the day.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3591. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6400

493. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
September 20, 1936
CHI. MAHADEV,

Do send me some envelopes.
Write to Dr. Shah about Amtul Salaam, inquiring how she is,
what she does, whether she can be cured, etc.
Did you write that your lemons should be included in the
parcels that come from Bombay? So far none have come.
I went through Ba’s letter in The Hindustan Times. It does reveal
Ba’s pain, and also Devdas’s.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11488

378

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

494. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
September 20, 1936
CHI. AMTUL SALAAM,

How foolish of you ! No one reads your letters and, supposing
someone does, what is there for you to be ashamed of?Don’t you see
that your purpose could not be served because your Express Delivery
letter reached late?But no one reads it, having recognized your
handwriting. But I read it to Mahadev to show him your folly, and
both of us laughed at it.
Why do you write in Gujarati or in Hindi?By all means write in
Urdu. Your handwriting is clear. Never mind if I take more time to
read it.
How can I be persuaded to speak nothing to Kanti when you
give money for him?You had forbidden me to discuss the matter with
you and I respected your wish. I did rebuke Kanti and he then wrote
to say that your wanting to help him was not a recent thing. But then
if you persist in making yourself unhappy, how can I help it?
Write to me about the final decision regarding your operation.
Did you get the letter addressed to Santa Cruz P.O.? You have
no more complaint regarding letters, have you?Won’t you be a little
reasonable, a little cheerful? You do not in any way prove your
goodness by making yourself miserable.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 348

495. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
September 20, 1936
CHI. LILAVATI,

I have read your letter very carefully. If you could only have
some idea of my anxiety about you, you would become straightened
as a cane, curb the wild horse of your imagination and become
absorbed in the work entrusted to you. I do not trust you and hence
you cannot be at Maganwadi. I am anxious about you because I have
expectations of you. I am thinking what my duty towards you is. If at
VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

379

Segaon you can mix as sugar does with milk, even if you wanted to I
would not let you go. You must admit that you do not have that
strength right now. But all will come right in time. Be patient. I have
understood the purport of your letter. It contains a few misunderstandings. But I have no time to clear them. It is not ever
necessary. Do read Prithvivallabh1 again. And let me know about the
effect it has on you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

496. LETTER TO G.D. BIRLA
September 20, 1936
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I gave three days to Parameshwari, Parnerkar, Saryuprasad,
Dinkar and Dharmadhikari and talked with them to my heart’s
content. They all hold different opinions. Parnerkar is not prepared to
take charge of the dairies. It does not seem proper to undo
Parameshwari’s sixteen years of experiments. I have not been able to
reach a final decision as even the winding up of this will take two to
three months. I feel that Parameshwari should be given a further Rs.
2,000 for the expenditure up to December 31. There was some talk
about sowing, to which I have already agreed. He should be given Rs.
2,000 in the same manner as he was given Rs. 500 and, whatever may
ultimately come about, the sum of Rs. 2,500 should be the first charge
on the establishment. Meanwhile we should meet somewhere and take
a final decision. I must go to Banaras on October 25.2 Jamnalalji, too,
will be there. I have further advised Parameshwari to obtain the
opinion of the Government expert.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 8023. Courtesy: G.D. Birla
1
A novel in Gujarati by K. M. Munshi; vide also”Letter to K. M. Munshi”,
26-9-1936
2
For the opening of the Bharat Mata Mandir

380

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

497. LETTER TO G.S.N. ACHARYA
[Before September 21, 1936] 1
I never knew that there was a movement in Andhra Desa against
Hindi pracha2 . But I would resist any attempt to displace the rich
vernaculars of the different provinces. Hindi is not intended to take
their place, but it is intended to supplement them as a medium of
inter-provincial intercourse. Therefore, Hindi propaganda should not
only not interfere with the progress of vernaculars, but it must enrich
them.
The Hindu, 22-9-1936

498. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

September 21, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,

Your eczema has to go. I do not know how. Will Shummy
approve of gently steaming the part affected, then applying ice
poultice? If you think you can discuss this with him you should do so.
But at the same time you must not fret because it is a skin disease. You
will be well earlier, if you will cease to think about the trouble. How I
wish I was by your side at the present moment ! But that cannot be.
Please tell Fielden3 with my regards that he is working himself to
death without a just cause. He ought to take leave and get well
quickly. Of course the effect of malignant malaria is said to be very
bad.
I wonder if Mahadev passed on to you the yarn that I was to
have died of heart failure at 10 a.m. on Friday last.4 This was sent by a
learned man in all seriousness to Jamnalalji. He told me all about it.
And though he made light of the information, he could not help
posting poor Mahodaya here for the night. Though he was deprived
of the privilege of last rites, he came in handy as Mira happened to
have high fever that very day.
1
2
3
4

The news report carrying this item is dated September 21, 1936.
Propaganda
Lionel Fielden, first Director-General of All India Radio
Vide also “Letter to Kantilal Gandhi”, 18-9-1936

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

381

I hope the access of visitors has not proved a real strain on your
scanty resources. I wish you could hide yourself somewhere during
the cold season. Any other hill will be better than Simla. Is it
impossible to try Mahabaleshwar or Ooty?
Love.
R OBBER
From the original: C.W. 3592. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6401

499. LETTER TO BHULABHAI J. DESAI
September 21, 1936
BHAISHRI BHULABHAI,

Shoulder the whole burden of the parliamentary election,
financial as well as organizational. You will yourself no doubt
contribute the largest amount but also persuade others to do likewise.
This task is primarily yours; others will join afterwards.
I hope Dhiru and Madhuri are fine. Blessings to them both.
Vandemataram from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Bhulabhai Desai Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

500. LETTER TO G.D. BIRLA
September 21, 1936
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I become more and more convinced each day that for Harijan
work in each province the necessary funds should be raised within the
province. If money has to be provided by the centre to enable
provinces to carry on their work, work thus accomplished cannot be
enduring. We shall also not be able to gauge the feelings of the caste
Hindu. Rather than we should be forced later to cut down on our
work, it is better that we should recognize our limitations.
What it means is that each province should now submit its
budget in the light of the above and having examined these budgets
we should then provide to each province such assistance as may be
feasible for a year or two. I see our work purely as a religious
382

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

undertaking. Expansion of the work therefore depends on our finding
self-sacrificing and saintly workers. Money will go after them. They
will not have to go after money. If this has not been made clear to our
Council it is only unfortunate.
If it is necessary that there should be a meeting of the Council at
Wardha to take a final decision in the matter, such a meeting may be
arranged.
Yours,

MOHANDAS GANDHI
From the Hindi original: C.W. 8022. Courtesy: G.D. Birla

501. LETTER TO ZOHRA ANSARI
September 21, 1936
DEAR DAUGHTER ZOHRA,

I cannot attend your wedding1 but I shall certainly be with you in
spirit. You will both have my blessings on that day. May God grant
you long life and happiness.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Urdu: Mahatma, Vol. IV, between pp. 112-3

502. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

September 22, 1936
CHI. AMALA,

I am glad you are keeping up your Gujarati and Hindi. How
could you feel that I had ceased to take an interest in your welfare ! I
am glad you are in a more commodious house. You must get rid of
your malady. It is tragic how your mother is being hindered. Let us
hope however she will be able to come at last.
Love.
Blessings from

BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library
1

With Shaukat. The wedding was to take place on September 25; vide “Letter
to Amtussalaam”, 25-9-1936
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

383

503. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
September 22, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,

Your two letters came in the same day one after another. I know
that my letters comfort you. Therefore I am trying to write to you as
frequently as I can.
How I wish I could have you under my care in December and
onward. But your eczema must disappear before then. Sardar
Vallabhbhai is due there on 24th. I have asked him to get Deshmukh1
to examine you. He is a good all-round man. He might be able to find
the real remedy. I take it Shummy won’t mind that.
Of course I shall write to Shummy to let you come to me
between December and February both inclusive. But I don’t want to
write just yet or you will tell me when.
The folding charkha will be sent as soon as you send me the
address. It will be specially made.
I understand what you say about your letters. Your wish is being
literally respected.
It does seem to me that you should let Shummy put you on a
meat diet. Surely you won’t refuse to take meat as medicine. You
have not developed that independent conscience. Let the evolution be
slow and steady. If I religiously avoid meat even as medicine, it has
been a life-long sadhana independently and deliberately undertaken.
Anyway I would urge you to yield to Shummy in this repect, if he is
sure that he will cure you. You must not expect the impossible from
him.
Love.
R OBBER
S HRI R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
MANOR VILLE
S IMLA W.
From the original: C. W. 3743. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6899

1

384

Dr. Punjabrao Deshmukh
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

504. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
September 22, 1936
CHI. LILAVATI,

I have finished Prithvivallabh1 . I am now sending it to you.
Read it carefully but quickly, and let me know what you think of it.
The book belongs to Kakasaheb. Be careful not to soil it. Don’t make
any marks in it. The ones you will find in it are not made by me. We
should never make any marks in other people’s books.
I got your letter yesterday and the slokas you have copied out.
How can the slokas convey any meaning to you unless you spend
some time to understand them? Shouldn’t we exercise the mind a
little? The work I have given you so far is the least and the easiest.
Today also I dreamt of you. What a sorry state. How nice it would be
if I did not have to worry on your account!
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9347. Also C. W. 6622. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

505. LETTER TO JAYANTI N. PAREKH
September 22, 1936
CHI. JAYANTI,2

I could manage only today to read your letter and I am
dictating this at once while spinning. You wrote the letter on your
birthday. Live long and bring glory to your elders and to the country
by your work. I have followed your argument about the batch and it
is correct. But the batch was never disbanded; for those who have this
faith, it still exists. But I must admit that there are very few who have
this faith. I give you the freedom you now ask for. I would have liked
to have a little talk with you before granting you this freedom, if only
I had the time to send for you and meet you. That would be purely
for my own satisfaction. I have had to forgo such satisfaction on
several occasions before; so I can forgo it now. Do only what your
inner voice tells you. In this alone lies your good. Only make sure
that you rightly understand what the inner voice says. If the inner
1
2

A Gujarati novel by K. M. Munshi
An Ashram inmate who later became Communist

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

385

voice prompts a murderer to commit murder, a debauch to commit
debauchery, or a thief to commit theft, we shall not regard it as the
inner voice. Men of experience have therefore laid it down that he
alone can have recourse to the inner voice who has acquired the
ability to hear it. As men have often failed to understand this clearly,
they have pillaged and plundered in the name of religion. However, I
know I don’t have to explain all this to you. Write to me occasionally.
I am in correspo-ndence with several socialists, though not with our
comrades from Gujarat. If I set out to seek such contacts on my own I
would be overwhelmed by them. I reply to those who write to me, but
at present I am curtailing even that kind of correspondence, as I desire
as present to bury myself in Segaon and be forgotten. Even if this
desire cannot be wholly fulfilled, should I not at least do all I can to
realize it? And that is what I am doing. A certain amount of
correspondence has therefore come to a stop.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6263

506. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

September 23, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,

I am trying to send you somebody. Frontier Gandhi is not sent
out anywhere. So this will be rather difficult.
Do keep throwing out the names that occur to you. Why is it not
possible to find out from the books what amount was sent by Sorabji?
Durban has been urgently demanding it. Maybe Chhaganlal [Gandhi]
will know and maybe Chhaganlal Joshi, too. The books are there. For
the rest, anyone can look into them and find out. We don’t have so
very many ledgers, do we? What is the difficulty?
I enclose a letter from Jaisukhlal. It contains complaints against
Chhaganlal Joshi. I had written to him that he should allow me to
show these complaints to Joshi. At last he has sent me the permission.
But he has added that I should send the letter through you and obtain
your opinion also. That is why I am sending you the letter. Do let me
have your opinion and, unless you have some objection, show it to
Joshi and ask him to send me his reply. Or I shall send it direct to
386

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Joshi if you so wish.
You may always take for granted thousands of blessings from
me on your birthday. I have cherished many hopes of you. They have
also borne fruit, and will further do so. But the real test will come
when I am no more, won’t it? I have assumed that then, too, you will
succeed.
I am reaching Ahmedabad on the 30th and from there I shall
have to rush off to Nadiad the same day. My wish to see the elders
before that is growing stronger and stronger. I shall therefore try and
drop in if I can. I shall leave soon after receiving the blessings of the
elders. There should be no fanfare. No one is to be informed. You
should not expect me to do any other work. At the most I shall spend
one night there. I shall not have all that time and I shall arrive in the
morning and leave at night. For me this is nothing but a pilgrimage.
You, too, should give up all thought of taking advantage of my
presence for some other cause. Persons like Nanalal Joshi will of
course know, and anyway Shuklasaheb will have to be informed.
However, everyone should understand that my visit to Rajkot is not to
be considered a visit at all. It is likely that Khan Saheb will accompany
me, and you may take advantage of his presence then but don’t make
any announcement in advance.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C. W. 8505. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

507. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
September 23, 1936
CHI. KANTI,

I have your letter. I do not wish to annoy you on account of
Amtul Salaam. I am satisfied that you visited her.
It is certainly good that you have been using a mosquito-net. Do
not take it for granted that you will remain free from fever in spite of
taking all sorts of liberties with yourself. As for the studies, you
should observe some restraint. Why should you strain your eyes at
night after having studied the whole day?
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

387

I had forgotten to write about Saraswati. I shall enquire about
her from Ramachandran and then let you know.
I expect you have been regularly writing to Devdas. Ba will be
glad to have a little note from you. Did I tell you that Ba and Manu
have gone to Devdas? Here at present we have two additions—
Pyarelal and Nanavati. Lilavati continues to stay at Maganwadi.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 7306. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

508. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
September 23, 1936
CHI. BRAJKRISHNA,

Mahadev gave me your letter about Deka. I have read Deka’s
letter. Fortunately Shankerlal too happens to be here. I have had a talk
with him too. A copy of my letter 1 to Deka is enclosed from which
you will see that you have no reason to worry about him. You must
have got the letter I wrote to you some time back. I was sorry to read
about Mother being unwell. I hope she is all right now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 2444

509. LETTER TO SUNDARLAL
September 23, 1936
MY DEAR SUNDARLAL,

You did well in writing to me this letter 2 . I have not seen
Maulana Abdul Haq’s statement. I saw only a portion of it. Please
send me a copy of that statement.
1

This is not traceable
In the letter the addressee had regretted that the Hindi-Urdu controversy,
which was mainly a literary affair, should have been given a communal shape.
Comparing the grammar and idiom of the two he emphasized that they were
fundamentally the same. Urdu and Hindi writers were both obstructing the formation
and development of a common Hindustani language and confusing its grammar. He
explained that neither “ Hindi” nor “Urdu” could rightly denote this common
language.
2

388

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Whatever I have done in this connection, I have done with
absolutely pure intentions. My position is exactly what it was in 1920.
My efforts are directed towards the acceptance of the word. That is
why I got the word ‘ Hindustani’ passed by the Congress. I could not
do so in the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan. Therefore, at Indore, I got the
connotation of the word Hindi clarified. In the All- India Sahitya
Sammelan1 I went one step further. My object was the same, viz., to
give one common name to the two forms of the language as used by
the Hindus and by the Mussalmans, as well as to make them one
language in reality.
You have yourself written that the adoption of the name Urdu
had its special reasons. I never meant to attribute motives for this
adoption.
You have also accepted what I said with regard to grammar.
That Hindi writers commit mistakes of another type does not disprove
or falsify my statement.
The prevalent misunderstandings are bound to be removed,
because there is absolutely no ground for them. I do not at all want to
give up Urdu. I have sufficient regard for it. I attach sufficient value
to it. I daily read from some Urdu work or other. I also write letters in
Urdu to several Muslim sisters and brothers. I have patience enough.
I think I have cleared all your points. If there still remain some
doubts, we shall see about them later. Even for writing this I could
with difficulty snatch a few moments.
Yours,

BAPU

[PS.]
One thing more. The language of the sentences you have
quoted is not mine. From where did you take them? 2
The Searchlight, 9-10-1936

1
At Nagpur on April 24 and 25, 1936; vide “Speech at Akhil Bharatiya
Sahitya Parishad”, 24-4-1936
2
The original letter was in Hindi.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

389

510. PREFACE TO “GITAPADARTHAKOSHA” 1
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

September 24, 1936
Kakasaheb has explained in his own foreword why this kosha,
which was prepared twelve years ago2 and which has not come up to
the required standard yet, is being published today.
This kosha is indeed necessary for those who are at all interested
in the translation3 which has been published under my name. Maybe it
will be useful to other students of the Gita as well. To them I would
suggest that if they do not like the interpretations given in the
Padarthakosha and prefer others, they should note these down in the
book itself. By doing so, they will have a glossary of their own liking
with very little effort. And if such students send me the interpretations
of their choice, I shall be grateful.
The more I study the Gita, the more I am made aware of its
uniqueness. For me, it is a spiritual dictionary. Whenever I am in
doubt as to what I should or should not do, I fall back upon it, and so
far it has never disappointed me. It is indeed a Kamadhenu 4 . In the
beginning, we recited one sloka a day, then two, then five, then a
chapter a day, then a complete recitation in two weeks and, finally, in
the last few years some of us have been able to do a complete recitation in seven days. And on particular days of the week the sound of
particular chapters is heard around 4.30 a.m. Some—a very few—
have learnt all the eighteen chapters by heart. The morning prayers
include the chapters in the following order during the days of the
week.
Friday I, II
Tuesday XIII, XIV, XV
Saturday III, IV, V
Wednesday XVI, XXII
Sunday VI, VII, VIII
Thursday XVIII.
Monday IX, X, XI, XII
1
This appeared in the book under the title Request to Readers and also in
Harijanbandhu, 25-10-1936, under the title “Gitarupi Kamadhenu”. A padarthakosha
is a concordance as well as a glossary.
2
Gandhiji had prepared this Padarthakosha while in the Yeravda jail in
1922-24; vide “My Jail Experiences- XI”, 17-9-1924
3
Anasaktiyoga; vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 23-5-1935
4
Mythical cow that gave anything that was desired

390

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Suffice it to say that there has been some deliberation behind
this schedule. Our experience has been that this order facilitates
understanding of the text.
It may well be asked why the recitation has to begin on a Friday.
The reason for this is simply the following: For considerable length of
time a complete recitation used to take fourteen days. In the Yeravda
jail I thought of a seven-day recitation and the idea was put into effect
on a Friday. In this way and since that day, the recitation week begins
on a Friday.
There are two reasons why I mention the matter of complete
recitation here: to show how far devotion to the Gita has taken some
of us up to date and to indicate to the reader the way to encourage its
study.
But we are not to rest content with merely reciting the Gita. It is
a spiritual dictionary; it is a tremendous force for straightening the
creases of the soul; it is the refuge of the afflicted; it is an awakener
from stupor. Only those who have this faith can derive help from
reciting the Gita. I do not in the least suggest that recitation of the
Gita without an understanding of its meaning is by itself beneficial to
a man. With sufficient effort a tame parrot can certainly be taught to
memorize the Gita. But that is not going to bring the slightest merit
either to the parrot or to its trainer.
The Gita is the living, life-giving immortal mother. The mother
who suckled us will one day disappear and leave us in the lurch. We
see countless mothers failing to protect their children from peril. But
one who seeks the support of Mother Gita saves himself from the
greatest peril. She is ever wakeful and she never lets one down. But a
mother will not give one nourishment unless one asks for it. Mother
Gita too gives nothing without our asking for it. Before taking anyone
under her wing she tests him severely, expects whole-hearted devotion.
The devotion, too, should not be dry. She wants single-minded
devotion. Hence, she plainly refuses to help those who are not
prepared to surrender their all to her.
The student of physics gains an insight into his subject only
when he is crazy after it. Those who obtain M.A. and B.A. degrees
read day and night, spend money and put themselves to great physical
strain. From amongst those who make such efforts, only a few are
successful at the first attempt. Those who fail do not despair but try
again and again and only rest when they have passed. And in the
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

391

end—?
For those who wish to drink the nectar that is the Gita, much
greater effort than this should be and is required. But how many want
to partake of that nectar? Even of those who feel the need, how many
are prepared to make a strenuous effort? We know that the number of
people devoted to the Gita in the way I have suggested is negligible.
Yet all agree that the Gita is the essence of all the Upanishads. No
Hindu should remain ignorant of it. At present, however, all religion
has depreciated in value. This is not the occasion to go into the
reasons for this. In this note of appeal all that I have tried to do on the
occasion of the publication of this volume is to draw the attention of
seekers to the gem that is the Gita and to suggest how it can be put to
good use. May it bear fruit.
MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI

[From Gujarati]
Gitapadarthakosha , pp. iii to vi

511. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
September 24, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,

This is a left hand effort just to give the right a little rest.
You do seem to be overworking yourself. You ought to find a
way out.
The newspaper cutting is funny. They cannot live without lies.
Presently they will reduce you to thin air ! ! ! Then you will fly about
everywhere without any escort and I shall need provide no corner for
you when you choose to waft yourself to Segaon. The only difficulty
will be how to make you out—a mere airy nothing. Well, by the time
you become nothing, I shall have grown a sixth sense enabling me to
recognize beings or non-beings of the air.
Don’t you think that I have nothing else to do but to write
nonsense. I wanted to chat with you. I don’t want to be always
lecturing to you on your eczema. And the wretched cutting gave me
the text for this letter.
The apples have come in again. Are they still from your
392

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

garden?
Love.
R OBBER
From the original: C.W. 3593. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6402

512. LETTER TO S. AMBUJAMMAL
September 24, 1936
CHI. AMBUJAM,

1

Your fruit has been coming in regularly and it has been serving
its purpose.
I returned to Segaon on Saturday. I am keeping well though still
feeling weak. I don’t want to move out of the place if I can at all help
it.
I see that Mrs. Rangasami has given you Rs. 2,000 for the Hindi
work.
I hope Kichi is better and that Father and Mother are also
keeping well. And how about you?
I am glad you are continuing the Ramayana.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: Ambujammal Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library

513. LETTER TO A. H. WEST
September 24, 1936
The Phoenix experiment for me was a life-work. And so, if you
ever come to India, you will find me amid conditions simpler than in
Phoenix. For the ideal has not only persisted but it bears today an
ampler meaning.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

1

This is in Hindi.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

393

514. LETTER TO BALWANTSINHA
September 24, 1936
CHI. BALWANTSINHA,

I have your letter. Who knows when this will reach you?
Everything is going on smoothly here. Every day there is a
churning, giving lots of butter. Today two and a half seers of curds
yielded fourteen tolas of butter which gave ten tolas of ghee. Pyarelal
has become an expert at it. Munnalal looks after the milk.
We had a heavy rain today.
Kishorelal’s letter is enclosed. He is all right now, though pretty
weak.
Tell Maharaj1 that I got his letter.
Yes, give them a sound training in sanitation too.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1887

515. LETTER TO M. S. KELKAR
September 25, 1936
DEAR ICE 2 ,

What shall I say to you? I would love to have you by me and yet
with all your belief in stars, I have no faith in your treatment. Your
belief, too, that I gained by your treatment is not quite correct. After
all your effort, I had at last to undergo an operation. 3 You treated
many patients in Sabarmati but except little Manu who had raw eggs,
nobody derived any permanent relief. You have been trying all these
many years to settle down to solid work but you still remain a rolling
stone. I very much fear that you are self-deluded. It is high time you
recognized your limitations. I know you have talent and energy. It
grieves me to find it running to waste.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

1

Sant Tukdoji Maharaj; the addressee had gone to his Ashram at Mojhari to
teach carding, spinning, etc.
2
The addressee was a specialist in ice treatment.
3
On January 20, 1919

394

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

516. LETTER TO BAL D. KALELKAR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

September 25, 1936
CHI. BAL,

It is strange that you of all people should have this sudden craze
for testimonials. However, if you want one here it is.1
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2178

517. TESTIMONIAL TO BAL D. KALELKAR
September 25, 1936
Chi. Bal, the younger son of Kakasaheb Kalelkar, is well known
to me. It may be said that he was brought up under my care at
Sabarmati Ashram. He is very intelligent, sociable and cheerful. His
ambition is to live a life of service after acquiring much knowledge.
Chi. Bal rendered me excellent service during my second 21-day fast2
and on other occasions. He is entitled to my blessings at all times.
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2177

518. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
September 25, 1936
CHI. AMTUL SALAAM,

Not only are you foolish, but you are also silly. Your letter is
full of nonsense. It appears that in your view no man is good. I got
your letter regarding Dr. Gilder. He did not open any of your Urdu
letters nor has he read any. I read out your last letter to Mahadev as
itcontained nothing confidential. Doesn’t a parent have that freedom?
I had replied immediately to your letter regarding Dr. Gilder
saying that if you needed to be examined by Dr. Gilder it could be
1
2

Vide the following item.
From May 8 to May 29, 1933

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

395

arranged. Did you get my letter addressed c/o Bari, the Theosophical
Lodge? I have not failed to reply to any of your letters. What can I do
if letters fail to reach you? If you wish, I shall obtain a certificate of
posting. Why do you make yourself unhappy for nothing?
Zohra and Shaukat are getting married today in Delhi. The
ceremony will be entirely private.
Write to me regularly. You should write only in Urdu.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 349

519. LETTER TO TARABEHN N. MASHRUWALA
September 25, 1936
CHI. TARA,

What shall I say to you? I would not like to rebuke you but I
cannot bear your not keeping your promises. Where is the account
you were going to render every week? It is not even in the letter you
write. Why are you so sluggish? When will you wake up?
Do you write to Dr. Ooman?You should have kept up the
contact for the sake of your studies if for nothing else. If you have
broken with him, I would recommend that you make it up with him. I
have not given up hope. It is open to you to get from me fresh
instructions from day to day. But you do not seem to be interested
even in improving your health. Who can create this interest in you?It
is our duty to preserve this largesse from God and make noble use of
it. But it seems you have closed all your doors. This is not right. You
have strength, a desire to serve, candour and purity. But there is also in
you something—call it obstinacy or stupidity or some other failing—
that does not let your potentialities flower. It would be a good thing
for you to find out that shortcoming and resolutely remove it. Open
up your mind, which you have locked.
I got the yarn. Congratulations to those who participated in the
spinning. I trust your parents are doing well. Do you make use of
Oommen’s book or his box?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7528. Also C.W. 5004. Courtesy:
Kanubhai N. Mashruwala

396

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

520. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
September 25, 1936
CHI. LILAVATI,

You shouldn’t be in a hurry to come to Segaon. You have as yet
not even acquired a command over your handwriting. Ask yourself
whether you can live at peace with Munnalal, Balwantsinha and
Mirabehn. At present we have perfect peace here and there are no
quarrels to annoy me. I tremble at the thought of a threat to this
peace. So think calmly and tell me yourself. Meanwhile, you are
already busy with the work there. You have peace. Mahadev gets your
full help. He needs that help. Therefore it seems you are in the right
place. You will not take this to mean that I do not at all want to have
you in Segaon. I do wish to have you here, but not at the cost of any
threat to peace. Even from here I do try to guide you. Do you expect
anything more?You should patiently consider whether you yourself
would be happy here. Do not encroach on Mahadev’s time for this.
Do the thinking yourself and write to me what you feel.
I hope your leg is all right now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9348. Also C.W. 6623. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

521. LETTER TO GOPINATH
September 25, 1936
BHAI GOPINATHJI1 ,

. . . 2 Now tell me if there is in the Ayurvedic system any
medicine for malaria as efficacious as quinine. Which medicine
is definitely more effective than the allopathic drugs? In the villages,
in spite of my strong inclination to the contrary, I have to take
1

Editor of Arogya Darpana, a Hindi journal advocating Ayurvedic system of
medicine; the letter was originally published in the November 1936 issue of the
journal.
2
Omissions as in the source
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

397

recourse to quinine, soda-bicarb, potassium permanganate and
tincture iodine . . . .1
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Gujarati, 3-1-1937

522. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
September 25, 1936
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

It is only natural for you to grieve over your father’s death.
What you write about [the devoted]2 Hindu [wife]3 is perfectly right.
You must of course console your mother.
The question of giving up the effort to observe brahmacharya
does not at all arise. Mother Gita assures us that “no well-doer meets
with a sad end” 4 . You may certainly fast on Saturdays if you find it
beneficial.
Consider carefully whatever you decide to do.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4289

523. LETTER TO SHRIMAN NARAYAN AGRAWAL
September 25, 1936
BHAI SHRIMAN,

I read your Naye Yugka Raga. I liked the poems. Your purpose
is clear and pure. But I do not consider myself qualified to express
any opinion about its poetic quality. Only poets can judge whether
your work deserves to be published.
Blessings from

BAPU
1
2
3
4

398

Omissions as in the source
Illegible in the source
ibid
Bhagavad Gita, VI. 40
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[PS.]
How much time I spent over writing this ! I didn’t know what to
write.
[From Hindi]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 299

524. THE LAW OF OUR BEING
The Statesman has devoted a reasoned article to the argument
advanced by me in reply 1 to its criticism of Canon Sheppard’s war
against war. In that article a very clever attempt has been made to
dispute the whole of the position taken up by me.
The writer says that whilst the Bhagavad Gita assists him, it does
not assist the terrorist. Once you admit the lawfulness of the use of
physical force for purposes other than the benefit of the person
against whom it is used, as in the case of a surgeon against his patient,
you cannot draw an arbitrary line of distinction. The Mahabharata,
of which the Gita is only a tiny chapter, describes in gruesome detail a
night slaughter of the innocents which, but for our recent experiences
of our civilized war, would be considered unbelievable in actual
practice. The grim fact is that the terrorists have in absolute honesty,
earnestness and with cogency used the Gita, which some of them
know by heart, in defence of their doctrine and policy. Only they
have no answer to my interpretation of the Gita, except to say that
mine is wrong and theirs is right. Time alone will show whose isright.
The Gita is not a theoretical treatise. It is a living but silent guide
whose directions one has to understand by patient striving.
The Statesman writer next likens Canon Sheppard’s position to
that of Arjuna. Surely this is a faulty analogy, hastily drawn. Arjuna
was the Commander-in-Chief of the Pandava forces. He became
suddenly paralysed when he contemplated the awful scene before
him. As general he knew exactly what he had to do. He knew that he
had to war against his cousins. His paralysis was due to momentary
weakness. He could not have given up the task before him without
creating the utmost confusion and disorder, and bringing disgrace on
himself and his innumerable friends and followers. He was bound to
engage himself and his followers in the terrible slaughter for which he
1

Vide “God of Love, Not War”, 5-9-1936

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

399

had trained himself and them. It is profitless to conjecture what would
have happened if non-violence in thought, word and deed had
suddenly but really possessed him.
That rich possession, let us hope, has come to Dick Sheppard
and his companions. Anyway, so far as I know, his position is wholly
different from Arjuna’s. He is no general of an army drawn up in
battle array. He makes no distinction between kinsmen and others. For
him man is man, no matter where he is born of what his skin is, or
what he calls himself. After having prayerfully searched through the
book which for him is the Book of Life, he has been driven to the
conclusion that he may not hurt his fellowmen for gain for himself or
his country, and that therefore he must himself abstain from
participation, direct or indirect, in war. He naturally takes the next step
of preaching to his neighbours the doctrine of peace or love and
goodwill towards men without exception. This is a position which
Arjuna never took up.
But the Statesman writer has many strings to his bow. And the
strongest is his denial of non-violence or love as the law of the human
race. If love or non-violence be not the law of our being, the whole of
my argument falls to pieces, and there is no escape from a periodical
recrudescence of war, each succeeding one outdoing the preceding
one in ferocity. I cannot undertake, and least of all through a
newspaper article written during moments snatched from the daily
routine, to prove that love is the source and end of life. But I venture
to make some relevant suggestions which may pave the way for an
understanding of the Law. All the Teachers that ever lived have
preached that law with more or less vigour. If Love was not the law of
life, life would not have persisted in the midst of death. Life is a
perpetual triumph over the grave. If there is a fundamental distinction
between man and beast, it is the former’s progressive recognition of
the law and its application in practice to his own personal life. All the
saints of the world, ancient and modern, were each according to his
light and capacity a living illustration of that supreme Law of our
Being. That the brute in us seems so often to gain an easy triumph is
true enough.-That, however, does not disprove the law. It shows the
difficulty of practice. How should it be otherwise with a law which is
as high as truth itself?When the practice of the law becomes universal,
God will reign on earth as He does in Heaven. I need not be reminded
that earth and heaven are in us. We know the earth, we are strangers to
the Heaven within us. If it is allowed that for some the practice of love
400

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

is possible, it is arrogance not to allow even the possibility of its
practice in all the others. Not very remote ancestors of ours indulged
in cannibalism and many other practices which we would today call
loathsome. No doubt in those days too there were Dick Sheppards
who must have been laughed at and possibly pilloried for preaching
(to them) the strange doctrine of refusing to eat fellow men. Modern
science is replete with illustrations of the seemingly impossible having
become possible within living memory. But the victories of physical
science would be nothing against the victory of the Science of Life
which is summed up in Love which is the Law of our Being. I know
that it cannot be proved by argument. It shall be proved by persons
living it in their lives in utter disregard of consequences to themselves.
There is no real gain without sacrifice. And since demonstration of the
Law of Love is the realest gain, sacrifice too must be the greatest
required.
The rest of the argument advanced by the Statesman writer in
refutation of mine needs no answer if the Law is recognized. His
argument is valid if the Law is denied or doubted.
One point may, however, be dealt with in passing. The writer
seems to pooh-pooh the idea of honour derived from 1 individual and
national gain. He says: “What is this honour that would be left to a
nation that voluntarily destroyed itself?” There is no question for
one 2 of self-destruction, voluntary or otherwise. But there is of
“anation allowing itself to be destroyed” for the sake of preserving
its honour, as would be the case, say, if Indians died to the man,
without lifting a finger, in their determination not to surrender to the
will of an invading host. A woman defends her own honour and that
of her sex, when she non-violently refuses to the point of death the
advances of a rake. Young Prahlad non-violently risked his life to
defend his honour, which consisted in his persistence in declaring his
belief in God. Jesus defended his honour and that of man when he
preferred the death of a felon to the denial of his faith.
Harijan, 26-9-1936

1
2

Slip for ‘devoid of’; vide “A Correction”, 10-10-1936.
Slip for ‘me’; ibid

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

401

525. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

September 26, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,

If the unbreakable thermos comes, I shall not return it. As I
destroy all your letters, I have inadvertently destroyed the
Mahmudabad address. Please repeat it on a separate sheet.
Surely it is ‘idiotic’ to pass summer in Simla merely because
you possess a house there. You ought to select another summer resort
where you can really recoup yourself.
Remember one of the attributes of non-violence. It seldom
speaks, it simply and silently acts. It appeals not to the intellect, it
pierces the heart. The more it speaks and argues, the less effective it
becomes. Therefore do not hesitate to let your case be lost by default.
Apparent defeat may be the hour of victory. Speech is often a sign of
weakness.
You will please give a trial to meat if Shummy says it is
necessary. Your vegetarianism will be on surer ground for your
yielding now, if yielding becomes a duty.
Love.
R OBBER
From the original: C.W. 3594. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6403

526. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
September 26, 1936
MY DEAR KU.,

Jajuji has sent in his resignation to be presented to you, if I
would agree, for submission to the Board. I am not quite happy over
the prospect. Though J. is quite capable of adjusting himself to new
conditions, the manner. . .1 to leave. . .2 do not know that the
resignation will be in the best interest of the Sangh. I will like you to
examine the situation from that standpoint and that alone. Just think
the thing over with Bharatan and let me have your opinion.
1
2

402

Faded in the source
ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Meanwhile I am holding the paper. I am asking J., too, to consider the
question from that point of view.
From a photostat: G.N. 10111

527. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
September 26, 1936
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

I have your letter. The Bhangis’ problem seems to have been
solved satisfactorily. I am returning the letter which you want.
I am surprised about Chandulal 1 . I have sent him the relevant
extract from your letter and asked for his reply.
I hope your work is going on smoothly now. It must. Very few
workers are left now.
I am hoping to meet you all. I only wish to pay a visit of duty.
There should be, therefore, no publicity.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5540

528. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
September 26, 1936
CHI. AMTUL SALAAM,

I myself went through your letter written in pencil. I just got
your wire and am sending a letter to Dr. Shah. You may show it to Dr.
Jivraj if Dr. Shah is away. Send me a wire if you need anything.
You are foolish. You make yourself unhappy. You deliberately
suspect people. Why did you have to go away when you had fever?
Why don’t you write a note to Kanti and ask him to come? At the
moment I don’t have the courage to keep you or anybody else in
Segaon. Let me settle down in peace.
Why don’t you listen to me?
What do you propose to do if Bari goes out of town?
1

Chandulal Becharbhai Patel who was then Education Officer of the Gondal
State. The reference is to the segregation of Harijans at public places.
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

403

Shall I make some other arrangement for you in Bombay itself?
Who are there with you in the house?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 350

529. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
September 26, 1936
BHAI MUNSHI,

Kakasaheb’s acquaintance with you has been growing and he is
having the opportunity of reading your works. He read Prithvivallabh and has pressed me to read it and give my opinion on it. I
read it four days ago and now send my opinion direct to you.
Kakasaheb will read it. You had already sent me some of your books
when I was in jail where, however, I could read none of them. You had
even then asked for my opinion. I read Prithvivallabh with interest.
Not one character appealed to me. I did not at all wish to be like
Munj. Why so? It would not be quite in the fitness of things for you to
say that you delineate the characters as they are. Some at least in this
wide and varied world are likely to be noble, free from hypocrisy,
loyal. Mrinal you reduced to pieces, and poor Vilas melted like wax
before Rasanidhi. Could it be that men are so cunning and that even a
forty-year-old, homely and self-restrained woman would fall for a
man’s love talk and suggestive gestures? What does a man read for?
For mere enjoyment? And that too so low? Kalidasa wrote nothing of
the kind. Shakespeare made no such impression on me. From them I
learn something. Why not from you? Personally you appear to me
nice and pleasant. I am drawn to you. I have hopes of getting much
from you both. How did I fail to get a glimpse of your personality in
Prithvivallabh which is regarded—or isn’t it—your best work? I have
little hope that Kaka can solve this puzzle for me. You alone can do it.
There is of course no question in this which calls for a reply
immediately.
Now allow me to have a little fun. Your last sentence is
somewhat like this: Crushed under the elephant’s foot, Munj’s body
lay flat like a rotlo 1 . The word rotlo was all right; but did it ever occur
1

404

Cake made from millet or other coarse grain
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to you that the body could not be turned into a rotlo? It may do to
say ‘turned into chhundo 1 ’. The body can be turned into murabbo2 ,
into churna3 , but it can never be turned into a rotlo.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7606. Courtesy: K.M. Munshi

530. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
September 26, 1936
CHI. PRABHA,

You have no reason to be irregular. I definitely wish to learn of
your condition even before I have recovered my strength.
I am regaining my strength. I have at present reduced my food
intake. I take about a pound and a half of milk. Among fruits I take
mosambis, prunes and occasionally chikoos or some other fruit. I take
plenty of rest.
You can find half an hour for a hip-bath whatever work you
may be doing. You must. Nor would it do to be unmindful of your
food. You will be bed-ridden if you are careless in this regard.
I had a good talk with Father. It was decided that Jayaprakash
should get Rs. 50. I take it he will himself explain things to you better.
Mirabehn is of course with me. She is improving. The rains may be
said to have stopped now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3482

1
2
3

A preparation made by crushing the ingredients
Jelly
Powder

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

405

531. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

September 27, 1936
MY DEAR REBEL,

If you do not chew garlic well, it is likely to pass out undigested.
It must therefore be well pounded. You may take it the last thing
before retiring in an ounce of dahi or at the table.
You must send me a copy of your rural broadcast.
Khan Saheb wants me specially to thank you for all you are
doing for Mehrtaj and Mariam. I am glad they are coming under
your influence.
Does Navin ever write to you?
Too late to say more.
Love.
R OBBER
From the original: C.W. 3744. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6900

532. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
September 27, 1936
CHI. AMTUL,

You are hard to please. I have written to you daily. The first
letter was sent, as instructed by you, care of the Postmaster and the
later ones to the Easter Villa address. Am I to blame if you don’t get
the letters? And is it my fault that I cannot do something beyond my
power? Tell me now how I can satisfy you.
I see no need at present to consult Dr. Gilder. It would be right
on our part to go to another after we have tried one. Nonetheless, if
you wish I shall write to Dr. Gilder too. You may consult Dr. Jivraj if
he is available and anyone else you think fit.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 351

406

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

533. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
September 27, 1936
CHI. AMTUL SALAAM,

I got your postcard. I do not at all like your having to suffer,
but what am I to do? Do you take anyone with you when you go to
Dr. Shah’s? Does he carefully attend to you? Give me the full details
regularly. Is Bari still there, or has he left? I cannot help it if you
make yourself unhappy.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 352

534. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
September 27, 1936
CHI. LILAVATI,

If I were to call you after you had copied out the whole of the
Gita, I would ask you to copy out a hundred slokas a day and be
done away with that excuse. What I am thinking about is the threat to
my peace. Nor do I say that the fault lies with you alone. I have made
the utmost demand on you because you wish to stay with me purely
for training yourself.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9581. Also C.W. 6553. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

535. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
September 27, 1936
CHI. MAHADEV,

I am sending with this Gadodia’s cheque for Rs. 200, which for
the present is to be credited to the Segaon account. You will be
sending it to Jamnalalji’s, I suppose?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11485
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

407

536. LETTER TO LAKSHMI NARAYAN GADODIA
September 27, 1936
BHAI LAKSHMI NARAYANJI,

I am very happy to see that you are both taken up with hydrotherapy. Let this always continue. You have found a pure altruistic
activity in which both of you have such great faith and I see the
greatest good where the energies of you both are equally applied. I
continued my morning hip-bath even through the attack of malaria,
and my walks too. The hipbath still continues though the hour has
been shifted to ten o’clock. After the morning prayers I go to sleep
and I cannot manage a walk after the hip-bath at 10 o’clock. Anyway
I do go for walks twice a day. I cannot take friction-bath because due
to lack of practice the foreskin cannot be drawn back in the required
manner. I had made an attempt on receiving your first letter. The skin
is intact and I used to take friction-bath years ago. I have not yet
started having the abdominal mud-pack at bedtime. Formerly I used
to try mud-packs on many occasions and now I shall try it for your
sake if for no other reason. If I come across an honest naturopath, I
would certainly keep him with me and popularize the treatment. I
have not so far found such a person. Most of the hydropaths in India
have reduced their treatment to a means of making money. There are
very few like your Moulvi Saheb, and they cannot give up their
occupations. What can we do under such circumstances? I have
thecheque for Rs. 200. I shall see how it can be utilized in Segaon.
Three-fourths of the Segaon village is owned by Jamnalalji and he has
authorized me to spend for the villagers’ benefit whatever returns he
gets from the property and I think the amount is sufficient. Hence I
cannot tell you just now how and when I shall be able to use your Rs.
200 for the welfare of the people of Segaon.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5624

408

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

537. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

September 28, 1936
CHI. AMALA,

You have made such progress in Gujarati as to tempt me to
correct the few mistakes you have made.
I am quite well. I wish you could say as much about yourself.
I do hope you will soon have good news about and from
Mother.
You must not stint yourself about food. You should eat plenty
of fruit and salads.
The friend you have in mind is all right.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

538. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September 28, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,

Herewith the message. Tell Mother1 that I am longing as a child
to rest my head in her lap and Father’s2 . It is unthinkable that I should
go to Ahmedabad and not see them. So take it that, God willing, I
shall be there. The date will be around 27th or thereabouts.
Your purpose could be met if someone reaches there between
the 2nd and the 12th. I am considering whom I can send. You may
send me a wire if you have some other names in your mind.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8506. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
1
2

Devkunwar Gandhi
Khushalchand Gandhi

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

409

539. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
September 28, 1936
CHI. MAHADEV,

I am sending three articles with this. You may delete from the
articles anything that you do not like. I wrote out what I had long
been contemplating. I took up my pen at 8 and laid it down at 10. I
took up the file at 7.30. It took me half an hour reading and
rearranging the matter from Hardikar, drawing out the substance of
Raja’s writing and trimming the one1 regarding the Madurai judge.
Narandas does need some public figure. Whom may we send?
Can you think of somebody? How about Kaka, Jajuji, Kumarappa,
Lakshmidas, Malkani? What about Bapa? Have you any woman in
view? I would send no one but Mira if she were well.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Post the letter to Magan by air mail.2
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11486

540. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
September 28, 1936
CHI. BRAJKRISHNA,

You must have received my letter 3 about Deka. I am all right.
Amtul Salaam is not here. She stayed for two or three days at
Maganwadi but never at Segaon. She is now in Bombay. I had already
read about your mother in your letter to Mahadev and I hope she is
now better. How is your health?
I suppose you get my letters regularly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2443

1
2
3

410

Vide “Remnant of Barbarism”, 3-10-1936
The letter to Maganlal P. Mehta, however, is not traceable.
Vide”Letter to Brijkrishna Chandiwala”, 23-9-1936
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

541. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

September 29, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,

Your two letters at the same time.
Khan Saheb is delighted that you are giving all that attention to
the girls.
You should yield to Shummy now and take what meat he wants
you to. There will be grace in your yielding now. There will be little
or none if you yield when you are driven to it. And there will be no
restraint possible. That you took very little meat when you did is no
argument to prove that it will produce no effect in your case. Since
you have no religious objection, I would like you to listen to me and
straightway tell Shummy to prescribe what he likes. You must get rid
of the eczema before you begin to move about.
I see that you can’t come to me in December. Let us see what is
possible in January and February. Of course you are to be in Faizpur
at the time of the Congress if you are able to go to Ahmedabad. When
do you descend to Jullundur?
The idea of building a separate cottage for yourself in Simla is a
chimera. If you had one, you would be torn to pieces. You are
physically unfit to have an eternal round of guests. Mira is free from
fever but is not herself still. But she will be quite well in a few days. I
am getting stronger though slowly.
You will persevere with the hip-baths and try the sitzbath too. I
have described the latter to you. Sit on a stool with the legs outside the
water which should be level with the stool and then gently wash the
genitals with a smooth towel. It is supposed to work wonders. You
should take this separately.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3745. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6901

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

411

542. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September 29, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,

I know nothing about my birthday. I see it only as the Charkha
Jayanti. The reason why you take an interest in observing the day is
not that you are my kinsman but so that the charkha which is as dear
to you as it is to me may gain impetus in your vicinity. In the sluggish
atmosphere that prevails today this is an arduous, maybe even a rather
dreary task. But faith can make a difficult task easy and a dreary task
interesting. May your faith make the people around you see the
power of the charkha.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8507. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

543. LETTER TO J.P. BHANSALI
September 29, 1936
CHI. BHANSALI,

It is very good indeed that following Mahadev’s advice you
gave up the idea of coming to me and hiding yourself as in a cave.
Your cave is there. Listen to another bit of advice. For the boil in your
arm-pit, perhaps plain earth will not suffice. You should let ordinary
poultice be applied to it. I see no reason why it should not maturate.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

544. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM K. JERAJANI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

September 29, 1936
BHAI KAKUBHAI,

You have given me good news. Samples of the exercise books
412

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

are good. It will be all to the good if people do not forget khadi.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 10838. Courtesy: Purushottam
K. Jerajani

545. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
S EGAON, W ARDHA

September 30,1936
CHI. AMTUL SALAAM,

Your letter is full of fancies. You listen neither to your brothers
nor to me. Why a cottage? Why a visit of Ooty? You ought to improve
your health in Bomaby. One’s mother’s home is the true cottage. I
would have to hang my head if Dr. Shah did for money what he
would not do on the strength of my letter. I advise you to accept his
treatment and understand that he does what he thinks right. After the
nose has been attended to, you may certainly take homoeopathic
treatment if you want to.
Your Urdu letters have certainly not gone astray. I have of
course replied to them. Mehrtaj will pursue her studies at Vakil’s
school there. Lali has gone to the High School at Panchgani. All will
go well if you keep up your patience. The Rajkot climate is good if
you should choose to go there. Balkrishna, who is staying there for
the present, finds it good. I went through your letter myself.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 353

546. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
September 30, 1936
CHI. LILA,

There is no end to your lila1 . Yesterday you wrote, “We shall
talk it out when we meet,” and today you write to me that there is no
letter from me. And what a bad hand you have written! It is all right if
1

Play, sport, especially of God

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

413

you do not go to Rajkot just now. Go there when we go to Kashi and
from Rajkot join us at Ahmedabad when we leave the place. Isn’t that
what you want?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11487

547. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
[About September 1936] 1
CHI. MUNNALAL,

I cannot understand why there was no news yesterday.
Hearty congratulations to both of you for the termination of
mutual non-co-operation. This news has removed a heavy burden of
anxiety from my head. Let the co-operation grow from day to day. I
hope to get much work from both of you.
I will inquire from the doctor why he did not come yesterday.
More kudos to Balwant Singh for progress in the production of
butter. It is one more step forward that Prahlad, Govind and Rajaram
have started taking butter-milk there. Everything will be all right if we
hold our patience. I will inquire if anyone needs butter-milk here. I
will procure the Ramayana for you. You need not try to secure it.
Now I know that letters and newspapers were sent from Maganwadi
yesterday also but they could not be forwarded from the bungalow. It
would be better if someone brought them here. It seems necessary to
spend some money over this arrangement. Now it is exactly
fiveo’clock. Neither Sadashiv nor Prahlad has arrived. Sadashiv has
already taken letters, and newspapers from Maganwadi.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 8595

1

From the contents, it is evident that the letter was written about this time;
vide “Letter to Munnalal G. Shah”, 9-9-1936

414

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

548. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

October 1, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,

I was glad to have your little note saying the toothache was over.
I shall anxiously await the Dentist’s report.
The unbreakable thermos has arrived after all. Let us see when
that too shares the fate of the others.
More than half the apples were quite uneatable. Evidently they
have now become too delicate for transport. Is there any fun in
wasting money like that? Why not put to my credit all the money you
thus save. It may then be used for buying good fruit as and when
needed. That is a sporting offer that should appeal even to an idiot ! ! !
I dare not give you more time just now as I have to attend to
Nanavati1 who is laid up with fever whose kind I do not yet know.
Love
R OBBER
From the original: C.W. 3746. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6902

549. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
October 1, 1936
CHI. PREMA,

I have both your letters. Yesterday I got your last letter. Day
before yesterday I had to write ‘no’ to Achyut Patwardhan. Narandas
had invited me for Rentiya Baras.2 But I could not accept it. Would
you then wish me to make an exception in your case? You must
understand that from the point of view of our ideals it is good for
Khan Saheb to refrain, for the present, from going out for public
speeches, etc. Slowly we are getting to know each other. Am I then
relieved?
1
2

Amritlal Nanavati
Gandhiji’s birthday according to the Vikram calendar

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

415

I will be able to answer your earlier letter only at leisure. At the
moment I have too much work.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Try to find some women worker; persuade Khurshedbehn.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3788

550. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
October 1, 1936
CHI. MARY,

Just before retiring, this is merely to acknowledge your two love
letters giving me very cheerful titbits.
My love to you both.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 6068. Also C.W. 3398. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

551. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
[Before October 2, 1936] 1
CHI. MAHADEV,

I didn’t at all like your returning after having arrived so late in
the day. However, I did not have the courage to insist on your staying
over, with the result that both of you were quite exhausted and
reached at 11 in the night. I would not wish to ask anyone to stop over
and sleep for the night in this weather. Nanavati’s fever persists. It is
not malaria; it may be typhoid. There is no need to send a doctor
from there; I hope to cope with it.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11497

1

416

Vide “Letter to Mahadev Desai”, 2-10-1936
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

552. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

October 2, 1936
CHI. AMTUL SALAAM,

I am replying to your letter as soon as I have got it. I enclose a
letter 1 also to Vadud2 , from which you will see what my advice is in the
matter. I do not write more as I am in a hurry. You should act
thoughtfully in your interest. You have a number of ailments. The
trouble with your nails requires immediate care. It is better to follow
Dr. Shah’s advice regarding your nose. If, however, you wish to
undergo homoeopathic treatment, take that too there. There are many
doctors in Ahmedabad and also in Rajkot, no doubt. I would suggest
Rajkot if you definitely do not like Wardha. At Rajkot you will be
happy and have peace of mind. The question that always troubles me
is how to bring you peace and happiness.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 354

553. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
October 2, 1936
CHI. LILA,

You have seen how from being Lilavati you have become Lila.
Now before you become Lili I have to be worthy of it. If I were, I
would not have to argue with you. It is difficult to become a kinsman
without being a blood relation. About paper you may do as you think
fit.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9582. Also C.W. 6564. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar
1
2

The letter is not traceable.
Addressee’s nephew

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

417

554. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
S EGAON,

October 2, 1936
CHI. MAHADEV,

You may bring in a doctor, if you wish, to put your mind at rest.
It would be good if Amtul’s letter goes today. The rest when you
come. At present Rajendra Babu and others have gathered here.
Nanavati is still not free from fever but he is cheerful.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11489

555. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
October 2, 1936
CHI. MAHADEV,

Did you find the Kavishar judgment in the Times? Do they send
newspapers to Navin?—Harijan, Harijanbandhu and The Hindustan
Times? I think Kanti too has asked for them.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11490

556. REMNANT OF BARBARISM
We know by painful experience of what is daily happening in
India that there are husbands enough who regard their wives as their
property like their cattle or household furniture, and therefore think
they have the right to beat them as they would their cattle. But I was
unprepared for a judicial endorsement of the brutal habit till a friend
put into my hands a newspaper cutting reporting a decision of the
Sessions Judge of Madura recognizing the legal right of a husband of
beating his wife. Fortunately an English Judge on going through the
calendar detected this extraordinary Judgment of the Madura Sessions
Judge and issued notice to the accused husband to show cause. In due
course the case was heard by Justices Pandurang Row and K. S.
418

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Menon, whose judgement1 I make apology for quoting below:
... It is perhaps enough to say that though the learned Judge may be
entitled to have his own views on the subject in a private capacity, yet he was
not justfied in laying down the law in this manner from his seat on the Bench
declaring that the husband has the right of punishing his wife by beating her
for impudence or impertinence. No such right is recognized by the Indian
Penal Code and wife-beating is not one of the exceptions in the chapter of
‘General Exceptions’.
One can easily imagine the serious consequences of such a declaration
being made from the Bench by a Sessions Judge unless the declaration is
declared to be wrong and unfounded by this court. That is the reason why we
thought it necessary to state in unmistakable terms that the learned Sessions
Judge’s declaration of the rights of husbands in this regard has no foundation,
so that no one may rely upon that in future as any justification or excuse for
beating wives.

It has to be confessed with shame that even educated husbands
are not free from the belief in the right of husbands to treat their wives
as chattels and beat them whenever they feel the impulse to do so.
Would that this judgment would show them that such treatment of
wives is a remnant of barbarism.
Harijan, 3-10-1936

557. TEACHING OF HINDUISM
Referring to my recent articles2 on the English peace movement
led by Canon Sheppard, a friend writes:
I hold the view that independently of the context of the Gita and the
preliminary conversation between Arjuna and Shri Krishna, Hinduism does not
stand decisively for non-violence in regard to organized invasion. It would be
straining too much to interpret all out best scriptures in this way. Hinduism no
doubt holds the spirit of compassion and love as the very highest duty for
man.
But it does not preach what you or the pacifists preach, and it is no good
straining everything into an allegory for this object.

1

Of which only extracts are reproduced here.
Vide “God of Love, Not War”, 5-9-1936 and “The Law of Our Being”,
26-9-1936
2

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

419

I have admitted in my introduction1 to the Gita known as
Anasaktiyoga that it is not a treatise on non-violence nor was it written
to condemn war. Hinduism as it is practised today, or has even been
known to have ever been practised, has certainly not condemned war
as I do. What, however, I have done is to put a new but natural and
logical interpretation upon the whole teaching of the Gita and the
spirit of Hinduism. Hinduism, not to speak of other religions, is ever
evolving. It has no one scripture like the Quran or the Bible. Its
scriptures are also evolving and suffering addition. The Gita itself is
an instance in point. It has given a new meaning to karma, sannyasa,
yajna, etc. It has breathed new life into Hinduism. It has given an
original rule of conduct. Not that what the Gita has given was not
implied in the previous writings, but the Gita put these implications in
a concrete shape. I have endeavoured in the light of a prayerful study
of the other faiths of the world and, what is more, in the light of my
own experiences in trying to live the teaching of Hinduism as
interpreted in the Gita, to give an extended but in no way strained
meaning to Hinduism, not as buried in its ample scriptures, but as a
living faith speaking like a mother to her aching child. What I have
done is perfectly historical. I have followed in the footsteps of our
forefathers. At one time they sacrificed animals to propitiate angry
gods. Their descendants, but our less remote ancestors, read a
different meaning into the word ‘sacrifice’ and they taught that
sacrifice was meant to be of our baser self, to please not angry gods
but the one living God within. I hold that the logical outcome of the
teaching of the Gita is decidedly for peace at the price of life itself. It
is the highest aspiration of the human species.
The Mahabharata and the Ramayana, the two books that millions of Hindus know and regard as their guides, are undoubtedly
allegories as the internal evidence shows. That they most probably
deal with historical figures does not affect my proposition. Each epic
describes the eternal duel that goes on between the forces of darkness
and of light. Anyway, I must disclaim any intention of straining the
meaning of Hinduism or the Gita to suit any preconceived notions of
mine. My notions were an outcome of a study of the Gita, Ramayana, Mahabharata, Upanishads, etc.
Harijan, 3-10-1936
1

420

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 23-5-1935
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

558. HEADING FOR PROMISCUITY
Thus writes a young man:
You want everyone to become moral in order to change the world. I do
not exactly know what you mean by morality-whether you confine it to
matters sexual, or whether it covers the whole field of human conduct. I
suspect the former, because I do not see you pointing out to your capitalist and
landlord friends the great injustice and harm they are doing by making huge
profits at the expense of labourers and tenants, while you are never tired of
castigating young men and women for their moral lapses in sexual matters and
upholding before them the virtues of celibacy. You claim to know the mind of
Indian youth. I do not claim to represent anybody, but as a solitary young man
I beg to challenge your claim. You do not seem to know through what
environment the modern middle-class youth is passing, what with long spells
of unemployment, crushing social customs and traditions, and temptations of
co-education! It is all a conflict between the old and the new ideas, resulting
usually in the defect and misery of youth. I humbly request you to be kind and
compassionate to the youth and not to judge them by your puritanic standards
of morality. After all, I think every act, when it is performed with mutal
consent and mutual love, is moral whether it is performed within marriage or
without. Since the invention of contraceptives the sexual basis of the
institution of marriage has been knocked down. It has now become an
institution mainly for the protection and welfare of children. You will,
perhaps, be shocked at these ideas. I would here venture to ask you not to
forget your own youth when judging the present-day youth. You were an oversexed individual given to excessive indulgence, which seems to have created
in you a sort of disgust towards the sexual act and hence your asceticism and
the idea of sin. Compared to you, I think many young men of today are better
in this respect.

This is from a typical letter. To my knowledge the writer has
gone through several changes even during the past three months that I
have known him. He is still passing through a crisis. The extract
quoted is from a long letter which together with many of his other
writings he would gladly have me publish. But what I have quoted just
represents the attitude of many a youth.
Of course my sympathies are with young men and young
women. I have a vivid recollection of the days of my own youth. And
it is because of my faith in the youth of the country that I am never
tired of dealing with problems that face them.
For me morals, ethics and religion are convertible terms. A
moral life without reference to religion is like a house built upon
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

421

sand. And religion divorced from morality is like ‘sounding brass’
good only for making a noise and breaking heads. Morality includes
truth, ahimsa and continence. Every virtue that mankind has ever
practised is referable to and derived from these three fundamental
virtues. Non-violence and continence are again derivable from Truth,
which for me is God.
Without continence a man or women is undone. To have no
control over the senses is like sailing in a rudderless ship bound to
break to pieces on coming in contact with the very first rock. Hence
my constant insistence on continence. My correspondent is right in
saying in effect that the coming in of contraceptives has changed the
ideas about sexual relations. If mutual consent makes a sexual act
moral whether within marriage or without, and by parity of reasoning
even between members of the same sex, the whole basis of sexual
morality is gone and nothing but ‘misery and defeat’ awaits the youth
of the country. Many young men and women are to be found in India
who would be glad be free from the craving for mutual intercourse in
whose grip they find themselves. This craving is stronger than the
strongest intoxicant which has ever enslaved man. It is futile to hope
that the use of contraceptives will be restricted to the mere regulation
of progeny. There is hope for a decent life only so long as the sexual
act is definitely related to the conception of precious life. This rules
out of court perverted sexuality and to a lesser degree promiscuity.
Divorce of the sexual act from its natural consequence must lead to
hideous promiscuity and condonation, if not endorsement, of
unnatural vice.
Since my own experiences are relevant to the consideration of
the sex problem, let me just warn the reader who has not read my
autobiographical chapters against drawing the conclusion that my
correspondent has drawn about my sins of indulgence. Whatever overindulgence there was with me, it was strictly restricted to my wife. And
I was living in a big joint family where there was hardly any privacy
except for a few hours at night. I awoke to the folly of indulgence for
the sake of it even when I was twenty-three years old, and decided
upon total brahmacharya in 1899,1 i.e., when I was thirty years old. It
is wrong to call me an ascetic. The ideals that regulate my life are
presented for acceptance by mankind in general. I have arrived at
1

However, Gandhiji actually, took
Autobiography” sub-title “ Brahmacharya- I”

422

the

vow

in

1906;

vide

“An

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

them by gradual evolution. Every step was thought out, wellconsidered, and taken with the greatest deliberation. Both my
continence and non-violence were derived from personal experience
and became necessary in response to the calls of public duty. The
isolated life I had to lead in South Africa whether as a householder,
legal practitioner, social reformer or politician, required, for the due
fulfilment of these duties, the strictest regulation of sexual life and a
rigid practice of non-violence and truth in human relations, whether
with my own countrymen or with the Europeans. I claim to be no
more than an average man with less than average ability. Nor can I
claim any special merit for such non-violence or continence as I have
been able to reach with laborious research. I have not the shadow of a
doubt that any man or woman can achieve what I have, if he or she
would make the same effort and cultivate the same hope and faith.
Work without faith is like an attempt to reach the bottom of a
bottomless pit.
Harijan, 3-10-1936

559. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

October 3, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,

I was delighted to hear that you were examined by Dr.
Deshmukh even though it was after daylight. Let us hope you will
profit by his prescription.
S[hummy]’s antipathy to nature-cure is either a simple pose or
simply due to prejudice born of ignorance. Ansari always appreciated it.
How I would love to have you with me even in your bad health
and nurse you to good health! But you must not be impatient. No one
can get out of his or her limitations whether external or internal
without patient and persistent striving.
I fear your fretting over this eczema is due to the temporary
disfigurement. What vanity, if my surmise is right. Your will certainl
have to come to me to shed it. And here at least you won’t be
conscious of the spots or any such thing. Here you won’t have the
society of your peers. Anyway this continual brooding over the
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

423

ailment worries me. I want you to be above it. Can you do it? Make a
brave effort and forget the wretched thing.
Of course, when I say nothing about myself you should know
that I am well. But I have a sick companion to nurse. He is Nanavati—
a first-class worker and good singer. He was in chagre of the kitchen
in Maganwadi. He seems to have a mild attack of typhoid. He is
simply on orange juice or honey and hot water. He has hip-baths and
enema daily. He is keeping up his strength and is quite cheerful. I
expect he will be free in seven days. This is the fifth day. As you
know, I love nursing. It is no strain on me. Pyarelal is in charge of the
kitchen. He is a sleepless giant.
Sardar is due here today.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3747. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6903

560. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
October 3, 1936
CHI. AMTUL SALAAM

Yesterday I wrote to you in a great hurry. Today also I am in a
hurry. Nanavati, beset by fever, lies in bed before me. I have wrapped
him in a wet sheet. I would not approve of your going to Trivandrum
for improving your health. The climate there cannot be said to be
good. Nor would the food there quite agree with you, and an expert
doctor may not be readily available.The place, moreover, is so far
away for you that you should go there only after improving your
health. I have no objection to your going there to meet Saraswati after
you have recovered. I have already told you what you should do. As
for Kanti, he always has my blessings.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 355

424

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

561. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
October 3, 1936
CHI. MAHADEV,

I am sending with this some telegrams. Any news of Sardar?
Motihari perhaps has no telegraph office.
I am sending the letters also.
I will send away Jawahar from here at 10 o’clock since on
account of illnesses here I shall not be in a position to provide meals
to anybody tomorrow. You will of course be arriving here tomorrow.
I proceed on the assumption that Sardar will certainly reach this
afternoon.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Ask Kumarappa or Bharatan to read the telegrams so that no
mistake is left. Kanu should despatch the telegrams, post the letters
and make the required copies, if Mahadev is already on his way here.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11491

562. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
October 3, 1936
CHI. DEVDAS,

I see your pain in Ba’s letter.1 I was already aware of hers. But
what is unavoidable you should not worry over2 . Besides, no one can
say what part, knowingly or unknowingly, I or we both parents might
have played in Harilal’s fall, and to what extent. The saying ‘the
quality is in the seed’ contains a whole Shastra. There is a similar
proverb in Gujarati, “As the banyan so its fruit, as the father so the
son.” When such thoughts occur, I don’t feel like finding fault with
Harilal. What is the use of being angry with myself? I know how
lustful I was then. I do not know anything else. But who can
1
2

To Harilal Gandhi
Reference to Bhagavad Gita, II. 27

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

425

understand the inscrutable ways of God? We can only deduce
principles from well-known illustrations.
Let me know if you have received any comments on Ba’s letter
whether through public or private correspondence.
How are you? Are you making any progress?
How is Lakshmi? Is Ba happy? Or is she annoyed? How is
Manudi?
Kanti has plunged into his studies.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2037

563. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
October 3, 1936
BA,

There has been no letter from you lately. Have you been ill? If
so I hope you are recovered by now. Mirabehn is better. She is of
course weak. She has no fever. Nanavati, who has some fever still, is
likely to be free from it in a couple of days.
I read your letter in the newspaper. What made you write it?
Your letter has prompted an Englishwoman to write to you.
Understand the letter with the help of Devdas and ask him to write her
a reply. Lilavati comes here from time to time with Mahadev. Things
are going on fairly well.
All of you there, I expect, are now all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2038

564. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
October 3, 1936
CHI. PRABHA,

Your letter brings tears to my eyes. On the one hand, I think that
what you say about milk and fruit is true, while on the other hand, we
cannot afford your falling ill for want of that kind of food. What is
426

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

more, any saving thus effected would be spent in paying the expenses
of the doctor and the medicines in case you fell ill. So difficult is
dharma. It is not proper for me to send you the extra money nor
proper for you thus to take more milk and fruit. I must keep my
peace having said that you should, if somehow it is possible, take more
milk and fruit. God will protect you. Who am I to worry on your
account?
You are quite right in saying that you do everything after
consulting me. You are also right in saying that you do it in
obedience to my command. If your dharma to do what you have been
doing is clear to me, how can I give you an order to the contrary?
And, how can I arrange to pay you Rs. 25 as long as you remain
occupied with your own family? Hence, I have decided to obtain
another Rs. 25 also for Jayaprakash and have even given instructions
to send it. You should of course take full rest, and also do a little
walking. I expect you are not taking oils and spices, and that you take
whole-wheat flour. What leafy vegetable can you get? Is the jaggery
that you get good?
I have written to you about myself earlier. I am on milk, fruit
and vegetables. I have not started taking chapatis for fear of fever. I
have not been weighed recently, as the necessary arrangements do not
yet exist. Ba is still with Devdas, and Manu too.
What else would I tell Father about you? He praised your nature
and was pleased with you. Yes, I shall reach Kashi1 on the 24th and
leave it on the 26th for Rajkot. After paying my respects to
Narandas’s parents, I shall go to Ahmedabad and after staying there
for three days, to Segaon. You aren’t likely to come to Kashi, are
you?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3483

1

Gandhiji was to open there a Bharat Mata Mandir at the invitation of
Shivprasad Gupta.
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

427

565. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
October 3, 1936
CHI. LILA,

It seems you expect a letter from me every day since I have got
you into the habit. I never said that I would write to you daily. It just
happened that I did so because I wanted to comfort you. Do you still
need that support?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

566. TALK WITH JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 1
[October 3, 1936] 2
That is why we have made you the King Canute so that you may
do it better than others3 .
J AWAHARLAL NEHRU: But is there no better way? Must you do all these things
yourself?

Who else is to do it? If you go the village nearby, you will find
that out of 600 people there 300 are ill. Are they all to go to the
hospital? We have to learn to treat ourselves. We are suffering for our
own sins. You must have seen in the series of articles Pyarelal has
written on the water problem in Bengal that we have brought on all the
diseases like malaria, cholera, and the rest ourselves. How are we to
teach these poor villagers except by personal example?
Harijan, 10-10-1936

1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
Mahadev Desai mentions in his “Weekly Letter” published in Harijan,
17-10-1936, that Jawaharlal Nehru along with Sardar Patel visited Segaon on this
date.
3
Nehru had compared Gandhiji’s insistence on nursing the patients himself
to that of King Canute’s attempt to stop the tides.
2

428

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

567. TALK WITH AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI 1
[After October 3, 1936] 2
If you feel like going because you think it would please your
parents better if you were in the hospital or under Kakasaheb’s roof,
you should certainly go. I can ask for a stretcher at once and have
you shifted. But if you think of going out of consideration for me, let
me tell you that you will be untrue to me. No son would think of
leaving his father out of consideration for him. The father himself
would feel deeply hurt if he whispered a suggestion of that kind. And
no consideration is needed. I can get any amount of help here, I know
that I can nurse you back to health as clearly as I knew that I should
nurse Ba back to health when she was at death’s door in South Africa,3
or as clearly as I knew that I should pull my son Manilal through his
enteric which lasted for 42 days.4 The doctors in both cases gave me
grave warnings and said the responsibility for their deaths would be
mine. But I was as ready to sacrifice them as I was anxious to save
them and careful to nurse them. Well, God tried my faith, but He also
gave me the strength to stand the trial. I may tell you, as you are a
brave man, that I am not afraid to lose you, if it should come to it, but
I know that I am doing all that is needed to pull you through. If,
therefore, you will decide to leave me out of pity for me, you will be
untrue to me and to yourself. I am making this so clear to you
because we are satyagrahis, we have to weigh the motives and springs
of action of everything that we do, and we should deceive neither
ourselves nor others.
Nanavati had no difficulty about answering: “I am thinking of going only
because of you. I feel that I should not be the source of so much worry to you.
Otherwise I know that nowhere else in the world am I going to get better nursing and
more loving attention”. And he elected to stay.

Harijan, 17-10-1936
1

In his “Weekly Letter” Mahadev Desai introduces this as follows: “[Amritlal
Nanavati’s] condition has been apparently giving us all some anxiety, and
Kakasaheb and I and other friends thought that he should be removed to the hospital,
both in order to relieve the congestion and lighten Gandhiji’s task and anxiety as
also to place the patient within reach of medical treatment. When we went with the
proposal Gandhiji was perfectly agreeable to his removal but he insisted on making
one or two things clear.”
2
As reported by Mahadev Desai
3
Vide “ An Autobiography”, sub- title “ Kasturbai’s Courage”
4
Vide “ An Autobiography”, sub- title “Settled in Bombay”
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

429

568. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

October 4, 1936
CHI. KANTI,

Your letter reached Wardha yesterday evening and came to my
hand this morning. You must have received the telegram I
immediately sent just for the peace of your mind even though it is
Sunday.
I shall not write at length as I am sitting between two sick-beds.
Balwantsinha and Nanavati are in the grip of fever.
You are in a painful situation from which you will no doubt free
yourself. Have patience and courage. You should refuse politely but
firmly to see her, saying that you have orders from me. I am writing1
to her also not to see you at all and not to annoy you. For fear of the
nuisance she may cause you, you do not have to go to Ahmedabad
where too she is likely to follow you. I have myself suggested to her
that she might go to Ahmedabad or to Rajkot. I have told her not to
go to Trivandrum while she is unwell.2 Even if she follows you
everywhere, you will be free from her only be refusing to see her.
However, if you otherwise like the idea of going to Ahmedabad
you may by all means go. You may stay with Maganbhai and Diwan
and Ballubhai will welcome you [to their school]. Devdas will pay the
fees. I only want you to pursue your studies in peace, without any
obstacle. I shall see that you do not have to suffer annoyance from
Amtul Salaam. Write to me from time to time. Take no step in a
hurry.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7307. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

569. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
October 4, 1936
CHI. AMTUL SALAAM,

I have today a very painful letter from Kanti. He says that you
do not leave him alone and waste his time talking for hours about
1
2

430

Vide the following item.
Vide “Letter to Amtussalaam”, 3-10-1936
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

useless things though he has not a minute to spare. I had told you
specifically that you might see Kanti only if he wished it. I have
forbidden Kanti to see you, and I am forbidding you also to see him.
Kanti’s future will take care of itself; you may not bother about him.
Just get well as early as possible.
Tell me in your letter that you will not see him any more. Write
to me whatever you want to say to him. You must have got my letter
of yesterday.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 356

570. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

October 5, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,

Two baskets with apples and one containing honey have arrived,
also the two glasses.
I do hope Deshmukh will see you again.
Of course I am not going to strive with you any more about
meat. I do want to respect your scruples.
I await your experience of the S.A. Delegation1 .
Don’t expect long letters from me just now. I have two serious
cases and now Mira is down again. She does not know how to regulate
her diet. Who does? Idiots may.
Love.
R OBBER
From the original: C.W. 3595. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6404

1

South African Delegation; vide “Letter to Purushottamdas Thakurdas”,
13-9-1936
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

431

571. LETTER TO J. H. HOFMEYER
October 5, 1936
DEAR MR. HOFMEYER,

It was a great pleasure to receive your warm letter.1 I do hope
you are having a profitable time in this land and that you find the
people you meet to be hospitable.
It will be a matter of regret to me that although you have so
many friends in India, we may not meet at all.
You may be interested to know that the paper I am writing on is
hand-made written with a village reed pen. You ought not to leave
India without seeing some typical villages. Of course it is foolish of
me to expect you to visit Wardha and Segaon and glance at the
humble effort we are making.
With kind regards to you and fellow members.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G ANDHI
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

572. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
October 5, 1936
CHI. MAHADEV,

I am sending whatever could be got ready. My article is still
unfinished, and I must detain Kanu for an hour more if I wish to
complete it. I shall, therefore, send it with somebody who may happen
to come or with a special messenger tomorrow morning or this
evening. Amidst patients I am carrying on as best as I can for the day.
Workers from Kathiawar may be invited if Sardar gives 12th/13th to
Narandas. Intimate to him whatever Sardar wishes.
Blessings from

BAPU

1

432

Vide “Letter to Purushottamdas Thakurdas”, 13-9-1936
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[PS.]
Somebody will be going there as I shall of course have some
post to send.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11494

573. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
October 5, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,

You should not expect any letter from me for some time now.
Mira and Nanavati have been seriously ill. I have to spend the whole
day in nursing them. Jamna1 too should not expect a letter from me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8508. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

574. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
October 5, 1936
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

I got your explanation concerning Jaisukhlal. I am completely
satisfied. I have received complaints against you from many sources. I
have however not believed most of them. Those that I believed I have
discussed with you. I shall send your letter to Jaisukhlal. 2
I have received a long reply from Chandulal. Reply to his letter
directly. Or better still, send your letter to me so as to avoid the
necessity of making a copy.
It seems certain now that we shall be meeting, although I should
like to run away on the very same day that I arrive there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5541

1
2

Addressee’s wife
Vide “Letter to Jaisukhlal Gandhi”, 6-10-1936

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

433

575. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
[October 5, 1936] 1
CHI. MAHADEV,

Just as I was about to send with Prahlad all the accompanying
matter having finished it all, I got your gun-shot; but it has misfired. I
had a hearty laugh when I read your message. Nowadays we don’t
have any occasions to laugh. I had no idea that my Note 2 contained
any criticism of you. Even when Mirabehn drew my attention to it I
told her, “What can Mahadev do?” Cancel my Note and send in
yours. Why should I have to insist on anything? For my part I can
manage even if nothing is issued. A similar mistake has occurred in
the current number too, which I am not at all going to correct. I have
in me a far greater strength to let such things pass than you might
imagine. However, you are after all a poet and that too with a sensitive
skin; so you are easily upset. Where can I have the remedy for this? It
would have been enough, had you only asked, ‘How if we draft the
Note like this?’ Why did you have to make an issue of it? But that is
that. “Old habits die hard.” It is useless to plead on Lilavati’s behalf.
Her coming up here has crowned her faults. However, why didn’t she
promptly take charge of him 3 when he fell ill? The fact is she is
crushed under the weight of sympathy she gets.
Look here, don’t you take offence again. If I haven’t said the
right thing you should correct me but never feel hurt.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I am sending McArrison’s speech, which may be included as it
is after deleting the first paragraph.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11492

1

Vide “Letter to Mahadev Desai”, 5-10-1936; “Letter to Mahadev Desai”,
6-10-1936 and “Letter to Lilavati Asar”, 6-10-1936
2
Perhaps this is a reference to “A Correction”, 10-10-1936
3
Prabhu Dayal, vide the following item.

434

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

576. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

October 6, 1936
CHI. MAHADEV,

I am sending herewith the letters that I wrote last night. Even
today Nanavati’s fever has not gone and he is noticeably weak.
Balwantsinha has normal temperature. Mirabehn has suffered an
attack again and her illness seems to go deeper. She has some kind of
a sore on her nipple. She is bed-ridden.
The last blow dealt by Lilavati has hurt me very much. I never
thought that she would forget anyone lying ill before her eyes. My
impression has been that you encourage her. Why didn’t you yourself
put her in charge of Prabhu Dayal? Kanu had been keeping a vigil
throughout the night. Bhansali happened to visit at 3 in the morning
and he then relieved Kanu. This much Kanu told me when I wrote to
him and inquired. He also said that she wasted a good deal of your
time talking. But I felt she had a number of complaints. You should
learn them from her as I don’t have the time and am, moreover, as
good as dumb. She will not benefit from undeserved pity. Her trouble
lies deep within her. She herself says that she has never submitted
herself to any rules.
Again my stock of envelopes is exhausted. Why not send me
eight packets of them? I have had to send a few letters without
envelopes. I need no postcards.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11493

577. LETTER TO S. AMBUJAMMAL
October 6, 1936
CHI. AMBUJAM,1

Your letter. I am getting a regular supply of fruit from you. You
must let me know the price. If the fruit is dear I must not have it from
you. I must get it from where it is cheap even when it is a gift. I have
1

This is in Hindi.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

435

three sick-beds just now.
Your argument is both sound and unsound. I would have the
hospital in preference to superstition. But there is a middle way—to
have intelligent home treatment and then await the result with
confidence. Even kings have to die. Thousands die in hospitals. It is
all a toss. The key to life is in God’s hands. We can but explore His
laws and obey them. And I do not expect a time when every villager
who wishes can have good hospital treatment. But I do expect a time
when he can have at his door competent advice. But even that time is
far off.
I hope you are all well.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: Ambujammal Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library

578. LETTER TO NANDALAL BOSE
October 6, 1936
DEAR NANDLAL BABU,

Just a line to thank you for your letter and to tell you I shall be
at your disposal on 13th instant. You will please wire to Mahadev
when you are coming.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G.
S HRI NANDLAL BOSE
C/ O R ABINDRANATH TAGORE
6 DWARKANATH TAGORE LANE
JORASANKO , C ALCUTTA
From a photostat: C.W. 9778

436

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

579. LETTER TO GLADYS OWEN
October 6, 1936
MY DEAR GLADYS 1 ,

I was glad to receive your good wishes.
You are a bad woman to have free days just when I am to be
away. I leave here on 22nd and do not return till 5th Nov. I am in
Kashi on 24th and 25th [October]2 . Tell me when you can come
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 6193

580. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
October 6, 1936
MY DEAR RAIHANA,

Your touching letter. Of course I am with you and Mother.
When I received your first letter I could not understand how Mother
was reconciled to a mixed union at this stage of our society. I am sure
Hamida is too good to resist Ammajan and you. I expect you have
seen my letter3 to her. I am now corresponding with Shankerlal and if
necessary with Prabodha. Please keep me informed of developments if
any.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: S.N. 9650

1
2
3

The addressee was a teacher in the Theosophical Society School, Banaras.
The source has “November”.
This is not traceable.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

437

581. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
October 6, 1936
CHI. LILA,

Is it any less lila that from Lila you have become Lilavati again?
What would have been my plight had you become Lili? 1 I like your
decision. It was beyond your capacity to remain with me. I hope you
will always carry my blessings with you wherever you are. You may
certainly stay away from me but don’t forget me altogether.
Your reason for leaving me is unusual. What do you ask to be
forgiven for? Have you committed any fault? If you have, the proper
atonement would be not to abandon me but to cling to me with
greater resolve, to conduct yourself in conformity with it and show
greater watchfulness. However, a correct decision, though taken for a
wrong reason, is always welcome, and this applies to this decision of
yours. Consult Mahadev in taking whatever step you may choose to
take. Yesterday you could see my anger, but couldn’t you see my
unbearable pain—couldn’t you read my love?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9349. Also C.W. 6624. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

582. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL GANDHI
October 6, 1936
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,

I am enclosing with this the reply to your complaint. For my
part, I fully believe Chhaganlal’s denial, and my impression is that
Narandas too believes it. Anyway he does not support you. Now it
remains for you either to prove your charges against him or cleanse
your own mind in the matter. Chhaganlal has his faults but, I trust, he
is free from the ones you attribute to him.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./III
1

438

Vide”Letter to Lilavati Asar”, 2-10-1936
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

583. LETTER TO H. L. SHARMA
October 6, 1936
CHI. SHARMA,

I have two patients on my own hands. They are both having
fever. The temperature of one of them has now been below 99o for the
last eight days and the other patient is at Simla. What will you do
about such patients? Anyway there are many other patients as well. I
hope everyone at home is all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah
Varsh, facing p. 260

584. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
October 6, 1936
CHI. MAHADEV,

Herewith I am sending whatever post I could write as I don’t
know when I shall be able to finish it. Lilavati’s decision is quite
correct although she has added insult to injury. She will never be
happy with me. She needs to be guided for her future.
It seems the situation here has become very critical. Mirabehn
has suffered a severe relapse. Her fever this time looks dangerous.
Nanavati too is certainly not well enough. Inwardly he also seems to
be losing hope. God’s will be done.
The letters include a postcard to Nandalal Bose. It would be
good if it goes with late fee paid.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11495

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

439

585. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

October 8, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT AND REBEL COMBINED,

Your own blank paper returns to you duly filled. The
magnifiers are already being used for various purposes examining
patients as well as snakes. I have two live specimens again.
Yes, Nanavati is with me—three beds going—Mira, Nanavati and
Balwantsingh. The latter is free from fever. The other two cases are
obstinate. Fever persists with ups and downs. They all require careful
nursing. They are under water treatment and get fruit juices. No cause
for anxiety as yet.
Of course there is as much illness in Simla as elsewhere and I
was told when I came there for the first time that the place was
notorious for venereal diseases. But those who choose can certainly
benefit by its mountain air. Therefore if the climate agrees with you,
you should stay as long as Shummy wants you to. Village work in
Manganwal1 will take care of itself meanwhile.
When I go to Ahmedabad I shall see what can be done about the
women’s differences. But I hold out no hope. I know the state of
affairs there. From what you tell me it seems that you never received
any letter from Mridula2 in reply to yours. And she told me definitely
that she had written to you inviting you to her house.
Khan Saheb says it is enough that the girls seek and like your
company. He says he is grateful to you for the open invitation you
have given them. He does not want or expect you to give them
lessons. Khan Saheb was never ill. I suggested an examination of his
teeth and sent him to Nagpur. One tooth was extracted.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3748. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6904

1
2

440

A place in the Punjab
Mridula Sarabhai
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

586. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
October 8, 1936
CHI. LILA,

I have your letter. You would be stable if you stayed with
Mahadev; going to Nagpur is lack of stability. Therefore you had
better stay with him; or at the Mahila Ashram if you can bear with the
life there, though I am afraid you will not be able to. Be sure I have
not given you up for lost.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9350. Also C.W. 6625. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

587. TASK BEFORE HARIJAN SEVAKS
Ever since the inauguration of the Harijan Sevak Sangh, the
central organization has been feeding, very properly, the provincial
branches. But the time has certainly arrived for the branches to stand
on their own and be self-sustained, even though it may be at the
sacrifice of part of their programme. The work in each province, and
for that matter in each district or taluka, should be an unequivocal
demonstration of active savarna support. For the chief mission of the
Sangh is to touch the savarna heart and change it. Supposing the
central organization had collected from two or three reformers a crore
of rupees, and with it established branches all over India to cover it
with schools and hostels for Harijan boys and girls, it would not have
hastened the day of the doom of untouchability. For the savarna
heart would remain as stony as ever. Supposing conversely that
without the cost of a single pice, by some stroke of good fortune the
savarna heart was changed and untouchability became a thing of the
past, the whole object of the Sangh would be fulfilled. For in that case
every public school, place of worship and other institutions would be
open to Harijans precisely on the same terms as to caste Hindus. That
day may be far off or much nearer than many people expect. Anyway
that is the goal of the Harijan Sevak Sangh and never the opening of
separate schools, wells, temples and the like for Harijans and
consequent perpetuation of untouchability. At present these things are
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

441

undoubtedly done, but they are done only as a means to THE end.
They have become necessary because the savarna heart is slow to
change.
The growing number of reformers must not sit still and make
protestations of removal of untouchability from themselves. They
must demonstrate that change by their visible conduct. The spending
of their purse for the Harijan cause is a tangible proof of the change
and therefore an essential part of the programme. But immediately it
becomes a corner confined to a few individuals who salve their
conscience by liberal donations, it ceases to be a token in the manner
indicated by me. Hence it becomes a matter of duty for the Central
Board to invite the attention of the branches to this fundamental part
of the programme and for the branches to appreciate it and prepare
the way to becoming wholly self-reliant. Indeed the burden has been
progressively thrown on provincial boards of financing their own institutions. But the time has come for definite and decisive action in the
direction.
This change to full self-reliance will never come unless all the
workers realize that this is essentially a religious movement. We are a
nation spending lavishly for causes which the masses believe to be
religious. One has only to go to the places of pilgrimage to have an
ocular demonstration of the fact. A study of the history of religious
endowments will reveal the tragic story of fortunes being entrusted to
them by credulous millions without ever caring to know how they
were spent. It is enough for people to believe that they pay their mite
to a cause which in their opinion is religious. Harijan workers have a
cause that is wholly religious in the best sense of the term. If they have
a living faith in it, if they do not move mountains they will at least get
from their surroundings enough for the institutions in their charge.
Harijan, 10-10-1936

588. A CORRECTION
I know that Harijan contains almost always printer’s errors. It
would be tedious, if not even pedantic, to issue corrections every week.
In the difficult circumstances under which Harijan is being issued, the
problem before me is to cease publication or to continue it in spite of
mistakes recurring with unfailing regularity. I have chosen the latter
course whilst a sufficient number of subscribers tolerate the errors.
442

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

But the issue of 26th September contains two howlers in the article
headed ‘The Law of Our Being’ which need correction:
Last para, II. 2-4.
I NCORRECT:
“The writes seems to poohpooh the idea of honour derived
from individual and national gain.”
CORRECT:
“The writer seems to poohpooh the idea of honour devoid of
individual and national gain.”
Last para, II. 6-7.
I NCORRECT:
“There is no question for one of self-destruction, voluntary or
otherwise.”
CORRECT:
“There is no question for me of self-destruction, voluntary or
otherwise.”
The errors seem to have originated in Wardha, the typist having
misread the manuscript sent from Segaon.
Harijan, 10-10-1936

589. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

October 10, 1936
MY DEAR REBEL,

I have been obliged to neglect you these few days. My only
comfort is that the correspondence has been practically suspended—
all my time being given to the sick ones. I can’t say they are yet on
the mend. The temperature is slowly rising daily. There is no danger
as yet. But both are very weak. They will be all right if they have
enough vitality. Anyway neither they nor I have any anxiety. The
C.S.1 was here today to examine them. They are having only watercure.
I have just finished your broadcast.2 Your experience of the
village is excellently reproduced. The other part is not well balanced.
1
2

Civil Surgeon
To village women

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

443

You say “old systems... have perished.” If they have, where is
the cause for revival? But you yourself show later that they have at
most decayed, not perished.
And then you begin at the wrong end—build roads and houses!!
Who can do the thing? Surely sanitation comes first.
We were agreed upon it too!! And you began with it. But how
should [you] be Idiot, if you remembered such a very simple fact?
And then you have not made a sharp division between what people
can and should do themselves and what the State can and should. You
do not want more than this, do you? And you are in no need of
praise. Of that you must have had a surfeit.
If you are only permitted to pass two months with me, I should
hope to reconstruct your body. This eczema is certainly a source of
anxiety from the medical standpoint. But I do not despair. Of course
you won’t go to Ahmedabad, if you are not quite fit.
The apples of late have been quite hardy and all in a good
condi[tion]. You should tell me what the fruit costs each time and
what the railage costs. The honey too came in quite safely. I finished
the whole yesterday. It was quite nice.
I have not yet heard from Lionel.
Khan Saheb has all the fruit he can eat. I get apples from you
and Ambujam—more than I need—mosambis from Bombay and
oranges locally.
Love.
TYRANT

[PS.]
Khan Saheb leaves for Delhi on 14th.
From the original: C.W. 3749. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6905

590. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
October 10, 1936
CHI. DEVDAS,

I am gald to learn that the whole line of thought has been Ba’s
own. She certainly has that power, and the letter is indeed a good one.
Dr. Mahmud writes a long letter which I am enclosing. Read it and
1

1

444

Vide “Letter to Kasturba Gandhi”, 3-10-1936
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

tear it up. Am I to understand from the rather long letter you wrote
that you can now write fairly well? The two patients take a good deal
of my time, which I certainly like to give.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2035

591. LETTER TO V. L. MEHTA
October 10, 1936
BHAI VAIKUNTH,

I heard only yesterday that Lallubhai1 has fallen ill again.
Things are bound to be all right where workers like you are available
to look after him. I hope he is better now.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I spoke to Shankerlal about the Agriculture Department.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1363

592. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
October 10, 1936
CHI. PRABHA,

I have your letter. Of course, I do wish you to see me at Kashi,
but the wish ought not to conflict with dharma. If you cannot be
freed, or if you can be freed but Jayaprakash does not want it, then it
would be improper for you to come and my desire that you should
would be against dharma. I should be glad if, subject to these two
conditions, you could come. I might even wish that you could be by
my side at present ! However, the wish would go contrary to dharma as
your dharma at present is to do whatever service you can by
remaining there. Both Mirabehn and Nanavati are laid up here. Both
are very ill. You could be very helpful to me on the present occasion;
but how can I entertain such a wish? That way, even Mahadev would
prove helpful here. But wishing his presence here is against dharma.
1

Lallubhai Shamaldas, addressee’s father

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

445

He has before him the dharma I have assigned to him. Such is the case
with the others too. Have you now followed me on the question of
wishing? Does God let us fulfil all our wishes?
I have been keeping good health amidst all this work. Such work
has remained part of my nature to this day. God has always kept me
well while nursing the sick. I hope that this time too it will be so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3484

593. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
October 10, 1936
CHI. LILAVATI,

Your handwriting, instead of improving steadily, becomes worse.
I asked Kanu1 if you had been nursing Prabhudayal and he said that
you had not gone anywhere near him. How is that? Can you find no
time to serve a person when he falls ill there? You seem to be
spending a lot of your time only in talking. I ask that you quietly
apply yourself to the work entrusted to you. I am pained.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

594. LETTER TO PRABHUDAYAL VIDYARTHI
S EGAON,

October 10, 1936
CHI. PRABHUDAYAL,

I have your letter. I was all the time having news of you. Never
eat peanuts. When one is weak it is usual to have dreams. You need
not worry about it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 11703
1

446

Second son of Narandas Gandhi
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

595. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

5 a.m., October 11, 1936
CHI. LILA,

I warn you lest you should prove all my fears right. Do you
think you are free from all restraints since you are released from the
obligation of coming here? Have you stopped copying out the slokas?
You do not mean that you will never be able to come here, do you?
He who used to play on the dilruba is prostrate.1 Shall I send it to
you? Let me have a list also of your other belongings which are here
so that I may send them to you, or you may come and collect them.
Do as you think fit.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9351. Also C.W. 6626. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

596. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
October 11, 1936
CHI. AMTUL SALAAM,

I went through your letter carefully. Stick to your decision.
Don’t leave Bombay. Ask of me any help you need. Remain cheerful
and do everything to recover your health. You may come to Segaon
after recovering your health. Three-fourths of the people in this
village are Harijans. Those attending on me are Harijans and they are
enjoying themselves. You may serve them to your heart’s content. Is
there anything more that you want? Remember, however, that you will
have to go back to Bombay if you fall ill. You are yourself
responsible for your falling ill. Have your nails attended to.
You must have got my letter of yesterday regarding Kanti.
Kanti, you and I will all be happy if you willingly act on it. If you had
been thinking of God as you have been thinking of me you would
certainly have got your wish fulfilled. Do it even now. Forget me,
forget Kanti and forget Saraswati. Think of God alone. This in no way
means that you should abandon me or I should abandon you.
1

The reference is to Amritlal Nanavati, who was ill.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

447

However, it does mean that you should give up your exaggerated
notions of me and trust only God. You will surely have peace and
happiness if you do this.
There is sense in weeping for God while remembering Him, but
in weeping for a man one only hurts one’s eyes. You would stay
patiently where you are if you would follow my advice.
Tell Vadud I am not writing to him separately. Even this I am
writing after 8 p.m.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 357

597. TALK WITH STUDENTS OF MARWADI VIDYALAYA1
October 12, 1936
Gandhiji asked the students to be worthy of the Principal, Sjt. Aryanayakam,
who at the invitation of Jamnalalji had agreed to take charge of the institution. He
had a distinguished career at Cambridge and London and later on at Santiniketan, and
he has come to Wardha with his wife who is a great Sanskrit scholar and a
distinguished graduate of the Banaras University. She has been placed in charge of the
Mahila Vidyalaya,1 also a creation of Jamnalalji. Gandhiji asked the boys to be not
only worthy of the Principal, but of Jamnalalji... [He said:]

He had long ago broken the bonds of sect and community and
creed, and though the institution owed its existence to donations from
Marwadis only—that is what gave it its name—Jamnalalji would not be
satisfied until it was thrown open to boys of all castes and creeds. He
has no interest until he had found his way to destroy its exclusive
character, to throw it open as much to the Harijans as to any other
section of Hindus, as much to the Mussalmans as to the Hindus. He
has no room in his heart for untouchability, and he had none at all for
any feeling that Hinduism is in any way superior to any other
religion. He has helped Muslim institutions no less than he has done
Hindu ones, and he has several Muslim friends whom he treats as
blood-brothers. I would ask you students, Hindus and Muslims, to
take a leaf from Jamnalalji’s book and to have the same regard for
one another’s religion that Jamnalalji has, and to treat one another as
1
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”. The Principal and the
students came to see Gandhiji on his birthday which according to the Vikram calendar
fell on October 12.

448

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

blood-brothers. And let me tell you one thing which you may not
know, and perhaps many do not know. This passion for removal of
untouchability and freedom from communal feeling as well as equal
regard for all religions, Jamnalalji does not at all owe to me. It is not
possible for anyone to transfer his conviction to another. All one can
do is to help another to manifest the conviction which is already in
him. But in respect of Jamnalalji, I could not take the credit for having
even helped him to arrive at or to manifest those convictions in his
life. He had the convictions in him long before he met me and he had
lived up to them. It was these inner convictions of his that brought
him and me together and made possible the close co-operation in
which we have been able to work together for so many years. You
children have to be worthy of a man like him.
Harijan, 24-10-1936

598. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
October 13, 1936
CHI. AMTUL SALAAM,

I got your letters, but the nursing of patients here leaves me no
spare time. Nanavati and Mirabehn have been suffering from typhoid
fever; somebody has to keep awake by their side day and night. I can
hardly write a letter. By all means do go to Mecca Sharif if you get
the required facilities and if your health permits.
If you recover your health somehow, it would indeed be an
achievement. I continue to be well enough, though I have not taken
my weight. There aren’t the means.
I am enclosing a letter to Dr. Jivraj.1 I am writing regarding Dr.
Gilder also.
Do not expect more letters for the present.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 358

1

The letter is not available.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

449

599. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
S EGAON,

October 13, 1936
CHI. MAHADEV,

When you have already placed your head at my feet, where is
the question of forgetting?
I think that the article1 should go as it is. We had better let him
proclaim his dissatisfaction rather than anticipate his argument. There
is no harm in letting the article go as it stands, for it is, according to
me, a fine thing that the same old argument should have occurred to
me involuntarily even today though I had forgotten the subject.
Haven’t I said before that I have no matter with me? I am certainly
not sorry that I can spare no time from amidst the patients. All is well.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
You should derive full satisfaction from the services assigned to
you.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11496

600. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
S EGAON,

October 14, 1936
CHI. PREMA,

I got your letter. You are flying high. All right fly. But see that
you don’t get exhausted and fall.
To my right and left are Mira’s and Nanavati’s sick-beds. Both
are suffering from typhoid.
I have practically stopped attending to correspondence. But you
certainly have my blessings for your camp which you have asked for.
I hope that being the servant you are, you will go on serving silently
and without ostentation and regard service as its own reward.
I don’t know anything about my having to go to Bombay. Even
1

450

Vide “Ahimsa Conundrums”, 17-10-1936
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the visit to Ahmedabad has become uncertain now. I cannot leave
Mira in her present condition. Nanavati, one may say, is on the road to
recovery.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10385. Also C.W. 6824. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

601. MESSAGE TO MILL-OWNERS’ AND LABOUR
ASSOCIATIONS 1
[Before October 15, 1936] 2
The Mahatma says he is surrounded by two typhoid fever patients,
nevertheless he is prepared to give two hours on October 21. He has to depart for
Benares on 22nd if the patients are well enough.

The Bombay Chronicle, 16-10-1936

602. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
S EGAON,

October 16, 1936
CHI. MAHADEV,

Nobody brought the papers yesterday. I am sending two letters
and also the telegrams herewith. Nanavati shows much improvement
today; his temperature in the morning was 990 . Mira, too, may be said
to have improved; she too had 101 0 after several days. Lilavati’s
clothes which I sent with someone must have reached there. Is there
anything more left? If so, she should write to me so that I might find
it. There is an entirely discoloured and tattered sari with big holes—is
it hers? How is Bhansali?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11498

1
The Mill-owners’ and Labour Associations had requested Gandhiji to fix a
convenient date for hearing the wage-cut question.
2
The report is date-lined “Ahmedabad, October 15”.

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

451

603. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
October 16, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,

Since I have a free moment. I must utilize it for a few words to
you. The patients are doing well, though fever persists. How many
villagers can go to hospitals?Both would have gone to the hospital if I
had wanted them to. I could not do so without denying my past and
the recent article1 I wrote. So long as God wants me to work on this
earth in this body, He will take care of it. Not all the physicians in the
world can save me when the hour strikes.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3596. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6405

604. LETTER TO VITHAL L. PHADKE
October 16, 1936
CHI. MAMA,

I cannot recall your earlier letter. For the present there is a
mountain of letters before me as I lie between two sick-beds. As things
stand at present, I am not to stay in Gujarat for more than three days.
Sardar has the control of the programme there. You should write to
Sardar though at the moment I don’t feel like going anywhere. The
rest if I find out your letter or if you write again. How should I be
able to say at this stage who in Ahmedabad would take how many
minutes?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3836

605. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
October 16, 1936
CHI. MAHADEV,

You seem to be deeply immersed in work. The fever still persists
though it is slowly subsiding.
1

452

Vide “Of My Recent Illness”, 19-9-1936
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

When can I go through the pile of the Sahitya Parishad papers?
I am returning it after removing those about the constitution and the
Chandravadan matter. If there is anything else that I should read, send
it. Send me a copy of my programme. Very probably I shall have to
go direct to Rajkot for a day, and from there Sardar may perhaps take
me straight to Nadiad and I may reach Ahmedabad on the 30th
afternoon or evening. Do mention that my Rajkot visit is only a
family visit. From the present trend of things I see that you will be
required to stay on at Segaon. The final programme will be known by
Monday.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11499

606. AHIMSA CONUNDRUMS
A college professor and two representatives of a class of fifty
students write: 1
As you are no doubt aware, the Intermediate Prose Text-Book, Pearce and
Aryatna’s Models of Comparative Prose, used in most Intermediate Colleges
in India this year, contains a selection about five pages long from your book
The Story of My Experiments with Truth. The selection is entitled “Ahimsa”,
and contains your discussion of this most challenging principle and its
application to our lives.
The fifty students in my prose class, and I, their instructor, have been
spending several class periods studying and discussing the above essay....
At one point, however, both the students and I, their instructor, have
been unable clearly to understand the precise nature of your views. I refer to
your statement about the conduct of a votary of ahimsa in case of war,
particularly the following passage2 : “When two nations are fighting, the duty
of a votary of ahimsa is to stop the war. He who is not equal to that duty, he
who has no power of resisting war, he who is not qualified to resist war, may
take part in war, and yet whole-heartedly try to free himself, his nation, and
the world from War.” A little further on (discussing three methods of recourse
in case of the European War, for yourself): “... or I could participate in the war
1
2

Only extracts are reproduced here.
Vide “ An Autobiography”, sub- title “ Miniature Satyagraha”

VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

453

on the side of the Empire and thereby acquire the capacity and fitness for
resisting the violence of war. I lacked this capacity and fitness, so I thought
there was nothing for it but for me to serve in the War.”
We should be deeply and humbly grateful if you would expand and clarify
this subject and your past and present views upon it...

I do not know that I need have suppressed the name of the
college or the names of the signatories. The learned professor has sent
me a stamped envelope for answer. This presumes a personal reply.
But I have only limited time at my disposal especially when I am
nursing two precious patients. I would not miss my weekly talk with
the readers of Harijan. I am, therefore, with apologies to my
correspondents, combining two purposes to save my time.
The question raised in the letter is of very great importance and
has always caused me the greatest difficulty, not much in deciding
upon the action to be taken at a given moment but in justifying my
conduct in terms of ahimsa. For the same action may outwardly be
taken by the believer and the unbeliever. At these times the motive
alone decides its quality.
At the time of writing I have neither the text-book nor the
original in Gujarati of which the text is a translation. But I have a
recollection of what I wrote. What is more, so far as I am aware, my
views on ahimsa, as I held them, remain the same today.
The general proposition that I laid down in the quotation was
derived from my conduct during the European War. I had thrown
myself whole-heartedly into it at the peril of my life—not because of
the risks attendant upon serving at such times, but because at the time
I was attending drills and camps I was suffering from pleurisy and
general weakness as I had hardly regained the strength I had lost
during an exhausting fourteen days’ fast I had undertaken two or
three months or before the War. I believed then the British Empire to
be on the whole a system beneficial to humanity. I had dreamt of one
day converting it to methods of peace instead of war for the sake even
of its own existence though in another form. But I was fully conscious
of my limitations. I was an insignificant atom ineffective for resistance
to its general policy. Whether I joined the War or not, I was helplessly
party to it, inasmuch as I ate the food protected by the British fleet. I
was enjoying personal liberty too under its protection. If, therefore, I
helped the War somehow or other, I felt that for me as a votary of
ahimsa, it was better to take a direct part in it so as to enable me the
454

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

sooner to end War. It is quite possible that all this was argument of the
weak and that if I felt that war was an evil, I should have gone away
from it even if it meant starvation or a rebel’s death. Anyway I did not
think so then, nor do I now.
It is wholly beside the argument what my attitude would now be,
seeing that I no longer believe in the Empire as on the whole a
beneficent power.
To illustrate my answer, let me take another argument from my
own life. Even when I was a little urchin my heart and intellect
rebelled against untouchability. But being then an insignificant
member of the family I acquiesced in their conduct towards Harijans
which I should not do now. Needless to say, I could not then have
argued out my conduct. My personal belief did not appear to me to
be inconsistent with my living in the family.
Indeed life is made of such compromises. Ahimsa, simply
because it is purest, unselfish love, often demands such compromises.
The conditions are imperative. There should be no self in one’s
action, no fear, no untruth, and it must be in furtherance of the cause
of ahimsa. The compromise must be natural to oneself, not imposed
from without.
I should not at all wonder if my answer has given no satisfaction
to the professor and his pupils. I must be pardoned for the constant
reference to my own actions. The reason is obvious. I am not a wellread man in any sense of the term. All I know of ahimsa is in the first
instance derived from my own experiences and experiments carried
on in broad daylight in a humble scientific spirit and in the fear of
God which is Truth.
Harijan, 17-10-1936

607. LETTER TO PRABHUDAYAL VIDYARTHI
S EGAON,

October 17, 1936
CHI. PRABHUDAYAL,

You must not eat rice and dal. Take only milk and fruit. I am
sending six Mosambis from here. Eat them. Take milk. It is your duty
to get well quickly. Do not take cereals.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 11701
VOL. 69: 16 MAY, 1936- 19 OCTOBER, 1936

455

608. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
S EGAON,

October 18, 1936
CHI. LILA

I understand your lamentations. I would have sent for you even
today if I could have the courage. However, have patience. When I
return from my journey, I shall accommodate you at Segaon.You
may also stay at Segaon if I leave Mahadev behind. If both of us go,
you may go to Rajkot and join us the day we leave Ahmedabad.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9583. Also C.W.- 6555 Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

609. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS PODDAR
October 18, 1936
CHI. RAMESHWARDAS,

I like the scheme sent by Parnerkar for the Goseva section at the
Exhibition. I think it would be proper for you to shoulder its expense
around Rs. 1,300 to Rs. 1,500 if it is not too much for you. Not more
than Rs. 5,000 is to be taken from the Congress Committee for the
entire exhibition.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 173

610. LETTER TO SYED MAHMUD
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

October 19, 1936
MY DEAR MAHMOOD,

Two precious patients have stopped all my usual correspondence. I am wirting this under great stress. I have not much to say in
defence of my attitude on Hindi-Hindustani. I fear you do not know
the whole history. Moulana Abdul Haq has given a distorted picture. I
456

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

entered the Hindi Sammelan not only a year ago. It is now nearly ten
years that I was first invited to preside at their conference.1 I pleaded
then for recognition of Urdu as part of Hindi. The views I then
pronounced I held even before 1908. I went a step further and got a
definition accepted at the Indore Conference a year ago which
included Urdu speech and script. 2 That is the fons et origo of my
crime. Did you know all this? If you did, what is it you do not
understand? It is a fault that I could not accept for that meeting either
Hindi-Urdu or merely Hindustani? I have dealt with that question
fairly fully in Harijan.3 Please read these and then if you do not feel
convinced, write to me fully and I shall strive with you. I should
despair of myself if I cannot carry conviction to you on an issue
which appears to me to be perfectly simple.
Love.
BAPU
DR. M AHMOOD , B AR-AT-LAW
C HHAPRA
BIHAR
From a photostat: G.N. 5079. Also the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary.
Courtesy: Narayan Desai

611. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
October 19, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,

I am returning the pamphlet after correcting it. I shall give you
the exact date in my next letter.
It would not be correct to see Jawaharlalji4 during the lecture. I
would certainly see him if he would grace us with a visit. The timings
both for the spinning sacrifice as well as for the prayers, are quite all
right. Arrange Khan Saheb’s interview with the Muslim brethren. You
may arrange another gathering for meeting all the people, if possible,
that is, if all wish it. I shall not be able to attend it. There is no harm if
1
Gandhiji presided over the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan at Indore on March 29,
1918; vide “Statement of Transvaal Indian Case”, 16-7-1909 sub-title “A Brief
History of the Struggle”
2
Vide “Letter to H. S. L. Polak”, 29-9-1909
3
Vide “Hindi or Hindustani”, 9-5-1936 and “ Hindi or Hindustani-II”,
16-5-1936
4
A Jain sadhu

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

457

nothing can be arranged for Khan Saheb. Whatever is done shoud be
spontaneous.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8509. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

612. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
October 19,1936
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,

I liked the letters from you both. Manilal, it was your dharma to
have pointed out my shortcoming which you did, nor was it
indecorous. Filial piety consists in respect for parents in spite of one’s
knowledge of their shortcomings. In that test none of you fail, barring
Harilal. But the fault is not entirely Harilal’s. For how could we hold
him responsible for what he does or says under the influence of
drink?
I shall not write a long reply as I am surrounded by patients.
Mirabehn as well as Nanavati are better today. I do not repent for the
kind of education I gave you brothers. I should have been glad if I
could have done more along the same lines. I offered you at the altar
of my sacrifice, not unmindful of your well-being but knowing it
fully well. Nor do I believe the result has been unhappy. There was a
special purpose in sending Sorabji1 . He achieved it too; we could have
seen it had he lived. As for Chhaganlal2 , he was sent to prepare himself
for a specific task. It miscarried because he was threatened with
tuberculosis and left England abruptly. How do you forget about
Ritch3 and Polak4 ? There was a purpose in sending them and there was
one also in not sending you brothers. By the time you had reached
the age of discretion my infatuation with Western education had worn
away. It was not that I did not provide you such education for want of
money. The Doctor’s 5 purse was always at my disposal. When Ritch
was sent I too was in a position to meet the cost. However, I purposely
moulded you in the school of experience and drafted you for public
1
2
3
4
5

458

Vide “Letter to Harilal Gandhi”, 16-10-1912
Chhaganlal Gandhi
L.W. Ritch; vide “Speech at Farewell to L. W. Ritch”, 9-3-1905
H.S.L. Polak
Dr. Pranjivan Jagjivan Mehta
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

service. I understand how you might regret the want in view of the
present times, but that does not change my thinking. Don’t you know
that I have done the same with the boys and girls that came to be
placed in my charge here too? I am not worried that Radha, Keshu,
Shankar, Bal, Jayanti, Kanti, etc. rebelled against it. I see in it the force
of the current stream and not any defect in my thinking. The best of
workers here have no Western education, and men like Mahadev who
have it are with me not because of it but because of their other
qualities. I do of course make use of Mahadev’s education by the
way, but that is of no great significance. It may be my efficiency.
Mahadev will himself admit that Maganlal was more valuable than he.
How many educated men do you think there are in my army? To
what position would I have been reduced had I depended on them?
Don’t you know that I had a hand in sending Joseph, both the
Godfreys and Bernard? Where are they? What have they achieved? I
also know the art of producing barristers and doctors, but it has borne
no fruit. I think you brothers were spared the wild goose chase. Why
can you not see my non-violence in the exceptions I made in the cases
of West 1 and Sam 2 ? Had I not been generous to them, how could I
have accommodated them and others like them? You know that I
encouraged Kitchin3 to eat meat when he was ill and, as a result, he
gave it up altogether. In the Boer War I myself served wine to the
stonebreakers in my corps and served bidis to others. Discretion is
very necessary in doing all such things. Generosity to others is as
necessary as strictness with oneself.
I have dilated far more than I had intended. You need not send
anything to Kanti as Devdas has undertaken to pay all his expenses.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4858

1
2
3

A.H. West
Govindaswami; vide “Letter to Chhaganlal Gandhi”, 13-5-1905
H. Kitchin

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

459

613. LETTER TO BALVANTRAI K. THAKORE
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

October 19, 1936
BHAISHRI BALVANTRAI

1

I am at present busy nursing patients. I finished your letter little
by little yesterday evening. I have no idea what I would be able to do
in Ahmedabad. I regard myself quite unfit to preside over the
Conference. Being a Mahatma, perhaps, I am supposed to know all
things. Would you send your suggestions in the form of an
amendment? I should be glad to meet you, but how could there be
such an occasion? After all I am not visiting Bombay. I Shall be
wandering into Ahmedabad.
I expect you are in good health.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS

[PS.]
Your letter shall remain confidential. I have destroyed it.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9238

614. LETTER TO BENARSIDAS CHATURVEDI
October 19, 1936
BHAI BENARSIDAS,

Prabhu Dayal gave me the news of your brother’s death. You
are a man of knowledge and therefore hardly need to be consoled. We
all have to go the same way as Ramnarayan, the only difference being
in time. Why then should we grieve over it? But with the passing away
of our loved ones, our responsibility increases and yours has grown
heavily. God alone is our true help at such times. He alone can guide
you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2516

1

460

(1869-1952); Gujarati poet and man of letters
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

615. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
October 19, 1936
CHI. MAHADEV,

I can say that I have done a fair amount of writing today. Baba
has done a great thing. Mira’s temperature today has been 98 o and it
has not risen so far. She however continues to be restless. There is no
release of saliva in her mouth. It remains sticky and she has no wish to
take glucose or even fruit. There is something else too. I want no
oranges or lemons. Munnalal made a mistake in sending for the
lemons.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a Photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11500

616. LETTER TO PRABHUDAYAL VIDYARTHI
October 19, 1936
CHI. PRABHUDAYAL,

It is good you wrote. I am enclosing a letter to Pandit
Benarsidas. Send it to him.1 Take milk and fruit as necessary. Do not
work beyond your strength.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a Photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 11677

1

Vide “Letter to Mahadev Desai”, 19-10-1936

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

461

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I

LETTER FROM JAWAHARLAL NEHRU1
May 25, 1936
About women and W. C. I began by saying that I had received some protests
for their non-inclusion. I would have welcomed even stronger protests for I wanted
our women to be more aggressive and to insist on their rights, both political and
social. I invited them to organize themselves to press for their rights which they were
not likely to get if they waited for the goodwill of their menfolk. About the W. C. I
said that it was formed under peculiar circumstances when I had to play an unusual
part. The hayadar (self-respecting) president would probably have resigned and I
being behaya (shameless) stuck on even though the majority of the Congress had
decided against me on some vital issues. This peculiar position was reflected in the
formation of the W. C., which certainly could not be under the circumstances of my
choice although technically I was responsible for it. When various viewpoints have
to be represented, the lesser ones go to the wall. You are perfectly right in saying that
I was responsible for the exclusion of women. But yet this is not the whole matter. I
would have liked to have a woman in the Working Committee but as the matters
developed and a number of other names appeared and stayed, there was little choice
left. Ultimately I felt that it mattered little to me who was in the W. C. and who was
not. The Committee as it took shape was not my child, I could hardly recognize it and
to some inclusions, as you know, I reacted strongly. Yet ultimately I submitted but
inevitably with the thought that I was surrendering to others and almost against my
own better judgment. At the very first meeting, almost without provocations, the
inherent conflicts appeared. The whole purpose of a president nominating a
homogeneous committee was thus frustrated.
File No. 32/12/36, Home, Political. Courtesy: National Archives of India

1

462

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 27-9-1935
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX II

LETTER FROM VALLABHBHAI PATEL TO RAJENDRA
PRASAD1
May 29, 1936
I have received your letter... of 24th with Kripalani’s letter to you enclosed
with it.
His 2 Bombay speeches have disturbed me much. I am not worried so much
about khaddar. It will recoil on him if he goes on in this fashion. But I cannot stand
the attitude of injured innocence he has assumed regarding the nomination of
members in the W. C., particularly his statement regarding omission of a woman.
Rajaji feels equally strongly.
Bapu had written to him on these points and the extracts of his reply and the
last letter of Bapu to him on the subject of the W. C. nominations are enclosed
herewith for your information. Re: khadi—he says the report is not correct and he had
issued a correct version of his speech next day though. I have not seen it reported
anywhere. His reply about the W. C. is bad enough and I don’t think I can swallow it.
It is a humiliating position in which I for one would not agree to stay at any cost. He
was expected to act honourably with his colleagues but he cannot do so or if he feels
that we are a drag on him we must clear the way for him.
I am going to Bangalore tomorrow where I am staying till the 12th and then
we disperse for our respective places. Hope you are doing well.
File No. 32/12/36, Home, Political. Courtesy: National Archives of India

1
2

Vide “About ‘Conversion’”, 28-9-1935
Jawaharlal Nehru’s

VOL. 69 : 16 MAY, 1936 - 19 OCTOBER, 1936

463

