1. A CASE FOR FASTING

1

One who describes himself as a Harjian worker writes a long
letter of which I give the following substance:
With the Chairman of the local Harijan Seva Sangh and a sister I
went the other day to a village. We were in a bullock-cart. On the way
the Chairman and the sister were engaged in conver-sation exchanging jokes. The sister seemed to be fatigued and lay in the Chairman’s lap. This familiarity somewhat startled me. On returning we
were to take the train to the city from which we had started. We had to
wait for a few hours at the station. The Chairman and the sister occupied a bench. I sat on the platform ground. It was a moonlight night. I
had a mind to test them, for I thought that there was some-thing
wrong with them. I, therefore, pretended that I would sleep and told
the Chairman: ‘We have yet to wait for some time. If you don’t mind
I would sleep for a while. I am tired. Will you wake me up when the
train arrives?’ Hearing this, the Chairman seemed to be delighted over
my proposal and he readily permitted me to sleep. I lay down and
pretended that I was in deep sleep. In order to make sure that I was
asleep he called out. Not having any response from me he felt free to
take what liberties he liked with the sister. They quietly went into a
cluster of trees near by. After some time they returned and when the
time for the train drew near, he woke me up. I did not like this
indecency between the Chairman and the sister. I recalled your 21
days’ fast and the rea-sons which you had given for it. I took some of
the co-workers into confidence. They tackled the Chairman, but he
put on a bold front and not only denied the charge of indecency but
charged me with jealousy and designs upon the Chairmanship of the
local organi-zation. What am I to do in the circumstance ?
I have omitted unnecessary details from the letter. let not the
reader try to guess the names of the actors and the scene of the tragedy. Idle curiosity should be avoided. I am drawing public atten-tion
to my correspondent’s letter to serve as a warning to all Harijan
workers. Let us, therefore, examine it.
In the first instance, the correspondent did wrong in wishing to
test his companions and exposing them to temptation. It is always a
bad business to become detectives over co-workers; and if, without
1

The Gujarati original appeared in Harijanbandhu, 8-10-1933.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

1

wishing it, we discover any moral or other lapses on their part, our
business should be not to gossip about them, but immediately to draw,
in a gentle manner, the companions’ attention to them. Had my
correspondent, when he first scented danger, put the Chairman on his
guard, he would have saved him from the lapse, assuming, of course,
that the correspondent has given a true version of the tragedy. But,
instead of taking the straight course, he adopted the crooked course of
testing the couple. We are all fallible human beings ever exposed to
temptations. Fortunately for us, ‘there’s many a slip ’twixt the cup
and the lip’. Very few are saved from succumbing to temptations, if
there is no external interruption. There is no certainty that the correspondent himself, exposed to the same temptation, might not have
fallen as the Chairman is said by him to have fallen. Indeed, had he
been a little thoughtful, a little considerate towards his companions, he
could have prevented their complete fall, by giving up the pretence of
sleeping and gently pulling them up. I know cases in which such
warnings have proved the saving of people. Thus, it seems to me that
this Harijan worker signally failed in his duty towards his friends and
fellow-workers. He has, however, asked the question, what he could
do. I do not propose to answer the question from his standpoint. Evidently he is anxious to know, not how the parties can be brought to
repentance, but how they can be exposed, and the charges against him
disproved. It is none of his business to expose his companions, as it
was none of his business to tempt them to fall but his business now is
undoubtedly to give a private notice to the chairman that he would
have to undertake a fast till the Chairman confesses his guilt, or if that
is beyond his capacity, to undertake a fairly prolonged fast, so as to
bring home the guilt to the parties. Such a fast cannot be taken
publicly. It is highly likely that the Chairman and the sister will realize
the grievousness of their guilt, but it is not at all unlikely that they
might harden their hearts and ignore the fast. That ought not to be a
matter of any concern for my correspondent. He will have done his
penance for having made himself a detective over his friend and it will
be some relief to him from the oppression of the charge brought
against him of jealousy and ambition to become the Chairman of the
local Seva Sangh. It is hardly necessary to emphasize the obvious
truth that the fast, if it is at all taken, should be taken only if the
Harijan worker believes in its necessity and efficacy and if he can take
it with a clean heart.
It may be that the parties charged by my correspondent have

2

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

not erred. Let us hope that they have not. But I know that such errors
have occurred before now. Let the incident described here serve as a
warning to all workers. It furnishes, in my opinion, a clear case for
fasting. Harijan service is no sinecure; it is a movement for bringing
about a revolutionary change in the mentality of millions of human
beings. It is like walking on the edge of a sword and, therefore,
requires the greatest vigilance over self on the part of the workers.
Harijan, 27-10-1933

2. PREFACE TO “GITAPRAVESHIKA” 1
WARDHA,

October 8, 1933
This selection2 of shlokas for the Gitapraveshika was made last
year (1932) in Yeravda Mandir. My third son Ramdas was in the same
jail. The authorities permitted me to meet or write to him occasionally.
Ramadas used to read the Gita but could not understand it fully.
Ramdas does not lack bhaktibhava3 ; he has the shraddha4 too. I
selected simple and devotional verses from the Gita and sent them
over to him so as to help him. Ramdas liked the collection. I further
encouraged him by calling the selection “Ramagita”5 .
Baba Raghavdas6 happened to see the collection when it was with
Kakasaheb; he went through it and felt it would prove useful to
Harijan workers. With that in view he asked for my permission to
haveit published. Being no pundit myself I could not decide if the
collection was worthy of publication. Sjt. Vinoba, Kakasaheb and
Balakrishna7 of the Ashram were all here. All the three are devoted
students of the Gita. I told the Baba that I had no objection to the
collection being published provided the three Ashram inmates
1

The original in Hindi, published with the text by the Calcutta Shuddha Khadi
Bhandar, is not available.
2
In the following order : VI. 5, 6, 14, 29 to 32 and 47; VII. 7 and 10; VIII. 14;
IX. 22, 26, 27, 29 to 31, and 34; X. 8 to 10; XI. 53 to 55; XII. 15; XIII. 27; XVIII.
46, 61, 62, 66, 78; XI. 15, 16, 18 to 20, 38 to 40, 43 and 44
3
Attitude of devotion
4
Faith
5
Vide “Letter to Ramdas Gandhi”, 7-11-1932
6
A kisan leader of U.P.
7
Vinoba Bhave’s younger brother

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

3

approved of it. All the three had consultation among themselves and
advised me, with a view to increasing its utility, to omit three of the
verses and to add four new ones. The collection thus revised is now
presented to men and women workers as well as to other lovers of the
Gita. I hope—and it is also my intention—that the collection will be
read as an introduction and nothing more and that a study of the Gita
as a whole will be undertaken only after it had been fairly digested.
All the same it should be remembered that merely memorizing or
knowing the meaning of the Praveshika or [even] the whole of the
Gita is not going to help realize the atman. The Gita is to be put into
practice. When one has knowledge of its techincal phraseology and
has taken to heart its central idea of non-attachment, it becomes easier
to understand the Gita.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 9-9-1934

3. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
Unrevised

October 8, 1933

DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,

I have your letter about the amounts of Harijan fund received
by me. I have the account from Mathuradas. I am simply waiting for
Chimanlal who is expected to reach here shortly. As soon as he comes
I shall attend to the matter.
I have also your letter about the tour. Your second letter has
crossed mine. I am quite clear in my mind that the whole of the Central Provinces should be finished at once. I do not mind the cold
weather of the Punjab. Therefore it does not matter where I am during
the cold weather. Nor do I mind the hot weather. What you have to
guard against is the rainy season. Therefore, June and July should be
given to those provinces where the rains do not set in early.
I was considerably relieved as you must have been to find
Bakhale withdrawing from the Municipal contest. We will now discuss
with Mr. Kodanda Rao the principle underlying the advice that you
and I tendered. I have told him that I would welcome the discussion.
BAPU
S JT. A MRITLAL V. THAKKAR
GENERAL S ECRETARY, S. U. S.
BIRLA M ILLS, D ELHI
From a photostat : G. N. 1125

4

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

4. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
October 8, 1933
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,

I have your letter1 .
The difficulty you raise is there and it was in anticipation of it
that I suggested the formation of a trust board. My idea is that the
property should be held by these trustees permanently, under very
defined conditions, with the right even to sell. You and Thakkar Bapa
should be permanent members, irrespective of what happens to the
popular organization. This proposal disposes of the question from
which has arisen the larger one that I am not prepared to discuss in
this letter for want of time. Meanwhile I would ask you to study the
constitution of the All-India Spinners’ Association. We may postpone
the discussion till we meet, and seeing that I am here up to the 7th of
Novemeber, it might be possible for you to come, even if it be for that
one question.
You have referred to the proposed hostel in Delhi. In view of
our possessing the Ashram ground and buildings, do you think there
is any urgency for the Delhi proposal? Should we not wait and see
how the Sabarmati plan progresses before venturing upon another big
scheme? I am inclined to think that we ought to concentrate our attention upon making the Sabarmati scheme a thorough success and it will
tax the energy of many of us to make it so.
I hope you are keeping well. What about the nose? Weather in
Delhi ought to be very fine at this time of the year.
BAPU
C.W. 7938 and 7939. Courtesy : G. D. Birla. Also In the Shadow of the
Mahatma, pp. 126-7

1

Dated october 5, which, inter alia, read : So far we have no property. But by
the acceptance of your offer we will shortly be in possession of a valuable peroperty.
The question will thus immediately arise as to who will be the owner of this property.
Will it be the Harijan Mandal ? If so, then the Harijan Mandal would for all practical
purposes mean the persons by whose sufferance it exists and there is no such thing as
sufferance in our socitey so far. Therefore, we have to decide what sort of constitution
we are to have in future.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

5

5. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
October 8, 1933
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

Gopi is doing quite well. She is cheerful. I have written to
Gajanan.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original : C. W. 7939. Courtesy : G. D. Birla

6. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, WARDHA1
October 8, 1933
Till yesterday I had no idea that I would have to face a large
assembly like this, nor did I imagine that I would have to make a
speech. I cannot speak very loudly. Doctor friends have advised me
not to try it. That is why I have jotted down a few points. You are
aware that till the 3rd of August next year I wish to engage myself
mainly in Harijan work. I have tried to study Hinduism since my
youth and have endeavoured to shape my conduct according to what I
was taught in my childhood. I have studied the Hindu scriptures to the
best fo my ability. I have studied the sacred books of other religions
also with reverence. Right from my childhood I have believed that
untouchability as we know it today has no place in Hinduism and that
it is a great evil which has somehow entered it. Study and experience
have confirmed me in this view. I am convinced that Hinduism will
perish if we do not get rid of this evil of untouchability.
Removal of untouchability does not mean merely that we should
touch the people whom we regard as untouchables. Of course we
should touch them, whenever necessary, with love. But removal of
untouchability means much more than that. It means that we should
give up the feeling of high and low. In a sense the feeling of high and
low is found prevailing in all countries. But is cannot be said that this
1
Owing to his weak state of health Gandhiji himself did not speak. The
speech, which was in Hindi, was read out at the meeting. No Hindi report being
available, this has been translated from Chandrashankar Shukla’s weekly letter.

6

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

feeling is part of any religion. It is asserted that it is part of Hindusm;
but if we examine objectively the fundamental principles of Hinduism,
we can see that it too does not sanction such a feeling. It is true, of
course, that our daily conduct is strongly influenced by this notion,
and we have been taught to believe that it is a special feature of
Hinduism. One of the principles of Hinduism is that we should not do
to others what we would not like to be done to ourselves. In another
verse having the same meaning, it is stated that we should regard all
living creatures as we regard ourselves. How the feeling of high and
low crept into such a religion is beyond my understanding.
In other words, it is the duty of every Hindu to fulfil completely
the pledge that the leaders had taken on behalf of the Hindu
community on 25th 1 September last year at a meeting in Bombay
presided over by Malaviyaji Maharaj. I hope that all of you who have
come here will keep that pledge. It was categorically stated in that
Resolution that the Harijans have the same right as the other Hindus to
the use of public temples, public wells and public schools. When vast
numbers of caste Hindus undergo change of heart and we fully
appreciate and follow the dharma of compassion, not only will there
be unity between them and Harijans but we shall also live in amity
with followers of other faiths and the present antagonisms will
completely disappear. I pray to God that He grant us enough strength
to purify ourselves thus and that the evil of untouchability that has
crept into Hinduism be completely abolished.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 15-10-1933

1

The source has “24th”. The resolution drafted by Gandhiji and agreed upon by
other leaders at Poona on Spetember 24, 1932, was formally adopted at Bombay the
following day. Vide, “Resolution at the Hindu Leaders’ Conference, Bombay”,
25-9-1932

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

7

7. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
[Before October 9, 1933] 1
BHAISHRI VALLABHBHAI,

I got your letter only today. You will know from the papers that
my work is increasing. The blood-pressure has come down. It remains
160-100. And the weight has gone up to 103 pounds.
Raja is in Coimbatore. He keeps fairly good health. Lakshmi left
on Saturday. Krishnadas2 has accompanied her. While in Madras, he
will inspect the khadi work there. Lakshmi will pay a visit to Coimbatore. Devdas writes to me regularly. He seems to be doing well. He
does some reading.
Krishna (Nehru) will be married to Gunottam Hutheesing on the
20th in Allahabad. I am not attending the wedding. They don’t
expect me to do so, either. I have already written a letter giving my
blessings. You also should write.
Kishorelal will come here in two or three days.
Jamnalalji is of the opinion that Anandi should be betrothed. I
also feel that that should be done . . . . 3 She says, however, that she
does not wish to get married just now. But I think she will marry if I
advise her to do so. Let me have your views. If you can, see
Lakshmidas and ask him his views. I am writing to him.
. . 4 I have already written to Mani. Perhaps she may not come
even with Mridu5 .
Jamnalal is going to Bombay today for two or three days for
private work.
My tour will probably commence on November 8. I shall probably be accompanied by Thakkar Bapa, Chandrashankar, Mira,
Nayar, and Ramnarayan Choudhri.
Blessings to you and Chandubhai from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro–2 : Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 33-4
1

The date has been inferred from the reference to Krishna Nehru’s marriage and
Jamnalal’s visit to Bombay; vide “Letter to Chhaganlal Joshi”,18-9-1932
2
Chhaganlal Gandhi’s son
3
Ommissions as in the source
4
ibid
5
Mridula Sarabhai

8

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

8. TELEGRAM TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
WARDHA,

October 1, 1933
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
ANAND BHAWAN, A LLAHABAD
THANK GOD. HOPE

MOTHER

WILL

BE

WELL

ENOUGH

ATTEND

FORTHCOMING WEDDING IN GOOD HEALTH.

BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

9. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
WARDHA,

October 9, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I had your wire to which I sent a reply in the afternoon. I do
hope Mother will be strong enough to attend to the wedding.
I got today the accompanying from Saraladevi1 . I have told her
2
Indu is left free to do as she chooses and that she is not likely to
entertain any marrigae proposal as she is still studying. I have told her
too that I am forwarding the letter to you. If Indu was at all prepared
to consider a marriage proposal, I do regard Dipak 3 to be a good
match.
Hardikar4 and Kamala Chattopadhyay came in today. Hardikar
is suffering from fistula and would need an operation. I shall know
more tomorrow. Jamnalalji has gone to Bombay for helping a friend
who is in financial trouble. He will be back in four days.
My tour commences on 8th November, all being otherwise well.
I am having fair rest.
Kamala never writes nowadays.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library
1

Saraladevi Chowdhrani
Indira Nehru, addressee’s daughter
3
Son of saraladevi Chowdharani
4
N. S. Hardikar, founder and Secretary-General of the Hindustani Seva Dal
2

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

9

10. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
October 9, 1933
CHI. MARY,

I had full report yeaterday of your misbehaviour. The doctors
say you have a spleen. It points to a diet of milk and fruit and greens.
You are doomed to a course of quinine pills. I trust you will be all
right again in a day or two.
The Swami’s name is Shri Kuvalayanand, Santa Cruz, Bombay.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat : G. N. 6009. Also. C. W. 3336. Courtesy : F. Mary Barr

11. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
October 10, 1933
MY DEAR KUMARAPPA,

I have your letter.
Of course, you will take your time and put the affairs of your
sister in good order. I am here till the 7th of November. You have,
therfore, ample time.
Veena is expecting you in Ahmedabad so as to be able to give
you the treatment that you will need.
You will get the full hour for all that you might have to say
when you come here. Kakasaheb will be here for some days yet, but
may not be when you come.
Yours sincerely

BAPU
S JT. J. C. K UMARAPPA
“MANORAMA”
P ALLAMCOTTAH, (T INNEVELLY DIST.)
From the original : G.N. 10101

10

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

12. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
October 10, 1933
BHAI THAKKAR BAPA,

I also had a letter about Rohtak, and had read about the matter
in the papers too. Lala Sham Lal, thought he is in L 12 ahore, has
assured me that he will look into the matter on behalf of Rohtak,
expecially as he is minting money in Lahore.
We have no choice but to put up with Mr. Young’s antics. After
all, the axe can strike at the tree only if a wooden handle helps it.
You seem to have upset Mathuradas. I read a copy of his letter
to you. I wonder what you could have written. Whatever that was, I
know that Mathuradas is not at fault in the least. He is always very
careful about things. But he easily gets angry. Nobody should get
angry with old men like us who have grown up as slaves, even if they
blurt out anything thoughtless. But can we expect young people to
bear with old men ? Please, therefore, apply some balm. I shall of
course write to Mathuradas.1 A copy of the letter 2 to Dr. Bidhan is
enclosed. I have sent a copy of it to Devi Babu and also written to him
in Hindi.
I enclose the letter received frm Assam, and also a copy of my
reply.3
I see that I shall be confined here till November 7 at any rate. In
a way I like that, because slowly I am disposing of the work which has
accumulated and can give time to the visitors. Probably I shall also
regain more strength during the time. Jamnalalji had unexpectedly to
go to Bombay to help a friend, and so he might not have been able to
send you a draft of the programme here.
He will return within four days. If you leave out the C.P. 4 and
draw up another programme as I have suggested, you will be ready
with it sooner. The entire C.P. must be covered at one time. Our party
will include (1) you, (2) I, (3) Mirabehn, (4) Chandrashankar, (5)
Ramnarayan, (6) Nayar and anybody else whom you might bring with
1
2
3
4

Vide “Letter to Mathuradas Trikumji”, 11-10-1933
These are not available.
Ibid
Central Provinces

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

11

you.
Sastri wants to shift Harijan to Madras. His argument seems
convincing. He is rusting in Poona. It is, therefore, likely to be shifted
in about 15 days.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 1126

13. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI 1
WARDHA,

October 10, 1933
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have received your letters.
I can see that you do not want me to write anything to Gokhale
right now. I have seen Gokhale’s letter in the Chronicle today.
Your letter to Thakkar Bapa is full of anger. You seem to have
lost sight of one rule. You ought not to read in letters what isscored
off. And if you happen to read it, you ought not to read any meaning
in it. A person should be given a chance to modify his views. It is
sheer ignorance to attribute wickedness even to the most wicked
thought once it has been modified. The world would not go on in
peace even for a minute if we started throwing our views at one another. I think you have been unnecessarily angry. Thakkar Bapa deserves to be complimented on his alertness. Moreover, his age and his
dedicated service of so many years give him a right to say a great
deal. When he says something, there is no sting behind it. If there is
anybody’s mistake in this, one might say it is on my part. I have
written at this length because I would not like even a trace of anger in
you. 2
Now for the Ashram. I think you are mistaken in the matter. If
the Government does not take possession and we allow the land to remain untended it means we are harbouring a feeling of revenge. It
would be an unnatural situation. There was nothing to prevent the
Government from taking possession of the land and letting it lie
fallow. But on what ground can we allow the land to remain fallow if
the government does not take it over? In that case, why should we not
burn down our movable property? According to what you are saying,
1
Extracts from this letter appear in "Letter to Mathurdas Trikumji”,
11-10-1933
2
Vide also “Letter to Amritlal V. Thakkar”, 10-10-1933

12

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

those who burnt their crops acted wisely. I am convinced that the
Satyagraha Ashram will fulfil its purpose if the land is donated to
Harijans. This is of greater moment than if the land was to remain with
the Government. Even if it should go to the Government, we would
always want to claim it back in the end. But in this case, the Ashram
inmates gave it up for good and placed themselves in the hands of
God. If we examine the problem from this point of view, it would be
clear that the path adopted alone does credit to a satyagrahi. There has
been no place here for greed for money. It was merely a matter of
what was right, that is, of non-violence. The Government may well
want to turn this land into a wilderness, but we should not let that
happen if we can help it. If you are not convinced by these two
arguments, write to me again. It should not be difficult to convince
you in this matter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujara ti origin al: Pyarel al Papers . Nehru Memori al Museum and
Librar y. Courte sy: Belade vi Nayyar and Dr. Sushil a Nayyar

14. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL PAREKH1
[Before October 11, 1933]
I am grieved to learn that you have not succeeded in bringing
about conciliation. I am more grieved that the conciliation was obstructed by preliminary difficulties. I cannot decide, without hearing
both the sides, what information could be asked and what information
the mill-owners could not supply.
It is not necessary to refer such a question to arbitration. Mr.
Gulzarilal Nanda, Secretary of the Labour Association, saw me and [I]
told him that if I am asked to give my decision, I must have the arguments of both the sides before me. This can be done by written statements.
The Bombay Chronicle, 11-10-1933

1

President, Ahmedabad Mill-owners’ Association. He had informed Gandhiji
about his resignation from the Conciliation Board.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

13

15. LETTER TO PADMA
WARDHA,

October 11, 1933
CHI. PADMA,

I got your letter. I hope all of you are all right now. Give me a
description of the accomodation. My weight has now gone up to 103
pounds. My diet includes milk, fruit and vegetables such as gourd,
snake gourd, tomatoes, etc.
After a few days Anandi, Babu and Nirmala will leave for
Ahmedabad. At present there are about 40 girls here. The girls under
12 willingly got their hair cut yesterday. I have been trying to persuade the rest.
You cannot be blamed for the doctor having given you an injection of brandy. You did not drink the thing for pleasure. Moreover,
an injection of brandy is not as objectionable as a vaccine. I don’t
know any remedy for your complaint of the ear-drum. You should
show it to a doctor, or a vaid who knows the remedy that can help
you.
My tour will commence on November 8. Till then I shall remain
here. I hope Sheela is enjoying her time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 6145. Also C.W. 3500. Courtesy :
Prabhudas Gandhi

16. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
October 11, 1933
And now regarding the Ashram. You are completely on the
wrong track in this matter. To let the buildings and the land fall into
ruins if the Government does not take possession of them would be
vindictive and unnatural. If the Government had taken over the
Ashram and then let it fall into ruin, we would have had nothing to say
against it. But on what principle can we let the land be ruined if the
Government does not take over? If we do that, why should we also not

14

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

burn the movable property? According to the principle which you
apply, those who burnt their crops acted wisely. I am convinced that
by offering the Ashram land to the cause of Harijans, we shall have
completely fulfilled the aim for which the Ashram existed. Its aim will
have been fulfilled better in this manner than by its remaining in the
possession of the Government. In handing over the Ashram to the
Government, we secretly hoped that one day we would get back its
possesion. But by taking the step that we have taken, the inmates of
the Ashram have given up their claim permanently and trusted their
future wholly to God. From whatever point of view we look at the
matter, we find that the course we have adopted is the only right one
for satyagrahis. The desire to save property has been no motive at all
in this transaction. It was only a question of what was right and
consistent with ahimsa. The Government may let the whole country be
ruined, but we should not if we can help. If this does not satisfy you,
you may ask me again. It shouldn’t be difficult to satisfy your doubts
in this matter.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p.137

17. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
October 11, 1933
You seem to have forgotten one rule, namely, that one should
never read what has been scored out by the writer of a letter. If one
reads it by chance, one should not pay any attention to it. A person
must be permitted to revise his ideas. It is lack of understanding to
think ill of a person for even the most wicked thought, after he has
corrected himself. If all of us revealed all our thoughts to one another,
people wouldn’t be happy even for a minute. I think you
unnecessarily got angry.1
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 138

1

Vide “Letter to Amritlal V. Thakkar”,10-10-1933

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

15

18. LETTER TO H. K. HALES
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, W ARDHA,

October 12, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

You will pardon me for being a little late in acknowledging your
letter of 6th inst. The fact is that my capacity for dealing with the increasing correspondence is limited.
With reference to the suggestion made by you, evidently you do
not recognize my limitations. In the first instance, I am not at all sure
whether the Government would favour the idea of my visiting
Midnapore and if it did, whether it would give me a free hand to work
in the manner I might think best. Above all, you know the view that I
have expressed.1 Even a confirmed peace-maker like me can have no
chance whatsoever if I have to address only one party of violence. I
regard both the Government and the terrorists as representing violence; that of the terrorists is unorganized, insane and wholly ineffective from my standpoint, and that of the Government is orga-nized,
deliberate and blasting though also wholly ineffective again from my
standpoint. I should have short shrift from the terrorists if I could
have no influence with the superior party of violence. Even so, do not
for one moment believe that because I do not go to Midnapore I exert
no influence over the terrorists. It may be a negative kind. I know
what handicap I am working under. But I have boundless confidence
in my creed of non-violence and in the end, not so distant as many
people may imagine, non-violence will visibly succeed.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
H. K. HALES, E SQ., M. P.
53 GALSTAUN BLDGS
R USSEL S TREET, C ALCUTTA
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

1

16

Vide, “Statement to the Press”

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

19. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, W ARDHA,

October 12, 1933
DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,

Herewith letters with copies of the correspondence with the authorities from Sahu and a copy of my reply to him. It might be as well
for you to address a formal letter to the Collector or to the Home
Member, Bihar and Orissa, just setting forth the difficulties unnecessarily created in the way of the prosecution of the movement.
I have your wire about N. Three days ago, just after the prayer
meeting, she suddenly disappeared. Of late, her behaviour had been
very strange. Her brain has, undoubtedly, softened. I have sent you a
telegram in reply which, I hope, you have received. You need not
waste any time over her and if she presses herself on your attention
she may be reported to the police, though I hardly think that she will
do that. Dr. Sharma has telegraphed me and I have advised him not to
take any notice of her at all.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
From a photostat : G.N. 1127

20. LETTER TO MAHENDA V. DESAI
WARDHA,

October 12, 1933
CHI. MANU,

I got your letter written with red and green inks. The whiskers
with which you have tried to beautify the letters don’t look well. You
can do that after you have learnt drawing. Just now it would be better
to write legible, clean and simple letters.
Children should have plenty of things to write about.
My blessings to you all for the New Year 1 . May you live long,
be great scholars and be very good men.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 3160. Courtesy : Valji G. Desai
1

Kartak Sud 1, New Year day, according to the Vikram Era, which fell on
October 20, 1933

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

17

21. LETTER TO JAISHREE RAIJI
October 12, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

You are not a good business woman. To expect me to commit
myself to promise specific help is to expect to produce butter by
churning sand. I don’t have even a pie of my own. If, however, I
know any specific need of yours which you cannot meet in any other
way, and if by chance I come across a likely victim, I may beg some
help from him. The fact is that at present my sole interest is in Harijan
work.
MOHANDAS

[From Gujarati]
Bapujini Shital Chhayaman, p. 107

22. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
October 13, 1933
CHI. MARY,

I am glad you have been free from fever. If it is not inconvenient, you should come at 4 p.m. and I will see you in your car—
you won’t come up.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat : G.N. 6010. Also C.W. 3335. Courtesy : F. Mary Barr

18

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

23. NOTES
MANY THANKS
From friends all over India and from the West I have had many
telegrams of the birthday greetings. I am deeply thankful to them for
these. They will excuse me for my inability to send personal acknowledgements. I would have these friends to pray that God may make
me worthy of their greetings. I know that the senders expect that I
should be rendering some service to humanity. The wish is always
persent. God alone knows how far I succeed in the effort.

FORTHCOMING TOUR
If all goes well, my forthcoming tour for the Harijan cause
should commence as from 8th November. I am said to be making
substantial progress and Dr. Khare, who is just now in charge, is of
opinion that I could safely commence the tour from the date mentioned. But this does not mean that I can cope with crowded programmes as I used to before. It is proposed to avoid travelling for two
consecutive days, preferably Sundays and Mondays, in the week, to
enable me to deal with Harijan editing and correspondence. As usual
I shall make collections wherever I am taken. I should like to meet
sanatanists at all places. I have no doubt that much opposition to the
movement is due to misunderstanding. Naturally I must meet Harijans
everywhere and there must be on the programme visits to Harijan
quarters. Late hours should be avoided. Those places that feel
tempted, in spite of the handicaps suggested here, to send invitations
should send them to Thakkar Bapa as early as possible, so as to avoid
alterations in the programme and disappointment. All spectacular
demonstrations, not required for the cause itself, should be avoided.
Every pice should be economized. If addresses are to be presented at
all, they should contain a brief description of the work done and
statistics regarding Harijans, their occupations and economic condition, instead of a recital of my many excellences, which may be expected to take care of themselves, if there are any.
WILL OTHER UNIVERSITIES F OLLOW?

Sjt. N. K. Behere, a member of the Nagpur University and C.P.
High School Board, writes to say that he moved a resolution that
“students belonging to the Depressed Classes and the aboriginal tribes

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

19

should not be charged examination fees”, that he is glad to say that it
was passed, with the addition of the clause—“up to the year 1940”—
by the University and with a time-limit of five years by the High
School Board, and that, therefore, no examination fees will be charged
against these students from the Matriculation to the M.A. or L.L.B.
examinations for these periods, as far as the Central Provinces are
concerned.
I congratulate the Nagpur University, the High School Board
and the mover on the passing of the resolution. The addition of the
time-limit does not detract anything from the resolution. It is a token
of the optimism of the members of the respective bodies. They
evidently think that in five to seven years the economic status of the
classes exempted will have so improved that they will not need the
exemption any longer. May that optimism be justified ! Will the other
Indian Univversities and Boards copy the excellent example set by
those of the Central provinces ?
Harijan, 14-10-1933

24. SLAVERY V. UNTOUCHABILITY
Deenabandhu Andrews writes :1
A century ago a far more terrible form of ‘man’s inhumanity to
man’ that ‘untouchability’ was abolished in the West. Slavery made men
and women into chattels, to be bought and sold and possessed by
their owners. . . . Negroes from Africa were transported on ships like cattle
and set to work in the sugar plantations just like beasts of burden . . . . The
results of this slave traffic were to create a colour problem in America and
elsewhere which has never yet been solved. . . .
It has been doubted whether any great moral reform has ever been
carried through from purely humanitarian motives. The nearest to reach the
standard was the abolition of slavery. . . . Great Britain paid £ 20,000,000 out
of its own revenue in order to get rid of the evil. Therefore, it is not right to
say that in politics philanthropy never gains its own victory. In the year
1833, philanthropy won.
What then will happen in 1933 ? . . . Surely if India could abolish
altogether, within the present year, ‘untouchability’, . . . that would be the
greatest philanthropic act of all.

Would that Deenabandhu’s hope were fulfilled. Unless a miracle
happens, the wholesale conversion of millions will not take place
1

20

Only excerpts are reproduced here.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

during the remaining months of this year and, may be, for many more
years to come.
But what is the meaning of the abolition of untouchability and
what was the meaning of the abolition of slavery in 1833 ? The abolition of slavery was a legislative act. The slavery of the heart was not
abolished then and even the lapse of a century has hardly abolished it
altogether. This is written, not to belittle the great act of 1833, but to
clear our minds and to understand the limitations of the effort of
1833.
Now, in the sense in which slavery was abolished in 1833, untouchability was abolished in 1932 at that representative meeting of
Hindus assembled in Bombay in September 1932, 1 under the Chairmanship of Pandit Malaviyaji. It was no bogus affair. It was signalized
by the immediate establishment of the All-India Anti-untouchability
Board. There has been an incessant campaign against untouchability
going on ever since, throughout the length and breadth of the land as
the pages of Harijan can amply prove. One life is being definitely
held as hostage for the due fulfilment of the solemn pledge of the
Hindus.
Let no one underrate the effort of 1932 by saying that, whereas
the abolition of 1833 was an act of a legislature, that of 1932 was an
act of a voluntary association and, therefore, lacking sanction. In the
nature of things the act of 1932 could not well be otherwise. Slavery
was a matter of contract enforceable at law, Untouchability as a
religious institution is, as Deenabandhu Andrews rightly says, “moral
slavery”. This could not be abolished by law. The only way in which
it could be formally abolished was adopted in Bombay. Nor, as I have
already shown, does the act lack sanction. The sanction, it is true, is
moral. But moral sanctions are in the end far more potent than legal
sanctions. Let the reader note that the Bills sought to be passed by the
Central Legislature are not intended to be acts of abolition at all. One
is meant to regulate temple-entry by Harijans and the other to
withdraw legal recognition of untouchability. Neither affects the
religious recognition and social practice. That is the function of the
religious and social reformer. The Bills are very much needed to
expedite reform; they cannot abolish untouchability. Untouchability
is not a matter of contract. ‘Untouchables’ cannot be bought or sold.
Thus, I hope, it is clear that the abolition of untouchability
analogous to that of slavery in 1833 definitely took place on 24th
1

Vide “Resolution at the Hindu Leaders Conference, Bombay”, 25-9-1932

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

21

September 1932. Its anniversary was duly celebrated on the 24th day
of last September. When the whole mass of Hindus will respond to the
Resolution of Bombay will largely depend upon the earnestness of
those who passed it and those who are now seeking to enforce it. But
that is a process of which it will not be possible to say it took place on
a particular day.
And I know that Deenabandhu is not looking forward to any
such definite day when the mass manifestation will be a single act for
mankind to see. What he wants, what I want and what every reformer is
striving after is such a manifestation of the combined energy of
Hindus as would show unmistakably to any passerby that Hinduism
has shed the distinction between high and low and that there is in it
neither high caste nor low caste nor outcaste, whether by birth or in
fact. A sinner is equal to the saint in the eye of God. Both will have
equal justice, and both an equal opportunity either to go forward or to
go backward. Both are His children, His creation. A saint who considers himself superior to a sinner forfeits his sainthood and becomes
worse than the sinner who, unlike the proud saint, knows not what he
is doing.
The mission of anti-untouchability organizations is perhaps the
noblest of any that can be conceived. Let us, therefore, pray with
Deenabandhu Andrews that they may be blessed with enough spiritual
power to melt the age-long superstition that has corrupted Hindu
society and that threatens to destroy Hinduism, if it does not react to
the spirit of the times.
Harijan, 14-10-1933

22

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

25. WHAT ONE MAN CAN DO
A would-be Harijan Sevak writes to the following effect:1
I have little doubt that my correspondent missed a golden
opportunity of serving both the poor sweeper and the ‘orthodox’
family. He should have gently remonstrated with the mother of the
‘polluted’ girl and he would have drawn her wrath towards himself,
even if he had not shamed her into repentance. The sweeper would
have felt the warmth of a friend in her need. The mother and the other
relatives of the girl would at least have been set athinking. He would
probably have been drawn into an argument. Perhaps the whole
village might have interested itself in the matter and if he had risen to
the occasion, he would have laid a solid foundation for substantial
service in the future. Or he might have had a broken head. That, too,
would have been a good passport for further service. It is clear to me
that on such occasions, every lover of humanity should consider it his
sacred duty to protect the helpless by tactful and gentle, yet courageous, intervention.
Now for the general question. Had we not lost self-confidence,
the question, what an insignificant man can do, would never have
arisen. No man is too insignificant for rendering personal service to
those who may be in distress. The art does not need previous training.
The ability to give effective help resides in every human being who
has the will and the necessary courage. Thus my correspondent could
certainly go to the Harijan quarters of his village and befriend them in
a variety of ways. He could teach their children during his stay in the
village. He need not fear the interruption due to his absence. For
teaching does not mean only a knowledge of the three R’s. It means
many other things for Harijan humanity. lessons in manners and sanitation are the indispensable preliminaries to the initiation into the
three R’s. The correspondent could take Harijan children for sight
seeing, teach them innocent and even instructive games, could sweep
and otherwise keep Harijan quarters clean, could find out cases of
1

The letter is not reproduced here. It described how a Harijan woman, who had
touched a caste-Hindu girl, was subjected to filthy abuse by caste Hindus. He also
wanted to know how he could be useful in such a village where superstition reigned
supreme and Harijans were treated like beasts.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

23

illness among the Harijans and procure medical aid. He could take
careful notes of their economic, social and other wants and transmit
them to the Harijan Seva Sangh of his district or province, as the case
might be, and thus become an effective link between the Harijans and
the Seva Sangh. I have by no means exhausted the list of possibilities
of individual effort. Mine is a mere illustrative list. A resourceful
sevak can multiply the possibilities endlessly. “Where there’s the will,
there’s the way.”
Harijan, 14-10-1933

26. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, W ARDHA,

October 14, 1933
MY DEAR CHARLIE,

I have your telegram to which I have sent you a reply as
follows :
Your wire. Hope Gurudev will be soon restored. My love. Mohan.

Hales wrote to me suggesting that I should at one proceed to
Midnapore and I understand that he has published the letter even
without waiting for my reply. Here is a copy of my reply1 to him for
your information.
You know that I am taking all the rest that the doctors have
advised and not moving out till the 7th of November. My weight has
steadily gone forward and blood-pressure has steadily decreased.
I have told the C.U. Press2 I have no objection to their publishing the passage on ahimsa.
Love.
MOHAN

Encl. 2

REV. C. F. A NDREWS
S ANTINIKETAN
(BENGAL)
From a photostat : G. N. 3797

1
2

24

Vide “Letter to H. K. Hales”,12-10-1933
Presumably, Cambridge University Press

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

27. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
Saturday, October 14, 1933
BHAI THAKKAR BAPA,

You know the story of the person who intended to write [“went
to] Ajmer” but wrote to the effect “died today”. 1 And those who
read his letter must have been as stupid as he was. If such a thing were
suspected it would not have been sent away unrevised. I intended to
write “Calcutta” and not “Delhi”. 2 I don’t even know that anything
has been given to Delhi. N.’s story is a painful one. If the president
suggests that the tour should commence on November 15 but I don’t
agree, should even that be a ground for complaint ?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 1128

28. MESSAGE ON DAYANANDA SEMI-CENTENARY3
October 14, 1933
Rishi Dayananda was one of the greatest reformers in Hinduism. He stimulated Vedic studies, and fearlessly opposed untouchability among other evils.
The Hindu, 15-10-1933
4

29. TALK WITH A KHADI WORKER 5
[Before October 15, 1933]
We require machinery on a large scale for the industries running
on steam power, etc. We do not have such machinery at present; we
1
Writing Ajmer gaya (went to Ajmer), he happened to drop a diacritical mark
making it read aj mar gaya (died today).
2
Vide “A Note”, 30-9-1933
3
The message was sent to Tej, an Urdu daily published from Delhi.
4
Dayananda Saraswati, founder of Arya Samaj.
5
This appeared in chandrashankar Shukla’s weekly letter under the title “ Why
the Spinning-wheel Only ?”.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

25

can get it from other countries only on the terms acceptable to them.
We would also require experts to run such machines. We do not have
enough of them either. At present, therefore, we shall have to import
them from outside. Nor do we have the capital required to meet the
needs of a population of 30 crores. Hence, even if it is possible to be
self-sufficient through industries run on steam power, etc., it would
take a long time. Moreover, if this source of tremendous energy is
employed on a large scale in the country, it would lead to a great
increase in the present unemployment. It is said that in America every
man gets the work of 36 slaves with the help of gigantic machines.
This means that with the help of these machines each person does the
work of 36 persons. If we estimate that the population of India will be
37 crores when it reaches such a stage, it would mean that 36 crores of
them would remain unemployed. In other words, to enable one crore
of people in this country to be as rich as Americans, 36 crores would
have to commit suicide, or else a Chenghiz Khan or a Ravana should
wipe out 36 crores and distribute the country among the remaining
one crore. The per capita distribution of land in this country is two or
three bighas only. This much land is certainly not enough for one’s
maintenance. Everyone, there-fore, must have some other occupation
at home. This is naturally the spinning-wheel. We require very little
capital to make it universal. Other requirements would be available in
every village. All that is necessary is a change of attitude among the
people. They must shake off their lethargy. The solution of the
economic problem of Harijans also lies in this. If the machine age
comes into vogue, all the Harijans would be included among those 36
crores.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 15-10-1933

30. REPERCUSSIONS OF UNTOUCHABILITY
Some idea of the wide repercussions of untouchability can be
had from the following letter1 of Sjt. Mulchand Parekh.
1
Not translated here. The correspondent had described an incident in which a
shepherd was considered responsible for bringing about disease and death to cattle
because of his association with Harijans and was threatened with ostracism or worse.

26

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Is it any wonder if the cup of sorrow overflows when to such
ignorance and resultant superstitions is added the dross of untouchability? There is only one remedy for it and that is that a Harijan
worker should tolerantly look upon all these insults as symptoms of
the same disease and proceed to find a solution for it. He should gain
access to the shepherd’s family, explain things to them with patience
and remove their ignorance. If any jealous person has taken advantage of their superstitious nature, he should make a peaceful endeavour to persuade him. These experiences suggest that the workers
ought to go to the villages and share the people’s lives. Moreover, the
frightened shepherd needs to be reassured. He sould be convinced
about the futility of a boycott and he should be made to feel secure
with our readiness to protect him in every way.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 15-10-1933

31. LETTER TO MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, W ARDHA,

October 15, 1933
As all the energy that I have been able to regain has been given
to the immediate work in hand, I have not been able to write to you.
There was nothing new I had to say and I knew that you would not
misunderstand any action that I took. I, therefore, did not send my
explanation believing that, if anything I did required explanation, you
would not hesitate to demand it of me.
I have kept myself informed of your health, or rather want of it,
and I realized long ago that it was vain to plead with you that you
should take this change or that. In this as in other matters you are a
law unto yourself. I do, therefore, satisfy myself with praying that
God, who has taken care of you all these long years and who has
blessed you with energy of which the youth of India may well be
jealous, will continue to take care of you, so long as He needs your
services.
I write this letter with reference to your latest statement. My own
impression is that the All-India Congress Committee, if it meets, will

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

27

by an overwhelming majority pass a resolution endorsing continuance
of the civil resistance movement. That being my conviction, I see no
reason for convening a meeting for such a confirmation, because the
confirmation will not accelerate the pace of civil resistance. It has to
take its own natural course. But, if you believe that the All-India
Congress Committee will adopt a new programme and give up civil
resistance, there is absolutely no reason whatsoever why you should
not actively canvass for a requisition on receipt of which Jawaharlal is
bound to convene a meeting. And I would venture to submit that if
you would promote a requisition you should also in consultation with
the requisitionists chalk out a definite policy and programme which
you will prosecute unflinchingly. If this is not done and a mere requisition is sent the meeting will simply end in a desultory dis-cussion
and ill-thought-out resolutions. Whilst I would gladly attend any such
meeting and say my say, I am not keen on attending such a meeting
and I would gladly refrain from attending it, if my absence was, from
the highest motives, desired by you or any body of responsible members.
P ANDIT M ADAN M OHAN M ALAVIYA
MUSSOORIE
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933, Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

32. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, W ARDHA,

October 15, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I had your letter enclosing a copy of your letter to Krishnamurti
of Madura.
Here is a copy of my letter1 to Hales, in reply to his letter which
you must have seen in the Press. And here is also a copy of my letter
to Malaviyaji.2 It speaks for itself.
All my good wishes for the wedding. I shall be with you in spirit
on that day.
Love.
BAPU

Encl. 2
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933, Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library
1
2

28

Vide ”Letter to H. K. Hales”
Vide the preceding item.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

33. LETTER TO SARUPRANI NEHRU
October 15, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

You are always in our thoughts though I may not write to you.
We receive news of you from Jawaharlal. I hope you will be well
enough on the 20th. I regret my inability to be there on that day but
my heart will certainly be there. May God grant you quick recovery.
Yours,
MOHANDAS

[From Hindi]
Gandhi-Indira Gandhi Papers. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Also G.N. 11406

34. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
October 15, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

Here is a letter for Mother.1 Let us all hope that she will be well
enough to take part in the ceremony.
Have you introduced the Roman character for writing Hindi ?
A typed letter2 is going to you [today]3 with a copy of my letter
to Malaviyaji.
Love.
BAPU
From a facsimile : C. W. 10108

1

Vide the preceding item.
Vide “Letter to Saruprani Nehru”, 15-10-1933
3
Illegible in the source
2

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

29

35. LETTER TO JANAKDHARI PRASAD
October 15, 1933
DEAR JANAKDHARI BABU,

On going through the arrears of my correspondence, I came
upon your letter of 28th August last. But, before I came upon your
letter I was often thinking of you, and only the other day I discussed
about you with Jamnalalji.
Your children are so young that it is very difficult for any institution to take them without you and your wife. That means you must
find something there. The first thing is that you must humble yourself
and put yourself on a level with the common labourer and bring up
your children to become labourers. But even labourers should have
education. That education should be given by you. Your wife should
also labour. If you will accommodate yourself to this life, a great load
will be off your mind, which itself would soothe your nerves and
much of the dyspepsia would also go under the stimulating effect of
the new life, that is, if you take it joyously. Unless we who have
received a fairly liberal education effect a revolution in our life, we
would simply remain parasites that we are—living on the sweat of the
famishing peasant. You should discuss this matter with Brijkishore
Babu and others.
I would like you to be the pioneer of the new thought and the
new movement, and yet it is really not new, for, I gave it currency
when I returned to India in 1915, and have been trying to live in
accordance with it, however imperfectly I might have done it. You
have, therefore, to perfect it.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
From a photostat : G.N. 54

30

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

36. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
October 15, 1933
MY DEAR AGATHA,

It was stupid of me not to acknowledge your letter about Vithalbhai Patel by the ocean mail. 1 I am therefore punishing myself by
sending this by air mail. I must say I have not taken kindly to it as yet.
It is the luxury of the rich and the necessity created by those who
would rule the earth, water and air and their inhabitants. You can’t
understand how deeply I appreciate letters such as you wrote about V.
J. Patel. I had cabled to Bose as soon as I got your timely cable and
Bose promptly replied.
I am glad you were in Geneva for that meeting. You will not
hesitate to ask for any information of explanation you may need. We
here may not always anticipate your requirements.
Here is a copy of my letter 2 to Hales, M.P., about Midnapore.
You are likely to have a mutilated version by Reuter. The copy is
therefore for your information and use if need be. Hales’s letter was
handed to the Press without his waiting for my reply. You might have
seen it.
Mahadev is in Belgaum all alone save a cart-load of books. 3
Devdas in Multan and Pyarelal in Nasik.
I wonder if you are getting any daily or weekly newspapers
from here. If you or anyone has time to read them I could easily send
a selection, unless you will make it yourself.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat : G.N. 1471

1

The addressee had noted down on this letter : “When I was in Geneva in
October 1933, I went to see Vithalbhai Patel who was dying in a sanatorium in Gland.
Subhas Bose was looking after him, and I wrote an account of this visit to Gandhiji.”
2
Vide “Letter to H. K. Hales” 12-10-1933
3
He was preparing to translate Anasaktiyoga into English which was later
published under the title The Gita According to Gandhi; vide Vol XLI.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

31

37. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
October 15, 1933
MY DEAR BHRRR1 ,

You must give me your reasons for disliking and distrusting
Kamaladevi. I have to advise and I cannot without your assistance.
Rehana2 has been quite silent of late.
How is Hamida 3 doing ?
Love to you all from,
BHRRR
From a photostat : S.N. 9587

38. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
WARDHA,

October 15, 1933
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I got your letter today. I was getting a little worried. You should
certainly stay there as long as you find it necessary. On my part, I
have given you complete freedom to come away here whenever you
wish. But you should stay where your duty requires you to stay. Do
call on Mother. Take care of your health. Write to me from time to
time. My weight is 103 pounds at present, and the blood-pressure is
160-100. This should be considered very good. I am continuing the
same diet. There has been no change. Anandi and Om 4 help Ba.
Anandi, Bachu and Babu will leave after the 20th. Gopi certainly
misses you. And as long as you were here I also did not worry about
her. She will go to Bombay for Diwali. She will start from here on
Tuesday5 . N. has left without telling anybody. When last we heard
from her she was in Delhi. Amalabehn is here. Just now at least she is
doing good work.
1
2

3
4
5

32

This was how Gandhiji and the addressee greeted each other.
Addressee’s daughter
Addressee’s grand-daughter
Uma, younger daughter of Jamnalal Bajaj
October 17

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Krishna’s marriage will take place in Allahabad on the 20th.
Prabhudas’s marriage will take place here on the 17th. The bride1 is a
fine girl. She is his own choice. I believe that they will be happy. I had
a letter from Lakshmi. Write to Gopi from time to time. Write to
Prabhudas also. I know that you need no advice in this matter. Make it
a rule to read something daily. Read a little English and a little from
the Ramayana, and study arithmetic a little. And, above everything
else, there is the Gita. Surendra has been released. He will come here
in a few days.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 3434

39 LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
WARDHA,

October 15, 1933
CHI. MATHURADAS,

My right hand is now tired. Be it so. Now you have become the
father of three children. Traramati will be doing well. Who came for
her delivery? If enough care is not taken during and after the delivery,
the mother has to suffer a lot. Have you studied this science? It is
easy.
Herewith the letter from Harakhchand. Act on it. Continue
correspondence with him. He is a man of character.
I understand about Thakkar Bapa. I have written to him that it
would have been better if he had not offered his criticism. Be that as it
may you were not in the least at fault. Still, a public worker like you
should show tolerance.
For the present, I do not feel like writing anything to Gokhale.
There is a letter from aunt 2 about K. Chattopadhyaya 3 . She saw you
and somebody else. Write to me about it.
I have no doubt that in course of time you will understand
everything about the Ashram.

1
2
3

Amba Devi, daughter of Lala Lalchand of Bijnor
Sarojini Naidu

Kamaladevi, wife of Harindranath Chattopadhyaya

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

33

Prabhudas will be married on 17th. The girl1 is from the North.
She is his own discovery. Krishna2 will be married on the 20th.
you must be meeting Premlilabehn.
How are you yourself?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal papers. Nehru memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

40. LETTER TO PANNALAL JHAVERI
WARDHA,

October 15, 1933
CHI. PANNALAL,

Chimanlal says that you have given up civil disobedience and
now wish to start a dairy. If your faith in civil disobedience is shaken,
you can certainly do something else. But I certainly expect that before
taking any new step you will consult me.
All the three of you will be doing well.
Prabhudas will be married on the 17th. The bride is from the
North.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Manavtana Prahari—Pannalal Jhaveri, p. 31

41. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, W ARDHA,
October 16, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

Herewith the resignation3 of Jamnalalji. If you think that it must
not be sent in and is likely to cause embarrassment, you need not take
any action upon it. You may then return it with your reasons after you
are free from the wedding arrangements. If, however, you think that
the resignation may be accepted, you may publish it forthwith. I know
1

Ambadevi, of Lala Lalchand of a Bijnore. However, the marriage took place
Jawaharlal Nehru’s sister who was engaged to marry Gunottam Hutheesingh;
vide also “Letter to Manu Gandhi”, 29-12-1933
3
From the Congress Working Committee
2

34

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

that the Treasurer can only be appointed by the All-India Congress
Committee. Therefore, the treasurership may remain in Jamnalalji’s
hands, for the time being. The chief thing is that he ceases to be a
member of the Working Committee. I think that the step is a wise and
necessary one. Constituted as he is, it is risky for him to seek imprisonment just now, that is, without taking the rest that the specialist
considers necessary. But, ordinarily, fighters can’t consult their health
to the extent that Jamnalalji’s temperament demands and as he shares
the same view of a civil resister’s duty that I have, he is ill at ease, so
long as he holds a responsible office in the Congress Organization.
I have given you my reasoning which decided my acceptance of
Jamnalalji’s proposal to resign.
Yours,

BAPU

Encl. 1
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

42. STATEMENT TO PRESS
W ARDHAGANJ,
October 17, 1933
I regret to have to inform the public that Shrimati N. disappeared suddenly from the Wardha Ashram about ten days ago. She
had of late become more than usually unbalanced. All the affec-tion
that parents, brothers or sisters could show was shown to her, but evidently her fearful past proved too strong for her. It is likely that she is
again leading the old thoughtless, untruthful and unclean life.
I give this information to warn young men against tempting her,
or being tempted by her. I would like those who may come in contact
with her not to give any financial aid. She is hardly responsible for
her actions, and it would be a deliverance for her, if some philanthropic institution would take charge of her. If she sees this notice, I
would have her to recall all the promises she made to herself and to
me, and in humility to ask God to exorcise the devil that has possessed
her. She knows that if she asks truly, her prayer will not go in vain.
She had such experiences in her sane moments.
She was last heard of in Delhi.
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 18-10-1933

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

35

43. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
October 16, 1933
MY DEAR CHARLIE,

I think you told me that you visited the Brooker Washington
Institution at Tuskegee. For the sake of Harijans I have been reading
literature about that wonderful institute. Does your personal inspection confirm what appears in the books about it ? Will you write a
brief account under the title ‘What I saw in Tuskegee’ ? Did you meet
any of the Red Indians ? Can you give me your impression of them?
The United States Government seem to be spending large sums on
their education and general improvement.
Love.

MOHAN
REV. C. F. ANDREWS
ANAND BHAWAN
ALLAHABAD
From a photostat : G. N. 3798

44. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, W ARDHA,
[October 18, 1933] 1
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

Despite all intentions of writing to you I have been unable to do
so till today. Jamnalal shields me well from the visitors but who can
protect me from letters ? Never am I able to clear my desk. Because
the order of going to bed early has also to be observed. I am writing
this having got up at 3 a.m. The implication is not that this letter is the
sole cause for rising early. Even during the time allowed in the
evening I am prevented from doing anything substantial by the
pestering insects.
I have read your article about Jawaharlal. It is good and you
have done no harm by writing it. There could be no need to suppress
our opinions about one another. When Truth alone is to be sought,
suppression of one’s opinion becomes a fault. You must have sent the
article to Jawaharlal, if not, do so. He is a very straightforward man
1

The date is inferred from the reference to Gopi’s departure; vide “Letter to
Prabhavati”, 15-10-1933

36

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and corrects his error. I am confident ultimately he is bound to follow
the path of Truth. And if his line of thinking proves to be correct,
comment would be superfluous. Equality can never mean uniformity.
Equality only means uniformity in justice. There is no distinction
between an atom and the Himalayas in the eyes of God. He is the
same to the atom as to the Himalayas.
Gopi left yesterday. I could not have a long talk with her but she
used to come and sit with me every day. She is an extremely simple
girl and was very happy here; she mixed with everybody. She went to
Bombay on account of Diwali. She was also keen to see the illuminations there. It will be good if she returns after Diwali. I have no
doubt that she will be ready. Gajanan has replied to the letter I wrote
to him. Gopi too was asked to write a letter. Write to me about your
health.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I shall get someone to write in English about Harijan. It was very
good that ………1 ultimately did stay ……… 1
From Hindi : C.W. 7940. Courtesy : G. D. Birla

45. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
October 18, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

Herewith two garlands made out of yarn specially spun by me
today for the bride and the bridegroom charged with my blessings.
Will you please put them round their necks on my behalf! I hope they
will reach you in time.
I cannot help being sorry that the ceremony has been vetoed by
Mrs. Hutheesing. But I suppose in these matters I am a back number.
I understand what you say about Dipak. I would write to Sarala
Devi in as gentle a manner as I can.
Love to you all.
BAPU
1
1

The source is illegible here.
ibid

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

37

[PS.]
I would like you to wire to me when all is over that Mother was
able to stand the strain.
A Bunch of Old Letters, p. 112

46. SPEECH AT WEDDING OF PRABHUDAS GANDHI
W ARDHAGANJ
October 18, 1933
At the conclusion of the ceremony addressing the couple
Gandhiji said that this was an inter-provincial marriage and not an
inter-caste one. He had no hesitation in advocating inter-caste
marriages under well-defined limitations, for he believed that there
was no varna or division in the original sense of the term and that
limiting marriage to the same division or varna was never its distinguishing feature.
He drew the attention of the couple to the fact that marriage was
not intended to indulge in one’s passions but to impose a restraint
upon them. He hoped that both of them would make service of the
country their mission in life and then they would find that their joint
life would be one of happiness, contentment and increasing self-restraint.
It gave him much pleasure to find that the bride came from an
Arya Samajist family. His relations with the Arya Samajists, he continued, had always been intimate, although they knew that there were
honest differences between them. This marriage had brought them
nearer.
The Bombay Chronicle, 19-10-1933

47. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
WARDHA

October 18, 1933
CHI. RAMA,

If the doctor says that it is not necessary now for you to stay in
the hospital, I would advise you to come here. The weather here is
very good indeed. There is quite a large number of girls. You will be
able to help Lakshibehn a little, and can also have your arm massaged.
I shall not be happy if you stay anywhere else, and shall keep on

38

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

worrying about the condition of your arm. You should still not use it
very freely. You will also get a doctor’s services here. If you decide to
come here, the earlier you come the better, so that we can be together
for some days. The kitchen here runs for about 60 persons, more than
40 of whom are girls. Anandi, Bachu and Babu will start from here
today. Tarabehn is expected any day now.
Prabhudas was married today to a girl from North India. She is
24 years of age, and her name is Amba.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 5357

48. LETTER TO PANNALAL JHAVERI
ASHRAM, W ARDHA,

October 19, 1933
CHI. PANNALAL,

It seems your letter has crossed my postcard.
Your purity has so impressed me that anything you write or any
step you take cannot hurt me. By that I do not mean that I shall
always agree with you on the rightness of your step. But the more
experience I gain the more I realize that there are as many conceptions of dharma as there are individuals. The deeper I delve the greater is my comprehension of the dictum of the Gita : Better to die
following one’s own faith.
I certainly wish you success in what you have considered your
dharma.I personally did wish that when others slackened, you would
be able better to understand satyagraha. I hold that satyagraha has not
yet manifested itself in India in its true form. The duty of manifesting
it devolves on you and me, that is, the inmates of the Ashram. For you,
civil disobedience cannot be a political matter. It can only be a matter
of dharma. Dharma reveals itself in its true form only when there is
despair all around. If we join the crowd in offering prayers, it would
not be an indication of our faith. But it would in some measure be a
test of our faith if when others lost faith in prayer a handful of us
continued to offer prayers and derived joy from so doing. But what is
dharma to me may not be dharma to you. Only what you see as
dharma will be dharma to you. I have only conveyed my views to you
as an elder. If your reason does not accept it, if it does not appeal to
your heart, then do not act on it. Individual civil disobedience must

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

39

be taken to mean perfection. If you are starting a goshala, are you
going to do it on your own, or is there any room for suggestions and
guidance? If there is such scope, meet me. I shall then send you my
suggestions. Do come over if you feel like coming.
What you write about Gangabehn and Nanibehn seems correct.
It is your duty to guide the two of them. And it is also your right. I
may or may not be able to write letters. But both of them have got to
write to me. In fact I have been awaiting their letters. I hope you
yourself are in good health.
Prabhudas’s marriage was solemnized yesterday. The bride’s
name is Amba. She is 24 years old. She is competent, and has a deep
sense of sacrifice. She has been to jail twice. She had been trying to
come and live in the Ashram for several years but there were restrictions from her guardians. Kishorelal and Gomati have gone to Akola
today. Anandi, Babu and Bachu have gone in that direction today.
Prabhudas will be staying here for some time. Amba is of course with
him. I am regaining my strength. I am gaining weight. The bloodpressure is going down. There are more than forty girls here.
I have received your second letter. I am here till the 7th November. I shall leave on the 8th.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Manavtana Prahari—Pannalal Jhaveri, pp. 31-2

49. A NOTE1
[After October 18, 1933] 2
For the poor and those with abstemious habits, the only
after-meal treat for the mouth is water. And so, it is not necessary to
offer guests betel-nut, etc.
One should not put one’s hand into the cooked foods. All of
them should be served with a spoon or a ladle.
If the guest is an Englishman or Englishwoman, we should place
a spoon before them without their asking for it. It is not necessary to
cook many articles of food for guests. No special article of food
should be cooked for them. If, however, we ourselves are
1

Gandhiji states at the end of the note that he was sending it for Amba.
Evidently the note containing these suggestions was written after Prabhudas’s
marriage to Amba on October 18, 1933.
2
ibid

40

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

addicted to pleasures of the palate, on the day when we have a guest,
we should take the occasion to cook only a frugal meal, have it
ourselves and serve it to the guest, and humbly and gently mention the
fact of the meal being frugal so that we may not seem affected.
We should never let dirt collect in our nails, eyes, ears or nostrils.
Even if we are not so on the other days, before guests we should
always appear clean and keep the children so, for a cultured guest
dislikes dirt and feels repugnant to being served food cooked by
persons with dirty hands. The saree is not meant for removing the dirt
with, a handkerchief must be used for the purpose.
When eating, one must not make smacking sounds, nor talk
while eating. If children have such a habit, we should make them give
it up.
We should offer a guest something suitable to sit on. We should
have respect for the guest in our mind. If it is there, the guest cannot
but see it. We should teach the children always to bow to a guest to
greet him.
We should make no distinction between a guest who is an important person and one who is not so, or between a guest whom we
know personally and one who is a stranger to us.
Since our aim in the Ahsram is to lead an abstemious life, we
should not indulge the palate.
Since we are not to serve a guest relishing dishes, we should not
cook sweets, nor season them with condiments, nor make spicy sauces,
nor c cook too many vegetables. If we have a number of vege-tables
with us, we should mix them together and serve them boiled as far as
possible.
We should take care to see that children do no dirty things. We
should place a clean handkerchief before the guest at the same time as
wegive him a jug of water. We should tell him where he may wash his
hands or help him to wash his hands in a utensil.
We should not expect a guest to clean the plates he has used for
eating but insist on taking them away from him and clean them
ourselves.
We should courteously ask a guest and know from him his
needs, and if they are not contrary to our dharma or beyond our
means, satisfy them.
I am sending this note for Amba. Preserve it after reading.
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33080

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

41

50. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, W ARDHA,

October 19/20, 19331
CHI. THAKKAR BAPA,

Everyday I think of writing you a long letter and it is postponed
everyday. Jamnalal can help avoid interviews, but who can stem the
increasing flow of correspondence ? I have got to go to bed early and
so some letters do remain unattended piling the heap of papers up. I
carry on in this pitiful state.
What should I write about N.? I have done my best for her. I
think she did try honestly to restrain her passions. But she slipped
during her attempts and ultimately ran away. If she drowns herself, I
would neither be surprised nor sorry. If she is alive, I would not give
up hopes for her improvement. I do not at all repent having
readmitted her. It was my duty to do so. She was basking in affection
not only here but at Sabarmati also. She used to write to me that she
never experienced such affection even from her parents. All were
content with whatever little restraint she voluntarily accepted. How can
one be changed so suddenly, who remained unbridled for several
years ? I have not yet judged . . . .2 I have never noticed any fault on
this part in connection with N.
The Agra affair is very sad. We reap what we sow. Let Hinduism
perish if the so called sanatanists fail to wake up and, in their vanity
resort to goondaism with the help of the masses. It is enough if we
continue doing our duty. God’s will prevails ultimately. The affairs at
Samartha and Dholka are not only sad but shameful for us also.
Similar petty cases take place here too. I intend to write something in
Harijan about this matter.3
I think it is good that Harijan is shifted to Madras. It was the
only way to utilize Sastri fully. Kodand Rao had arranged a small
function in honour of Sastri. Deodhar spoke there. He hinted at the
1

The letter bears the date October 19, 1933, at the end of paragraph 2, but was
signed “Wardha, 20-11-1993”, which appears to be a slip for “20-10-1933”. The
letter was evidently written before Gandhiji’s tour of the Central Provinces on
November 8, 1933.
2
The name has been omitted.
3
Vide “Two Cruel Cases”

42

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

same thing. He said Sastri was withering in Poona and will blossom in
Madras. Sastri has gained confidence to run Harijan. He will get help
from some others. It will be away from Delhi; but that is no
inconvenience. The Hindi edition is already based in Delhi. If Sastri
could not settle in Poona to devote himself fully to Harijan he could
do so much less in Delhi. His suffering was mental and genuine. Since
we were to bring out Harijan with the help of Sastri, it was our duty to
look to his convenience. I shall send you Sastri’s letter, if I have not
destroyed it, which will give you an idea of his mental distress. It has
always been my opinion that the English edition can be produced best
and cheapest from Madras. However, you may write to and arrange
with Sastri directly in case you and Ghanshyamdas are not fully
satisfied with my letter.
My mention of rest on Sunday and Monday may be considered
an oversight. You are welcome to include Monday and Tuesday in the
programme that you may chalk out.
Tour programme for C. P. will be completed within the time
prescribed by you. Dr. Khare has already issued the tour programme
for C. P. (Marathi). You may have seen it. He wished to write to you
also. Satisbabu has written from Bengal. He has also written to you.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 1133. Also C. W. 10489. Courtesy :
Harijan Sevak Sangh

51. LETTER TO H. K. HALES 1
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, W ARDHA,
October 20, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I am able this time to send you by return [of post] my reply to
your letter of 18th inst.
I have no such modesty as you attribute to me. I meant literally
what I said about my limitations. They are abvious. I am dying to cooperate with anybody and everybody and certainly with the Government in restoring peace that is living and real, not the peace of the
grave. A living peace cannot be and will never be brought about at the
point of the bayonet. The plan of the Government is, at any rate seems
to me to be, after that of a physician who seeks to remove a deadly
1

The letter was published in The Hindu, 29-10-1933, with slight verbal
variations.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

43

disease without probing and dealing with the causes. I can be no party
to any such plan. And I should despair of proving my sincerity about
non-violence, if it requires further proof after my having lived a life
of non-violence in the face of circumstances often most provoking,
for an unbroken period of 40 years and more.
As to your suggestion about an All-Parties meeting1 , judged by
the accepted standard I have proved a hopeless failure, as witness1 my
last performance at such a meeting2 convened for the purpose of
achieving a communal settlement. I was no less a failure at the3 various
meetings that we held in India for similar purposes.
Your Sincerely

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat : G. N. 1472 a

52. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
Unrevised

October 20, 1933

MY DEAR AGATHA,

I had your long letter. I do not know whether you had sent
copies to my two partners. Anyway I have posted it on to Andrews.
You thought that we were all at the same place. But just at present we
are not.
Your work in Geneva was great. And I know wherever you are
you can give a good account of yourself. But I retain the same
opinion that I have you some time ago that if you came as a delegate
your expenses should be found by your constituency. But if you
come for the purpose of seeing things first hand, your expenses can
be found from here. Whether it is worthwhile your coming for that
special purpose is solely for you to decide. If you feel the need you
should come. If you are a good sailor you can certainly come in the
3rd class without the slightest difficulty and see more of life, because
you see more of common humanity as a 3rd class passenger than as a
saloon passenger. That is my own experience and that of others who
have travelled in all classes.
1

The source has “Witnessed”
The reference presumably is to one of the informal meetings held in London;
vide “Speech at Meeting of Friends of India”, 7-10-1931 and “Statement to the
Press”,14-10-1931
3
The source has “two”.
2

44

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

About the ban on Bose’s passport, I am quite sure that they
would not remove it at present except under humiliating conditions. I
entirely agree with you that what he does not know of Bengal is not
worth knowing and I know also that he can render the greatest help in
the restoration of peace, but his difficulty would be the same as mine.
I send you a copy of another letter1 which I am obliged to write
to Mr. Hales. The fact is that the Government demand co-operation
on their own terms, which nobody freely gives and which no selfrespecting man can ever give.
I think that this covers all the important points you have raised
in your letter.
Yours Sincertly

BAPU
Froma photostat : G. N. 1472

53. LETTER TO RUKMINIDEVI BAZAJ
October 20, 1933
CHI. RUKMINI,

I heard from you after many days. Today is the first day of the
new year. I again advise you to remember that life is well governed by
observing rules. It is desirable that you should make a rule to write to
me, if not once a week, once a fortnight or at least once a month. Personally, I believe that the ideal thing is to do everything according to a
rule. Prabhudas was married the day before yesterday. The bride
seems a good girl.
Blessings to you both from

BAPU
From Gujarati : C. W. 9701. Courtesy : Benarsilal Bazaj

1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

45

54. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
WARDHA,

October 20, 1933
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have not received copy of Andrews’s letter.
In my opinion, the money should be sent to Harakhchand, for
he might be regarded as an agent of the Committee. If the money is
sent from Calcutta, commission on the bank draft will be saved.
Harakhchand’s report can be treated as fully authentic. The Utkal
Committee should also know that the money will be sent through
Harakhchand.
You do not have to go wandering in the sun to collect the
money. If it is necessary to write to anyone, I will do so. I take it you
will be publishing reports in the Press from time to time.
There is no alternative but to guide Kamaladevi. One cannot go
by rumours. I asked her many frank questions. But she only de-clares
her innocence. I am not trying to stop the divorce. It has become
necessary.
The wedding of Prabhudas took place the day before yesterday.
I am enclosing Thakkar Bapa’s letter. You can see how guileless he was in his previous letter. He was not at all at fault in what he
wrote. I have heard many complaints about your temper. But I have
always defended you. You should remove the cause for com-plaint.
Forgive Kodanda Rao1 for his jest and write a nice letter to Thakkar
Bapa.“Caesaer’s wife must be above suspicion” does not mean that
Caesaer’s wife may never be suspected. What it means is that C.’s wife
should never give cause for suspicion, and if she is even then suspected, she can afford to remain unconcerned about criticism. It is in
man’s hands to remain pure. That others should consider him pure is
in nobody’s hands. Do you know that there are many in the world
who find fault with God’s creation?
Taramati and the child will be doing well.
Today is the New Year day. May it bring good to you all, that is
to say, may the country received greater services from you.
Blessings from

BAPU
1

46

P. Kodanda Rao

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[PS.]
Send me Gokhale’s address. Then I shall write to him. Surely
you do not wish that I should send back all your letters?
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

55. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL AND KASHI GANDHI
WARDHA,

October 20, 1933
CHI. CHHAGANLAL AND KASHI,

I received your postcard. You must have received my telegram
sent after the wedding ceremony was over. I can see from your
postcard that you have been worrying. Kashi’s wish was fully
respected. Lakshmibehn sang the women’s prayer 1 with the utmost
devotion, beginning with the shloka ‘Shantakaram’2 . After the ceremony was over, she also sang the bhajan 3 ‘Vaishnava Jana’. In
Amba, Prabhudas has got exactly the kind of girl suitable for him.
She seems to me to have a transparently sincere nature. Brave of
course she is. She has twice been to jail and has been yearning for a
long time to live in the Ashram. She does not seem to love overmuch
any kind of pleasure. She wore no bangles at all at the time of the
wedding ceremony. After the ceremony was over, Janakibehn put
glass bangles on her wrists. Very likely she will break even these in a
short while. Probably you do not know that in the North it is usually
customary to wear bangles or put the auspicious red mark on the
forehead. It is customary for the bride, after a particular ceremony is
over, to wear the garments offered by the father-in-law’s family. I had
three saris ready with me. One was got woven by Janakibehn, the other
was sent by Santok and the third by Gomati. The sari sent by the last
was woven from yarn spun by Kishorelal and Gomati themselves.
Gomati happened to have it with her by chance and so sent it to me
and insisted that I should give that very sari to Amba to wear. I too
liked the idea. But was Amba the kind of girl to accept it? She said:
“How would I be the better for it. What I am wearing is
goodenough.Please let it be”. I found all this so pleasing and natural
1
2
3

From the Ashram Bhajanavali
A verse in Sanskrit
A devotional song

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

47

that I did not at all insist on her accepting the saree. She then wore,
during the wedding ceremony, the sari sent by her parents. She had
some fever during the ceremony. She had been forbidden to take
anything except fruit on the wedding-day. The fever came down in
the evening. She passed the whole of yesterday on fruit and milk
only. She is now able to move about and is quite happy. For the
present, she will stay here. A sari was made for Ba from yarn spun by
me. It was neither washed nor dyed. I gave Amba that sari also. A
piece of rejo1 or kokali2 khadi with fine needlework on it given by Ba
and Mithubehn for Jakir has also been given to Amba. Amba has thus
come into possession of a fairly good number of articles. For the
present, both wish to stay here. Afterwards, they will come to you for
your blessings. My previous letter was not written to rebuke you. It
was written to make your dharma clear to you and to strengthen your
faith.
Blessings for the New Year3 .
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33070

56. AN M.A. IN A HURRY
An M. A. of Kerala writes a long letter from which I take the
following paragraphs4 of public importance :
I can heartily endorse my correspondent’s statement that ‘there
can be no peace for me or him and his friends, if untouchability continues in our country’. My word also stands. But untouchability will
not be removed by force or, which is perhaps the same thing, by law,
not will temples be opened by such means. Legislation is badly required to remove legal obstruction which has been created by certain
judicial decisions. But if and when the two Bills are passed, untouchability lurking in the Hindu heart will not necessarily be removed
1

Coarse silk for making blouse
A variety of khadi
3
This and the subscription is in Gandhiji’s own hand.
4
Not reproduced here. The correspondent had written about the continuing evil
of utouchabilty, indifference of khadi workers towards Harijan work and villagers’
attitude towards Harijans, and suggested steps to instil courage, self-confidence, etc.,
into Harijans.
2

48

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

nor will public temples be automatically opened. Untouchability will
go when the Hindu heart has melted, and the public temples will be
opened when the worshippers have discovered that God is no respector of persons and that He does not reside in temples which man’s
insolence or ignorance has closed against any body of persons who
are desirous of offering worship on the same terms as they.
The correspondent would throw the sole responsibility for
opening the Guruvayur temple on me. He should know that it is no
one man’s work. It will be done in God’s good time. Workers can but
work to the best of their ability. Let him also know that Kelappan’s
pledge is not exhausted. His visit to Colombo is temporary.
Rajagopalachari works by prayer even though he is in prison. Madhavan Nair, that great and true Kerala servant, is no more. But I have
no doubt that his spirit watches over our conduct and misconduct. It
will not rest till Hinduism is purified of the evil of untouchability. And
the correspondent may rest assured that, when the proper time comes
and if God wills it, both Kelappan and I would again stake our lives
for the opening, not only of the Guruvayur temple, but many others.
As to the khadi service, the correspondent’s complaint is wholly
unjustified. Those who are engaged in khadi service may not very well
be expected to give their time to Harijan service. But I know that the
vast majority of them have no untouchability in their breasts and that
they never miss an opportunity of rendering whatever personal service
they can to Harijans. There is no bar to taking Harijans in Khadi
service. Lastly I may state that several thousand Harijan families are
being supported through the khadi organizations dotted over the
whole country.
The correspondent is on surer ground in his complaints about
villagers’ attitude in many parts of India. The ignorance of the villagers is colossal. They are wedded to the idea of high and low. Village
workers are far too few for the numerous villages. But there is no
cause whatever for despair. Villagers are waking up. They have begun
to realize that to deny to fellow beings the same status that they have
for themselves is to deny God’s equal justice. The correspondent has
no notion of the silent but solid work that many workers are doing in
and around villages. This Harijan work being purely religious does
not lend itself much to the spectacular. It will prosper in exact
proportion to the purity and penance of the workers. It will be surely

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

49

retarded by the impurity, selfishness or mixed motives of workers.
As to putting life into Harijans, it will be there immediately the
crushing dead weight of untouchability is lifted from off the heads of
Harijans. They should, of course, have, as they are having, religious
and other instruction in the many schools that have been and are
being opened. Time is on our side and so is the time spirit. No
religion can possibly stand the blazing light of the world’s opinion
that is being directed towards all religions, and still retain in it proved
evils and superstitions.
Harijan, 21-10-1933

57. WHAT OF SWEEPERS IF . . . ?
An English friend referring to two ladies who are coming to
India writes : 1
They . . . want to do their own “sweeper” work, even though it may get
them into trouble with some of the local caste Hindus . . . it may get them into
difficulties with the local sweepers, who will complain . . that they are losing
good work, and good wages. Now, what is the right reply to that ? Supposing
that thousand of millions of caste Hindus and others, up and down India,
resolved to do their own “sweeping”, as an act of penance and visible proof
that they felt themselves no better than sweepers, many sweepers would lose
their livelihood . . . It is to some extent the old story (in a different form) of
the displacement of labour as a result of social development. I don’t remember
seeing any comment of yours or anyone’s on this point in Harijan . . .

It is quite true that I have not discussed this question in these
pages as a difficulty, as it has never arisen that way as yet. In several
places, including the late Ashram at Sabarmati and its branch at
Wardha, the inmates have been doing their own sweeper work without
the local sweepers being ruffled. At Sabarmati, in the beginning
stages, we had sweepers, who were paid a paltry sum. It was not possible to pay them more for about two hours’ work which at best was
never satisfactorily done. They did not know the hygienic method.
They would not easily take to it Sanitary service is by no means a
hereditary occupation of long standing. All the evidence hitherto
collected by me goes to show that before the Mohammedan conquest
there were no professional sweepers; the Hindu social system, being
based on rural conditions, did not necessitate such sanitary service as
1

50

Only excerpts are reproduced here.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

is indispensable in these days of rapid urban growth. I do not,
however, wish to convey the meaning that rural sanitation during the
purely Hindu period was by any means perfect or even fairly satisfactory. On the contrary, it seems to have been very crude. The highly
scientific methods evolved and still being developed in the West are
undoubtedly a recent and very beneficial growth.
Holding these views, I can only welcome the determination of
the two English sisters to do their own sweeper work. If I were in their
place, I should invite the sweepers in the neighbourhood to give other
service, if they were in want of employment, or to learn the hygienic
and clean method of doing sanitary work if they were minded so to
do. Whether they took up some other work or no, whether they
volunteered to learn better methods of sanitation or no, they could not
harbour any feeling of being wronged for not being asked to do
sanitary service for the sisters, for I would expect them to work for the
betterment of Harijans in a hundred ways. The difficulty can only,
and must always, arise when things are done in a patronizing or selfish
manner. I would, for instance, be patronizing, if I offered now and
then to work a little in a touch-me-not fashion, side by side with my
sweeper, just in order to be able to declare at public meetings that even
I did sweeping alongside my sweeper. I would be acting selfishly if I
did my own sweeping for the sake of keeping my closets cleaner than
they would otherwise be and did not want to waste my time in
teaching my sweeper the modern method or did not want to pay more
for more efficient and more intelligent service. But there never can be
any offence taken when I serve my sweeper neighbours in a variety of
ways and, by doing my own sweeping, teach them by example that
sanitary service is not only not a mean occupation, but a perfectly
honourable and most useful occupation which everyone should learn
and many may follow with great benefit to society, if it is taken up in
a humanitarian spirit.
Harijan, 21-10-1933

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

51

58. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
W ARDHA,
October 21, 1933
CHI. PREMA,

I think I told you in one of my letters that I intentionally did not
write to you, so that you might receive all the letters of Dhurandhar1 .
But I gather from Amtul’s letter that you expect me to write and that
you can get my letters. I was thinking of writing, when I got Sushila’s2
postcard yesterday. I am, therefore, writing this letter before the
morning prayer.
I see that you are all right there. If you are permitted to write,
give me your daily-time table and any other details about food, etc.,
which you can.
I have just now Ba, Mira, Chandrashankar and Nayar with me.
Kaka is here at present, Kishorelal and Gomati 3 left the day before
yesterday. Swami4 will arrive shortly, and so also will Tarabehn.
Pannalal5 , Nanibehn6 and Gangabehn 7 are in Ahmedabad. The Ashram will be permanently converted into a hostel for Harijans. The
office, etc., will be handed over for that purpose. You must have read
all this in papers. I hope you and all the other women liked this idea.
I get long letters from Mahadev. He has collected a library in
Belgaum. I hope Durga8 hears from him. Devdas is happy in Multan,
and Pyarelal in Nasik. Ba is getting ready [to go to jail].
There are more than 40 girls now under Lakshmibehn’s9
charge. She is being helped by Dwarkanath10 . Narmada is with
Vinoba in Nalwadi.
Prabhudas’s marriage was celebrated on Wednesday. He has got
a partner of his choice. She is 24 years old. She has been educated at
the Gurukul and seems intelligent.
My tour begins on the 8th. I hope all the women are well and
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

52

Addressee’s former teacher
Addressee’s friend Sushila Pai
Kishorelal Mashruwala’s wife
Swami Anandananda
The Jhavris
ibid
ibid
Mahadev Dedsai’s wife
Lakshmibehn Khare
Dwarkanath Harkare

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

make good use of every moment of their time. More after I hear from
you.
Blesssings to you all from

BAPU

[PS.]
I have not revised the letter.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 10351. Also C. W. 6790. Courtesy :
Premabehn Kantak

59. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
October 21, 1933
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

I got your letter. I am doing what you wish. There will be no
moral difficulty. I should like you to stop worrying.1 You must have a
telescope more powerful than even Premlilabehn’s. Through hers a
mustard seed will appear as big as a mountain. I hope you remember
the planet Uno2 .
Prabhudas’s marriage took place on Wednesday. He got a girl
exactly of the type that he wanted, and through his own efforts. She is
24 and is thoroughly simple in habits. Since she is from North India,
she cares neither for the vermilion mark nor for bangles. She wasn’t
wearing bangles even during the marriage ceremony. Janakibehn has
forced bangles on her wrists now. She is fairly well educated. She is an
Arya Samajist.
I had a long letter from Mahadev (written from Belgaum Jail). It
is like a long poem. I send with this a few extracts from it.
Brijkishan3 got ill after going to Delhi. Ba is getting ready [for
courting imprisonment]. Kishorelal and Gomati left the day before
yesterday. Anandi, Bachu and Babu also left. Kishorelal went to
Akola. Anandi intended to get down on the way to see Lakshmidas.
There has been no letter from Lakshmidas yet. Even if she marries,
she will continue to enjoy complete freedom in the Ashram.
What is your weight ? What is your food ? How much milk and
1
2
3

The addressee had requested Gandhiji to take rest.
This seems to be an error for Pluto, which was discovered in 1930.
Brjikishan Cahndiwala.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

53

curds do you take ? May I send anything for you ? Remember that
even a mother doesn’t serve an item during a meal unasked. And in
this case the mother is a person like me. What can you expect then ? It
is now time to attend the morning prayer. So I stop here.
Blessing from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2 : Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 34-5

60. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
October 21, 1933
CHI. MARY,

You may take barley not because you have some with you but
because you need it. But if you are constipated, it is not barley you
need but some green, such as gourd1 or the like.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat : G. N. 6011. Also C. W. 3337. Courtesy : F. Mary Barr

61. LETTER TO KOTWAL
October 21, 1933
BHAI KOTWAL,

As a general rule it can be stated that a person who has faith in
civil disobedience and has joined it cannot take up any other work.
But, on the other hand, a person who has faith in it but has already
taken up some responsibility should not join it at the risk of failing in
that responsibility. “Better one’s duty, bereft of merit ……”2
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 3605

1
2

54

The source has dudhi in Devanagari script.
Bhagavad Gita. III. 35.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

62. LETTER TO VANAMALA N. PARIDH
October 21, 1933
CHI. VANAMALA,

I hope you have now completely got over your illness. Now go
and join Anandi, Bachu and Babu as soon as possible. If you had
been well and had come here, both you and I would have been happy.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 5782. Also C. W. 3005. Courtesy :
Vanamalabehn M. Desai

63. LETTER TO MOHAN N. PARIKH
October 21, 1933
CHI. MOHAN,

I got your letter. You must have completely recovered now. I
will be glad, therefore, if you join Anandi.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S. N. 9186

64. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL GANDHI
October 21, 1933
1

CHI. JAISUKHLAL ,

I got your letter.
I had heard about Umiya’s 2 illness. I had talked about her with
Jamnalalji. You should solve the problem about the charkhas there.
One of you should try to gin with the help of one of your charkhas
and make the necessary changes in it. Keshu’s letter is enclosed.
Vinod and Kusum wrote to me also. I hope you keep good
health.
Blessings from

BAPU
1
2

Jaisukhlal Amritlal Gandhi a khadi worker.
Addressee’s daughter

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

55

[PS.]
You must have read everything about Prabhudas’s marriage.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M. M. U./III

65. LETTER TO KESHAVRAM S. TRIVEDI
October 21, 1933
BHAI KESHAVRAM,

I have your letter. Please send the khadi to Shri Harakhchand
Motichand through the Orissa Flood Relief Committee, Cuttack,
Orissa.
Blessings from

BAPU

SHRI KESHAVRAM TRIVEDI
SUDDHA KHADI BHANDAR, NAVSARI
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M. M. U./XXII

66. LETTER TO SHANKARLAL D. PARIKH
October 21, 1933
BHAI SHANKARLAL,

I received your letter a few days ago, but could not get time to
reply to it. I cannot postpone doing so any longer, and so I write this.
I hope Vanamala and Mohan have completely recovered now. I would
advise you not to keep either of them in Kathlal. There was a letter
from Narahari specially about them, and he also says that both of
them must live with Anandi. It is desirable that they should get used to
living with other people and have some experience. They will fall ill
occasionally, no matter where they are. Of course if neither of them
can be persuaded to go, I shall be helpless. But I think you should try
and see if you can persuade them to go. So far as I know, Vanamala
used to feel very happy with Anandi, but it is possible that Mohan
may find it difficult to forget his attachment for Kathlal. But he has a
simple heart and I think it will be easy for you to persuade him. If
you have recently got any news about Narahari and Mani1 , please let
me know. Also tell me what you are doing at present. You have
preserved the love of neatness which I had observed in you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : C. W. 2685
1

56

Narahai Parikh’s wife.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

67. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI P. PANDYA
October 21, 1933
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

I got your previous letter, but I simply couldn’t find time to
reply to it. I had completely forgotten to write to you about the prices
of raw and processed yarn. I have sent your letter to Bhai Shankerlal
and asked for his comments. Perhaps he will talk with you, too.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : C. W. 363 : Bhagwanji P. Pandya

68 LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
WARDHA,

October 21, 1933
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

Blessings for the new year. Anandi, Babu and Bachu will have
arrived there. As Vimu1 has not come so far, all the girls will go to
Sharda Mandir. So there is nothing to say about their studies.
I find that the girls do not get proper food. They cannot be fed
differently from the Harijan girls. Talk to them and if necessary make
changes in the menu without increasing the expenditure. I believe that
the Harijan girls should get the same food as we normally eat. I know
it is difficult. We can think about it only when we meet. I have just
told you of the girls’ attitude. We should do whatever is possible
without doing harm to the Harijan Ashram.
New Year’s blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 32824

69. INTERVIEW TO “UNATI”
[Before October 22, 1933] 2
Q. Inspite of efforts on the part of social reformers, the standard of living of
educated communities in Sind has been rising very rapidly; what would you advise
under the circumsatnces ?
1
2

Vimala, daughter of Chhaganlal Joshi
The report was released to the Press from Hyderabad (Sind) on this date.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

57

A. I would advise those who think this is wrong to set an example
by living simply and thinking and acting nobly.
Q. Young men believe that unless they are in a position to earn from Rs. 150
to 200 per month, they cannot even think of marriage. At the same time, an ever-increasing number of them keep on imagining that it is legitimate to satisfy sexual
instinct in some way or another without undertaking the obligations of married life;
how do you view such a mentality ?
A. I can only look upon it with shame and deep regret. Such
mentality can only lead to suicide. The only cure for it is for young
men, who realize te enormity of the evil, to set their faces against it by
showing the greatest purity in their own lives and correctness of
conduct.
Q. What advice would you give to young girls who have perforce to remain
unmarried or who are not in a mood to marry ?
A. Such girls should go out of their little communities or even
Provinces in search of suitable deserving companions. The sooner we
get through the spirit of provincialism and exclusive caste, the better
would it be for us. I cannot understand why an educated Amil should
be in search of an Amil companion and why he or she should not take
a deserving companion from any part of India, the condition being,
not selfish gratification of base animal passions, but search after spiritual growth and national advancement.
Q. Would you not advise the Amil girls to break the barriers of Amilism and be
prepared to marry any non-Amil—be he a Bhaibund or a Bhatia or any other ? What
are your views on inter marriages between Sindhis and Gujaratis, etc. ?
A. Already

answered above.

Q. If you hold that “man and woman should be given fullest opportunity for
self-expression”, would you advise that young girls and young boys should be given
unfettered discretion in mixing or associating with each other, irrespective of
parents’ knowledge or control ? Also, should girls be allowed to move about as freely
as boys do?

Most decidedly not. I believe in the middle path. Most boys
and girls should be guided and allow themselves to be guided by their
parents and guardians and the latter on their part should cherish and
promote the independence of their boys and girls who may be under
their guardianship or supervision. If the youth of the country will
remain pure they should avoid all secretiveness.
A.

Q. It is maintained by the old people that in view of the peculiar conditions
obtaining in Sind, it is not safe to discard purdah, but young men are naturally

58

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

against this system which they regard as highly pernicious. What would you suggest
to avoid the clash on this point of difference between the young and the old ?
A. I have never believed in the purdah system. I think it

is fast
going and the girls, who dare to tear the purdah and demonstrate to
their neighbours that no harm has befallen them in any way whatever,
will be most potent proofs for removing the prejudice or fear. Tearing
down the purdah does not mean that girls should wander about
anywhere and everywhere. It is the hiding of one’ face in the presence
of men which I consider to be so highly injurious to one’s growth or
self-expression. Modesty is the best protection and purdah.
Q. What are your views on co-education ?
A. I

believe in well-regulated and well-thought-out co-education.
The Bombay Chronicle, 26-10-1933

70. TALK WITH A FRIEND

1

[Before October 22, 1933]
You are aware of the agreement among the so-called minority
communities when the Round Table Conference was in progress in
London. The Harijans also were included among them. I staked my
life for them at that time.3 Being a far-sighted man I realized that since
some sort of a constitution was coming, if the Government acce-pted
the scheme contained in that agreement our relations with Harijans
would come to an end and Hindu society would be perma-nently
divided. Harijans would either separate from the rest of the Hindus
and form a new community; or would merge in some other
community; but they would not continue to belong to the Hindu fold.
I saw that this would mean the destruction of Hinduism. It would be
destroyed not because 60 million people would have left it, but
because of the reasons driving them to that course. Anyone is free to
abandon Hinduism if he so chooses, but we, the caste Hindus, should
not be the cause of their doing so. I, therefore, felt that it was my
dharma to prevent such a division even at the cost of my life.
Though I was in jail when the Award of the British Cabinet
2

This and the following item are from Chandrashanker Shukla’s weekly letter.
This appeared under title “Why Took Up Harijan Work”.
2
Vide “Speech at Minorities Committee Meeting”, 13-11-1931 and “Speech at
Westminster School”, 13-11-1931
3
ibid
1

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

59

regar-ding electorates was published,1 I still felt that I had no choice
but to keep my pledge to oppose it. I, therefore, went on a fast unto
death in September 1932. People say now that, even if only incidentally, it rendered a great service to Hinduism. If you believe that I had
taken the right step in opposing the British Cabinet’s Award, all the
other steps follow logically from it.
Q. Will you kindly explain that in more detail ? By your fast in 1932 you did
succeed in getting the scheme of separate electorates for Harijans altered, but what
was the justification of the other steps ?
A. The

desire to get the Cabinet Award amended was merely the
originating cause of the fast. But with its amendment a duty devolved
on the caste Hindus. Hence, when Sir Purushottamdas1 and Sjt. Ghanshyamdas visited me in jail, I told them that I would not be content
merely with the amendment of the Cabinet Award and that the caste
Hindus would have to do a great deal. Then I embodied this in the
form of a resolution. It was passed at the Bombay Conference on September the 25th in almost the very words of my draft. 3 It was stated
therein that from then on no one would be regarded as an untouchable in Hinduism and that all temples and other public places would
be accessible to Harijans to the same extent that they were to the other
Hindus. When all the leaders came to me after the Resolution was
passed, I pledged my life to the Harijan leaders for the implementation of the Resolution. Hence it became incumbent upon me to take
steps even in Yeravda jail. I corresponded with the Govern-ment to get
the doors of the prison that had closed after that fast opened again,
and told it that I would have to keep the caste Hindus awake to their
duty, and that, therefore, I should not lose contact with them. As a
result of the correspondence, the Government granted me full permission to carry on Harijan work from prison. 4 Then I noticed some
impurity among the Harijan workers and in consequence I had to
resort to the 21 days’ fast. Then I was imprisoned again in August
and asked for the same facilities as before. On their being refused,
there followed another fast of 8 days.
Q. Can you say more about this impurity among the workers ?
1

On August 17, 1932; vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 8-11-1932
Sir Purushottamdas Thakurdas
3
Vide “Resolution at the Hindu Leaders Conference, Bombay”, 25-9-1932
4
Vide, Footnote I “Telegram to Home Secretary Government of India”,
3-11-1932
2

60

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

A. That fast was intended for the purification of the workers. I
have given an illustration in Harijan to show when a purificatory fast
becomes necessary.1 Please refer to it. If such impurity creeps into us,
religious reform would not spread among the crores of people and the
irreligious practice of untouchability which has entered deep into our
villages cannot be eradicated. I have already described the great
conflict in my heart and the terrible storm through which I had to pass
before arriving at the decision to fast. I have not cited in Harijan all
the instances of impurity that have come to my notice. I came to know
a great many other things during and even after my fast. Many of the
workers woke up and told me that they had considered themselves
absolutely pure that they could not see the blemishes in them. I have
already published the confession2 of an overseer who had collected a
pice each from the labourers. If I were to publish all such instances
the pages of Harijan would start stinking. I have, therefore, refrained
from doing so. We need not worry about purifying the world. But we
can certainly except that those who have dedicated their lives to
Harijan work will always remain pure. Fasting is a very common thing
in Hinduism,but other religions too have recommended fasting as a
means for purification.
Q. Many people feel that your efforts to get the Temple-entry Bill3 passed in
the Assembly and sending Rajaji to Delhi with that aim was a violation of the
principle of non-co-operation. Will you kindly explain your point of view ?
A. The Congress principles are intended to facilitate its work.
You know that in 1921 when the non-co-operation movement was in
full swing a Congressman in Utkal had misappropriated some money,
thinking that he would not be taken to a court of law since the Congress had boycotted them. When this thing was brought to my notice.
I wired advising that they should have the man arrested. The rules of
the Congress should not be such that defeat its own aims. In the matter
of temple-entry, I saw that there was a legal impediment, and that if we
could not proceed further without getting it removed, we must do so,
and bear with any short-sighted person who may see a contradiction
in our action. Is there no difference between taking one grain of
1
2

Vide “A Case for Fasting”
Vide “Notes” , sub-title “A Noteworthy Donation” , “Some Dangerous

Beliefs”
3

Introduced by Ranga Iyer in the Legislative Assembly; vide also footnote 3,
“Letter to Ranchhoddas Patwari”, 11-1-1933

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

61

arsenic and 30 grains of it ? Medicine should be used to cure a disease
and not to commit suicide. It is the moral duty of those who passed
the Bombay Resolution to take the help of the law, if necessary, to get
the disabilities of Harijans removed. This is clearly stated in the
Resolution. How can the supporters of that Resolution oppoe this Bill
? Or, why should they hesitate to take the help of members of the
Assembly ? We have not given but accepted co-operation. Supposing
that the Government passes legislation enforcing complete prohibition; shall we say then that we do not want it ?
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 22-10-1933

71. SEATS FOR HARIJANS1
[Before October 22, 1933]
To say that Harijans will not be able to use their franchise properly and will not be able to understand the interests of the country is
to lay the axe at the very root of the principles of democracy. It is like
the imperialists telling us that we are not fit for democracy and will
never learn the proper use of the franchise. Mistakes will always be
made. We shall progress only through mistakes. But does it mean that
we should not have the right to vote ? Exercise of the right of voting
will in itself be an education for Harijans. Nor would it be proper to
say that they would not under-stand national interests. Their representatives would be persons elected with our own votes. For every
Harijan seat, Harijans would elect four persons, and from among these
four we shall have to elect one. Would we not find even one person
from among them who would understand the nation’s interests ? If we
really do not find such a person, then the fault would be ours for
having neglected them to that extent. The right way is to embrace
them and win over their hearts by serving them. It won’t help to
distrust them.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 22-10-1933

1

This was Gandhiji’s reply to some critics of the representation given to
Harijans under the Yeravda Pact.

62

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

72. ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS1
[Before October 22, 1933]

UNDYING MEMORY OF THE BELOVED2
I fully share your grief. Your letter reminds me that several
friends of mine have been in the same condition as you. But I have
seen from experience that our love for the beloved one is not for his
or her body but the immortal spirit dwelling in it. As the years pass,
your memory of your wife will not grow dim in your heart, but will
become stronger and richer. This thought should dispel your grief
and give you deep joy and make you see what is real and what is unreal in life. If one individual can possibly share the experience of
another, I wish that you would share my experience as I am sharing
your grief.

GIFT OF DEATH3
If you have to depart, do so peacefully with the consciousness
that you are going to your own home and with the Lord’s name
inscribed in your heart. If God wills to take some service from you
through this very body of yours, He will save your life.

THE BEST USE OF THE ASHRAM
The Satyagraha Ashram has been permanently given away for
Harijan work. I feel that this is the best use it can be put to. Since the
Government did not take possession of it, there was no other equally
good purpose for which it could have been used. This was also the
best way of sacrificing the Ashram. Having regard to the ideals of the
Ashram, everybody here feels that this is the best purpose for which it
could be used. A special committee will be appointed to run it. It will
not admit just any Harijan. Whoever is admitted will have to abide by
the rules of the place. I see nothing wrong in the Ashram inmates
being without a permanent abode and living anywhere contented with
whatever comes their way. When everything is over, we may set up
another Ashram; that is the only proper course for us.
1

This appeared under the title “Form the Mail bag”.
This was in reply to a correspondent who had described his grief at the death
of his wife and asked Gandhiji how he could cherish her memory so that it might be a
source of joy without any shadow of grief.
3
This was addressed to a woman who was on her death-bed.
2

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

63

QUESTIONS FROM A HARIJAN W ORKER1
I do not believe that many Harijan workers are taking more than
what they need for their subsistence. Some of them take nothing at all.
I do not know what is ‘fat salary’ according to you. I consider him
the best propagandist who takes only enough for his food and clothing. In our poor country we do not have a leisured class which would
provide us national workers.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 22-10-1933

73. REGARDING MUNICIPALITIES, ETC.
A gentleman makes the following suggestion2 regarding municipalities, local boards, etc.
I think this suggestion certainly deserves consideration. The
municipalities themselves may not put the scheme into practice but
where the local Harijan Sevak Sangh is prepared to take the responsibility, the school buildings should be made over to them outside
school hour rent-free but on condition that the buildings and the
furniture would be well looked after. This will save rent and Harijans
will have the benefit of better accommodation and amenities.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 22-10-1933

74. SOME MORAL POSERS
The gentleman who has made suggestions regarding the municipalities, etc., has asked the following questions which are useful for
all workers.3
1

The worker had complained that most of the temples remained closed
toHarijans, workers doing Harijan service drew fat salaries, khadi workers took on
interest in Harijan work and that villages were steeped in ignorance and superstition.
Paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of Gandhiji’s answers are not translated here as they are
covered by “An M.A. in a Hurry’
2
Not translated here. The suggestion was that civic bodies should run night
schools for Harijans and encourage them with financial aid.
3
The questions are not translated here. The correspondent had asked :

64

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I would answer them in the following order—
(1) Any vow to be taken must be written out in precise terms. It
should be done in the presence of a witness , if available at the time. If
a doubt arises, it must be interpreted rigidly, not loosely. Nothing
should be appended to it, under the excuse of being left out, which
would weaken it. For instance, say, I pledge not to touch liquor. No
country has been mentioned in this pledge. I then go to England and
someone persuades me to take liquor on grounds of health. Now, I
cannot argue that since I happened to be in India at the time of taking
the pledge it applied only to my stay there and that I was free to take
liquor while abroad. Nor can I permit myself to take liquor as a
medicine on the ground that there was no mention of medicines in the
pledge.
(2) As in the case of other activities, the time for prayer too must
be fixed. It matters little what time is fixed for it. It is best to have it
just before bed-time and on waking up in the morning after cleaning
one's teeth. It is also necessary to have fixed hours of sleep. No one
can achieve concentration of mind all at once. As the saying goes,
"even hard black rocks can be cut with a rope." So concentration will
automatically follow in the wake of regular praying. So long as this is
not attained, one should diligently continue to pray every day rather
than worry about it. “You should never accept defeat, even if you
die.”
(3) Never give up the practice of writing a diary once you have
resolved to do so. If not immediately, you will certainly realize its
advantages later. This habit itself will guard us against many of our
shortcomings as the diary will be a permanent witness to these. All the
slips must be noted in the diary. There is no need to condemn them.
Criticism is always taken for granted. It is enough to mention, say,
‘Today I was angry with B; today I deceived A.’ There is no need to
make observations like, ‘This was very unfortunate, ‘Oh me! I must
not repeat it.’ Words in praise of oneself should never be there. It is
enough to note down the work done and the slips committed. The
diary should not take note of other people’s faults.
(4) This question does not appear to be right. Neither the
language of the Gita, nor my own, is aphoritics. It is not proper to
compare my language with the Gita’s; I would be happy if I could
(1) What are the factors to be considered before taking a vow and whether in
can be modified afterwards?
(2) Can the fixed times of prayer be immediately after waking and just before

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

65

write the language of the Gita, but I am far removed from it. Whatever
we read on a subject with which we have little familiarity, appears to us
aphoristic. Technical language is language which is adequate for the
purposes of that subject alone. To those who are not familair with it, it
sounds aphoristic. But this is one thing and the sutras1 of Patanjali are
another thing. The latter leave many things unsaid. This cannot be
said of the Gita. But here the author gives a new connotation to
familiar expressions, which makes them difficult to understand. My
language has one quality, viz. brevity. However, it is imperfect,
whereas the Gita is perfect. When I say that my language is imperfect
I do not imply that I have inadequate command over the language,
although that too is true. What is implied here is that my thoughts are
imperfect. Hence there is bound to be difficulty in understanding
them. As my thoughts mature, they will come to be expressed so as to
be easily comprehended. Having admitted this shortcoming in my
language, I can still say that some readers do not make the fullest
effort and then fail to understand even perfectly expressed ideas. And
then they blame me! For example, let us take the instance cited by the
correspondent himself. Spinning is a tangible activity; it can therefore
be actually demonstrated. Agitation of the mind is intangible. It is
quite correct to say that restlessness can be got over by practice.
Today, we have no means for actually demonstrating [the truth of]
this. If we learn to reduce our thought processes to a visual image we
would be able to obtain a picture of this practice too as we do of
spinning. At present we can only say that mental restlessness can be
got rid of through diligent praying. In this, one has to rely on the
truthfulness of the student, i.e., his adherence to truth. Who can know
a person who pretends to pray while continuing to be agitated ? Or,
who is there to rebuke the individual who deceives himself every day
and while praying daily makes many impossible plans ? In other
words, the success of practice depends entirely upon the sincerity of
the aspirant. If there is insincerity in spinning, it can be pointed out to
the spinner, since it can be directly perceived.
(5) “You should be satisfied with whatever little you get” does
not imply that a lazy person may rest satisfied with what he gets. The
implication is that one should be satisfied with what one gets after
making constant and sincere effort. That is to say that in addition to
the utmost human effort, God in heaven has His say on the result.
1

66

Yogasutras enunciated by Patanjanli.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Hence, there is absolutely no need to be despondent if the effort does
not appear to bear fruit. This is what the author of the Gita suggests.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 22-10-1933

75. LETTER TO MADHAVDAS AND KRISHNA KAPADIA
WARDHA,

October 22, 1933
CHI. MADHAVDAS AND KRISHNA,1

I got your letter. My blessings to you both. May you be happy
and have peace of mind during this year.
The tour will commence on the 8th.
Ba knows your address, of course.
Ramdas is fine.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M. M. U./XXII

76. LETTER TO KANTI N. PAREKH
W ARDHA,
October 22, 1933
CHI. KANTI,

I was very happy to read your letter. My blessings to you and
Jayanti for the new year. May both of you cultivate greater devotion
to service and live long.
Parbhudas’s marriage was celebrated here on Wednesday. The
bride is from Bijnor, and excels even Prabhudas in simplicity. She is
hard-working and seems good-natured. She is brave and loves serving
people. She has no love for pleasures at all. Ramdas is doing fairly
well. Keshu has joined a ginning mill. Krishnadas is in the khadi
department. There are more than 40 girls here. The whole burden is
being shouldered by Lakshmibehn and Dwarkanath. Things are going
fairly well. Anandi, Bachu and Babu left for Ahmedabad only
1

Kasturba Gandhi’s brother and his wife

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

67

recently. Balabhadra and Dhiru Joshi are in Bhavnagar and deeply
engrossed in the activities there. I think Indu will cling to the place.
Dudhibehn lives in Bhavnagar and looks after the children.
I frequently hear from Devdas and Mahadev, and from Sardar
also, of course. I had a letter today form . . . 1 too. Prithuraj 2 is at
Calicut. He writes to me occasionally. Mani must have gone to Ahmedabad. Swami has come here today. Kishorelal and Gomati have
returned to Akola.
My tour will commence on the 8th.
I think I have written enough now, haven’t I ? Make the best use
of every moment. Write to me again if you can.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Mirabehn, Chandrashankar and Nayar will accompany me. At
present Ba also is here. She leaves for [Yeravda] Mandir after a few
days.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 6276.

77. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
October 22, 1933
CHI. MANI,

I got your postcard. I will wait for you there on Wednesday. I
do hope Baba will come. I hope you are improving. Swami arrived
today. The rest on Wednesday.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna patro-4 : Manibehn Patelne, p. 109

1
2

68

The souree is illegible here.
Son of Lakshmidas Asar.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

78. LETTER TO GANGA T. HINGORANI

1

WARDHA,

October 22, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

Chi. Vidya 2 has read out to me your letter to Anand. You should
stop worrying about the two of them. Anand and Vidya are no kids.
Their ultimate welfare lies in our letting them do what they wish to.
Anand will meet you. Please give him your blessing. Give up un-due
attachment. Vidya needs peace. She keeps fit here. She also learns a
few things and is in good company. Mahadev too is well. You need
not be anxious on his score either. How long can grown up children
stay with their parents ? They ought to have their freedom. Since God
has endowed you with wealth you need not feel the necessity of
phyical service from Anand or Vidya. Moreover, Vidya is incapable
of rendering physical service. She herself needs it.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy : National Archieves of India and
Anand T. Hingorani.

79. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
October 23, 1933
CHI. MARY,

Great minds think alike. I was wondering why you would not
take your meal here last evening. Of course you can take all your
meals here. The liquidness has nothing to do with the indigestion. It
points to the necessity of less protein. But you should take some time
from me when you come.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
If the bowels have been sluggish and you feel any indigestion
1
2

Mother of Anand T. Higorani.
Anand T. Hingorani’s wife and son

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

69

now, you may mix one portion of milk. Yes, three meals will be
perhaps quite enough.
From a photostat : G. N. 6012. Also C. W. 3338. Courtesy : F. Mary Barr

80. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
WARDHA,

October 23, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I had two wires one from you and the other from Krishna and
Raja. Thank God. Mother’s bravery commands my worship. I have
pictured her to be a personification of quiet, dignified bravery and
sacrifice, ever since I have met her.
One thing I have been forgetting to write to you. If ever you
feel that you would like to call a meeting of the A. I. C. C., you must
not hesitate to call it. You need not mind my disinclination. I am
disinclined, because I feel it will make confusion worse confounded
and mean waste of energy, time and money. But I may be quite
wrong.
Love to you all.
Blessings from

BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.

81. LETTER TO MITHUBEHN PETIT
October 23, 1933
CHI. MITHUBEHN,

I have offended you. But I am helpless.
I examined your samples. I will try to find buyers for them. I
will also try if somebody agrees to buy up all your stock. You say that
you are prepared to sell even at a loss. Let me know what you mean
and how much loss you are prepared to put up with.You had asked
me for something in the nature of a letter of recommendation. I give
it below.
God alone can reward you for the service you have been doing
to the poor through khadi work and by running a dispensary. However, the country also will not forget the services of self-sacrificing

70

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

women like you. It can show it appreciation of them best by welcoming them, taking up those causes and helping you in doing your
work better. The people should know that, even if the khadi manufactured through; your help is costly, every pie paid by them for it
goes directly into the pockets of the poor. You don’t want even a pie
by way of profit. God has given you enough and you are not only
satisfied with it but even spend from it for the benefit of the poor.
I hope you keep good health. My tour will commence on the
8th.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Give me news about Jaiji and also her address.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 2706

82. LETTER TO PADMA
October 23, 1933
CHI. PADMA,

I got your letter. I don’t wish to take you with me during my
tour just now. You should become more mature and settle down to
something. After that, I may take you if I get a suitable opportunity.
You must have read about Prabhudas’s marriage. Several visitors have
turned up and so I stop here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 6146. Also C. W. 3501. Courtesy :
Prabhudas Gandhi.

83. LETTER TO RANI VIDYAVATI
WARDHA,

October 23, 1933
CHI. VIDYA,

Have you not received my letters at all? There is no mention of
them in your letter which I received today.
Why did you go to Hardoi in spite of the pain? One can be

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

71

attached even to service. You can render true service only by giving
up attach-ment altogether. Can the cripple not worship? One can also
serve through one’s mind. Take a couple of Harijan girls into your
house and bring them up.
Lakshmi has not been writing at all. How is that? Write to her
that I shall be satisfied if I have a postcard from her. Do you receive
Harijan Sevak?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Rani Vidyavati Papers: Courtesy: Gandhi National
Museum and Library

84. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR1
October 24, 1933
CHI. MARY,

If I knew where N. was, I would immediately wire her to return.
I am in search but have failed so far.
Love.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat : G. N. 6013. Also C. W. 3339. Courtesy : F. Mary Barr

85. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
October 24, 1933
DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,

Herewith George Joseph’s letter and a copy of my reply1 to
him.
Also herewith a letter of complaint against poor Bapineedu and
a copy of my reply.2
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
1
1
2

72

The letter was in reply to the addressee’s request to be allowed to go and fetch
These are not available.
ibid

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[PS.]
I got the letters regarding N. [The National] Call has done great
injustice to her and S 1 . I have written to Sahani; I had expected his
reply today.2
From a photostat : G. N. 1129

86. LETTER TOMATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
October 24, 1933
Why would I refrain from criticizing you for getting angry
when I think It necessary to do so ? . . . 3 But I certainly don’t want
you to apologize against your will. If I wouldn’t force anybody else
to do anything against his will, why should I force you ? And would
you tolerate me even if I tried ? But I certainly have a right, and it is
my duty as well, to criticize you whenever I feel it necessary to do so .
. . 4 A person apologizes not for the sake of the other party but for his
own good. Among persons with equally virtuous character, age is a
consideration. I close this chapter here. Forget all that I have written
about the matter.
What connection has this affair with your becoming a trustee 5 ?
I was a party to the proposal for making you one of the trustees. If I
get a person better qualified than you, I would certainly withdraw
your name. But I would remain neutral if we could think of another
person as well qualified as you but not better.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 138

87. LEETER TO MOOLCHAND AGRAWAL TTER
October 24, 1933
BHAI MOOLCHAND,

I have your letter. Teaching is the right vocation for you.
Through it you may do what you can for khadi. But for that a
thorough knowledge of the technique of khadi is essential.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G. N. 752
1
2
3
4
5

The name has been omitted.
The pstscript is in Gujarati.
Omissions as in the source.
ibid
Of the Gandhi Seva Sangh

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

73

88. LETTER TO RAMA DEVI CHOWDHARY
October 24, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

I have your letter. If your son and daughter are keen on studies
it would be the right thing to arrange for that. It would be excellent if
they learn some vocation. It is impossible to have your son touring
with me. The present tour is rather [difficult].1
Blessings from

BAPU

SMT. RAMA DEVI CHOWDHARY2
CHANDNI CHOWK
CUTTACK, ORISSA
From a photostat of the Hindi : G. N. 2782

89. TRIBUTE TO VITHALBHAI PATEL

3

October 24, 1933
Mr. Vithalbhai Patel’s death removes one of the most painstaking and ablest of politicians. His self-sacrifice and whole hearted
application to the work he undertook were beyond praise. His capacityπ for work was amazing. It has been truely said of him that
whether as the President of the Bombay Corporation or of the Legislative Assembly, he cleared his desk every day, and never allowed
arrears to grow. His death is a distinct loss to the country at this juncture. I cannot close this tribute without placing on record my deep
appreciation of Mr. Subhas Chandra Bose’s magnificent and devoted
nursing of Vithalbhai at much risk to his own health.
The Hindu, 24-10-1933
4

1
2
3
4

74

The original is damaged here.
Wife of Gopabandhu Chowdhary
Gandhiji paid this tribute in an interview to the Associated Press.
On October 22

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

90. LETTER TO JANAKDHARI PRASAD
SATYAGRA
ASHRAM, W ARDHA,
October 25, 1933
DEAR JANAKDHARI BABU,

I have your sorrowful letter. You must not give way to grief as
you have done. I hope you received my letter written to you on 15th
inst. There need be no apology for writing to me. Do please write as
often as you wish. You have every right to have my opinion and
advice. If you can accept the advice I have given in my previous letter,
it will solve all your difficulties.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat : G. N. 55

91. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
October 25, 1933
DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,

Here is a letter from Narasimhan1 about the Southern tour. I do
not know why Rajagopalachari wants me to tour in the South as early
as possible. You will perhaps know. I am asking Narasimhan to ascertain the reason.
From your letter about N., I suspect that you think that I don’t
want to do anything with her, but that is not the case. I am anxious to
have her. But she is so unhinged that she might not come at all. Anyway, I am telegraphing today to you and to the American Mission. I
know that The National Call’s references to S. are all unmerited and
vicious. He has done no wrong to N. N. herself does not know why
her passions were excited when she saw him at Sabarmati. In the letter
in which she told me this, she had acquitted S. of all blame. Many
women, like many men, often get excited over seeing some members
of the opposite sex, and N., having led a life of complete abandon
would naturally get excited. I am asking S. to see you so that you can
make his acquaintance and know him. Now that you are in this case, it
is much better for you to understand all the actors. It will help me also
to have your estimate of these actors, for I have not seen the last of
1

Son of C. Rajagopalachari

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

75

any of them.
I see that Ramnarayan cannot come for two months as Ramnath
‘Suman’ was asking to be allowed to replace him for two or three
months. And it was a question whether you could agree and whether
Ramnarayan would waive his claim in favour of Ramnath. I suppose
you know him. He is quite capable and he will do all the work that
you expect. Of course, Chandrashankar cannot possibly cope with the
correspondence, editing, and drawing up newspaper reports.
I have a copy of your letter to Negi. You seem to have expected
a reply from me to your letter about Biharilal, but in your letter
enclosing his long letter to you, you told me that you would write
further about him. Naturally, therefore, I did not write, but I can now
say generally that we may not create work for him. If there is work for
which he is fitted, it should undoubtedly be given to him, even though
similar work can be done for less wages than what might have to be
given to him.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU

Encl. One letter1
From a photostat : G. N. 1130

92. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
October 25, 1933
CHI. VASUMATI,

I heard about you through Tara. She is expected here now.
Surendra is here. He keeps good health, but seems to have lost
considerable weight. Swami also is here. Mani and Mridula are
expected today. Prabhudas has married a girl from North India. The
marriage took place here. The girl’s name is Amba. Both are still
here. My tour will commence on the 8th. Ba, Mira, Chandrashankar
and Nayar are with me. Ba is Preparing to go to Mandir. Nanibehn,
Gangabehn and Pannalal are in Ahmedabad. Write to me whenever
you can. Do you read anything ?
Blessings from

BAPU

SMT. VASUMATIBEHN PANDIT, PRISONER
DISTRICT PRISON, THANA
G. I. P. R LY.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S. N. 9337. Also C. W. 583. Courtesy :
Vasumati Pandit
1

76

This is not available.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

93. LETTER TO JANAKIDEVI BAJAJ

1

October 25, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

I must congratulate you on your proposed visit to Calcutta for
the purpose of ending the custom of purdah among the sisters there.
Purdah is not only a superstitious obsession, I feel it also smacks of
sin. Purdah from whom ? Are all men steeped in lust ? Cannot a
women retain her purity without observing purdah ? Purity is a state
of mind. It ought to come spontaneously to all men. In this age of
reason women should serve Daridranarayana if they wish to protect
their dharma. They should also educate themelves. Service of Daridranarayana implies propagation of khadi, spinning, etc. Harijan
service implies washing off the stain of untouchability; both of these
noble activities are God’s work. And education can never be acquired
while retaining the purdah.
Did Sita observe purdah in her wanderings with Rama in the
forests ? Has there ever been in the world a women more virtuous than
Sita ? Exhort the women to end the custom and preserve dharma.
Yours ,

MOHANDAS GANDHI
[From Hindi]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 118

1
The addressee was to preside over the All India Marwadi Women’s Conference
in Calcutta This letter was-message for the delegales and was published in
Vishwamitra 29-10-1933

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

77

94. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
October 26, 1933
CHI. MARY,

A ‘tragedy of errors’. The man who brought the first note said
no answer was required. Now Madan Mohan sends a reminder. 1 Do
please both of you come at 4 p.m.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat : G. N. 6014. Also C. W. 3340. Courtesy : F. Mary Barr

95. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
W ARDHA,
October 26, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

Herewith resignation from Dr. Alam. I have told him that it
should have been sent to you. I advise its acceptance. It arises out of a
letter of bitter complaint received against him from Lahore. I sent him
a copy of it. He strictly denied some of the charges made therein. But
accepted the one about practice.
Jamnalalji is anxious about his resignation. My own opinion is
that his too should be accepted. He is anxious to go to prison but it
worries him that he does not go at once.
I suppose Krishna is now in Bombay.
I see nothing in the paper about Mother now a days. Is she
better ?
Vithalbhai’s death was fully expected by me but the actuality is
disturbing me. His very opposition I valued. It cleared my mind and
enabled me to put my position more clearly before the country than I
otherwise could have.
Love.
BAPU

Encl.
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
1
The addresee has prefaced this letter with the following note in her book
Bapu : “I wrote a note asking Gandhiji if I might bring to see him an English friend,
who passing through Wardha, and onec, had received no reply. So I sent a reminder
with a man who was going to the Ashram.”

78

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

96. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
October 26, 1933
MY DEAR OLD BEARD,

Your letter about Kamala does credit to you. As I have to advise
her, I was bound to know the reasons for your opinion. You have
given me the straightest opinion. Raihana holds the contrary opinion.
Yours is based largely on instinct and so is Raihana’s. My instinct too
has been against her. But I have refused to act on my instinct in the
face of her emphatic contradictions. Of course I brought my own
suspicions to her notice.
I hope you had a successful time in Amreli. Did it do much
good ? Did you sell much khadi ? Were you able to do some
substantial Harijan work ?
Love to you all.
Yours,

BHRRR
From a photostat : S. N. 9588

97. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
October 26, 1933
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,

I must dictate in English in answer to your letter written in
Hindi.
It was not necessary to write more about the constitution of the
Harijan Seva Sangh. Whether we should immediately bring into being
a semi-democratic organization is a question for consideration. I do
not know whether under the appointment there is the power, but the
plan that I have suggested 1 is feasible and can be enforced immediately, that is, to register the Ashram in the names of the trustees that
I have suggested. You should discuss your idea with Thakkar Bapa
and Hariji.
As to the Spinner’s Association, I had an absolutely free hand,
and I evolved a plan which enabled it to become an easily operating
and sound organization with immense posssibility for democrati1

Vide “Letter to G. D. Birla”

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

79

zation. I wanted to write to you as soon as the decision for the transfer
of the Ashram was taken, that, in view of that acquisition, the ambitious plan for Delhi should be abandoned. But the hostel scheme is
quite sound. Of course, we shall want many such hostels; and I can see
immense possibilities emerging from them, if they are properly managed. When I am in Delhi you may take any work you like from me.
So far as Biharilal is concerned, if he will serve in connection
with the hostel schemes and so on, we can utilize his services. But I am
very much against engaging paid preachers, Harijans or otherwise.
And in this matter we cannot be too firm.
As to my stay in Delhi, of course, it is to be regulated by you.
My own inclination would be to stay at Lakshminarayan’s 1 place. I
believe in sticking to old places, except on sound reasons for a
departure. For my health Parmeshwari’s place would be ideal. But I
must not be made inaccessible. To do so would defeat the purpose of
the tour. My stay should depend upon the work to be taken from me.
You will come to wrong decisions, if you always think of my
convenience. You can depend upon it that I shall make my own convenience, no matter where you put me. For my stay in Calcutta, you
should consult Dr. Bidhan, Satish Babu, etc.
I understand what you say about Mrs. Lahiri. I did not give any
opinion, because I had none. As she had mentioned your name and as
you know almost everybody in Calcutta, I thought I would forward
that letter to you and have your opinion. I have written to Dr. Bidhan
also who has issued the certificate. You may dismiss the matter from
your mind for the time being at least. If I form any opinion in the
execution of which I need your assistance, I shall immediately let you
know.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU2

[PS.]
Gopi is doing well. She is certainly happy. How is your health ?3
C. W. 7938. Courtesy : G. D. Birla

1
2
3

80

Lakshminaryan Gadodia
The signature is in Devanagari script.
The postscript is in Hindi.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

98. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
October 26, 1933
DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,

I have copies of your two letters to Parikshitlal.1
What you have heard is quite true. The grass has been given to a
shepherd. I believe that some earnest money has been received, which
will have to be transferred to the Society. And nominal rent is to be
recovered from Ramji 2 and others who are already residing there.I
believe that there is a full map of the Ashram. I am asking Chimanlal
to write to you about it. Herewith a letter from Budhabhai as to what
he will do. Juthabhai is already, I believe, living in the Ashram and so
also Bhagwanji. It must be Juthabhai’s business to see to the proper
unkeep of the ground and the premises. The trees are a most valuable
part of the estate.
You have asked Parikshitlal to give you draft rules. Evidently
my letter sending you a copy of these was not received by you when
you sent your letter.
I enclose herewith a letter received from Dr. Bidhan in connection with the collections. You may destroy the letter after reading it.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU

[PS.]
You have done well in going to N.’s rescue.3
Encls. 2 letters
From a photostat : G. N. 1131.

99. “HARIJAN” IN MADRAS
The reader must have been surprised to see the transfer of
Harijan publication from Poona to Madras. Sjt. R. V. Sastri and Mrs.
Sastri have dedicated themselves to Harijan service. Sjt. Sastri felt that
in Poona he was not able to give full service to the cause and that in
1
2
3

Parkishitlal L. Majumdar.
A weaver
The postscript is in Gujarati

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

81

Madras he would be able to make use of all the talents God had
bestowed upon him. The argument went home to me. The result is the
transfer of Harijan to Madras. What will happen or can happen after
3rd August next need not worry the reader or me. ‘One step enough
for me’ is as true of organizations as of individuals. The additional
advantage of the transfer to Madras is that Madras is the most
advanced and cheapest city in all India for English printing. And what
can be better than that Harijan should be published in a Presidency
where untouchability flourishes in all its unshapeliness ? I entertain
the hope that the transfer will not only be welcomed but appreciated
by the reformers, the sanatanists and the Harijans in the South.
Harijan is designed to serve all these three. An easy test of
appreciation will be an increased circulation.
Harijan, 27-10-1933

100. A TRAGEDY
The longer I live the more do I realize that the happiness which
I enjoy and which so many friends envy persists inspite of tragedies of
which I have always had my due share. The latest is the disappearance
of N. I have no doubt that her repentance was sincere. She struggled
bravely against her past, but it did appear to me on my coming to
Wardha that the struggle was getting too severe for her. She was
becoming unhinged and losing control over herself. Previously, in
one of her letters from Wardha, she had hinted that she might become
insane. All the affection that could be shown to her was shown. She
was never insensible to it. She was most responsive. But she was also
most impulsive. She has gone away without any money or belongings.
The reports published about her in the Delhi Press are sensational
manufactures and do her grave injustice. She cannot be held
responsible for her actions in her present mental state. Her proper
place is in a philanthropic institution or in an asylum. Those who will
throw a few silver piecess at her out of false compassion, or in order to
get rid of her, will do her no kindness. Being irresponsible, she has
been squandering what she has received. I would esteem it a favour if
those who may come in contact with her will give me her address and
show this writing to her.
Harijan, 27-10-1993

82

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

101. KHADI AND HARIJANS
Very few people have any notion of what khadi means to
Harijans. Simple weaving is almost an exclusive speciality of Harijans,
and even though mill spinning and weaving have deprived many
Harijans of a source of livelihood, thousands of them are still
dependant upon weaving. But a friend argues : “What is the use of
keeping alive a perishing industry ? Why not give them instead an
industry that may be growing ? Surely, you do not intend to confine
them to worn-out occupations even when you are devising all manner
of means for their uplift otherwise.” Indeed, I have desire to confine
Harijans, or for that matter, anybody, to spinning and weaving or to
any one occupation, if they can be more profitably employed in any
other; only I do not take the gloomy view of hand-spinning and
weaving which the objector takes. I personally believe that handginning, hand-carding, hand-spinning and hand-weaving have a
brilliant future, at least in India. If the millions are to live with any
degree of comfort, the mills must seek main custom outside India.
The villagers must be induced to supplement their scanty resources by
hand-spinning, hand-weaving, etc., assuming that millions of villagers
could be better employed, for the indigenous mills to supply all the
needs of the nation means long delay—several generations—and then,
too, it must mean the need of big capital and dependence for
machinery and technical skill upon foreign countries. In the abstract,
whilst there may be nothing wrong in depending upon foreign
machinery and foreign skill, in practice it cannot but be a terrible
handicap upon the mill industry. So long as this industry has got to
depend upon external help, it would be untrue to call it an indigenous
industry.
On the other hand, khadi, as a village industry, requires very
little capital. The implements can all be manufactured in the villages
them-selves, and there is no lack of indigenous techincal skill. The
only thing necessary is to change the mentality of the people. Inspite,
therefore, of the most skilful arguments to the contrary, and of
imposing statistics with regard to the output of mills, I remain confirmed in my opinion that khadi in India has a very big future. What
we may not do voluntarily and out of conviction, we shall be obliged
to do through force of circumstances. India has to live, that is, her
millions have to live. There is no difference of opinion as to the fact

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

83

that they are not living today. They are merely existing. There is no
other country in the world where so many million of people have only
partial employment and where, inspite of the civilization being
predominantly rural, the holdings are rarely two acres per head. To
manufacture the whole of her cloth requirements through steam or
electricity, or any other than the human power behind the wheel, is
still further to deepen the unemployment of the population. An industrialized India must, therefore, mean utter extinction of many millions,
including, naturally, Harijans, who occupy, to our utter shame, the
lowest strata of society.
It is said that through highly industrialized processes every
American owns what is equivalent to 36 slaves. If we use America as
our model, and if we allowed only 30 slaves to every Indian instead of
36, out of our 31 crores of human beings, 30 crores must perform
hara-kiri or be killed off. I know that some enthusiastic patriots will
not only not mind such a process, but they will welcome it. They will
say that it is better to have one crore of happy, contented, prosperous
Indians, armed to the teeth, than to have 30 crores of unarmed
creatures who can hardly walk. I have no answer to that philosophy,
because, being saturated with the Harijan mentality, I can only think in
terms of the millions of villagers and can only make my happiness
dependent upon that of the poorest amongst them, and want to live
only if they can live.My very simple mind cannot go beyond the little
spindle of the little wheel which I can carry about with me from place
to place and which I can manufacture without difficulty. In this connection a friend sends me the following paragraph 1 which is going
round the Press :
To relieve unemployment in certain industries the Nazis have ordered
the stoppage of the use of machines which were displacing human labour.
Commenting on this interdiction the Manchester Guardian remarks : “There
has been a great deal of discussion about the effects of machinery in
aggravating the unemployment crisis, but it has been left to the Nazis to do
the logical thing and stop using it. . . . Mr. Gandhi’s efforts to replace the
spinning frame by the hand-wheel and the mechanical loom by the handloom
are being paralleled closely in the German cigar and glass industries.”

The Guardian concludes its remarks by observing that, if Germany’s ‘ethics become mediaeval, there is no reason why her economics should not become mediaeval also’.Replying to these
1

84

From which only extracts are reproduced here.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

comments, a correspondent writes in the Guardian :i
Hitler, Gandhi and others who in different ways are endeavouring to
slow production to a point at which all goods are consumed may be reverting
to mediaeval methods, but handicrafts are neither retrograde nor barbaric. They
are taught in every progressive elementary and secondary school . . . So long
as machinery promotes the happiness and the prosperity of the masses as well
as the classes it is a beneficent agent. But when it leads to the unemployment
and starvation of millions, as is happening in the highly industrialized
countries of the West, it becomes a curse. Machinery exists for man, and not
vice versa, and must be made subservient to the well being of the people and
should not be allowed to become their master.

That the village industries in Germany are being revived at the
point of the sword is not relevant here. What is relevant is that a
country, which has shown the highest techincal skill and is amongst
the most advanced in the matter of industrialization, is trying to go
back to village industries for solving the problem of her terrible unemployment.
Harijan, 27-10-1993

102. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR1
WARDHA,

3 a.m., October 27, 1933
Totaramji tells me that you know him. Many Harijans also know
him very well. But running the Harijan Ashram or Mandir or Nivas,
whatever you call it, is to be your responsibility. You should, therefore, follow your own plan. Treat me as an adviser only. I made the
suggestion as is my wont and I may make many more such
suggestions. Please remember that you are not bound to accept any of
them.
Your going out in search of N. has deeply impressed me.
Though I have had sufficient experience of your concern for others,
your boundless compassion for N. fills me with the deepest admiration. Other friends have roundly blamed me for going out of my
way to help her. You, on the contrary, seem to have got annoyed by
my apparent indifference on this occassion. I bow to you in reverence
a thousand times. Where my love has failed, may yours succeed in
melting her heart. I understood your point in what you said regarding
Utkal in your letter to Chandrashankar.
BAPU
1

Gandhiji added this to the letter written by Chandrashankar Shukla.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

85

[PS.]
I wish you would now finish off the task of selecting a name for
the Harijan Ashram in consultation with Ghanshyamdas.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 1132.

103. LETTER TO MOTILAL ROY
October 27, 1933
DEAR MOTIBABU,

I was wondering why in reply to my postcard I had not heard
from anyone about you. The delay has been more than made up for
by your long and affectionate letter.
Let us be thankful that one eye remains for the present. But, as
you say, if God wills it that the other eye should also go, He shall be
praised.
I was sorry to hear of Swami Brahmanand’s death. Death is a
never failing friend. He comes to our assistance sometimes even when
he is least expected. And it is our want of faith that makes us feel
sorry when he comes.
I am glad you are prosecuting your khadi programme with an
ever increasing faith.
When I travel in Bengal I shall be travelling like a prisoner
under custody, going wherever my keepers would take me; and if they
take me to your Ashram I should be, of course, delighted. You will,
therefore, settle with the Head Jailor, Dr. Bidhan Roy; or you may
write to the Asstt. Jailors, Satcowri Babu or Satis Babu.
As to Jawaharlal’s views, did you not see the letters we have
exchanged ? 1 I have there definately shown where I agree with him
and where I disagree. But, if there are any specific points on which
you desire my opinion more clearly than I have expressed, do please
write to me without the slightest reservation.
Love to you. Mirabehn sends love.
Yours,
BAPU

SJT. MOTILAL ROY
CHANDRANAGAR
From a photostat G. N. 11046

1

86

Vide “ Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru” , 14-9-1933

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

104. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
October 27, 1933
BHAISHRI VALLABHBHAI,

It is three days since Mani, Mridu, her uncle and Babo arrived.
Babo doesn’t feel shy with me this time. His health also is fine. He
and I play on the Japanese sadhu’s drum. The sadhu is a jewel. He is
extremely frank humble, cheerful and courteous. He is learning
Hindi. He also spins on the charkha and the takli. He observes all the
rules scrupulously. I have given many hours to both the young
women. This morning I gave nearly two hours. I will give more time
still at 11.30. They have come in great haste and are in equally great
haste to return. They have, therefore, given me notice that they intend
to return today by the Mail train. Mani’s leg seems to require electric
treatment and Mridu has to attend on some women who are ill. The
two have formed an excellent pair.
. . . 1 Pattabhi2 was here. I hardly met him for ten minutes. He
had turned up without intimation. Jamnalalji rarely permits any body
much time with me. Even to the representatives of mill workers [from
Ahmedabad] he permitted one and a half hours in all in three
sessions. He guards me with the strictest vigilance.
I was certainly grieved by Vithalbhai’s death, though for
himself it was a deliverance. We had well known that he would die in a
foreign country. He seems to have been looked after very well.
Subhas, it seems, was beyond all praise. From all sources I hear reports
of his wonderful attention to Vithalbhai. I have written to him. You
also should write. My letter was posted before the news of Vithalbhai’s death was received.
Swami will remain here for some time yet. Thakkar Bapa has
gone to Brindaban in search of N. His compassion has no limit. The
woman is out of her mind. She never misbehaved here. She had gone
insane. She has still not come out of the woods. If she comes back, I
will take her in again. Amala is working hard at present. Duncan has
buried himself in a village. Mary Barr is still here. She has recovered
from her illness. Vinoba has been doing wonderful work for Harijans
in villages Mani has gone with Anandi. Bablo has left too.
1
2

Omission as in the source
Pattabhi Sitaramayya

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

87

Devdas writes to me regularly. Dr. Datta paid him a visit.
Khurshed1 seems to be a little ill. I have written to Dr. Datta and asked
him to see her too. Do not worry about my tour. I will take care of my
health. It is Rajaji’s wish that I should tour the South first. Anandi went
and saw Lakshmidas. She is firm in her resolution not to marry [just
now]. Give my blessings to Chandulal.
Blessing from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 36-8

105. TELEGRAM TO ADWAIT KUMAR GOSWAMI
WARDHA,

October 28, 1933
ADWAIT KUMAR
R ADHARAMAN MANDIR
BRINDABAN
DO TAKE N. TEMPLE S

IF

SHE

WISHES.

GANDHI
From a photostat : G. N. 806

106. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
October 28, 1933
BHAI MUNNALAL,

I got your letter. If you wished to live with me, why didn’t you
say so all these days ? It is not proper for you to feel unhappy as you
do. You cannot accompany me on my tour. If you sincerely wish to
stay in one place and work, you may work under Vinoba or Jamnalalji. But I am afraid you will not be able to stick to any place. If you
can disprove my fear, I should like you to do so. I know you very well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 8646

1

88

Dadabhai Naoroji’s grand-daughter
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

107. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
October 28, 1933
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

There was a wire from Subhas today saying that Vithalbhai’s
body will reach Bombay on the 9th and that you should perform the
cremation rites. I have replied through the Press that I don’t believe it
likely that you will make a request to be released and that the rites
should be performed without you, by Dahyabhai. There was no time to
consult you, nor did I think it proper to do so. If you have any-thing to
say, please let me know. I am writing to Dahyabhai.
I hope you got the letter which I wrote to you yesterday
regarding Kaka’s fast. Today is the third day. There has been no loss
of weight so far. He continues to work in bed. He is quite cheerful . . . 1
is still here. But I don’t think we can expect anything from him.
Prabhudas and Amba seem to be happy.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 38

108. LETTER TO JAISHREE RAIJI
October 28, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

You bring credit to your father.2 The training you have had in a
diplomat’s family has not been fruitless. You have remained noncommitted till the last. All right, apply to the Harijan Seva Sangh there
if you have not done so, and send me a copy of the application. I will
then do what I can.
Blessngs from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Gujarati : Bapujini Shital Chhaayaman, facing p. 9

1
2

The name is omitted in the source.
Sir Manubhai Mehta, Dewan of Baroda State

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

89

109. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI 1
WARDHA,

October 28, 1933
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. There is no question at all of asking
forgiveness of Thakkar Bapa. But be sure that there was no contempt in
Thakkar Bapa’s language. His language is not polite. But I see him as
the very embodiment of kindness. My close association with him fills
me with joy. His love is boundless. I can see it not in his letters but in
his work. I have come to believe that no one is lowly in his eyes. How
can I convince you of it? You should come here and carry back a little
comfort. Why should your mind be in turmoil? What wrong have you
committed? What does it matter what others think of you? Why should
it disturb you? What is it that troubles you? I can never believe that
Thakkar Bapa’s letter could have distressed you so much.
Nobody has complained against your nature to make me
consider you worthless. And could you ever be worthy or unworthy in
my eyes merely because someone says so? Do I have to know you
through others? You must shake off your anguish. Come here and
lighten your heart. Your misery makes me unhappy.
I am enclosing two letters from Harakhchand. Read them. If
you like my suggestion about appointing him agent, and only in that
case, you should place before the Committee the separate letter2 I am
enclosing on the subject.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1
2

90

An extract from the letter appears in “Letter to Mathurdas Trikumji”
Not available
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

110. A TEACHER’S DOUBTS
A teacher was somewhat puzzled while explaining to his students
my writings under Mangal Prabhat 1 and he has asked certain questions regarding them. Here is the first one :2
My experience to date suggests that one’s good lies in following
the path which appears right to oneself. One has to discover for oneself the path followed by great men, and find for oneself who are great
men. A great man who appears a paragon to one individual may seem
worthless to another. There have been cases in which two individuals
both regarding the same person as an authority interpret his words and
actions in two opposite ways. The story of Virochana and Indra3 is well
known. At every step ‘I’ comes to the forefront. But the task is not
accomplished even by my saying this. It cannot be claimed that what
occurs to us is always the truth. What appears to me as truth today, may
appear to be untruth after a couple of days. What is regarded as truth
by a few has often been denounced by many. Hence we come to this
terrible conclusion : Man can have a glimpse of truth only after
making mistakes, stumbling on the way and tread-ing dangerous paths.
However, all this perplexity arises from a disregard of the prerequisites for the quest of truth. Entitlement and eligibility are as much
essential in the case of truth as in any other. The person who wishes to
see Truth in the form of God must observe the yamaniyamas4 . Anyone
who has not thus attained eligibility lacks the “insight”; he is as good
as blind. Anyone who claims to have seen truth without so much as
trying to develop the eye for catching a glimpse of it would look as
ludicrous as one who presumes to impart knowledge of astronomy
without having studied it.
1
A collection of Gandhiji’s articles on Ashram observances written from
the Yeravda Central Prison; vide “ 1st Footnote Letter to Narandas Gandhi”,
18/22-1930
2

The question, not translated here, was whether the better course was to follow
the path of truth according to one’ own lights or to follow in the footsteps of great
men.
3
Chhandogyopanishad, VIII. 7
4
Rules and regulations enjoined by Shastras for spiritual aspirants
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

91

The teacher’s second question is as follows:1
In saying “We have come to the border-line, etc.’, my only
intention was to say that we could now have an easy access to the
subject. While discussing truth, we inevitably come to non-violence.
That there can be no truth without non-violence has been proved to be
as plain as the fact that two and two make four.
The teacher’s third question is as follows:2
The sentence quoted here is a good example of my inadequate
expression. I remember having some difficulty while drafting the
article. I could not find the words I was looking for. However, if my
condition is pitiable, the teacher’s is no less so.
We all go on chanting the word ‘non-violence’ but little do we
inquire into its true nature. We do not act in accordance with what it has
been described to be, hence the language used with reference to it
seems like a Chinese puzzle. The teacher has used expressions like
‘destroying’,‘facing’, ‘difficulties’, ‘suffering’,‘winning them over’,
etc., but they have failed to reveal their full meaning to him. His very
language suggests it. I do not regard this as his failing. This
imperfection is almost universal.
By saying all this, I have put before the reader my difficulty and
our ignorance of the subject. I believe I quite understand what I want to
say, but I have not yet struck upon the language which would aptly
convey my meaning. But I shall not accept defeat. Success is sure to
come with repeated efforts
Non-violence does not destroy, it sustains. Hence it meets
‘difficulties’ by overcoming them. My yarn often gets entangled. If I
cut it off, so much yarn goes waste. Cutting it off is easy and the
process is over in no time. But, it does not lead me to truth. I ‘face’ the
knot disentangling it, which is time consuming. But it saves the yarn
and I learn a lesson in patience. When the knot is disentangled, my joy
knows no bounds. I clear the way for other spinners. I add to my
knowledge. I find that the time spent was not wasted, and thus I learn
that the apparently easy and quick method of cutting up the knot was
1

It was: “In the concluding part of your article on ‘Truth’ you say, ‘We have
come to the border-line beyond which lies ahimsa.’ Do you mean that the former is a
means to the latter ?”
2
It read: “What do you mean when you say that one makes progress by putting
up with difficulties, not by counteracting them ? What is your definition of nonviolence in the restricted sense ?”

92

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

not correct and therefore not quick either. While disen-tangling the
knot, not only did I face the difficulty but by living with it after having
accepted it as such, I also learnt that I was the author of it. The
responsibility for its coming into being rested with me.
I believe I have shown through the above example how many
virtues are acquired by suffering in this manner. I think other instances too could be easily interpreted to yield the essence of my
writings. Examples will be readly available. But this does not imply that
all the problems of non-violence are capable of being solved. Or that
somebody has all the keys. This philosophy has not yet reached
perfection. Could any be said to have done so ? The knowledge of the
scientist seems to be no more than the growing realization of his own
ignorance. Non-violence is an abstruse science. We shall have to make
many experiments, many people will have to sacrifice themselves. All
that can be said with certainty at present is that non-violence appears to
be the only straight and the shortest path to realization of God in the
form of Truth. For a long time we have been treading the path of
violence, but we seem to be going farther away from truth.
The killing of lower animals, small insects and even plants involves violence and is, therefore, sinful too. Nothing that is embodied
can continue to do so without committing sin. From the worldly
standpoint, however, the minimum inevitable violence committed for
preserving the body is not regarded as sin.
We can now define violence in its narrow connotation. The wilful,
wanton or arbitrary destruction of any living organism even smaller
than an insect, is violence; not wishing, committing or abetting it is
non-violence.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 29-10-1933

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

93

111. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
WARDHA,

October 29, 1933
MY DEAR ANAND,

You must get rid of this malaria fiend root and branch. I do hope
you did not overtax yourself in going to Multan. Vidya is opening out.
She is no longer moody; has walks with me. She likes the club
arrangement. She is keeping good health and so is Mahadev. You are
not to have any anxiety about her. She is absorbing herself in useful
service today. She is doing some serving for me. She is having her
English lessons regularly. She got me to write to your mother a long
letter. 1 She churned her butter for the first time today. Therefore trust
her to God.
Love.
BAPU
From a microfilm. Courtesy : National Archieves of India and Anand T.
Hingorani.

112. LETTER TO KANTI PAREKH AND JAYANTI PARKEH
October 29, 1933
CHI. KANTI, JAYANTI,

I got your postcard. I think both of you have acquired useful
capital. Take care of your health. Maintain the utmost purity of
character. Write to me whenever you can. Kakasaheb is here. Today is
the fourth day of his fast. He has taken a vow for a fast of seven days.
He will break the fast at 1.15 on Thursday. His health is good. The fast
is for atonement of sin. Surendraji and Durbari look after him.
Prabhudas takes down what he dictates. He is extremely cheerful. He
can drink sufficient quantity of water and so there is no trouble.
Kishorelal and Gomatibehn are at Akola. They will go to Bombay at
the end of this month.
1

94

Vide “Letter to Ganga T. Hingorani”,22-10-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The condition of Ramabehn Joshi’s arm can be described as
fairly satisfactory now. She will come here tomorrow and then stay
here. More and more girls are joining the Ashram here. The daily
programme for them is craft for four hours and study for four hours.
Marathi is a compulsory subject of study.
Balkrishna is experimenting with milk diet for building up good
health. He fasted for four days and lived for another four days only on
fruit. Now he only drinks milk, not even water. Today is the third day
since he started drinking milk. He increases the quantity daily by half a
pound. Today he will drink three pounds. We may not predict the
result just now.
Swami Anand is here. All of them will be here only for a few
days now. Kumarappa came and went back.
Vinoba has composed the following verse1 enumerating the
eleven vows. It is sung daily once or twice.
Ahimsa, truth, non-stealing, brahmacharya, non-possession;
Body labour, control of the palate and complete freedom from fear :
Equal regard for all religions, swadeshi and looking upon all human
beings as touchables :
The eleven vows one should observe, with humility and resolve.

Mani and Bablo left with Anandi. Vanamala and Mohan must
have joined them from Kathlal.
Totaramji and Hariprasad2 are here. They will be sent to
Sabarmati for Harijan work.
Vithalbhai’s body will reach Bombay on the 9th. It will be
carried to the cremation ground with due honours and Dahyabhai will
light the funeral pyre. Manibehn and Mridulabehn were here and
stayed for three days.
If in giving all this news I have repeated any details, I hope you
will remember that I have grown old and forgive me. If I remembered
all the letters which I write, I would be crushed by the weight of that
memory itself. Just as the power of memory is worth preserving, so also
the ability to forget is worth cultivating. If we don’t have it, we would
always be either laughing or crying. However, this was a little sermon
by the way. Instead of omitting any news, would it not be better to take
the risk of repeating some details ?
1
2

The verse is in Marathi.
Adopted son of Totaram Sanadhya

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

95

And now replies to your questions. What you say is perfectly
true. “What can physical control avail ?” 1 Can we force anyone to
remain unmarried ? Devdas and Prabhudas remained so till the age of
32, and married only when they found that they could no longer
control themselves. Is it not better that one should humbly admit one’s
weakness rather than let the mind run after lustful thoughts ? I can
testify that both of them tried hard to remain unmarried.
He who curbs the organs of action but allows the mind to dwell on the
sense-objects-such a one, wholly deluded, is called a hypocrite.2

If, then, both of them humbly express their desire to marry, it
would be violence on my part to refuse them my blessings. They will
continue to cherish the ideal of brahmacharya. One should strive hard
to live up to an ideal, but if, despite one’s best efforts, one cannot
control one’s mind, it would be better to be content with what one can
do rather than live as a hypocrite. Anybody who acts in this manner
deserves the blessings of his elders. One should stretch one’s limbs, as
the saying is, according to the length of the covering. In short, he who
does not deceive himself or the world goes forward in the end. If I have
not succeeded in explaining this idea, you may put me your questions
when you get an opportunity.
I have had no letter from Indu recently, but Keshu had one. He is
quite happy. Balbhadra and Dhiru also are with him. Manibhai Kothari
is in Wadhwan. He is doing Harijan and khadi work there. My tour will
commence on the 8th. I have already given you the names of the
persons who will accompany me. The name of Ramnath ‘Suman’
should be added to the list. He is lover of Hindi literature, and a good
writer. He wishes to join the Ashram, ultimately.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 6275

1
2

96

Bhagavad Gita, III. 33.Vide also “Discources on the “Gita”, 29-4-1926
Bhagavad Gita, III. 6. Vide also “Discources on the Gita”, 9-4-1926
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

113. LETTER TO JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
WARDHA,

October 29, 1933
CHI. JAYAPRAKASH,

I have your letter. Jamnalalji has given me the letter you wrote to
him. Jamnalalji is a bit chary of providing assistance to people in this
manner. But he wants to help you. He however feels that a loan should
be a loan according to proper legal formalities. The interest may well
be slight or none at all but the land you finally decide to mortgage
should be mortgaged now. That is one thing. The other is:
How much is the debt you have to repay? How did you happen
to borrow from the A.I.C.C.? How did you incur the other debts? After
you get the sum you want, are you sure you will not need to borrow
any more money? What do you intend to do now? If it is necessary for
you to come here to clarify all this, you may come, or reply fully
through letter.
I hope you are well. There was only one letter for Prabhavati.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Jayaprakash Narayan Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

114. LETTER TO DR. M. S. KELKAR
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, W ARDHA,

October 30, 1933
DEAR DR. KELKAR,

Will you put down as briefly as you can the reasons for your
asking patients under milk treatment to drink as much water as milk
you prescribe for them? I hope your experiment are prospering there.
Yours sincerely

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat : G. N. 6108. Also C. W. 3301. Courtesy : M. S. Kelkar

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

97

115. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
October 30, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I have your letter about the Hospital1 . You ought to be able to say
without fear of contradiction that the Swaraj Bhawan Dispensary is a
perfect fraud and thoroughly boycotted. Without absolute proof, I am
disinclined to believe that they fabricate cases. I am anxious to have
this evidence, because it is necessary for framing my opinion about the
Congress Hospital, for, I feel that we should be able to take possession
of the Swaraj Bhawan strictly for Hospital work, if the Government
management has proved to be a fiasco. If you think that the Congress
Hospital or Dispensary should be run in the place where it is now being
run and that no attempt whatsoever should be made to regain
possession of the Swaraj Bhawan, an appeal certainly becomes
necessary and then it should be issued in the names of Mohanlal
Nehru2 and Kamala.
I am glad that Mother is making steady progress. Evidently the
successful conclusion of the marriage ceremony has also something to
do with easing the mental strain she was having.
Andrews is expected here on Wednesday.
I understand what you say about Jamnalalji. When do you think
it may be safely announced ?
Thakkar Bapa writes saying that you prohibited Congressmen
from working for Harijan cause, even though they may not be offering
civil resistence. Where is the truth! I have known nothing about any
such embargo.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
1

A hospital run by the Congress in the Swaraj Bhawan was taken over by the
Government in 1931. After some time the British authorities “more for show than for
anything else” decided to keep a dispensary open for the public. “But”, the addressee
wrote, “there is no evidence that even a single member of the public has ever taken
advantage of it . . . I am told false entries are made in their books to show that many
patients are being treated.” After the seizure of this hospital, the Congress had started
another which from April, 1932 was being run in a cottage adjoining the Swaraj
Bhawan. The resources to run the Congress Hospital had been “almost exhausted.”
2
Addressee’s cousin

98

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

116. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
WARDHA,

October 30, 1933
CHI. MRIDULA,

I have your letter.
At first I thought of sending you a telegram about my going. But
then I had second thoughts. This letter should reach you tomorrow
morning so I have not sent the telegram.
I think I will not ask either you or Mani to come here for the
time being. Certainly not before the 8th, because, once the travelling
begins, I would not like to send for anyone. It is another matter if you
find it necessary to meet me and come. You would be free to do that.
That is why I do not wish to stop you from going to Allaha-bad
for the sake of keeping you near by. But you have already talked to
me and there is no need to go just for that. Still it may be necessary for
you to have your case prepared and send it. But if you want to go to
understand Jawaharlal’s mind do go. You may also place before him
all your complaints. Then you may let me know what he feels or ask
him to inform me. I have not written anything to him. I have started the
work. I have not sent your note, but have conveyed your complaint to
Shankerlal. I am required to solve a great many problems within a
shore time.
I hope you have had your teeth properly attended to. Illness
refuses to take leave of Saralabehn. She keeps having some trouble or
other.
Keep writing to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11185. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

99

117. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI 1
October 30, 1933
CHI. MATHURADAS,

Here is Tersey’s letter. Vithalbhai has to be cremeted.2 Do you
have anything to do with the arrangements? You must have seen my
note. If anyone hopes for my presence, disabuse him of the idea if you
can. Of course if pressure is brought to bear on me I shall be able to
manage, but I would rather that was not done. I do not feel at ease
outside. My mind is always in jail. I shall tour for the Harijan cause. I
hardly think of anything else.
Do make it a point to meet Hasanbhai regarding the market.
If everywhere you find only dirt keep yourself aloof. Personal
selfishness appears to be playing a considerable part in this matter.
The money for Utkal does not seem to be coming. Then,
Harakhcand’s report has come. I shall send it later. The purpose of
writing this is not to say that you should work beyond your capacity.
As for me, I see the sad state of affairs in Bombay and feel distressed.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

118. LETTER TO H. K. HALES
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, W ARDHA,

October 31, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter of the 25th instant. I would be the first person
to congratulate anybody who brings concord out of the present
discord, and I would wish you all success in your effort.
Undoubtedly the Hindu-Muslim tension is bad. I simply do not
know how it can be removed. I am making all individual effort that I
am capable of, but that is saying very little.
1

An extract from the letter appears in “Letter to Mathurdas Trikumji,
30-10-1933
2
The body of Vithalbhai Patel who had died in Vienna on October 22, was to be
brought to Bombay on November 9.

100

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Of course, my failures do not baffle me. I treat each one of them
as a stepping stone to success. But that is different from ven-turing out
without the slightest prospect of success. You may, there-fore, depend
upon it that, whenever I see the slightest opportunity of pushing
through a settlement and of my contributing to it. I would not hesitate
to plunge in.
The White Paper, when it first saw the light, did not please me. It
does so still less today.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Hindu, 26-11-1933

119. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
October 31, 1933
MY DEAR ANAND,

I have your letter about Devdas. You have given me a good
account. I can see from it how delighted Devdas must have been to
receive news from an eye-witness. But I must confine this letter to the
bombs which you say have burst upon you.
You must not exaggerate things that come from Father. You have
to be prepared for these things, and if you will but keep calm and yet
firm, all the clouds will vanish. You should talk gently but firmly to
both the parents and tell them that you must be allowed to regulate
your future. They have given you a liberal education. They may not
now quarrel with the fruits thereof. Having made your position
absolutely clear in as humble a manner as possible, you should take
your own line of action. You may avoid arrest in Karachi. After all,
Hyderabad is your scene of action, and there you will act in
consultation with friends. One thing you should avoid as a good
satyagrahi. You may not consult your convenience or predilections in
choosing the scene of action. You should therefore, dismiss the idea of
courting arrest somewhere near Wardha. You may not do it outside
Sind. It would be inconsistent with the spirit of satyagraha.
I have discussed the whole situation with Vidya, and I think she
agrees with me. I did not have to reason with her, but she volunteered
the statement that when she resigned herself to your seeking imprisonment and her remaining in Wardha, she concurrently resigned herself
not to see you during your incarceration. It would be enough, she said,
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

101

if you are permitted to write to her as, of course, you would be, and I
think that is the correct position even though you may not seek arrest
in Karachi. Vidya is really getting on excellently. She does not look
moody; she is not morbid and is feeling more and more cheerful. And
I expect you too to be cheerful and to write cheerful letters to her.
Love.
From a microfilm. Courtesy; National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani.

120. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
October 31, 1933
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

Rama and Vimala1 arrived yesterday. Since you have seen them
only recently, I do not write anything about them. I understand from
Rama that you get the letters written to you and that you are eagerly
expecting a letter from me. You are certainly entitled to expect one.
But I did not write any, thinking that, when Rama herself could write
very few letters, it would not be proper on my part to claim a share in
the number of letters which you are permitted to receive. However, as
Damayanti asked even trees for news of Nala, I used to inquire about
you from anybody and everybody whom I met and managed to get
some news.
You must, of course, make a return for having stayed with me for
such a long time, and you have done so handsomely enough. Mahadev
also has done that and is still doing it. But, as the sun always carries its
shadow as it moves, so also is the shadow always followed by light.
Similarly, Mahadev finds peace of mind through something or the
other. That seems to be true about you also. You get the company of
good books, and now you have been permitted to get butter from
outside. What more could you want to keep you happy ? You have
imbibed over the last many years the teachings of the Gita that one
should remain cheerful in all circumstances. If, when the time to put
that teaching into practice comes, we fail to do so, surely we would feel
1

102

Addressee’s daughter
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

ashamed of ourselves. I, therefore, don’t worry about you, con-fident
that you will certainly not fail in the test. I even hope that you will pass
with first-class marks.
Kaka has undertaken a fast. His vow was for a seven-day fast. It
will end on the day after tomorrow, that is, on Thursday. The fast is for
the sake of . . . 1 He is extremely cheerful. The fast seems to have had
no adverse effect on him. Of course, there is bound to be some
weakness. He sleeps in the open air. He gets good sleep. He can drink
plenty of water. In that respect, he can do much better than I. Darbari,
who regards himself as Kaka’s disciple, and Surendra attend on him.
You can, therefore, easily understand that he is being looked after very
well. Prabhudas works as his secretary. He takes down a few letters
which Kaka may wish to dictate, and reads to him from the Gita, the
Upanishads, etc. Swami also is here at present. Kishorelal and Gomati
arrived today. The weather here is bound to be beautiful at this time of
the year. The Wardha Ashram has become a girl’s Ashram. There are
more than 40 girls staying here just now. Lakshmi-behn has been
working extremely hard, and Dwarakanath helps her. Recently, we have
engaged a musician, but the prayers are conducted by Lakshmibehn
herself. I knew that she possessed a sweet voice, but I did not know that
she knew nearly a hundred bhajans. Two prayers, the evening prayers
on Thursday and Friday, are conducted by Mathuri, 2 and Yoga 3 joins
her in singing the ghazal on Thursday.
We celebrated Prabhudas’s marriage a few days ago. The bride
belongs to North India. Her name is Amba. She is in her 25th year.
The choice was Prabhudas’s own, and the discovery also was his.
Amba’s simplicity surpasses Prabhudas’s. She has plenty of courage,
too. Prabhudas is very happy. The two will stay here at least as long as I
am here. My tour begins on the 8th. Nobody, neither Kashi 4 nor
Chhaganlal5 nor any other relative or friend from outside, was invited
for the marriage. The bride also was accompanied by only six persons.
One can, therefore, say that this was the simplest wedding we have
celebrated. The marriage ceremony was performed by a priest from
Wardha under the guidance of Kaka.
1
2
3
4
5

The name has been omitted.
Lakshmibehn Khare’s daugher.
Narayan M. Khare’s brother’s daughter.
Prabhudas Gandhi’s parents
Ibid

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

103

Among the girls whom you know, Chandrakanta 1 also is here,
and so is Vidya Hingorani. She will stay here at least for a year.
Vinoba, as you know, stays in a village (of Harijans) about a mile from
here. But the moral responsibility for this girls’ Ashram is his. Anandi,
Babu and Bachu had come here with me, but they have returned now.
You will be surprised to know that the girls do not like to go to Sharda
Mandir for education.They want arrangements to be made at home. I
am in search of suitable persons. I don’t think there will be any
difficulty. Besides them, there are Vanamala, Mohan, Mani and Bablo.
All of them live in the Harijan Children’s Ashram run by
Anasuyabehn. They went to it quite willingly. Of course they find it a
little difficult to get used to the food, etc. The food for Harijan girls is
bound to be quite simple, and they get very little milk and ghee, too. If
we insist on bringing up our children on food like theirs, they would
soon grow thin. I am, therefore, thinking what arrangement to make so
that the children, even while they stay in that Ashram, may get proper
food. In the mean time, they somehow manage to get the food which
they require. Amina’s children also are staying in this same Ashram.
Unlike our children, they feel perfectly at home there. They play and
enjoy themselves the whole day. A munshi has been engaged to teach
them the Koran and Urdu.
You must have heard that finally the [Sabarmati] Ashram was
given over for Harijan work. It has been decided to send Totaramji to
the Ashram. Hariprasad also will go there. Both of them are here at
present. Pannalal2 intends to start an independent dairy. I have written
to him to come here. At present he is with Nanibehn3 and Gangabehn 4
in Ahmedabad. Our dairy is being run by Titus near the Kankaria lake
under the supervision of Shankerlal5 . I think it is running very well. We
have no responsibility even for that.
I suppose you know that the Ashram and the Vidyapith libraries
have been handed over to the Ahmedabad Municipality. Raojibhai6 and
1

Sister of Sumangal Prakash
Pannalal Jhaveri
3
Pannalal’s Wife
4
Pannalal’s step-mother
5
Shankerlal Banker
6
Raojibhai Nathabhai Patel who had been the head of the Khadi department at
the Sabarmati Ahram
2

104

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Mohanlal Bhatt1 are expected here in a day or two. Ba is pre-paring to
reach the Mandir. Manu is here. Dhiru, Balabhadra and Indu may be
said to have decided to stay on in Bhavnagar. Dudhi-behn also has
been living there with her children. Nila Nagini’s Sirius is in Sharda
Mandir. I am sure you recognize this handwriting.2 I think I have now
given you plenty of news. I can give still more, but I have no time.
Swami, therefore, will give the rest.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 5513

121. TELEGRAM TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
WARDHA,

November1, 1933
ANAND HINGORANI
S AHITIPUR
BUNDER R OAD
KARACHI
YOUR LETTER. SHOULD TAKE ACTION HYDERABAD. UNNECESSARY
OUTSIDE SIND.3

BAPU
From a microfilm. Courtesy : National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani.

122. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Unrevised

Novermber 1, 1933

MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

Your several letters to hand. I see you have handed to the Press
the two resignations4 . They should clear that air a bit.
I do not follow the Hindu Sabha activities. They are vicious. It is
1
2
3
4

Manager of Navajivan Press
Apparently Gandhiji dictated this to Swami Anand.
Vide “Letter to Anand T. Hingorani”
Of Jamnalal Bajaj and Dr. Sheikh Mohammad Alam

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

105

most unscrupulous if they are making use of my name in connection
with shuddhi.1 If you have any literature please pass it on to me. I think
that the nationalist Press so called or real has not welcomed its activities
and has been known often to condemn it. I do not know anything
about the embargo on M. A. K. Azad’s book. As to the Harijan
activities, the complaint is wholly unjustified. My conscience is
absolutely clear. So far as you and I are concerned, we can clear our
minds and hands by exchanging letters, if you like. I do not know what
aggressive action is possible or desirable beyond an emphatic
condemnation of specific acts.
As to Gorakhpur, I do not see what can be done. I am finding it
hard to get funds for your workers and the Dal people. I am still
talking about both. Baba Raghavdas told me he was trying grain
collections for the peasants in distress. He is under promise to send me
authentic details of persecution.
Nariman2 was here yesterday. I have advised him to see you and
told him that you were my political chief! What else could I do ? I
stand thoroughly discredited as a religious maniac and predominantly
a social worker. I told him that if I felt convinced that the A.I.C.C.
members desired discontinuance of C. D. and a council-entry programme, I would at once ask you to convene a meeting of A.I.C.C.I do
not do so because I believe that the majority will insist on a C. D.
programme and I do not want to invite the ordinance sword for it. I
have told him too that I would not resist any programme that the
A.I.C.C. might want though I could not give my approval to the suspension of C. D. I believe Kelkar’s 3 attitude to be honest and consistent. He frankly dislikes N. C. O. and C. D. He would not join the
terrorists or whatever they may be called. Then for a man of political
activity, council-entry is the only programme such as it is. Hopeless
inactivity is the worst of all and should be discountenanced.
I think I have now covered all the points raised in your letters and
even not raised. It is nearing 4 a. m.
Hope Mother’s progress continuing. Herewith note4 for Kamala.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
1
2
3
4

106

Literally, ‘purificatory rite’. Here reconversion to Hinduism.
K. F. Nariman
N. C. Kelkar
This is not available.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

123. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

There is a saying in English that great men think alike, and, since
both of us are great, we thought alike regarding the cremation rites for
Vithalbhai.1 I have written to Dahyabhai. I am not likely to publish
anything as being your view. With regard to the wires and cables which
you have received, after informing the Major 2 write one sentence in
your next letter to me to the following effect : “On my behalf please
thank through the Press all those who have sent letters and wires or
cables of condolence.” If the Major cannot pass that on his own, he
should write to the I. G. and, if he passes it, we shall publish it . . . 3
Nariman was here yesterday. He took a fairly long time with me
and I readily gave it. My warden4 let me do that. Just now, however, we
may pound any amount of paddy we like but we shall get nothing but
chaff.
Deenabandhu is arriving here today. He is returning after an
extensive tour, and so I expect that he will want much time with me and
I shall have to give it.
Kaka’s fast will end tomorrow. He is cheerful. He doesn’t seem
to have been visibly affected by the fast. He doesn’t feel a burning
sensation [in passing urine] as I do. He can drink plenty of water, no
matter whether it is mixed with salt or soda or is hot or cold. If God
would grant me the same ability, I should even at this age like to
improve upon Bhansali’5 performance. I wouldn’t mind if, in
consequence, I became crazy like him. He wears a codpiece of hessian
suspended from a string of coir tied round his waist. He eats moistened flour and wanders about. He reappears sometimes in the form of
1
In his letter dated October 29, 1933 the addressee had said that he had informed
friends that it would be improper for him as a satyagrahi to request Government to
release him for performing the rites.
2
Superintendent of the Nasik Jail
3
Omission as in the source
4
Jamnalal Bajaj
5
Jaikrishnadas Prabhudas Bhansali, noted for his long fasts

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

107

a postcard and tells me in it that he is getting real spiritual ex-perience
only now.
During the fast, [Kaka] also did some writing through dictation.
Prabhudas has become his honorary secretary and also recites from the
Gita for him. Since Prabhudas has been Kaka’s favourite disciple, the
arrangement suits the latter very well. Kishorelal and Gomati also
arrived yesterday. I was the cause of their coming.

•••

1

Kaka has done his duty as friend and father to the best of his
ability . . . 2 continues to follow his own way in his inordinate pride.
But I have not given up hope of him. I do believe, though, that his eyes
will not open till he stumbles some day. What you say is quite right. A
coward’s wisdom won’t carry him far. On the contrary, if an insolent
boy like . . . 3 who is always flying in the air, became wise, his wisdom
would never desert him afterwards and would help him fearlessly to
mount the gallows. But that seems too good to come true. I think Kaka
will soon regain his strength. Don’t worry about him. During the fast, I
didn’t let my knowledge as a quack rust, so that, over and above the
spiritual benefit from the fast, his body has certainly benefited. You did
well in administering a powerful dose of medicine4 . . . and Pandya 5 .
But the effect of such medicines does not last long and their reactions
are sometimes dangerous. I am not saying this to criticize your
medicine. My only purpose is to draw your attention to the truth.
Mahadev writes to me regularly. He has been collecting books from all
sources. I suppose one day all those books will go to a public library. I
hope he doesn’t go blind in jail through excessive reading. I do intend
to send him a mildly-worded prohibitory order. Dr. Datta visited
Devdas [in jail]. The latter seems to be making good use of his time.
He reads, teaches, plays games and spins. My programme is as follows :
Up to the end of this month, the C. P., then Delhi, then the Punjab, then
Sind, then Rajputana, then the U. P., Bengal, Assam, etc. This is the plan
at present. But it is not impossible that there may be some change in
this programme and I may go to Madras earlier. I shall be leaving this
1

Omission as in the source
The names are omitted in the source.
3
Ibid
4
The addressee, in his letter, had called the dose hiranyagarbha matra and
meant ‘suggestion to court imprisonment forthwith’.
5
Mohanlal Kameshvar Pandya, a worker of Kaira District
2

108

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

place on the 8th. I shall have to come back later for two or three days
for a tour of the Wardha taluka. I will write to Deodhar regarding your
letter. Rajendrababu has again been removed to a hospital. I think he
will now be kept there for some time.
Blessing from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro–2 : Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 39-43

124. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI 1
WARDHA,

November 1, 1933
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. I had a long talk with Nariman. I let him also
have my answer to the question in your last sentence, that my desire to
give up leadership has not weakened the least bit. On the contrary, it is
becoming stronger and stronger. But it cannot be given up just like
that. For I had hardly spoken when Nariman remarked that I was
issuing a threat. I have got the impression that Nariman would not like
to enter the Municipality by opposing the Bill. We then talked about
many other things. I shall not take up your time by going over them.
Gosibehn and Jamnabehn are here. Andrews is coming today.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
74 WALKESHWAR R OAD
BOMBAY-6
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

An extract form the letter appears in “Letter to Governor of Bengal”,
2-11-1933
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

109

125. LETTER TO GOVERNOR OF BENGAL
WARDHA,

November 2, 1933
H. E. THE GOVERNOR OF BENGAL
C ALCUTTA
DEAR FRIEND,

Though I have not the honour to enjoy personal acquintance
with you, I had the good fortune to know you through Sir Samuel
Hoare when I was in London in 1931. On the strength of that introduction, I venture to share the enclosed1 with you. It is a letter from an
esteemed worker. It speaks for itself. I have the hope that proceedings
described therein could not possibly meet with your approval. The civil
resister of whom mention is made in the letter is the writer’s brother.
No doubt a civil resister is out for suffering, but I should think that,
according to the standard apparently accepted today, all methods of
torture would be avoided by Governments claiming to be civilized.
I shall feel thankful to know that you have personally interested
yourself in the case I have ventured to bring to your notice.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.

126. INTERVIEW WITH DR. CONGER2
November 2, 1933
DR. CONGER : Is the hand of God behind good only, or is it behind evil also ?
GANDHIJI : It is behind good, but in God’s hand it is not mere
good. His hand is behind evil also, but there it is no longer evil. “

1
In his letters dated October 27 and 28 Satis Chandra Das Gupta had described
the inhuman treatment meted out to his brother Kshitish Chandra Das Gupta and other
persons in Hijli Jail for their refusal to salaam the jail authorities.
2
This is reported by Chandrashankar Shukla who was at the time working as
Secretary to Gandhiji and had kept notes of the interview which was later reproduced in
his book Conversations with Mahatma Gandhi

110

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Good” and “evil” are our own imperfect language. God is above both
good and evil.
Q. There is God’s will behind every one of our action, is it not ?

A. Even allowing that there is His will behind every action, man
can say that certain things God allows, wills or prohibits. All this is
taken to mean His “will”.
Q. You said there was God’s inspiration behind your twenty-one days’ fast. You
have also spoken of “wrestling”. What exactly do you mean to convey ?

A. These are the babblings of an imperfect man. Man’s wrestling

with God is like that of an infant’s wrestling with the mother. The
infant does wrestle with the mother; and when the mother gives it a feed
the infant says : “I wrested it from her.”
Here Gandhiji gave the dictionary meanings of the words “wrestle” and “wrest”.

Similarly God, when He parts with something, does so with pleasure, if God has pleasure and pain. A man who surrenders everything at
His feet says to Him : “I will die, if you don’t give me a certain
thing.”. He defies and challenges God. In millions of examples God
lets such men reach the point of death. Then we say that He has
thoroughly tested the man. That, however, is our own feeling. If man
can somehow know God’s way of putting things, I don’t know what He
would say. We foolish beings think that we have exhausted our strength
in wrestling with Him. With God there is neither wrestling nor wresting.
If God is just, He would not torture His devotee.
Q. Is God just or not ?

A. God is just. Rather, He is not jut but merciful. He is just
because He is merciful.These, however, are echoes of our own weak
feeling. Man also sometimes talks of giving God His due. But what can
a slave give to the Master ? In relation to God man is always a debtor,
and never a creditor.
Q. Is faith necessary or effort ?

A. Really both faith and effort are necessary.
Q. Has man got a choice ?

A. Man has got a choice, but as much of it as a passenger on
board a ship has. It is just enough for him. If we don’t use it, then we
are practically dead.
Q. God has a purpose which He is working out in the world, is it not ?
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

111

A. I qualify the statement by saying that this is human speech. I

don’t know God’s purpose, because I am not God. I am a man. I
therefore try to comprehend God and His purpose not through speech
but through life. I cannot deal with the hundreds of thousands of
beings in the universe as a unit. I cannot enter into the heart of every
one of them, because they are infinite in number. But God is all
powerful. Just as He has a purpose for the universe as a unit, He has a
purpose for every particle of life too—for man as well as the ant.
Q. Is it a good purpose ?

A. It is a good purpose—but “good” in the way of our limited
human speech.
The Sino-Indian Journal, Gandhi Memorial Number, December
1948.

127. NOTES
DISTRESS IN R OHTAK, P UNJAB1

This is a tale of distress that ought to move philanthropists to
action. Any contributions sent to the Editor, Harijan, 8-c, Pycroft’s
Road, Triplicane, Madras, will be acknowledged and forwarded the
proper quarters.
THE F ORTHCOMING TOUR

“How would the collections, made during the forthcoming tour,
be distributed ?” is the question put by several workers. They will be
handed to the Central Board with instructions to use them as far as may
be for the province or the district or the taluk or the town, in which
they may be collected. Whilst this will be the general rule, I do
contemplate receiving in some places large single donations which will
be utilized for the Harijan cause wherever the need is the greatest. It
must be obvious that any rigid rule restricting the use of collections to
the places where they are collected will defeat the very end of workers
or donors for fear of the collections not being used in their districts or
in the best manner possible. They should realize that the Central Board
has an efficient system of account keeping, that accounts are audited
1

This was appended to Amritlal V. Thakkar’s appeal for contributions to the
fund started by the Harijan Sevak Sangh for rehabilitating Harijans of Rohtak District
where 21,000 houses were detroyed due to heavy rains in September 1933; vide “Letter
to Amritlal V. Thakkar”, 10-10-1933

112

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and, I believe, published regularly.
HIS LOVE FOR HARIJANS1

In the hasty tribute 2 I paid to the memory of Vithalbhai Patel, I
omitted to mention the unforgettable scene I witnessed at the Harijan
quarters in Godhra, which place I visited in 1917 3 for its political
conference. There was a Harijan conference, too, held at the time, and I
had invited the audience to come to the Harijan quarters and hold the
conference there, if they were sincere in their professions.4 Whom
should I see there if not Vithalbhai Patel, who was then a member of
the Legislative Council, dressed in the peasant garb with a Sadhu’s topi
on his head ? 5 He mixed with the Harijans with the greatest free-dom
and I know that he evinced the greatest interest in the Harijan cause.
With him the sweeper was as good as any other person, no matter what
his caste might be. He never concealed his opinion or practice in order
to please the orthodox. Let me hope that on the 9th instant, when the
last rites are performed, Harijan tears will freely mingle with those of
the multitude who will pay homage to the memory of the deceased
patriot.
Harijan, 3-11-1933

128. THE CRY OF ORISSA
In the morning of the 17th inst. (October), we went to
Khandayta. Here the rushing waters had broken through the
banks and for miles and miles a new river had come into being,
destroying many a home. Very few houses appeared to be
standing. The Marwadi Society has carried on operations here. It
1

A similar article in Gujarati appeared in Harijanbandhu, 5-11-1933.
Vide “Letter to Janakdhari Prasad”, 25-10-1933
3
The source has 1916. Gandhiji had visited Godhra in November 1917; vide
“Speech at Gujarat Political Conference-I”, 3-11-1917
4
The Gujarati version here has the following additional sentences : “And for the
first time in the history of Godhra, the Harijan colony was crowded with caste Hindus.
The place overflowed with people. Abbas Saheb and his wife were no doubt there.”
5
The Gujarati version here adds : “As I had never seen Vithalbhai in this dress, I
could not recognize him immediately. But when I did, we heartily embraced each other
and had a hearty laugh. No doubt Vithalbhai had deliberately donned this dress but it
also shows his simplicity and readiness to mix with people.”
2

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

113

has been feeding 3,500 persons from 25 villages and doling out
7 seers (1 12 seers of Cuttack is equal to 4 lb.) of rice per month
per head and one cotton sheet, and husk for cattle. Thus the
Society has distributed Rs. 5,000 among these. At another centre,
the Society has been giving relief to 5,700 people from 27
villages; each person gets here 26 tolas of rice. There is a big
rush even for this little dole. There are two central depots in
Cuttack and two in Puri. Nearly Rs. 15,000 have been spent there.
From Khandayta we went to Khadarda. Half the number of
houses belonging to Harijans have been razed to the ground.
Those that remained have become dilapidated. There we saw a
woman only half clad and in perfect destitution. She com-plained
of want of work. In a house nearby, we saw a sister lying on the
damp floor and suffering from high fever. These people will
need clothes against the approaching cold weather. From
Khadarda we went to Jharpada. There we saw eight volunteers
working under most difficult circumstances. They distributed
medical relief among ailing people and they had rigged up a
king of accommodation for admitting very bad cases. You can
imagine what sort of nursing these poor patients can get. Here 4
lb. of rice (costing six pice) per week are issued to adults. Half
the rations are doled out to minors. Those who are able-bodied
get nothing. Therefore relief is confined prin-cipally to women
and children. I cannot imagine at the present moment a better use
for the money of those who are charitably inclined. You should
not imagine that anything like adequate relief is being given.
More depots could be opened if there was more money. It is
possible to make the best use of 40 to 50 thousand rupees per
month, for, even at the rate of 8 as. per month, out of half a lakh
of rupees only one lakh persons can be reached, and the number
affected is surely larger.
I have translated certain extracts from letters received from Sjt.
Harak[h] chand Motichand, who has been specially sent to Orissa in
order to help the local Flood Relief Committee, of which Deenabandhu Andrews has accepted the Chairmanship. Thakkar Bapa
rebukes me, and he has every right to do so, by saying:
Thakkar Bapa has to be pardoned for forgetting that notice of
the marriage was necessary in the interest of the Harijan cause.
How can you close the columns of the Harijan to the distress of the

114

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

people who are sorely affected by the flood ? They are no better of than
Harijans. And if you will plead only for those who are labelled as ‘Harijan’,
even so there are thousands of these labelled ones also. Surely, if you can give
some space to a description of the Devdas-Lakshmi marriage, you ought to take
notice of the distress amongst the flood-stricken people of Orissa. You have
already issued a moving appeal for Orissa. To open the columns of the Harijan
to periodical descriptions of the effects of the Orissa floods is but a logical
extension of what you have done.

But love is blind. And he is a lover of humanity in distress, no
matter in what quarter of the globe that humanity is to be found. His
love is limited only by the limits that God Almighty has prescribed.
Therefore, he exclaims : “See what my workers got the other day for
my Bhils in the Panch Mahals. Why can’t you get much more for the
more numerous population of a whole province ?” He is right. And in
all humanity I make this appeal to whomsoever may see it. There is no
doubt the distress. I have always held that Orissa is the most helpless
and the poorest province of India. Thousands of pilgrims visit the
ancient temple of Puri for acquiring merit. Hundreds among them are
rich enough to satisfy the hunger of the hungry and clothe the naked.
Times are not doubt bad. That is just the opportunity for the moneyed
people to deny themselves many things they have hither to held
necessary for their comfort or enjoyment and establish their right to
the wealth God has blessed them with, by unstintingly helping the
helpless.
Somehow or other, ever since my return to India in 1915, Orissa
has been to me an epitome of India’s distressful helplessness. The
Bombay Committee is there, but I must tell the citizens that their response is very poor. At the time of writing I find that only Rs. 12,000
have been subscribed by Bombay. I cannot recall an instance when
Bombay had pleaded bad times in the face of hunger and nakedness.
Bombay has felt uneasy in its cinemas and theatres, with the cry for
help ringing in the ears of her citizens. Let them not do less now than
they have done before. And why should not wealthy people of the
other parts of India wake up and vie with Bombay in catholic charity ?
Any money sent to the Editor, Harijan, at 8-C, Pycroft’s Road, Triplicane, Madras, will be acknowledged in these columns and forwarded to
the proper quarters.
Harijan, 3-11-1933

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

115

129. TWO CRUEL CASES
The record of steady progress reported from week to week in
these pages is perhaps more than balanced by the revelations of inhumanity towards Harijans that come to light from time to time. At a
village called Samarkha in the district of Kheda, Gujarat, the caste
villagers are reported to have burnt the crops of Christian Harijans
because one or more of them had the courage to draw water from a
public well. The case is now said to be pending before the Courts.
In the village of Dholka, in Ahmedabad District, caste men are
reported to have horsewhipped some Harijans, two of them seriously
because one of them had the temerity to bathe in a public tank.
These are not the only cases of their kind. They are serious
enough to have seen the light of day. We have no knowledge of the
many petty assaults committed upon innocent Harijans for the exercise of human rights recognized by law.
These cases should open the eyes of sanatanists. I have not
known a single sanatanist defend such inhumanity. Let them either cooperate with the the reformers or act separately, but effectively, in
preventing or dealing with such occurrences.
The duty before workers is clear. They may not hesitate to take
such cases to court, when it becomes necessary. But, before so doing,
they should make every attempt to bring the wrongdoers to a sense of
the wrong done and to induce the to make adequate reparation. I
imagine that this can be done, if, for instance in the case of Samarkha,
well-known men and women from Nadiad or even Ahmedabad, if
necessary, went to the village and reasoned with the wrongdoers who
have inherited the habit of thinkng that caste Hindus may deal with
Harijans as if they were mere chattels and not human beings. This dark
ignorance of the elementary rights of human beings can be dispelled
by the light of public opinion playing upon the darkness. I hope no
Hindu thinks that he need not concern himself in the case of Christian
Harijans. These have surely the same rights with Hindu Harijans to
public activities that caste men have. If the latter do not want to make
use of public institutions, it is open to them at their own expense to
erect others, for their exclusive use. Sects and communities do build
separate schools and hospitals for themselves out of funds they
themselves subscribe. No one takes exception to these. But no one
has the right to prevent anyone else from using what belongs to
the general public. And then, it should be remembered that Christian
116

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Harijans are our own creation. The evil of untouchability has spread in
quarters wholly unexpected. We may not wince if now we have to pay
the penalty for having harboured the evil for untold generations.
Harijan, 3-11-1933

130. NO NEED FOR A TANNERY ?
A correspondent has raised the following question :
I can understand the removal of the offices of the Provincial or Central
Board of the Servants of Untouchables Society to the Ashram donated for
Harijan use. I can also understand the hostel scheme and the one for
establishing a Harijan colony. But a tannery does not fit in, and if a tannery
should be there, why not also a department for teaching scavenging and
sanitation; for, it is as much a Harijan work as tanning ?

The fallacy of the argument lies in misunderstanding the purpose of the proposed tannery. It is that tanning should be a great
national industry. The leather constitutes an immense business, and
instead of exporting raw hide, we should keep it in India and
manufacture the various things we need. It must mean a great addition
to the wealth of the country. Now tens of thousands of Harijans are
engaged in tanning. It is an honourable profession and a lucrative
business, and can be much more lucrative if it is well organized. But the
tanning done in the villages is of the crudest type. Moreover, all the
processes are not performed in a hygienic or scientific manner. If they
were performed in a scientific manner, there would be no prejudices
against cattle skinning and tanning as they exist today. The idea,
therefore, behind having a technological department at the new
institution is to give dignity to the occupation, purging it of all
crudeness and uncleanness. Then, again, it is not as if only Harijans will
be doing the work. They will be doing it side by side with nonHarijans. No one will be forced to learn it and no one can dare suggest
that no Harijan tanner would want to learn the scientific or the cleaner
method. Lastly, the reference to the technological department is merely
by way of illustration. If all goes well, there will be many other
departments opened including even one for exploring the best method
of rendering sanitary service in which all can take part. Our
indifference towards it has resulted in the increase of diseases and in
insanitary habits becoming confirmed. I am hoping that there will be
no trade or profession neglected which can be of benefit to the
Harijans, whether it has been hitherto followed by them or not.
Harijan, 3-11-1933
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

117

131. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, W ARDHA,

November 3, 1933
MY DEAR AGATHA,

I enclose herewith a copy of my letter 1 to the Governor of
Bengal. Sjt. Satis Chandra Das Gupta, the author of the enclosures to
the Governor’s letter, is a valued and well-known co-worker. His nonviolence is deep-rooted, not at all superficial, and one of the truest of
men it has been my good fortune to meet. He first came to know of the
Hijli Jail practice when he understood that his brother who is a civil
resister was given standing hand-cuffs. Bar fetters are different from
hand-cuffs. Bar fetters are meant for the legs.
At the present moment I am not resorting to any public agita-tion
in connection with the things that come under my observation. I pass
them on to the authorities. Therefore, unless I tell you to the contrary,
all such correspondence should not be published at your end either.
Apart from this, there is no restriction upon the use to be made by you
of such information.
I send you also a copy of a note received from the Frontier
Province. That discloses a tale far worse than the treatment in the Hijli
Jail as disclosed in Sjt. Satisbabu’s letter to me. Naturally, nobody can
vouch for the accuracy of the information from the Frontier Province.
But, after the revelations made by Father Elwin, it would not surprise
me if the note is found to be an under-statement. The note has just
come to me, and I have not yet decided what use I should make of it
here.
C. F. Andrews is here.
BAPU
From a photostat : G. N. 1473.

132. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

My own opinion is that the atrocities such as are referred to in the
Frontier Province note should first be dealt with privately, and all the
1

118

Vide “ Letter to Governor of Bengal”, 2-11-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

means that we can employ to induce the authorities to adopt less cruel
measures should be employed. I am asking Andrews to deal with the
Frontier Province note. And if you have no objection I would like you
to show the note to Sir Tej Bahadur and see what he has got to say and
if he is at all inclined to move.
I enclose herewith a copy of my letter to the Governor of Bengal
about what is going on in Hijli.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.

133. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKAR PATTANI
WARDHA,

November 4, 1933
SUJNA BHAISHRI,

Deenabandhu Andrews is here. He will leave today and sail for
England on the 11th. You had promised him, while in England, to give
or get Rs. 5,000 for Santiniketan. Andrews, of course, didn’t like to
remind you. If you can send the money, please do so. Gurudev is
always in need of money, and so, if he has made any plans on the basis
of the sum promised by you, they would have to be abandoned and he
would be worried. I hope you keep excellent health. Andrews showed
me your letter. Please don’t worry about me. If God wants me to
complete the tour, He will preserve my good health. Where shall I find
a better watchman or doctor than He ?
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 5930. Also C. W. 3246. Courtesy :
Mahesh P. Pattani.

134. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
November 4, 1933
CHI. MANI,

I got your letter. Dahyabhai is putting up a good fight.1 Let him
1

According to the addressee it was in connection with the arrangements etc.,
for cremation rites of Vithalbhai Patel.
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

119

fight wherever he sees unworthy motives and insincerity. I hope you
are getting proper treatment. Do write to me regularly. I was very glad
that Babo came here. Ba will [court arrest] after I go. Anyway we must
keep ourselves ready for that.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gurajati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 110

135. ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS

1

[Before November 5, 1933]

W HAT IS THE LEAST W E CAN DO ?2
One can have attachment even for service. True service can be
rendered only by giving up all attachments. Cannot the weak and the
infirm worship God ? One can serve even mentally. You can take a
couple of Harijan girls into your household and bring them up.

INSTRUCTIONS T O A YOUNG MAN3
Live on milk, chapati and boiled greens. Give up chillies and
spices. Take moderate exercise in the open. Engage yourself in nationbuilding activities and go on repeating Ramanama. If you do this, you
may be able to overcome wet dreams.

HOW TO CURE THIS DISEASE ?
I am sure your disease can be cured. You must give up rich food
and medicines. If you spend your time outside the house in the open,
live on fresh milk, fresh fruit, greens and chapatis, take moderate
exercise within the limit of your strength, avoid reading exciting
literature and do not go to films and plays, you can be cured of your
disease.
HOW TO C ONCENTRATE ?

The best way of acquiring concentration is to be absorbed in
whatever physical work you may be engaged in. And one is bound to
get absorbed in it if one tries to do it to the best of one’s ability.
1

This appeared under the title “From the Mail-bag”.
This was addressed to a woman in poor health who felt unhappy because she
wished to but could not serve Harijans.
3
Who had asked for a remedy for nocturnal discharge.
2

120

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Among the names of God, that one will be most useful to us to
which we are accustomed. I myself love Ramanama.
WHAT IS INNER VOICE ?1

What you say is logically correct. But if one does not have a clear
idea as to what the inner voice means, the principle cannot be followed
in practice. I believe that the inner voice is perfect knowledge or
realization of the Truth. And because we do not see perfect Truth,
because the truth that we see is imperfect, we look upon the seers of the
world as our guides and follow them. Definite rules have been laid
down to help us realize truth, and we can know Truth only by
following them. Hence, just as we cannot know geometry without
studying it , so also it is not possible for anybody to hear the inner
voice without the necessary effort and training. Hence, accor-ding to
my definition, a murderer cannot cite the inner voice in defence of his
act.
LIMITATIONS OF A F AST2

I am firmly of the view that no one should resort to a fast for
personal benefit. If everyone started fasting against others for redress
of his or her grievances, there would be chaos in public life. This
friend, therefore, should be persuaded to give up his fast.
THINK OF THE MILLIONS3

A person who follows the path of dharma does not feel helpless.
One should not incur debt and spend money on medicines. If you
compare yourself with the vast millions, you will see that your financial
condition is a thousand times better than theirs. If you culti-vate
strength to endure your financial hardships, all your sufferings will
change into happiness. Of the eight persons, whoever can do physical
labour should do it.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 5-11-1933

1
This was in reply to a correspondent who had asked whether everybody would
not follow Gandhiji’s example and claim “inner voice” in justification of all his
actions, good or bad.
2
This was addressed to a man whose friend had lost his job and had gone on a
fast to get it back.
1
This was addressed to a correspondent whose financial condition was bad and
who had asked for advice.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

121

136. A WORKER’S PROBLEM
A worker serving the Harijan has sent a double-stringed necklace
made of gold, rudraksha and coral along with Rs. 13-8-0 which he had
received on the occasion of his maternal uncle’s shraddha. In an
accompanying note the gentleman says.1
The short and the straight reply to this is that one should not in
the first place act against one’s principles in order to please anybody.
Once it becomes clear to us that what we are being persuaded to do is
against our principle, there should be no question of giving in to
anyone’s importunity.
But I know this reply will not satisfy my correspondent. There is
only one root cause of all human failings and that is our lack of faith
in God. Chanting His name or visiting temples, etc., as a matter of
convention is no sign of our faith in God, but rather a symptom of
lethargy or mental weakness. Faith in God ought to be a matter of the
heart. And one who has it should find no need to satisfy another. He
who has satisfied God has triumphed; and, he who has not known him
may please thousands, but is lost for ever inasmuch as he has to deny
himself in trying to please one person after another. God is the soul
within, because He pervades every single atom. And this is not only a
belief but an established fact. Some know Him as Nature rather than by
the name of God. Some know Him as the great Power. Even modern
scientists concede that there is a power hidden in each atom which
sustains the universe. Anyone who acts in subservience to this great
Power will never be wanting in strength. His will-power will grow day
after day. It is well known that those experienced in the ways of the
world have shown the means by which this force can be demons-trated.
This power cannot but become manifest in anyone who adopts them.
As the Harijanbandhu has already referred to them 2 they need not be
repeated here.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 5-11-1933

1

The letter is not translate here. The correspondent had asked how one could get
over the weakness which obliged one to act contrary to one’s principles in order to
please others.
2
Vide “Some Moral Posers”

122

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

137. KUTCH HARIJAN WORKER BELABOURED
Bhai Gokuldas Khimji of Mandvi, Kutch, is a well-known social
and Harijan worker. Writing about him a gentleman says that when I
had gone to Kutch I had compared him to the docile cow. I remember
that occasion. Gokuldas is indeed humble. He serves wherever he can.
he just would not hurt anyone. He has written to Bhai Parikshitlal,
Secretary, Gujarat Anti-untouchability League, as follows :1
In this case, victory lies with the person who has been beaten up
and not with those who beat him up. The beating up of such humble
workers as Gokuldas will generate a spiritual energy which will melt the
core of caste Hindus and release the Harijans from bondage. The saner
sanatanist Hindus of Kutch ought to make efforts to stop such
rowdyism. Even if untouchability were dharma, it can be protected by
spiritual strength. I do not know if it was ever safeguarded by brute
force.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 5-11-1933

138. LETTER TO TOTARAM HINGORANI
WARDHA,

November 5, 1933
MY DEAR FRIEND,

I like your letter. It is full of love for Anand and Vidya. No
doubt they are both sentimental. But they are both good as gold. You
have every reason to be proud of them. I like, too, your idea of finding constructive service for both of them. But in this desire of yours I
detect an excess of affection. I plead for restraint. Anand’s soul will be
injured, if he is made or induced to break the sacred pro-mise made to
God. You do not need my assurance that Anand adores both you and
your noble wife. He would love to do anything to win your
approbation and blessings. It would be wrong to exploit parent-worship
for weakening him. Therefore for the time being let him do the
things he has promised to God to do. He will be safe. God will take
care of him. As for Vidya, she has been smothered by the blind
1

The letter is not translated here. He had insisted on taking Harijan children
along a certain road. The Rajputs objected to this and beat him up.
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

123

affection of fond mother-in-law. She is doing khadi work here. Believe
me she is keeping good health and so is Mahadev. She has very good
company and lives her own life. She has English tuition and I want to
add Hindi, if she will have it and her health stands it. If God wills, in a
year’s time she will return to you a daughter more lovable and stronger
both in body and mind.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm. Courtesy : National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

139. LETTER TO PREMI JAIRAMDAS
November 5, 1933
1

MY DEAR PREMI ,

I was glad to have your letter and the news about Father. Of
course I have no home in Hyderabad as dear to me as yours. When I
come you will keep me there or wherever on your behalf the
Committee keeps me and the large company accompanying me. Is
Father allowed to receive many letters ? Give him my love and tell him
Vidya is flourishing.
Love to you all
BAPU
S MT. P REMIBEHN
C ARE S HRI JAIRAMDAS DOULATRAM
MARKET R OAD, H YDERABAD, S IND
From the original : C.W. 9244. Courtesy : Jairamdas Doulatram

140. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
November 5, 1933
MY DEAR KUMARAPPA,

I had your note.
I hope you are now properly housed and that the treatment is
doing you good.
Ba and Manu are likely to be in Ahmedabad pretty soon.
1

124

Daughter of Jairamdas Doulatram
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

My tour commences properly on 8th inst. You shall have the
programme. But regard Wardha as my address.
Many of your companions are here just now—Morarji 1 Swami,
Gokulbhai, Divanji. They are dispersing as soon as they come.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From a photostat : G. N. 10102

141. LETTER TO N. S. HARDIKAR
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, W ARDHA,

November 5, 1933
DEAR DR. HARDIKAR 2 ,

I have read your long letter to Jamnalalji and had a long chat
with Sharma.
I have gone into the figures and have shown him how the
budget should be reduced. I have no time to reiterate the reasons. In
my view at the present moment and for one year your wants should not
exceed Rs. 5,000. From Jalbhai’s letter it appears that Rs. 4,000 can
easily be found. A loan is needed for the balance. But I have advised a
donation rather than a loan, and it may be Rs. 2,000. So, if Jalbhai has
difficulty in finding Rs. 4,000 and if you regulate your expenditure
according to my revision, you should have no difficulty for the current
year. Fresh effort will be necessary for the next year. But I think that
the workers should be told that they may not expect any guarantee
regarding the maintenance money. I have adopted this method for all
the workers. I would also warn you against raising loans. That will kill
the movement. We should not feel helpless for want of funds. I would
also like you not to raise further funds in regard to the budget now
provided for the year. You will please show this to Jawaharlal and
Jalbhai and get their approval, if you endorse my suggestions. On their
approval being secured, the money will at once be handed over.
My personal opinion on the insurance policies is that they
should be allowed to lapse. In any case, we may not be responsible for
them, unless we deliberately adopt the policy of taking out and
providing for the policies of all workers.
1
2

Morarji Desai
N. S. Hardikar, founder and Secretary-General of the Hindustani Seva Dal

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

125

I hope that the operation 1 has been wholly successful and that
you are making rapid progress.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
DR. N. S. H ARDIKAR
From the original: N. S. Hardikar Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library

142. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
[November 5, 1933] 2
BHAISHRI VALLABHBHAI,

I got your letter today. I heard about the Vithalbhai Shraddha
Committee as much as you did and from the same source. Surely Mani
is not your daughter only ?
Swami had shown me . . . ’s 3 analysis. Otherwise I would have
missed reading that literature. Why don’t you say plainly that the real
difficulty is that you are not with me ? I feel that as much as you do. I,
therefore, follow the example of Ekalavya. Being turned away by
Dronacharya, he kept an image of the latter in front of him and learnt
archery. I don’t want to be an archer, and you do not know how to
shoot arrows. You have broken your bow and made it into a plough. I,
too, wish to plough in fields.
I daily make a Partheshwar Chintamani 4 and consult him. But
how can one be sure that I always get the correct reply ? My point,
however, is that I always bear in mind what you would desire.
Ba is getting ready for imprisonment. Charliebhai is leaving on
the 11th. He left this place yesterday. He visited all places and met all
persons, but to no avail.
The news of Kaka’s fast does not seem to have spread. Here also
we didn’t let it be talked about much. He is regaining strength rapidly.
Ultimately Prabhudas has decided to go to Almora. I want you to
1

For fistula
The date has been inferred from the reference to C. F. Andrew’s departure from
Wardha; vide “Letter to Prabhashankar Pattani”,4-11-1933
3
The name is omitted in the source.
4
Gandhiji is apparently referring to the orthodox practice of making a clay
Shivalinga for worship, which in his case would obviously be the inner voice.
2

126

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

write to me even while I am touring. I, too, will write to you.
Kaka, Swami and company will follow Ba (to jail). Morarji and
others are here. They are all right. Don’t worry about them. This time
you. . . .1
Khurshed is improving.
Blessings to you and Chandulal from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro–2 : Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 43-4

143. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
November 5, 1933
CHI. MANI,

I have your letter. Dahyabhai is fighting hard to purify the
atmosphere. I will not be going there. Continue to write to me in detail.
Ba may start from here on the 13th. After completing Nagpur I have to
return to Wardha and so she feels tempted to stay on here till then. In
Ahmedabad I believe she will stay with Ranchhodbhai.2 Otherwise the
Red Bungalow at any rate is there. It will be for me to decide. Do you
have any suggestion to make ? Do everything possible about your leg.
Do not be in too great a haste.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4 : Manibehn Patelne, p. 111

144. LETTER TO NARAYAN M. KHARE
November 5, 1933
CHI. PANDITJI,

I manage to get news about you. I see that you have been spending your time well. Here Lakshmibehn has been doing very useful
work. She is looking after most of the things. Though a musician has
joined, I have requested her to lead the bhajans, etc., during the
1
2

The rest of the sentence was scored out by the jail authorities.
Ranchhodbhai Sheth

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

127

prayers and she does so. On Thursdays and Fridays, Mathuri sings the
bhajans in her beautiful voice. I didn’t know that she could sing with
such a full voice. Lakshmibehn is bound to write about the other
things, and so I don’t mention them here in order to save time. Kaka’s
seven-day fast ended on Thursday. It was necessary. I assume you have
heard everything. Chandrashankar, Mirabehn, Nayar and Jamnalalji’s
Om will accompany me in my tour. Ramnath ‘Suman’, a friend of
Haribhau’s, also will be one of the party. And of course Thakkar Bapa.
The tour will last for nine months without a break.
I don’t get full reports about what Rambhau1 does in
Ahmedabad. He himself never writes. Probably you get some news.
Gajanan2 and Dhiru are doing fairly well. The former is discontented.
He says that he doesn’t receive proper education. Yoga3 seemed to be a
fine girl. She is intelligent, too. I didin’t know she knew Gujarati so
well.
Blessings to all from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : C. W. 247. Courtesty: Lakshmibehn N. Khare

145. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
WARDHA,

November 5, 1933
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter.
I received Surjibhai’s book today. I have not forgotten about the
preface though I have not written it yet. I shall try now.
I am fully informed about the Vithalbhai Committee, etc., but I
just cannot come.
I understand about Utkal. I do not insist on anything. You
continue sending the money as you think fit.
I have instructed Chandrashankar to send more details about the
tour as soon as they are finalized.
Get from Hansabehn 4 the correct information about Jivaraj and
1
2
3
4

128

Ramachandra Khare, Addressee’s son
Addressee’s brother’s son and daughter.
Ibid
Wife of Dr. Jivaraj Mehta

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

let me know.
As for Utkal I shall be satisfied with whatever you can do and
whatever I can do by writing. Harakhchand will try independently at
the Calcutta end.
Baban Gokhale has sent many papers. I have not been able to go
through them at all. Now I shall attend to them in the course of my
tour and send a reply. They contain the lawyer’s opinions, etc.
What can be done about Nariman! Even after understanding the
situation here he has gone and published his statement. If a meeting of
the committee is called, the whole trouble can be put an end to.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Vilap Samiti does not sound good. Would Sharaddha Samiti not
be better?
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

146. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
WARDHA,

November 5, 1933
CHI. MATHURADAS,

An amount of Rs. 10,000 has come from Kamalabehn Sona-vala
towards the aid for Karnataka. You must meet her and collect it. Her
address is: Sham Bhuvan Building, opp. Babulnath, 5th floor. When
you get the money, credit it to the Karnataka account and inform me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

129

147. SPEECH TO HARIJANS1
NALWADI,

[Before November 7, 1933] 2
Vinoba has come here to serve you. The Ashram programme is
followed here regularly. I hope you will take full advantage of it.
Shethji reminded me just now that no one was prepared to remove the
carcass of a bullock, and so the Ashram inmates carried it and buried it.
The Harijan friends were displeased by this, for they think that others
should not do the work allotted to the lowest even among the
untouchables. Vinoba has made a thorough study of the scriptures. He
says that nowhere has God enjoined that some are high and others low,
some touchable and some untouchable. He has been working among
Harijans to wipe out these distinctions. Dr. Ambedkar is pained and
enraged by the oppression of Harijans by caste Hindus. Why should he
not feel angry at the oppression which caste Hindus have perpetrated
on Harijans? Why, then, do you make such distinctions of high and low
among you? If the position that only the Bhangis may remove nightsoil and dead animals is accepted, the work being done among Harijans
will stop Brahmana,Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra were the four varnas
and some others were regarded as belonging to the fifth varna, or as
falling outside the varna system. These varnas have not retained their
original character. What survives is the distinction of high and low. God
has not made anybody high or low. If, living here, we serve you as
your Bhangis, you should not be angry. How can we serve Harijans ?
Should we serve the Mahars but not the Bhangis ? Shoud we make
distinctions among Harijans? Hinduism will perish unless these
distinctions are wiped out. The majority of the population in India
consists of Hindus. If they perish, what would India be left with ? It
would of course be a different matter if all Hindus became Muslims or
Christians. If, however, we feel that Hinduism is good, we must save it
from destruc-tion. It has produced innumerable saints and sages. The
Gita is one of the greatest scriptures, if not the greatest of all. A
religioon which has given such a treatise and which has produced great
saints like Jnaneshwar, Tukaram and Samartha Ramdas is certainly not
1

This has been translated from Chandrashankar Shukla’s weekly letter.
This and the following item are from the report date-lined “Wardha, November
7, 1933”.
2

130

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

destined to perish. We must realize that it is meant to live for ever, that
is is imperishable. We must rid it of any imperfections or evil that may
have crept into it. The evil of untouchability that has entered it should
be wiped out. Mahar, Mang, Bhangi and similar names came into use to
indicate different occupations. But because of that it cannot be said that
the Mahars are higher than the Mangs and the Mangs are higher than
the Bhangis. Mang, Bhangi, Mahar and other Harijans, all serve society.
If they did not do so, society could not survive. The workers who have
come here have done so only to serve you, and not for money. They
will happy only if they can add to your income be ever so little. Accept
their service and thank God for this kindness.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbahdhu, 12-11-1933

148. ADVICE TO A HARIJAN WORKER1
[Before November 7, 1933]
From experience I have come to the conclusion that while
praying we should not worry about unwanted thoughts and should not
feel unhappy if they come. If we try to keep them out, they invade us
with greater force. Fear haunts the frightened. The same is true about
unwanted thoughts. To keep worrying why we get such thoughts, is like
devoting oneself to them through enmity. If we get unwanted thoughts,
we should know that enemies have arrived, but we should not invite
them. Just as an uninvited guest offended and leaves if he is not
welcomed, so also unwanted thoughts will go away if we do not bother
about them. But at the same time, as we do not neglect the invited guest
just becaue some uninvited guest has intruded, so also we should not,
just because of the invasion of unwanted thoughts, feel disheartened by
them and stop the practice of prayer which we want to keep up. The
more these thoughts are ignored, the weaker will they grow and the
prayer will engage attention more and more. The argument that we
should stop praying because of unwanted thoughts would be correct if
we ourselves invited these thoughts. It would be sheer pretence to sit
down to pray and invite thoughts at the same time. Our mind should
non-co-operate with bad thoughts.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 12-11-1993
1

This is from Chandrashankar Shukla’s weekly letter and appeared under the
title “Difficulty in Praying.”
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

131

149. LETTER TO DUDHIBEHN V. DESAI
November 7, 1933
CHI. DUDHIBEHN,

Dhiru seems to be keeping bad health. Ramabehn—who is
here—feels unhappy because of that. Give me a report about him, and
write seperately to Ramabehn also. I hope you have taken Dhiru and
others under your special care.
You must have received the letter I wrote to you at Rajkot. Write
to me from time to time. Whenever you get any news about Valji, let
me have it. Ask Manu and Mavo to write to me.
How is Kusum ?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C. W. 3137. Courtesty : Valji G. Desai

150. LETTER TO DHIRU C. JOSHI
W ARDHA
November 7, 1933
CHI. DHIRU,

I got your letter. Your handwriting in your letter to Rama was
very bad. One should not write to anyone in such bad handwriting. The
lines were not straight. You are no longer a little child. There was some
anger, too, in your letter. A child should never be angry with its
mother. Don’t you admit that we are poor ? How can poor people
spare money for visiting one another ?
You should take care of your health. Let me know what your
weight is. Be careful about what you eat. It would be better if you do
not eat dal for some time. [Be]1 satisfied with rice and milk. Do you get
fruit? Do you take cod liver [oil] 2 In any case, don’t [eat] 3 more than
you can digest. If you are careful, you can make your body as strong
as steel. I will reply to your letter some other time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 5314
1

The Source is mutilated here.
Ibid
3
Ibid
2

132

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

151. LETTER TO MAHENDRA AND SUDARSHAN DESAI
WARDHA,

November 7, 1933
CHI. MANU AND MAVO,

I hope you got my letter 1 of New Year blessings. Write to me
occasionally. Study with great care. My tour begins from tomorrow.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C. W. 3161. Courtesty : Valji G. Desai

152. SPEECH AT SELU
November 7, 1933
I believe it to be a happy augury that my tour commences with
this sacred act. 2 I do not know if I shall be able to go through the
programme that has been chalked out for me for the coming nine
months. Whether it is got through or not, my faith tells me that an
undertaking which begins under such good auspices must result in
good. The idol in the temple is not God. But since God resides in every
atom, He resides in an idol. When rites of consecration are per-formed,
special sanctitiy is attributed to the idol, and those who believe in
temples perform worship by visiting them. I hold it a blasphemy to say
that the Creator resides in a temple from which a particular class of His
devotees sharing the faith in it are excluded. Ramdeoji has, therefore,
well said that this will be a true temple only from today, when it is
declared open to Harijans.
Harijan, 17-11-1933

153. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, SELU
November 7, 1933
It has been my firm belief for the last 50 years that there is no
place in Hinduism for untouchability as we are observing it today. I
have studied to the best of my ability all the religions of the world,
1
2

Vide “Letter to Mahendra V. Desai”, 12-10-1933
Gandhiji had opened a temple to Harijans.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

133

and it has led me to the same conclusion. I should consider the sacrifice of my life as none too great for the sacred cause of the removal of
this curse of untouchability. I have not a shadow of a doubt that, if
untouchability is not removed root and branch, Hinduism is bound to
perish, for no religion can nurture itself on the degradation of its
votaries.
Harijan, 17-11-1933

154. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, WARDHA
November 7, 1933
It is good fortune for me that my tour begins at Wardha, which is
the geographical centre of India. I want it also to be the centre of this
movement. And I hope that the spirit with which Jamnalalji has opened
his temple to Harijans and with which Vinoba and his companions have
cast in their lot with Harijans will prove infectious and spread through
the whole of the country.
Harijan, 17-11-1933

155. SPEECH AT SWEEPERS MEETING, NAGPUR
November 8, 1933
What Mrs. Abhyankar said on behalf of hundreds of women like
her touched me deeply.1 While she was speaking I looked at Sjt.
Abhyankar, and I saw that is eyes had become wet. I have steeled my
heart, and I do not shed tears easily; but these words could not but
move me. I admit I have been instrumental in making paupers of
doctors, lawyers and merchants. I do not repent. On the contrary, I
rejoice that many have embraced poverty voluntarily. Why should Mrs.
Abhyankar, who is trying to identify herself, alongwith her husband,
with the sweepers, put on golden bangles at all ? In a poor country like
India, where people walk for miles to get a dole of one pice per day, as
they are doing in Orissa today, it does not behove anybody who cares
for the poor to wear costly ornaments. In no other way can we identify
ourselves with the Harijans. Those who have nothing else have God and
are men of God—Harijans. Those who have wealth are men of wealth.
1
Offering her two golden bangles Mrs. Abhyankar had said, “Nowadays
husbands leave little for their wives. I can, therefore, only make this humble offering
for the service of Harijans.”

134

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

All credit, therefore, to Motilalji, Das, Vithalbhai and many others
whom I can mention and who parted with their possessions for the sake
of the poor.
Harijan, 17-11-1933

156. ADVICE TO HARIJANS
NAGPUR,

November 8, 1933
Of course, I have told caste Hindus that they are responsible for
whatever evil habits are to be noticed among the Harijans. But this does
not mean that you should hug your evil habits. Harijans should
contribute to this movement by cultivating cleanliness, both of mind
and body, giving up carrion-eating which is looked upon with abhorrence by the whole of humanity, giving up drink, as also the differences of high and low that they are observing among themselves. When
they go to temples, they should observe the rules applicable to all
temple-goers.
Harijan, 17-11-1933

157. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, NAGPUR1
November 8, 1933
I am deeply grateful to you for the manifestation of this great
affection. Thanks be to God that you have assembled in such numbers
to listen to my message. The Chairman2 is right when he says that this
Harijan work is essentially religious from my standpoint. That it has
many other results is equally true. There never has been a single truly
religious activity but has had its influence on many departments of life.
That perhaps is one of the tests by which we recognize a great religious
movement. I would like to say in all humility, but with perfect
confidence, that I have taken up this movement in no spirit of
antagonism to any other religion or community. It would be impossible for any person to point to a single act of mine during the past
50 years which could be proved to have been antagonistic to any
person or community. I have never believed anyone to be my enemy.
1
2

Gandhiji spoke in Hindi.
Dr. N. B. Khare.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

135

My faith demands that I should consider no one as such. I may not
wish all to anything that lives. It is my certain conviction that, if the
Hindu heart is completely purged of the taint of untouchability, the
event will have its inevitable influence not only upon all the
communities in India but on the whole world. This belief is daily
becoming stronger. I cannot remove from any heart untouchability
regarding several millions of human beings and harbour it towards
some other millions. The very act of the Hindu heart getting rid of
distinctions of high and low must cure us of mutual jealousies and
distrust of and among other communities. It is for that reason that I
have staked my life on this issue. In fighting this battle against untouchability. I am fighting for unity not only between Hindu touchables
and Hindu untouchables but among Hindus, Muslims, Christians and
all other different religious communities. Do not for one moment
believe that I am interested in the numerical strength of Hindus. I have
never throughout my life laid stress upon quantity. I have ever insisted
upon quality at the sacrifice of quantity. If I collected a million false
coins they would be a worthless burden to me. One true coin would be
its value. A religion cannot be sustained by the number of its
lipfollowers denying in their lives its tenets. This great Hindu religion
itself will perish, in spite of its so called millions of followers, if its
votaries persist in harbouring the evil of untouchability. Not because
untouchables can be counted by the millions. If would perish even if
they were a handful. Milk is poisoned and has to thrown away whether
you put a little or much arsenic in it. If we believe that we are all
children of one and the same God and that God is Truth and Justice,
how can there be untouchability amongst us, His children ? God of
Truth and Justice can never create distinctions of high and low among
His own children. I, therefore, invite all without distinction of race and
religion to assist this movement by praying for its complete success, so
that we may all live in peace and friendship.
And if I want concord amongst all the communities professing
different faiths, I cannot desire discord between the so-called sanatanists and reformers. I can harbour no ill will against sanatanists. I ask
them to extend the same toleration to reformers that they would have
the latter extend towards themselves. If they tolerate the faith and
practice of others, why will they not tolerate the faith and practice of
the reformers ? They may not help so long as they regard untouchability as an integral part of Hinduism. I and fellow reformers firmly
136

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

believe that untouchability is an evil; and if it is so and If the reformers
will continue to exercise patience and gentleness, the heart of the
sanatanists must melt. There can be no room for compulsion or
violence in this great movement. I endeavour to place before the vast
mass of Hindus the results of a belief derived from such prayerful
study of the Hindu scriptures as has been possible for me, and from
association with those who are learned in them and, what is more, from
my practice based upon that belief. Surely, that cannot promote
internal dissensions. I observe that many who oppose this movement
have not taken the trouble to understand its implications. The object of
this tour is to place the position of the reformers clearly before the
public. And I am hoping that, as the scope of the activities of the
Servants of Untouchables Society becomes known, the opposition to it
will melt away. We want to change the hearts of those who today
oppose the movement. We want to remove their distrust. We do not
desire to compel them to act against their belief. We want to win them
over to the reform by gentlest persuasion, by appealing to their reason
and to their hearts. Love can never express itself by imposing
sufferings on others. It can only express itself by self-suffering, by
self-purfication. I am convinced that, if the reformers will show in their
own lives an increasing purity, self-denial, and capacity for suffering,
they will be sure to melt the hearts of those who are today saturated
with untouchability, believing it to be a desirable part of Hinduism.
Is is said that untouchables are so because of the evil in them. But
are the ‘touchables’ better ? Are they sinless ? Indeed, defenders of
untouchability claim that some people are always untouchables and
that no amount of pure conduct can pure them of the taint with which
they are born. They must remain social lepers for ever. The fact is that
whatever weakness we may notice about untouchables are a reflection
of our own weaknesses and sins. They are a direct result of the illtreatment that we have heaped upon their devoted heads. Their real rise,
therefore, depends upon te removing of untouchability root and
branch and upon showing a growing purity in our own lives. Thus the
movement is dependent, not so much upon pecuniary help, as upon
correct conduct. Pecuniary help is to be an earnest of our determination to rid ourselves of the evil and to achieve self-purification.
The question is repeatedly asked whether the reform includes
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

137

inter-dining. Though I have answered this question repeatedly, I must
continue to repeat the answer as long as the question continues to be
asked. Everybody knows what my personal views are. Since my youth
upward I have consistently dined with all so long as the rules of
cleanliness have been observed. But that has nothing to do with the
present movement. Interdining and the rest is a question for each
individual to determine for himself. The movement organized by the
Servants of Untouchables Society stands for simple removal of
untouchability in every shape and form, in so far as it is special to the
so-called untouchables. They would have the same public rights and
facilities as are enjoyed by every other Hindu, that is to say, they
should have access to all public institutions, such as wells, schools,
roads, temples, etc.
One word as to the objections raised against Anti-untouchability
Bill. Sanatanists have contended that they constitute State Interference
in matters of religion. I suppose by interference is meant that which is
undue. For it is possible to quote instances where State interference has
been sought and has been inevitable in matters of religion. What is
sought is freedom from external compulsion. I am no more in favour
of such compulsion in matters affecting religion, than sanatanists.
These Bills involve no such compulsion, no undue interference. The
interference sought is beneficial and unavoidable. If the State
compelled the opening of temples To Harijans, it would without doubt
be undue interference, but it cannot be undue when the State is called
upon to legalize the voluntary opening by a stated majority of
templegoers or the trustees. Not to do so would be compulsion. The
Temple-entry Bill merely seeks to legalize the action of a majority. The
other Bill has been long overdue. It does not abolish untouch-ability
altogether. It seeks to rob it of secular consequences. To clothe it with
such consequences is to constitute an intolerable interference with the
free exercise of religion. Nobody will deny that to make a religious
obligation an obligation in law would be a gross and undue
interference by the State. The observance of untouc-hability requires
the voluntary recognition of it by both touchables and untouchables.
For the State to compel observance by untou-chables would be a gross
interference in matters of religion. The Bill, therefore, seeks to remove
the secular recognition of untouchability, without in any way inter138

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

fering with the religious observance of it or the religious conse-quences
of the breach of it. If the objectors mean, therefore, what they say and
on a careful study should find that the Bills involve no compulsion,
they should waive their objection.1
The poor man perhaps had nothing else to pay and he seems to
have paid his all. It is an unsoiled cowrie, as Malaviyaji would call it.
We attribute our earnings to fate, but what we give in the name of God,
and for the service of His creatures bring us merit. Looking at it as a
symbol of sacrifce, it is more precious than gold.
Harijan, 17-11-1933

158. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
NAGPUR,
Before the morning prayer, November 9, 1933
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

I got your letter. You must not stop writing to me while I am
touring. I will also write to you. What happened regarding Vithalbhai
has not passed unnoticed by me. I also have been attacked strongly. I
have paid no attention at all to these attacks. Even if I did, what could I
do! If you stir dirty water, more dirt will come to the surface. I paid
attention only to Subhas’s services. As for the stories we hear regarding Vithalbhai’s last wishes2 , we can say nothing. I, too, have my
doubts as you have.
My work commenced from Tuesday. Wherever I go, large
crowds assemble. They don’t seem to resent my talking about untouchability. A fine temple near Wardha was thrown open to Harijans. 3
1

Gandhiji then auctioned the gifts which included the cowrie given to him at
Katol. The remarks that follow are taken from Chandrashankar Shukla’s weekly letter
entitled “The First Week’s Tour”.
2
It was reported that Vithalbhai Patel had bequeathed a large sum to Subhas
Chandra Bose to be used at his discretion for propaganda abroad. Later, the Bombay
High Court decided that the amount should go to Vithalbhai’s legatees. Gandhiji
persuaded the family to give it to the Congress for national service.
3
Vide “Speech at Selu”, 7-11-1933
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

139

There was a large crowd such as had never had never been seen before
in this city. My voice met the demand on it fairly well. Nor did I get
tired. I have started with my weight 108 or 109. The collection also, I
think, was good. After completing the C. P., I have to go to Delhi and
from there straight to the South. Raja says that it is necessary to tour
the South first. The opposition of the sanatanists comes mainly from
there. I have to return to Wardha on Saturday. The Wardha taluka
remains to be toured. Meanwhile Jawaharlal and others will come to see
me. Ansari1 has already arrived. Hence he also may join me. With me
are Mira, Chandrashankar, Nayar Ramnath (of the Sasta Sahitya of
Delhi), Om and the wife of Rameshwar Birla’s 2 son. The last will be
with me for a few days only. Om has become a strong willed girl.
Thakkar Bapa also is in the party. Ba will leave Wardha on the 13th.
She will reach Ahmedabad about the 15th or the 16th. This time she is
very much agitated. She is restless no doubt. But she will go [to jail].
She is convinced that that is the only right course.
Please continue to write to me at the Wardha address.
Blessings to you both from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2 : Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 45-6

1
2

140

Dr. M. A. Ansari
G. D. Birla’ elder brother

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

159. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
November 9, 1933
CHI. MANI,

I have your letter. You have acted wisely in writing to me
frankly. In future also do the same. If not you who else will write ? I
was surprised to learn that Dahyabhai misunderstood my action and
got angry. But we need not pay attention to that. Perhaps he is not
even acquainted with all the facts. I can even understand his being
pained. You yourself should try to calm him as much as you an. If
you wish, I will write to him and try to soothe him. I will like it better.
You may show him this letter if you like.
Ba will leave Wardha on Tuesday. She will halt at Akola for a
short while, i..e., for a few hours and then go there. At present she is in
a rather confused state of mind. She is worried also. All the same, she
herself announced her resolution of going [to jail]. You should try
and strengthen it.
Eat well and improve your health as much as you can. Write to
me regularly. Do take the rays as long as you can. You can receive the
treatment even in Ahmedabad. What did you do regarding your
teeth ?
Jawaharlal and others are coming to Wardha on Saturday.
What did Mridu1 do in Allahabad ? Did she return satisfied ?
Ask her to write to me. What did she do about her teeth ? If she has
heard more about Saraladevi2 , she should let me have the news.
We had a very good meeting in Nagpur. The tour has started
well. Let me know how the funeral went off.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4 : Manibehn Patelne, pp. 111-2

1
2

Mridula Sarabhai
Mridula Sarabhai’s mother

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

141

160. LETTER TO GANGABEHN B. JHAVERI
November 9, 1933
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I got your letter. Serve people as well as you can and be contented. Seeing other men’s mansions, we don’t demolish our own hut.
The happiness which people may enjoy in mansions is possible in
huts, too. You are doing good work in running a school for Harijan
pupils. If you live exclusively on milk and fruit, that is bound to do
you good. You need not, then, eat anything else. Nanibehn should
write to me. Write always at Wardha. Ask Mahesh also to write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
Form a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3119

161. INTERVIEW TO PRESS
November 9, 1933
Questioned whether he would issue a statement to the Press in connection with
the all-India anti-untouchability tour, the Mahatma said that there was nothing to
warrant a statement from him. All that he wanted to say in that connection had been
said by him in his address at the Nagpur public meeting the previous night. He said he
would be prepared to answer questions but warned them not to improvise questions.1
Q.
How many years do you think it will take for complete removal of
untouchability at the present rate of progress ?

It is more than I can answer. It is a question of a change of
the hearts of millions of human beings.
A.
Q.

Will you be prepared to receive swaraj before this curse is removed ?

A. T he question is badly put. There is no meaning in asking
whether I shall be prepared to receive swaraj if untouchability is not
removed by then. Swaraj in not a matter of receiving or taking. It is
one of evolution . We either grow to it from day to day or we go
away from it. If we, as a nation, are becoming more and more
conscious of ourselves if the fundamental unity of millions, then we
1

142

This paragraph is from Hitavada.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

are certainly progressing towards it. Whereas, if we are dissolving, then
we are receding from it.
Q. Do you not realize that the depressed classes have even now got their own
superstitions and that they very much hesitate to associate with, for instance,
Brahmins, even if the are asked to do so ?

A. No, I do not; because, if what you say is true, it means that
they want to remain in their present state of degradation. I cannot
understand a social leper glorying in his leprosy. If the so-called depressed classes are so disgusted with the so-called high-class Hindus
that they want absolutely to cut themselves adrift from Hinduism and
Hindus, then they form a separate entity, which means they establish a
new religion, or they accept any of the other prevailing religions of
India. That is a thing which can happen, if the so-called higher classes
continue to wallow in their imaginary superiority and do not perform
the elementary duty of regarding the Harijans as their kith and kin.
This anti-untouchability movement is an attempt to do this elementary
duty by the Harijans.
Q.

Harijans seem to be unwilling to mix with caste-Hindus. Is it not a fact ?

My experience is wholly different. I have talked with thousands of Harijans. They are eager to associate with the higher classes,
if the latter behave themselves. What is true is that they distrust the
higher classes, and where they do not distrust them, they are afraid of
them. And there is this unfortunate additonal fact the the notion of
inferiority from birth has been so much injected into them that they
consider themselves doomed by God to eternal inferiority. This must
be a matter of shame and humiliation for every thinking savarna
Hindu.1
A.

The best way for the so-called caste Hindus was to forget that they were higher
than anybody else. It was all a reflection of what was today a fact among the higher
classes. It ought to cause no surprise to higher classes when they discover that there
are differences in untouchability and therefore among untouchables.

Harijan, 1-12-1933, and Hitavada, 12-11-1933

1

The following is from the Hitavada.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

143

162. SPEECH AT STUDENTS’ MEETING, NAGPUR
November 9, 1933
I know this tussle between English and Hindi is almost an eternal
tussle.1 Whenever I have addressed student audiences, I have been surprised by the demand for English. You know, or ought to know, that I
am a lover of the English language. But I do believe that the students
of India, who are expected to throw in their lot with the teeming
millions and to serve them, will be better qualified if they pay more
attention to Hindi than to English. I do not say that you should not
learn English; learn it by all means. But, so far as I can see, it cannot
be the language of the millions of Indian homes. It will be confined to
thousands or tens of thousands, but it will not reach the millions.
Therefore, I am delighted when the students ask me to speak in Hindi.
You, both the speakers, have spoken of me in terms, which if I
believed to be true of myself, I do not know where I would be. But I
know my place. I am a humble servant of India, and in trying to serve
India, I serve humanity at large. I discovered in my early days that the
service of India is not inconsistent with the service of humanity. As I
grew older in years, and I hope also in wisdom, I saw that the
discovery was well made, and after nearly 50 years of public life, I am
able to say today that my faith in the doctrine, that the service of
one’s nation is not inconsistent with the service of the world, has
grown. It is a good doctrine. Its acceptance alone will ease the
situation in the world and stop the mutual jealousies between nations
inhabiting this globe of ours. You have said truly that in taking up this
war against untouchability, I have not confined myself to Hinduism. I
have said more than once that, if untouchability is removed in its
fulness from the Hindu heart, it will have farreaching consequences,
in as much as it touches millions of human beings.
As I said last night to the great meeting in Nagpur, if
untouchability is really removed from the Hindu heart, that is, if
the high-caste Hindus purge themselves of this terrible taint, we shall
soon discover that we are all one and not different peoples, Hindus,
Muslims, Christians, Parsis, whatever we may call our-selves. We shall
1

Gandhiji had begun his speech in Hindi. But as there was a cry for English,
he spoke in English.

144

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

feel the unity, once the barrier of untouchability is removed. As I have
often said, untouchability is a hydraheaded monster, appearing in
many shapes. Some of them are very subtle. If I have jealousy for any
human being that also is a species of untouchability. I do not know if
my dream about the removal of untouchability. I do not know if my
dream about the removal of untouchability will be fully realized while
I am living. All those who are religiously inclined, those who believe
not in formal religion but in the essence of religion, cannot but
believe in the removal of a subtle type of untouchability that affects
the lives of a vast mass of humanity. If Hindu hearts can be purged of
this evil, our eyes of understanding will be more and more opened. It
is not possible to estimate the gain to humanity when untouchability is
really removed. You can now have no difficulty in understanding why
I have staked my life for this one thing.
If you, the students who have assembled here, have followed me
so far and understood the implications of this mission of mine, you
will soon extend the help I want from you. Many students have written
to me asking what part they can take in helping this movement. It is a
surprise to me that students are obliged to ask this question. The field
is so vast and near you that you need not ask the question as to what
you may do and what you may not. It is not political question. It may
become one, but for you and me, for the time being, it is not
connected with politics. My life is governed by religion. I have said
that even my politics are derived from my religion. I never lost sight
of the principle that governs my life when I began dabbling in
politics. As this is a humanitarian campaign, students must devote a
part of their spare time, if not the whole, to the service of thousands of
Harijans. By giving me this magnificent purse you have certainly
equalled the brightest records of students’ meetings which I have
addressed in my many peregrinations throughout the length and
breadth of India. But I want much more from you. I have found that,
if I get many helpers who can give their spare time, much work can be
done. This work cannot be done by hired labour. With hired labour
we cannot go to Harijan quarters and sweep their roads, enter their
houses and wash their children. I have described in the columns of the
Harijan What students can do.1 A Harijan teacher has shown what a
Herculean task it is for him to tackle. Even wild children are better
than Harijan children. Wild children are not sunk in utter degradation,
1

Vide “Students and Vacation”

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

145

as the Harjian children are, nor do they live in such filthy surroundings. This problem cannot be tackled by hired labour. No amount of
money can enable me to do hired labour. No amount of money can
enabel me to do this. It must be your prerogative. It is an acid test of
the education received by you in schools and colleges. Your worth
will not be measured by your ability to make faultless English
speeches. Your worth will be measured by the service you render to
the poor and not by Government posts worth Rs. 60 or Rs. 600 that
you may have got. I wish you would do this work in the spirit I
suggest. I have not met a single student who has said that he cannot
spare one hour per day. If you write your diary from day to day, you
will find that you waste many a precious hour in the 365 days of the
year. If you want to turn your education to good account, you will
turn your attention to this work while this hurricane campaign lasts.
Erstwhile students are serving Harijans whithin a radius of 5 miles
round about Wardha. They are doing good silent work; therefore, you
do not know them. I invite you to see their work. It is hard but
pleasurable. It will give you joy, greater than your cricket or tennis. I
have repeatedly said that money will come if I have real, intelligent,
honest workers. As a boy of 18 I began my education in begging. I
have seen that money can be found easily if we have the right kind of
workers. Money alone will never satisfy me. I would ask you to
pledge yourselves to devote a definite number of spare hours to
Harijan service. As you, Mr. President, have said, I am a dreamer. I
am indeed a practical dreamer. My dreams are not airy nothings. I
want to convert my dreams into realities as far as possible. Therefore, I
must hasten to auction the gifts I have received from you.
Harijan, 17-11-1933

146

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

163. EXTRACTS FROM SPEECHES 1
[Before November 10, 1933] 2
For me the money you give is a token of your identification
with the cause. Mere money will not avail; I must have your heart also
with your money.3
You may not think that you have lost your money. Those who
have given have gained it, and those who, though able, have refrained
have in reality lost it. The money spent in gambling, drink and lust is
a double loss, for you lose your money and lose also your reputation
and health. Whereas those who give even a pice for the service of
humanity gain more than they give. Untouchability is a blot on
Hinduism. It is a canker eating into its vitals. I see with my eyes and
smell with my nose that the body of Hinduism is in the process of
destruction. If you think with me, you should contribute your mite to
this cause. Once we lose the spiritual power of Hinduism I do not
know where we should be. A man without religion is like a ship
without a rudder. The money, therefore, that you give is to my mind a
token of your desire to save Hinduism from spiritual destruction.
Harijan, 17-11-1933

164. NOTES
TRUE AHIMSA
Jamshed Mehta, a true servant of humanity, sends me a
rendering, received by him from a friend, of a discourse on ahimsa in
Jnaneshwari Gita4 . Chapter XIII. I have taken the liberty of further
condensing it and putting it in a form perhaps more easily to be
understood, without in any way marring the sense of the original.
Those who still harbour untouchability in their bosoms will do well to
1
These are reproduced from Chandrashankar Shukla’s “Weekly Letter” which
says the speeches were delivered before Gandhiji visited Gondia, which he did on
November 10.
2
Ibid
3
What follows was spoken at a wayside meeting of villagers who made an onthe-spot collection.
4
Jnaneshwar’s Marathi commentaryon the Bhagavad Gita.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

147

test it on the touchstone provided by the great saint of Maharashtra. Is
untouchability compatible with his definition of ahimsa ? Let the
extract speak for itself :
Before considering what is real ahimsa, it is necessary to
see what it is not. In order to secure a good rainfall, people
perform what they call sacrifices in which they kill animals. This
is not ahimsa. Is it not like cutting off one’s own hands so that
they may be cooked and served as food ? Is it wise to cut off all
the branches of a tree, in order to put a fence round it, with
those branches? Then, again, to save many people from diseases,
people cut away whole trees, or take out all the bark, or make
extracts of living animals and take out secretions from other
creatures. Is it not like pulling down a house in order to build a
verandah or shed for the house, and burning your clothes in
order to have a fire to warm yourself ?
Real ahimsa or love originates in one’s heart and is known
by one’s conduct even as gold is known by its qualities. A man
who is full of love never forgets that the world is full of life like
his and takes great care that he does not harm any living thing.
He sees his love reflected in the eyes of those whom he meets.
He is the friend of all. As a cat holds her kittens between her
teeth without hurting them, so does a man of love deal with all
with whom he comes in contact. He walks gently and noiselessly
lest his footsteps may disturb the sleep of others. He always
makes room for those who need it. He so regulates his voice as
not to jar on others. He is silent when he need not speak. His
speech is never intended to offend anyone. He does not want to
up-set other people’s plans or to frighten them. He never utters
words which lead to discussions and disputations, or which hurt
the feelings of others. There is no deceit in his talk, nor doubt
not ambiguity. He never stares lest his stare may offend people.
He does not move his hands aimlessly as he has no desire to
harm even a mosquito. He does not carry even a stick, not to
speak of other weapons. His hands are used only for salutation
or service.
These are but the outward signs of the inner abiding love
as a plant is of the seed that has borne it. His mind is the Master
of all the organs. Thus, real ahimsa is an attitude of the mind
expressed through the different sense organs. He alone who is
148

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

filled with love for all that lives and whose mind, speech and
action are in full union is truly noble.
Harijan, 10-11-1933

165. A COMMON PLATFORM
A correspondent sends me an essay by Sir C. V. Kumaraswamy
Sastriar, ex-High Court Judge, Madras. It occupies three sides of a
foolscap in print. It is written on behalf of ‘Sanatanists’. It is an
attempt to show that untouchability has existed from time immemorial
and that the legislation such as is contemplated is futile. It, however,
concludes with this significant paragraph :
Several social inequalities and exclusive outlooks are being softened
or removed by time and education. The old order is changing, and with it the
older conception of humanity. Several communities once considered depressed
or servile have, owing to rise in education and material well-being, become
possessed of rights and privileges. No lover of India would claim that
communties and castes should be in a state of antagonism, or that social
injustice and inequalities should not be adjusted. But nobody can view without
pain and alarm the methods adopted and the aids sought, which will only
accentuate the ill-feeling between the caste Hindus and the depressed classes,
without any considerable material advntage to the latter. Their state of
depression lies in other and deeper causes and its removal lies in combined
effort by the caste Hindus to improve their material and educational state.

This paragraph, in my humble opinion, vitiates the prior reasoning in support of untouchability as a sacrosanct religious instituion, It seems to admit that it is a social evil which the learned exJudge will gladly see uprooted. And every reformer will agree with
him when he says “nobody can view without pain and alarm the
methods adpoted and the aids sought, which will only accentuate the
ill-feeling between the caste Hindus and the depressed classes, without
any considerable material advantage to the latter.” Only, the reformer
must add that Sir Kumaraswamy’s fears are imaginary. Reformers
have adopted no method and sought no aid so as to accentuate illfeeling. Sir Kumaraswamy has not given himself time to study what
the reformers are doing and how they are doing it. Indeed, I can show
him that they are even postponing the material advantage to the
Harijans where ill-feeling, already existing, is likely to grow into a
fight with blows. Thus, for instance, reformers have been postponing
summary action even regarding the use of certain public wells to

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

149

which Harijans are beyond doubt entitled in law. As for the aids
sought, reformers will readily agree that social prejudices cannot be
removed by summoning the assistance of law. But they do invoke and
insist on legal and legislative aid when the law is interpreted to uphold
untouchability. No reform in respect of an evil can succeed in the
teeth of legal protection thereof. It is hardly necessary to state the
legislative obstacles can only be removed by legislative hindrance
and nothing more. What they desire is that untouchability should have
no legal sanction. They recognize that, even when that is withdrawn, as
a social evil it will demand attention for a long time to come.
I welcome the last sentence of the paragraph. When there is “a
combined effort by the caste Hindus to improve their (the Harijans’)
material and educational state”,untouchability will not be long indisappearing from the land. If the sanatanists distrust the reformers, let
them work independently. Will Sir Kumaraswamy move the ‘sanatanists’ to action ?If he succeeds, there will be no ill-feeling left. Does
he know that in the name of sanatana dharma its so-called representatives have burned the crops of innocent Harijans, assaulted them and
otherwise molested them when in the exercise of their just and legal
rights ?
Harijan, 10-11-1933

166. FOR HARIJAN TEACHERS
One who is responsible for the management of over twenty five
Harijan schools writes a long letter stating the difficulties experienced
in the management of the school and asks how I would conduct them
if I had the direct management thereof. I need not recount his
difficulties which he has described carefully. What I am about to say is
an attempt to answer them.
While we are bound to give scholarships and other help to those
Harijan boys and girls who attend the established schools, there is no
reason whatever slavishly to reproduce the mode and methods of
those schools in the ones under our own management.
We have to recognize that we get Harijan children with great
difficulty to attend any school at all. We cannot expect any degree of
regularity in them and, thanks to our past criminal neglect, they are so
unkempt that we have, in the beginning stages, to handle them in a
manner wholly different from the ordinary.
150

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

On first adimission their bodies have to be minutely examined
and thoroughly cleaned. Their clothes might have to be cleaned and
patched. The first daily lesson, therefore, will for some time consist of
applied hygiene and sanitation and simple needle-work. I should use
no books probably for the whole of the first year. I should talk to
them about things with which they are familiar and, doing so, correct
their pronunciation and grammar and teach them new words. I should
note all the new words they may learn from day to day so as to enable
me to use them frequently till they have them fixed in the their minds
regularly. The teacher will not give discourses but adopt the conversational method. Through conversations he will give his pupils progressive instruction in history, geography and arithmetic. History will
begin with that of our own times, and then, too, of events and of
persons nearest us, and geography will begin with that of the neighbourhood of the school. Arithmetic will begin with the sums applicable of the pupil’s homes. Having tried the method myself, I know
that infinitely more knowledge can be given to the pupils through it,
and without strain on them, than can be given through the orthodox
method, within a given time. Knowledge of the alphabet should be
treated as a separate subject altogether. The letters should be treated as
pictures which the children will first be taught to recognize and name.
Writing will follow as part of the drawing lesson. Instead of making
daubs of their letters, pupils should be able to make perfect copies of
the models placed before them. They would not, therefore, be called
upon to draw the letters till they had acquired control over their
fingers and the pen. It is criminal to stunt the mental growth of a
child by letting him know as much only as he can get through a book
he can incoherently read in a year. We do not realize that, if a child
was cut of from the home life and was merely doomed to the school,
he would be a perfect dunce for several years. He picks up
information and language unconsciously through his home, not in the
schoolroom. Hence do we experience the immense difference between
pupils belonging to cultured homes and those belonging to uncouth
homes, which are no homes in reality.
In the scheme I have adumbrated, the schoolmaster is expected
to treat his occupation seriously and feel one with his pupils. I know
that, in putting the scheme into operation, the want of schoolmasters
of the right type is the greatest difficulty. But we shall not get the right
type till we have made the right beginning.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

151

I must postpone the consideration of the stage when we have to
arm the pupils with books.1
Harijan, 10-11-1933

167. LETTER TO MANSHANKAR J. TRIVEDI
November 10, 1933
CHI. MANU,

You did well in seeing the Princess 2 . Now tell her the whole
thing yourself. I could barely write a short letter to her. I didn’t
discuss all the details. Write to me. Elizabeth2 also may write if she
wishes. You must have heard about Kakasaheb’s sevenday fast. . . . 3
has disappointed me.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Address Wardha.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 22621

1

Vide “School Books”, 1-12-1933.
Efy Aristarchi
2
A Roman Catholic whom Gandhiji gave the name Vimala. The addressee
intended to marry her.
3
The name has been omitted.
2

152

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

168. INTERVIEW TO PRESS
NAGPUR,

[November 10, 1933] 1
Four days is too little time compared to the nine months in front
of me.Therefore, I cannot say whether I shall be able to bear its strain.
I can only say that, If God wills that I should finish this tour, then, in
spite of all this strain, He will give me the strength to finish it.
Harijan, 17-11-1933

169. SPEECH AT GONDIA
November 10, 1933
Gandhiji deprecated the attitude of the higher castes if the allegations2 made
by the Harijans were true. He wanted a cleansing of the hearts and not a mere show. If,
however, they wanted to keep them separate still, they must declare so openly and be
prepared to meet the consequences. He could not reply to the other charge against the
bidi merchants, as he had no knowledge of the same. He pointed out how both
depended on the co-operation of each other and asked them to give up aloofness. The
term Harijan which the previous speaker resented as showing separateness,
Mahatmaji said, had been chosen by a Harijan and not invented by him. He said he
preferred to call himself a Haijan. He asked the bidi merchants to give fair treatment
to their labourers, and thanked them for the donations they freely gave to the cause
taken up by him. Mahatmaji then referred to the sales of khadi in the local Bhandar
which he said were very poor. For a town like Gondia, only Rs. 1,000 worth of khadi
was sold per month. He showed how the Harijans stood to gain by people espousing
the cause of khadi.

Hitavada, 16-11-1933

1

The interview was given on the fourth day of the tour which commenced on
November 7, 1933.
2
A Harijan boy had compained against the caste Hindus who made a show of
unity and sympathy and aganist the bidi factory owners who did not treat their
Harijan employees well.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

153

170. TELEGRAM TO J AWAHARLAL NEHRU
[November 11, 1933] 1
FIND UNABLE GIVE TWO DAYS. CAN GIVE THREE HOURS ANY MONDAY
AFTERNOON. TWENTY-SEVENTH INSTANT RAIPUR.

F OURTH DECEMBER

JUBBULPORE.
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.

171. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
WARDHA,

November 11, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I have just returned from a heavy tour programme and having
read your letter telegraphed as follows:2
It is impossible to give more than one day and more then three
hours. It is difficult enough even to give three hours. The programme
is so packed that hardly any time is given for rest. Four hours for rest,
bath and dinner, have hitherto dwindled down to two. A programme
in which tens of thousands of people are concerned cannot easily be
postponed or disturbed. The enclosed copy 3 will give you an idea of
the work, and where you find hours of rest, except for Friday
afternoon, they have been encroached upon, changing the time from
10 a.m. to 2 p.m. to 12 o’clock to 2 p.m.
I entirely agree with you that the proposed conversation will not
clarify matters to any satisfactory extent. If the A.I.C.C. meeting is
held, I do not know how I shall be able to attend the sittings. Will it
not be better for me to abstain from attending? If it is desirable, I will
send my views in writing. The opinion I have expressed in my public
letter 4 to you is becoming more and more confirmed.
1
2
3
4

154

Vide
Vide
Vide
Vide

the following item.
the preceeding item.
Appendix “ Tour Programme”, 7-11-1933
Vol. “ Letter to Jawahar Lal Nehru 14-9-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You must have seen Lahiri’s statement about the Hijli Prison. It
more than confirms Satisbabu’s letter. I have heard from the Governor. 1 His Secretary says that “His Excellency will look into the matter
to which you refer”.
I have read the appeal for the Hospital. 2 I hope it will have the
response it deserves.
I carefully read your letter about the Government demand. In
anything you do about Swaraj Bhawan, do you not think that you
should consult the trustees and not merely inform them ? I have not
been able even to show your letter to Jamnalalji for sheer want of
time. He twits me by saying that as I am in Wardha you are ignoring
him entirely, not even acknowledging his letters. I told him that your
letters to me are as much for him as for me and that just now the few
of us who are out have little time for performing acts of mere courtesy.
You cannot expect rapid progress for an old patient like
Mother. The wonder to me is that she has survived the attack she had.
I hope the progress though slow continues.
Love.
BAPU

Encl. 1
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

172. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
WARDHA,

November 11, 1933
I do not know what better proof any critic can demand than
these meetings and demonstrations that untouchability is rapidly disintegrating. This does not mean that the mass mind has changed
altogether. But if the evidence of the last four days is sustained
throughout the tour I should feel certain about the cremation of the
untouchabiliy monster within a measurable distance of time.
Harijan, 17-11-1933
1

Gandhiji wrote to the Governor of Bengal on November 2, 1933; vide
“ Letter to Governor of Bengal”, 1-11-1933
2
Vide “Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru”, 30-10-1933

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

155

173. SPEECH AT DEOLI1
November 11, 19332
I am essentially a lover of peace. I do not have the slightest wish
to create dissensions among the Hindus. It would be best for the sanatanists and reformers to confer among themselves and make an effort
to arrive at an understanding. But if that effort fails, both parties
should resort to peaceful and honourable methods and both should
learn to tolerate one another. I believe myself to be both a sanatanist
and a reformer. I have tried to gather in me all the goodwill which
caste Hindus can have towards Harijans. God alone knows how far I
have succeded in the effort. I am also trying, as best as an imperfect
human being like myself can, to see with Harijans’ eyes and to realize
what is going on in their hearts. It is not given to man to know the
whole truth. His duty lies in living up to the truth as he sees it and, in
doing so, to resort to the purest means, i.e, to non-violence. I do not
want to hurt the feelings of the sanatanists. I want to convert them to
my view in the gentlest manner. I want, if I can, to steal into their
hearts. I would love to melt their hearts by my suffering. I firmly
believe that untouchability as we practise it today has no sanction in
the Shastras. But I do not wish to enter into a discussion of what the
Shastras support and what they do not. I only put before you, as
humbly as I can, the truth as I see it, and am prepared to sacrifice my
life, if need be, in an unceasing effort to live up to that truth. It is
clear to my mind, beyond the shadow of a doubt, that, if untou-chability is not eradicated, both Hinduism and the Hindus are bound to
perish. Ever since I was a child of ten I have considered untouchability as a sin. My heart has never been able to reconcile itself to
untouchability based on birth. I tried to study the Shastras to the best
of my ability. I consulted as many pundits as I could. And a majority
of them have supported my view. But truth is not to be found in
books. Truth resides in every human heart, and one has to search for
1
Gandhiji had gone to Deoli to open a temple to Harijans but some
sanatanists opposed the plan. A shastri form the South requested him to stop the
movement and avoid creating dissensions in Hindu society.
2
From The Bombay Chronicle

156

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

it there, and be guided by truth as one sees it. But no one has a right
to coerce others to act according to his own view of truth.
I would appeal to the temple-goers here who are in favour of
Harijans’ entry into the temple to go into the temple only after the
sanatanists, who have blocked the way, leave the place. We do not want
to score a victory over them. Do not be angry with them, do not insult
them; on the contrary, feed them if they are hungry and would accept
your hospitality. We have to win them over by love. We may not ask
for police aid against them.1
I do not say this because I am a non-co-operator but because I
believe in the law of non-retaliation. Again, I believe that religion can
never be protected by force or hooliganism, but by penace and
suffering. I am, therefore, prepared to give up my life, if need be, as a
final act of penance.
He hoped that those who were arrested would be discharged and that the temple
would be opened to Harijans without delay and without friction.

Harijan, 24-11-1933

174. A PICE PER HEAD
Shri Harakhchand writes in his letter2 of October 26.
I hope readers will not be annoyed with me for giving all this
description. It is not proper if somemone says that it is an old story or
that the floods are a past event. When the floods came, those who were
destined to die died. Those who survived immediately got all possible
help. But it becomes the moral obligation ot the kind-hearted to look
after those who were rendered homeless till the next season is over and
the new harvest is ready. Such letters prove that this is the right time
for fulfilling this duty.
Readers will find that in some places the rice given per head is
less than what even one pice can fetch. If this picture is clearly impressed on his mind, the reader would not be happy to partake of his
meal without keeping aside a part of it for such unhappy people. If all
contributed according to their capacity, thousands will get en-ough to
keep themselves alive. Millowners can send clothes. Khadi lovers can
1
2

The following paragraph is from Harijan, 17-11-1933.
The letter is not translated here. Vide also “Pice Per Day”

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

157

send khadi. Only recently Harakhchand received anony-mous hundi
of Rs. 1,000 for distributing khadi.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 12-11-1933

175. LETTER TO GANGA PODDAR
[November 12, 1933] 1
I am writing to Rameshwar. It was of course a grave sin but you
can atone for and forget it. Bring back the ornaments and resolve
against ever committing such a lapse.
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 216.

176. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS PODDAR
WARDHA,

November 12, 1933
CHI. RAMESHWARDAS,

Ganga has certainly committed a grave lapse but she repents of
it now. One who repents deserves to be forgiven. Do not say a word
[of reproach] to Ganga; receive her with love. The ornaments have to
be brought back, that she will do. You can send her back afterwards.
Remain calm, chant Ramanama. We are all prone to errors but those
who confess theirs are blessed. Let us all wish that Ganga’s repentance
proves sincere.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 174.

1

158

Vide the following item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

177. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
WARDHA,

November 13, 1933
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,

I cannot reply immediately to your letters. I don’t have time
even today, but have found some to write this letter as Kishorelal told
me the substance of your letter to Nanabhai. If I could, I would certainly have tried to guide you in regard to the dispute among you
there.1 But I really cannot judge in such matters unless I see all the
people concerned. However, why do you always feel dependent on me
? Go on doing fearlessly what you feel to be the right thing. Don’t
mind if you make mistakes. Whenever you realize that you have made
a mistake, rectify it unhesitatingly without thinking of the consequences. If you always act thus, you will be able to judge what the
right course is in every matter. I shall not live for ever. You should try
to swim with your own strength. That is the right thing to do. Don’t
mind if you drown while trying to swim. If you realize that you have
made a mistake in adopting the course which you are following at
present, you should abandon it. If you don’t see any mistake, you
must cling to it no matter even if you die or become a pauper in consequence. But, while doing that, do not get angry with anybody or
adopt untruthful means or lose your peace of mind or patience. Bear
the hardships which may follow. Instead of seeking the protection of
an imperfect father, seek that of the Father of all, of Omnipotent God.
That will make you strong. This is the only lesson I wish to teach you.
If you have learnt it, you may rest assured that you have received
perfect education.
You will read accounts of my tour in papers and elsewhere. I
don’t have time to give you other news either.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4811

1

Vide “Letter to Vallabhbhai Patel”, 25-12-1933.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

159

178. NOTE TO VIDYA A. HINGORANI
WARDHA ASHRAM,

November 13, 1933
Hindus are in grave error. They have become cowards. They are
not prepared for sacrifice; they do not wish to purify temselves nor do
they want to give up their bad habits. What else can you expect ?1 In
these circumstances, those of us who are awakened should do their
duty by purifying themselves through sacrifice and have the faith that
therein lies the ultimate solution of the problem.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindu. Courtesy : National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani.

179. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
HINGANGHAT,

November 13, 1933
CHI. MARY,

I did not know that you were going to Betul so soon. I am writing this during the few minutes I have at Hinganghat. You will read
all the account of my doings in Harijan.
I thought Amala might listen if she knew who had made the
suggestion. Hers is a difficult case. But God succeeds where and when
we fail. Let us trust her to God. I hope you are keeping well body
and mind.
You must write often and that to Wardha from where letters will
be redirected.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat : G.N. 6015. Also C.W. 3341. Courtesy : F. Mary Barr.

1

The reference is to the riot in Sind resulting from the marriage of a Hindu girl
with a Muslim.

160

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

180. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Unrevised

C HANDA,

November 13, 1933
CHI. DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I have just arrived in Chanda and whilst the others are coming, I
have taken up your letter. It is now 9 p.m. The programme is fairly
strenuous. I was in Hinganghat at 6 p.m.
Tiwari has handed me your letter. I have also read yours to J 1 .
So far as he knows there is probably very little left in A.I.C.C. a/c. The
books are not with him. He has sent for the accounts. Meanwhile I
have suggested that Rs. 500 might be sent at least on a/c. If the funds
are exhausted, I do not know what is to be done. I have an earmarked
a/c at my disposal. I am loath to part with that fund. I am drawing
upon it for Hardikar and I want to do likewise for the list of workers
you have sent me. It too will be soon exhausted. In the circumstances,
the office staff has to be reduced if not given up altogether, i.e., if the
civil resistance movement is to continue. The more I look about me,
the more convinced I feel that those who are in the fight will have to
do without funds except such as may remain in hands such as mine. I
have just managed for Gujarat and Karnatak. The lady who was to
have paid Rs. 50,000 has just sent the message that she would like to
pay Rs. 10,000 to you. If she does, I shall expect you to pay the U.P.
workers out of this. Anyway I think it is best for you to confer with
Jamnalalji and if necessary with me as to the management of the funds
that are still available. I have sent notices everywhere that no more
help need be expected through me. I am trying to run through whatever is at my disposal.
Now about the informal meeting. You will see from the programme herewith that I am in Delhi between 10 and 14 December.
Thakkar Bapa says I can take up the bulk of 14th for our meeting. I
am supposed to entrain for Andhra on 14th immediately after 4 p.m.
Ansari who was with me on Sunday suggested Delhi. You will now
make your choice—24th inst., 4th Dec. or 14th Dec., i.e., if the
conference is to come off at all.

1

Jamnalal Bajaj who was the treasurer of the A.I.C.C. at this time.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

161

As to the Harijan tour, I am not worrying at all over the proposed boycott in U.P. I am finding no difficulty here. Congressmen
and non-Congressmen are co-operating in arranging for the tour. You
are unnecessarily hard on the liberals whom I would include among
non-Congressmen. We have to get work even from them. They work
according to their lights. In any case, I do not want a single
Congressman to work for this movement who would go to jail. I have
said this to everyone who has come to me. I am sending back some of
the best workers who have just come out. Ba I hope is going soon and
so is Manibehn Patel. Kakasaheb, Swami, Surendra are going. Those
Congressmen who are too weak to go or who have lost faith in civil
disobedience and who are anxious to work for the Harijan cause I am
taking, but not those who want Harijan work as a mere cloak. This
movement, if it is to become universal, must be able to continue even
if every Congressman is in jail or it must perish. I feel too that
congressmen should not handle this movement to strengthen the C. D.
movement or the Congress hold on the people. It would be going
about it the wrong way. Such an attitude will damage both the Congress and the Harijan cause. Cases of this type have come under my
notice. I have expressed strong disapproval of any such work. I think
I have now sufficiently answered all your questions. If not, please ask
again.
You will have noticed that the Sarkar Salaam 1 in Hijli has
stopped. Shall I write to Sir Tej about the Frontier treatment ?
I had a nice letter from Krishna. She seems to be happy in her
new home.
I hope Mother’s progress continues.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

1

162

Vide “Letter to Governor of Bengal”, 2-11-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

181. TELEGRAM TO SHRIKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
C HANDA,

November 14, 1933
S HRIKRISHNA C HANDIWALA
KATRA KHUSHALRAI
C HANDNICHOWK
DELHI
JAMNALALJI
REPEATED
WIRE BRIJKRISHNA1
SPARE. WIRE CONDITION YEOTMAL.

MUST

LIVE.

MAY

GOD

BAPU
From a photos tat; C. W. 10957

182. LETTER TO RAMNIKLAL MODI
C HANDA,

November 14, 1933
CHI. RAMNIKLAL,

You seem to be worrying about Tara. I hope this is a polite way
of saying things. You and I can’t afford to worry seriously. If we do,
we would discredit the knowledge that we profess. How would it seem
if we, who recite the Gita daily and read in it that we should not worry,
still go on worrying every day about something or the other ? I met
Tara. I liked her attitude, etc., very much. About her dental trouble,
she is trying some treatment.
Surendra told me everything about you. These days all of us are
being tested well. We may call it the primary test.
I am writing this letter while touring. I rose at three in the morning and, after brushing the teeth, the first thing I am doing is this. The
prayer will start at 4.20. I am in Chanda just now. We shall leave for
Saoli at six. Probably you know that Harijans there spin and weave.
The party going to Saoli is a large one. it includes Janakibehn,
Radhakishan2 , Dhotre and others. Those accompanying me on the
tour are Thakkar Bapa, Vishwanath, Chandrashankar, Ramnath, Mira1

Brijkrishna Chandiwala, brother of the addressee, who was seriously ill; vide
“Letter to Mathurdas Trikumji”, 15-11-1933
2
Radhakrishna Bajaj

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

163

behn, Nayar and Om. We have to work hard during the tour. The
crowds are equally big wherever we go. What else need I write about ?
You must have known everything through Tara. If I had the time, I
would write a long letter. I do not, cannot, write to you and to many
others. I do wish to write, but I have to suppress the wish.
Surendra and Durbari are still in Wardha. A Japanese sadhu has
come to live there. His cheerfulness is a joy to see. He is learning
Hindi. Ba left yesterday with Swami for Ahmedabad.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 4175. Also C.W. 1674. Courtesy :
Ramniklal Modi

183. LETTER TO TARABEHN R. MODI
November 14, 1933
CHI. TARA,

I had promised to give you a letter to Ramniklal, but I think I
could not do so and I had been feeling unhappy because of that. I
had decided to write the letter the first thing this morning. It1 is enclosed. When will Ramniklal get it now? Write to me always at Wardha.
Let me know what you do regarding the teeth. Write about all the
thoughts that may come to you, and also describe the experiences that
you get from time to time. I hope you have made it a regular practice
to read Harijanbandhu.
Do you know that Om is accompanying me on the tour? There
are many others also just now, up to Saoli. We are learning many
things. The body seems to be bearing the burden well enough.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 4176. Also C.W. 1675. Courtesy:
Ramniklal Modi

1

164

Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

184. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
C HANDA,

November 14, 1933
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

I must have your letters regularly. You have made me grow
accustomed to them. We are in Chanda today. it is four o’clock just
now. At six we leave for Saoli.
I didn’t like the manner in which things were done regarding
Vithalbhai. All the same, I have learnt much from here, from the way
in which people attended in large crowds. They don’t worship the
man. They worship, in their own way and on their own terms, the
image of the man which they have formed in their minds and which
they love. I have not read the accounts in papers and do not know
details. But I have got a complete picture in my mind of the whole
thing.
I learnt from The Times [of India] about eggs having been
thrown during the students’ meeting1 in Nagpur.I didn’t see anything
in the hall. I didn’t even see any commotion anywhere. Nor do I
know anybody else in the hall having noticed anything. Chandrashankar told me only this, that an egg had fallen on Om. Nobody
knows whether it was aimed at her or the ex-president sitting by her
side or at me. The truth is that the paper has magnified the incident
out of all proportion. The students’ love was beyond words. They
even gave me a purse of Rs. 700. It is the same in the case of U.P.
Ansari came and saw me on Sunday. [His] health is a little
better. [He] wished to see Vithalbhai, but could not. During the last
days he had become very restless. Ansari had nothing in particular to
say. He had come only to pay a formal visit. He has gone to see some
patients in princely families. He left the same evening. I w as
observing silence then, though not when he arrived. So far I have
experienced no difficulty in the tour. It is now time for my meal and
then to get into a car. So I must stop here today. Ba and Swami left
Wardha yesterday. Ba will go to Ahmedabad via Akola. Manu has
1

Held on November 9, 1933

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

165

gone to Rajkot where Rami’s1 daughter is ill. Always write to me at the
Wardha address.
Blessings to both from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4 : Manibehn Patelne, pp. 46-7

185. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
C HANDA,

November 14, 1933
CHI. MANI,

I got your long letter. You did well to speak out your mind. You
would only harm yourself if you hide your thoughts from me. After a
man’s death, we must not remember his shortcomings, but should
remember only his virtues. My absence had nothing to do with his
actions. It is not that I fail to appreciate his virtues. I did not go there
because I could not have taken part in anything.2 I feel that at present
I should be either in Yeravda or among Harijans. When I say that I am
out of prison only for the sake of Harijans, I do so not only for the
benefit of the Government of the world but because that is how I relly
feel in my heart. I simply cannot take part in any other activity.
People also seem to have understood this. I could not have tolerated
the restrictions imposed by the Government and would not have been
able to have things according to my own way. I would not have been
able to advise you or Dahyabhai. And so I bore the attacks in silence.
Apart from this, there is another thing, too, in my life which you
should know. Rasik3 was on his death-bed and he even wished that I
should be by his bedside. But I did not go to Delhi, Ba did. Rasik
died. I did not shed a single tear. I was taking my meals when I
received the wire. I finished my meal and resumed my work. There
have been many such incidents in my life. I have formed certain views
about death and they are becoming stronger as the years pass. I do
1
2

Rami Kunverji Parekh, daughter of Harilal Gandhi
The addressee had asked why Gandhiji did not attend Vithalbhai Patel’s

funeral.
3

Harilal Gandhi’s son who died on February 8, 1929; vide “Letter to
Mirabehn”, 9-2-1929

166

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

not look upon death as a calamity. Marriage may be that, death never
is. Does this set your doubt at rest ? If not, ask me again.
You have given a good description of the events there. It was
very painful. We should understand the meaning of people’s love.
That love is not of the individual but of the virtues which they want to
see in, and, therefore, attribute to him. Their love, therefore, is a pure
thing. It is a sign of the popular awakening and an eye-opener for the
world. Nobody can doubt that Vithalbhai was a lover of freedom.
Now about Ba. If I had had time, I would have explained the
point more clearly in that letter.1 Ba’s mind has weakened. She wants
and yet does not want to court arrest. Deep down in her heart she
knows that it is her duty to do so, and cannot forsake that duty, but
she does not like to go as I am out. I have not put any pressure. I have
left her free to do as she wishes. What I wanted to say was that you
should urge her and strengthen her resolution to do her duty, for she
believes in you and loves you. Anything I might say is likely to be
regarded as an order and might kill her individuality. I, therefore, tell
her nothing. But even my silence is interpreted by Ba to mean that I
want her to go.
I understand [what you say] about your teeth and legs. Follow
the doctor’s advice. It is very necessary to wait for a while, you need
not insist on immediate action.
I am writing to Dahyabhai.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Write at Wardha only.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4 : Manibehn Patelne, pp. 113-4

1

Vide “Letter to Manibehn Patel”, 9-11-1933

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

167

186. LETTER TO DAHYABHAI PATEL
C HANDA,

November 14, 1933
CHI. DAHYABHAI,

I understand your feeling and disappointment. You can know
my feelings and mind from my letter to Manibehn. 1 What can I do
when I am helpless? Just as a soldier deprived of his sword is no good,
so am I without civil disobedience. Moreover my whole life has been
pledged. My pledge is either I would be in jail or would be immersed
in Harijan work. I cannot even think of any other activity. The faults
of Vithalbhai have departed with him. He had many good qualities
and it is the memory of these that we have to treasure. You are perhaps not aware that I wrote a letter to him and he sent me an affectionate reply. My personal relations with him were never strained. Differences of opinion never affect personal relations. There is no need to
explain all this to you. But Manibehn writes that you and other
nephews too are a little hurt; so I am offering this explanation to you.
I am very much perturbed as Vallabhbhai is in jail. If he were out I
would have left it to him to remove all family misunderstandings.
Because he is in jail the task of removing such misunderstandings falls
on me all the more heavily. Do not hesitate to write to me frankly if
you feel that this explanation is not adequate.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI DAHYABHAI VALLABHBHAI P ATEL
R AMNIVAS
P AREKH S TREET
BOMBAY 4

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4 : Manibehn Patelne, pp. 115

1

168

Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

187. LETTER TO RUKMINIDEVI BAZAJ
November 14, 1933
CHI. RUKMINI,

I had your letter. Keep the rule. I have started writing letters
today at three in the morning immediately after rising. These days I
get up every day at three and write as many letters as I can in one
hour. We are leaving for Saoli today at six. I shall be accompanied in
the car up to Saoli by Janakibehn and the other grown-ups. Saoli is a
big centre of khadi manufacture, where khadi work is carried on on
our behalf. I hope all of you are well. I hear from your father-in-law1
occasionally. Keshu is quite happy.
Blessings to you both from

BAPU

[PS.]
Write always at Wardha.
From Gujarati: C.W. 9702. Courtesy : Benarsilal Bazaj

188. TALK TO KHADI WORKERS, SAOLI
November 14, 1933
Gandhiji exhorted them to introduce improvements in their
implements which would give them an increased output and a
consequent increase in wages.2 He said.
Even then if you do not give up your bad habits, an increase in
wages would not add to your happiness, for you will squander away
what you will get. What is necessary then, above all, is for you to
purify your life, give up evil habits, and you will add not only to your
resources but also to your well being.
Harijan, 24-11-1933

1
2

Rameshwarlal Bazaj
Some of the women workers had complained of scanty wages.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

169

189. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
C HANDA,

November 14, 1933
I should advise you not to put too much strain on your body. It
was not at all necessary for you to have run after the bier all the way.1
It is not an absolute moral duty to do so. I knew that my absence
would be misunderstood, but why should I forsake my dharma for
fear that others might not understand it ? If I can live mentally outside
jail, it can be only for Harijan work. That being so, I can do nothing
unconnected with such work. Unable to offer civil disobedience, I am
like a bird who has lost its wings. I would not have been able to endure some of the things which happened there. Looking at the matter
even from that point of view, therefore, I couldn’t have come.
Moreover, the date for the commencemnt of the Harijan tour had
already been fixed. I didn’t go to see Motilalji’s widow. I haven’t
gone to see Rami’s daughter, who is on her death-bed. Similarly, I am
not going to visit Brijkishan, who is as dear to me as a son and who
too is on his death-bed. . . .2 You should write to him. Perhaps a wire
may be necessary . . . .3 I did not go to see Rasik when he was on his
death-bed. I didn’t go even after he died. But I needn’t tell you all
this. I have given a few instances thinking that perhaps you do not
know about this aspect of my life. In fact, even you need not reply to
such charges against me. Those who have failed to understand me till
now will not be convinced by arguments. We must trust to the effect
which my life as a whole may produce. Our deeds will have their
effect sooner or later. No arguments can prevent them.
Your not coming did not please me. I had thought that you
would suddenly turn up on Sunday without previous intimation. It
seems that there will be no meeting4 . If it is held, it will be in Delhi on
December 14. Ansari wants it to be on that day. If so, you should
attend. . . .5

1

The addressee had attended Vithalbhai Patel’s funeral.
Omissions as in the source
3
Omissions as in the source
4
Of the A.I.C.C.
5
Omission as in the source
2

170

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Do your best regarding Utkal. The article 1 in Harijan seems to
have brought some money. You need not worry about this problem.
There is no necessity at all for you to strain your health. As one
should avoid indolence, so also should one avoid excessive work. The
verse
, etc.,2 is ever fresh in my mind. The Gita is like a
living mother to me, like the Kamadhenu3 . There is no exaggeration at
all in this statement.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, pp. 139-40

190. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
November 15, 1933
CHI. JAMNALAL,

Shri Harkare saw me about a memorial to Salpekarji. If a fund
to be called Salpekar Smarak Harijan Seva Nidhi, is started and
contributions are collected for it, I have agreed that my name may be
used for that purpose. But I have told him that this may be done only
if you approve of the plan and agree to help. A sum of not less than
Rs. 5,000 should be collected for this fund, and it may be given to me
in Chandwara in the form of a purse. A small committee may be
formed for the purpose and the money may be spent for Harijan
uplift in consultation with me. If you approve of this plan, help and
guide Shri Harkare accordingly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 2926

1
2
3

Vide “The Cry of Orissa”
Even-mindedness is yoga. Bhagavad Gita, II. 48
The cow of Hindu mythology which yielded all desires

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

171

191. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, WUN
November 15, 1933
I tell you, if you do not know already, that my friendship with
Bapuji Aney has grown with years. I can give you many reminiscences of his sweet manners and brevity pf speech, his resourcefulness and industry. I cannot conceal from you my grief at his enforced
absence1 from our midst today.
I was not prepared to hear this 2 from you, I want an unsoiled
cowrie from you, which means, I want you to sacrifice a little of your
comforts to spare money for the Harijans. I do not think any one of
you denied yourself, out of sympathy with the flood-stricken people,
a single meal or a single comfort. If that be true, it does not behove
you to plead inability when asked to contribute to this cause, which is
one of penance and purification for us, caste Hindus.
Harijan, 24-11-1933

192. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, YEOTMAL
November 15, 1933
This song conveys a message of peace and fearlessness. How
can we retain untouchability consistently with our prayer to be at
peace with the whole world ? If we want to be just to the whole world
we have to be just to the Harijans.
Ever since I set foot on the soil of Berar, the name of Bapuji
Aney is reverberating in my ears. After years of comradeship a
friendship has grown between us, the measure of which I cannot
describe to you adequately. I expect to hear his name being echoed in
every nook and corner of Berar.
3

Harijan, 24-11-1933

1

M. S. Aney was in prison.
The people of Wun had excused themselves from giving a purse on account of
the flood havoc.
3
The flag song.
2

172

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

193. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
AMRAOTI,

( AS AT WARDHA)
November 16, 1933
MY DEAR AGATHA,

I had your long letter.
I see that you are ever thinking of Andrews as a good mother
would think of her son, looking after him and anticipating his wants
and protecting him from all harm. You are quite right in saying that
without some such care his anxiety complex overtakes him and he
then suffers, and his work with him. Nevertheless, if you feel that for
more efficient work you should come to India for a month or two,
you should not hesitate. In this, both he and I agreed, but he is there
on the spot and you will do what you think proper after consultation
with him and other friends. Not that at the present moment any
substantial work can be done. Sir Samuel Hoare has made up his mind
about everything. He believes in his ‘mission’. He almost thinks that
we are incapable of looking after our own affairs or even knowing
what is good for us. He will not let us make mistakes. The immediate
needs of the Britishers blind him to the realities. I feel that, in these
circumstances, friends over there can do very little beyond watching,
waiting and praying. We must look after ourselves, and if we succeed
in demonstrably helping ourseleves, you over there will be able to do
substantial work.
Hijli affair seems to have been satisfactorily settled. I suppose I
am right in presuming that my very simple letter to the Governor of
Bengal had its effect.
It may be said that the funeral ceremony over the remains of
Vithalbhai Patel passed off fairly well. So far as the public were concerned they demonstrated in an unmistakable manner what they stood
for. The procession is described in Anglo-Indian papers to have been
at least a mile long. The whole of Bombay turned out to do honour to
the memory of the deceased. They identified themselves with the
cause for which he stood, viz., India’s unadulterated Independence,
not of association with Britain but undoubtedly of the slightest con-

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

173

trol. That the people are today helpless and unable to help themselves
does not affect their mentality. They know what they want and they
seize every occasion that offers to them to let the world know their
mind.
I wish you would succeed in bringing Subhas Bose to England.
I am dictating this during the few minutes that I have at my
disposal before motoring away to the next destination. I know you
had last week an accurate letter from Chandrashankar Shukla. I am
not going to put the strain on him by sending you another descriptive
letter. The same demonstrations and enthusiasm continue unabated. I
do feel that untouchability is going much more swiftly than many
may imagine. No less than 1,50,000 people must have taken part in
the numerous meetings and demonstrations. If they did not want to
endorse the movement, one would think that they could not possibly
have attended in such large numbers. They know that at the present
moment I am touring solely in regard to untouchability, and that no
political mission is mixed up with it, and yet they attend, and, in spite
of the very hard times we are going through, they give their pices and
their rupees. It is, therefore, sad to think that the Anglo-Indian papers
are seeking to minimize the importance of the tour and even seeking
to discredit it. I wonder if they had telegraphed to you the so-called
egg-throwing incident at Nagpur and the preparations for boycott in
the U.P. I enclose cuttings about the incident and my very brief reply.
Of course, the sanatanists’ opposition is undoubtedly there. But, up till
now I have not noticed any support being given to them by the public
at large. The sanatanists would not have hesitated to damage the
movement if they had any public support worth the name. More I
have not the time to say. But you must read Harijan as part of my
weekly lettter. Distribute it as much as you like, and if you want more
copies you can have them for the asking. And you may take it that it
will hide nothing of the opposition to the movement. I have refrained
from dealing with the egg-throwing question and the opposition in the
U.P., in the pages of the Harijan, first, because I have dealt with the
two things in the public press, and secondly, because they have no
bearing on the movement. They have a political bearing in the sense
that the Anglo-Indian newspapers are resorting to unscrupulous
tactics. But I do not want to deal with such things in the pages of the

174

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Harijan. I want it to be free from political controversy even though
just now I am out of prison. Immediately I am inside prison walls I
may not take notice of any politics even though they may have
profound influence upon the Harijan movement. And I am trying as
much as it is humanly possible to act as if I was a prisoner. If,
however, you find any omissions in the Harijan or my letters, you will
not hesitate to draw my attention to such omission.
I take it that you will share this letter with the friends who, you
think, should see it.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
From a photostat : G.N. 1474

194. LETTER TO EFY ARISTARCHI
AMRAOTI,

November 16, 1933
MY DEAR EFY,

I have your letter with the very beautiful card which you want
me to keep in my copy of the Bhagavad Gita. I am not going to
carry out your wish literally, for, that will defeat it. I do not read from
the Gita every day. I listen to its reading in the morning. And since
your idea, I take it, is that I should have the picture daily as a bookmark I propose to keep it in the book which I may be reading for the
time being and transfer it from book to book.
I see that you are having Gujarati lessons, probably from Manu,
for, you have addressed your name in Gujarati.
I am glad that you are coming in close touch with Manu and
Elizabeth. You ask me what I wish about this love affair. I regard both
as very lovable, very sincere and very earnest, but what I fear is that
they do not measure the full consequences of the proposed marriage.
I thoroughly appreciate their viewpoint. For them it is enough that
they love each other. But I have always held that whilst young people
should first make their choice, its finality should be dependent upon
the approval and blessings of the elders. I have seen young love so
often disappointed in after years. However deliberate the choice,
somehow or other later years proved the choice to have been ill made.
In this case I see grave danger ahead. The most fatal objection,
however, that I can see to this proposed match is that Elizabeth desires,

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

175

and from her own standpoint perhaps naturally so, that the progeny
should be brought up in the Roman Catholic faith. I do not mind it at
all. But, even though Manu may have no objection, his parents and his
people whom he loves dearly will never be able to reconcile
themselves to their grandchildren being brought up in a faith other
than their own.
Then there is the question of the whole Hindu culture. I see,
even at the present moment, a conflict going on between Hindu
culture and the Christianity of Indians; the latter are being torn
between two almost opposite attractions. Somehow or other, Christianity has become synonymous with Western culture. Perhaps rightly
so, for, the religion of the Western people is predominantly Christianity and therefore Western culture may be fittingly described as
Christaian culture as Indian culture would certainly be described as
Hindu culture. The progeny of Elizabeth must be brought up in entirely different surroundings unless Manu decides to tear himself away
from his own surroundings and lives an exclusive life or decides to
settle down in the West. I think that, spiritually considered, Elizabeth
herself should not be a party to the possibility of Manu having to tear
himself away.
Then there is the question of Elizabeth herself. She would be
hard put to it to accommodate herself to Indian surroundings. Her
constitution may be undermined or she would have to live a life out of
all correspondence to her surroundings. There is ample justification
for Europeans saying that they cannot possibly exist in India without
incurring expenses out of all proportion to the Indian average. It is
difficult enough even for Mira, in spite of her tremendous love for
India, in spite of her iron will, to bend herself to the Indian simplicity,
and Mira is the general average. But even she has to be protected
against herself and compel [led] to give herself facilities which her
associates are not given. She would have become bed-ridden long ago
if I had not laid down the law from the very first and I know that she
has extraordinarliy accommodated herself to the Indian life. But, even
she would have failed completely if she had married an Indian and
made the futile attempt of bringing up her children after the Indian
style. No-body who has not lived in India like Indians can possibly
have a conception of what I am writing. India is the poorest country in
the world. And if is a tremendous job for a Western girl to come to
India and marry an Indian with a fixed determination of living the
essentially Indian life. I do not recall a single Indian who has taken a

176

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

European girl for his wife living the life of the average Indian. He
simply cannot do it if he will do justice to his wife. And I myself
much less . . .1 reconciled to ourselves to Manu having lower his idea
for the sake of Elizabeth.2 It is for reasons such as this I have cried out
for celibacy for those who dedicate themselves completely to God, i.e.,
to the service of God’s creation. There is no difficulty in my treating
Mira as my daughter or you, but, imagine me having any European
girl as daughter-in-law. I should be frightened. I could not shoulder
the burden, because I could not reconcile myself to Devdas, for
instance, having to tear himself away from his natural surroundings. I
feel it to be premature for Indians to contract marriage relations with
Europeans. When India has improved her conditions or when
Euorpeans have boys and girls who have become inured to uttermost
simplicity and have become domiciled in India I can look forward
with happiness to Indo-European marriages.
Now, I think, I have given you a long enough letter and ample
matter for thought. You know, at least somewhat, what I would wish,
but I do not, in any shape or form, expect you to give effect to my
wish, if what I have said does not appeal to you. And, if you think
otherwise about the future of Manu and Elizabeth, you will not
hesitate to tell me so. Whilst I deeply appreciate your losing yourself
in me I would not be guilty of enslaving your reason or your heart.
Imperfect as I am, I would not have you to become a partner in my
errors. You must, therefore, exercise your full judgment in everything
you do in association with me. My love for you will be none the less
for your differing with me when you feel the need for difference in
thought speech or action.
I have not put before you one more thing that I have stated in
my letter to Elizabeth. I would simply state the proposition without
arguing it.
I believe that, when husband and wife profess a different faith,
the progeny should be brought up in the faith of the husband. There
are, to me, sound religious and philosophic reasons for this proposition. If this proposition does not appear to be sound, you should
1

some words are illegible.
Perhaps the sentence should read : And I [am] myself much less [inclined to]
reconcile ourselves ot Manu having [to] lower his ideal for the sake of Elizabeth.
2

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

177

ask Elizabeth to show you my letter to her.
I am working just now under tremendous strain. I get very little
time for carrying on correspondence. This letter too, I am dictating
under trying circumstances. I would therefore,like you, if you think it
wise, to share this letter with Elizabeth as also Manu. But, if you think
it wise not [to] do so, please tell both of them that I have their joint
letter as also Elizabeth’s previous letter, both of which I appreciate
and about which I have written to you.
I hope you received my letter wherein the £ 15 sent by you were
acknowledged. I cannot warn you too often against unduly denying
yourself.
Love.
BAPU
P RINCESS EFY ARISTARCHI
HOTEL S CHOTZKY
F REIBURG 1-B
(GERMANY)
From a facsimile in Mahatma, Vol. III, facing p. 344.

195. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
November 16, 1933
CHI. MANUDI,

I got your two letters together today. You did quite right in
going there. Now help Kusum to get all right. I suppose you will
return to Wardha after she has recovered. Bali1 also felt happy. I am
not writing to her separately. Write to me regularly at Wardha.
Blessings from

BAPU
S MT. B ALIBEHN
C/ O VORA HARIDAS VAKHATCHAND
BEHIND HIGH S CHOOL
RAJKOT
From a copy of the Gujarati : C.W. 1662. Courtesy : Manubehn S.
Mashruwala.

1

178

Balibehn M. Adalaja, Harilal Gandhi’s wife’s sister.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

196. SPEECH AT HANUMAN VYAYAMSHALA, AMRAOTI
November 16, 1933
This vast gathering must have seen that there is no Godmade
distinction between caste Hindus and Harijans. 1 The distinction is
purely man-made, and is an offence in the eyes of God. If the
Harijans are given full opportunities for advancement, they will certainly equal, if they will not beat, others in many a field of life. The
sight we have witnessed this evening must be an eye-opener to us and
must inspire us to purge our hearts of the taint of untouchability.
Harijan, 24-11-1933

197. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, AMRAOTI
November 16, 1933
I have visited many places throughout the length and breadth of
this country and such big meetings are to me the manifestations of the
grace of God. I believe that with God’s favour only can we conduct
such huge assemblies. With His grace also I have taken up the Harijan
work. It is a religious work and should therefore be done with truth,
peace and sacrifice. It could not be done otherwise. If we want to
expiate for the injustice done to the Harijans and if we want to atone
for the wrongs we, the savarna Hindus, are still doing them, we must
treat them as we treat other savarna Hindus. I would like to tell you all
that, unless we behave with them on equal terms, there is no chance of
our improvement also. I visited the Harijan quarters with the help of
Dr. Patwardhan, and have also seen other work here, and have now
heard the address read out to me by the local Municipal Committee. If
the Municipality of this place could not do anything in this matter, it
is not to be blamed. I have seen many other municipal committees
and the conditions are just the same all over. But I must say that now
even the Western scientists after their research have come to the
conclusion that if we leave out any particular section of our society
1

About a hundred Harijan boys had displayed their skill in physical drill
before the gathering to the accompaniment of a band.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

179

out of our fold, we are sure to go down economically. After these 25
years of observations, my belief strengthened that wealth should
always go hand in hand with religion. There should be harmony
between religion and wealth. I have come to realize from my Harijan
work that one who tries for wealth in accordance with religion gets
both. I believe it to be the duty of every savarna Hindu that he should
try to take up the Harijan into his fold. If we do our duty towards the
Harijans, all of us Hindus, Moslems, Parsis,Christians, will live
peacefully. To my mind there is no better way to unity of these
people than Harijan work. Now I must tell you what every one of you
can do in this respect. The Harijan movement is a great yajna and
each of you can put his little bit in it. Those who have money can give
it for this cause. Those who have the leisure and intelligence to spare
can teach the Harijan boys and give them lessons in personal hygiene
and cleanliness. The Congressmen are doing this work at present. But
I want that non-Congressmen also should undertake this work. It is the
religious duty of every one of you to do this work.
I do not value politics as much as I value this work. Politics is
nothing to me. It is my belief that if we do this work with religious
fervour everything will be obtained. I am not travelling with any other
intention in this work. And when I see people assemble in such large
numbers to hear me, I hope they will stand by me in this work. In July
last the Harijan Sevak Sangh was started and some of you must have
taken the vow to wipe out this curse of untouchability. It is the
birthright of the Harijans to make use of public institutions and to
enter into the temples. But as long as there is a single soul boycotted
as being a Harijan, I shall not regard untouchability as being wiped
out totally. It is up to you, therefore, to change your hearts and
consider the Harijans as your brethren.
The Harijan Sevak Sangh is composed of people of different
schools of thought but they can do this work together. The workers in
this field should not aspire after any kind of honour or title. They
should not have the slightest tinge of personal interest or selfish
motive. This work should also be free from any sort of political
meaning but I do not value political things as much as this. The
Harijan work is for the purification of the Hindu religion. I have great
hopes in this matter. I have always been an optimist and my optimism

180

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in this case is increasing every day. But even if I fail it remains my
duty to continue this work. Very few sincere workers have so far come
forward. I, therefore, pray to God that He should give you all the
necessary strength and guidance to do your duty in this respect.1
I must remind you of the pledge given last year in your name.
You will remember that a meeting of representatives of Hindus was
held in Bombay in September last year, Pandit Malaviyaji being in the
chair. Among other things they resolved that untouchability, being a
blot on the Hindu religion, had to be removed and that Harijans were
entitled to the same public utilities, and in the same manner, as caste
Hindus. There was in that resolution a special reference to Hindu
temples, and legislation was contemplated if it was found to be
necessary for attaining the end. It is, therefore, the bounden duty of
every caste Hindu to fulfil the pledge by throwing open to the
Harijans temples, wells and other institutions precisely on the same
terms as they are open to caste Hindus.
We are the cause of the degradation to which the Harijans are
reduced. We must spend money if the wrong is to be redressed. He
who will give to the cause will gain. We may not be satisfied, therefore,
with giving out of superfluous cash, we have to give even if we have to
stint ourselves. Some of us will have to give our all for Harijan service.
It gladdens me to find both Congressmen and nonCongressmen working together in this movement. Since questions are
being asked as to how far Congressmen can join this movement, I
would like to reiterate what I have said before. The Congress adopted
removal of untouchability as an integral part of its programme in
1920. It is, therefore, the duty of every Hindu Congressmen to fight
untouchability and help Harijans in every way open to him. But, if the
movement were confined to Congressmen alone, it could not make the
headway we all desire. Every savarna Hindu has to do his bit in the
movement. But whilst every Congress member is expected to fight the
evil, he or she is not expected officially to join the Harijan Seva
Sangh. If they are active civil resisters, they ought not to hold office in
these organizations. And no Congressmen who believes in and wants
to offer civil resistance need in any way feel constrained to suspend or
give it up altogether. The case is wholly different with those who feel
the call to give up civil resistance for the sake of Harijan service or
1

The following, except the last paragraph, is from Harijan, 1-12-1933.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

181

who have lost faith in the former.
In this movement of self-purification as in satyagraha there is no
room for camouflage.
Harijans have complained that some self-seekers have crept into
the movement. In a purely religious movement there is no room for
such people. Only those can or should take office who have the spirit
of service in them.
Some of the ladies of this place have offered me ornaments and
the little children have given me a little silver casket which I wish to
put for auction. I shall accept money from you all, be it even a cowrie
but it should be given with a pure heart. I assure you that it will make
you happy and will be helpful to the Harijans.
Hitavada, 23-11-1933, and Harijan, 1-12-1933

198. LETTER TO KIKABHAI L. WAGHELA1
[BeforeNovember 17, 1933] 2
The schools I open are not meant solely for Harijans and I
certainly do not open schools which are not open to Harijans. What
you state about enquiries into the condition of Harijans employed by
municipalites will not be overlooked by me.
The Hindu, 18-11-1933

199. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS
AKOLA,

[On or beforeNovember 17, 1933] 3
Gandhiji interviewed by the Associated Press, regarding a private report from
America that he was going to New York in the spring season, denied having received
any invitation to this effect.
He added that he had only recently declared to a Press correspondent his utter
inability to go to America or elsewhere, stating that he would not depart from his vow
of devoting his energy solely to the Harijan cause up to the end of next July.

The Bombay Chronicle, 18-11-1933

1

The addressee, a Harijan leader, had requested Gandhiji not to open separate
schools for Harijan children.
2
This appeared under the date-line “Ahmedabad November 17”.
3
The report appeared under the date-line “Akola, November 17”.

182

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

200. PICE PER DAY
Sjt. Harakhchand, writing on 26th October, says :1
Here the reader should stretch his imagination and ask himself
what it must mean when people gladly walk miles to secure doles
giving them less than one pice worth of rice per day and then search
his heart as to whether he can honestly plead hard times when he is
called upon to give a donation towards partially feeding the hungry
skeletons of Orissa. He must not expect a collector to go to him
before he will part with his rupee or whatever sum he can give. He
should send his money order without delay. Or he will, to save commission, combine with his neighbours so as to send the maximum
amount covered by the minimum commission.
Harijan, 17-11-1933

201. ADMIRABLE
The arrangements made by Dr. Khare and his Harijan
Committee for the programme last week were admirable. It could not
have been got through even as it was, had not a very large number of
willing and able companions helped Dr. Khare who never spared
himself or them during those trying and strenuous days, although he
has chronic heart trouble. I understand that the heavy expenditure
involved in having lofty electric lights and the solid platform at the
huge mass meeting was met from voluntary contributions and was in
no way a tax upon the purses presented. My host’s house was for the
time being turned into a dharmashala and Sjts. Tikekar Brothers
spared no pains or expenses in making happy and comfortable our
large company and others who had come for numerous functions. All
Congessmen and non-Congressmen seemed to me to have acted in
perfect co-operation for making the visit to Nagpur and the
surrounding places the success it undoubtedly was. I tender my
1
The letter is not repreoduced here. The correspondent, describing the
magnitude of the relief work in Orissa, had stressed the urgent need of funds. Vide also
“A pice Per Head”

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

183

congratulations to Dr. Khare and his colleagues for the efforts they
unstintingly put forth on the occasion. The great cause of purification
deserved all the pains and vigilance given to it.
Harijan, 17-11-1933

202. THE UTILIZATION OF DONATIONS
Workers desire further elucidation than I have already given in
these columns as to the mode of using the donations that are being
received during the Harijan tour. I have conferred with Thakkar Bapa
on the point and I can announce definitely that not less than 75 per
cent will be used for Harijan service in the places where they are
received, provided that a satisfactory budget is presented and the
Central Board approves of it. Indeed, even the full amount will be
surrendered wherever it is found necessary to do so. The only thing,
therefore, to do is for workers in each centre to prepare businesslike
schemes and produce honest and industrious persons for the due
execution of the schemes, and the money will be forthwith coming as
soon as needed. There is no desire to lock up the donations or to
deflect them without cause from the places where they are collected. It
is intended to keep a certain portion for the Central Board, but there,
too, not for overhead charges, but for constructive work directly
handled by it.
Harijan, 17-11-1933

203. SPEECH AT ANJUMAN MUFID-UL-ISLAM, KHAMGAON
November 17, 1933
When I heard that your Anjuman had invited me, I was very
glad. I am very thankful to you for your kind address and for the
purse you presented to me for Harijan work. I was very glad to read
the contents of your address. You very rightly state that so long as
untouchability remains there is no hope for Hinduism. I have been
with the Mussalmans all my life. The great virtue which I find in Islam
is that it teaches equality and brotherhood of man, be he king or slave.
Most of you must be Hafiz and must have read the Koran. I have also
tried to study and learn all the best in it.
What you have said about Hindu-Muslim unity has appealed to
me most. I find that there are too many misunderstandings. Still,

184

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Hindus and Muslims cannot remain apart like this. After all how long
will this go on ? I have found, however, that at present I have failed to
bring unity but I surely see success in this failure. It should also be
remembered that unity does not mean joining powers to crush
someone else. If this is our idea of unity, we had better remain as we
are. At present I am only concentrating on Harijan work and have left
this question for a time.
I can quite understand your anxiety to retain your culture. You
do not seem to believe in common educational institutions which, in
your opinion, are calculated to lead you astray from your religious
and cultural wealth. I look on this question of sectarian education
differently. Common schools or communal schools do not matter with
me. What is the good of the common schools when prejudices create
differences of heart ? What harm is there in communal schools when
there is purity of heart for all ? So you will see that communal schools
or common schools are of little importance. Purity of heart, trust in
each other and love for others are things more important than the
question of sectarian education.
I really did not expect a purse from you. More than this, I need
your blessings to give me strength to fight untouchability. I need your
help to rid India of a great curse. It is our common cause, not for
India alone but for the whole world. It is the service of humanity. I am
very thankful to you for your kind address and the purse presented to
me.
The Hindustan Times, 25-11-1933

204. SPEECH AT PUBLC MEETING, KHAMGAON
November 17, 1933
I am grateful to you for the address you have presented and also
for the purse and donations. I thank the association of the Muslims
for their purse. During my visit to the Chokhamela1 Harijan Boarding,
the brothers gave me cash and the sisters rings. I am thankful for these
gifts as well. I appreciate the good work you have done in Khamgaon
and its neighbourhood for removing untouchability.
1

A Harijan saint of Maharashtra

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

185

This evening, Thakkar Bapa has thrown open Udasiji’s1 Siva
temple to the Harijans in Lasoor. He has performed this sacred task
for the sake of our Harijan brethren. I am told no Harijan was present
on the occasion. The Harijans are still suspicious because of the
treatment we have meted out to them. It is the duty of the Hindus, or
of those who consider themselves caste Hindus, to do justice to them,
and atone for the atrocities they have heaped on the Harijans in the
past, and give up the ignorant belief prevalent today that the temples
are meant for caste Hindus alone. Udasiji has done his duty by this
act. Whether the Harijans come or not, we should discharge our duty
towards them with love and the result is bound to be good. When the
Harijans are convinced that our invitation is prompted by love, they
will come by themselves.
Here I wish to say one thing, that the law applicable to Hindus
applies to Harijans as well. Rules of public conduct and should be
applicable to all alike. Harijans should follow the rules for visiting
public institutions. They should keep their bodies clothes clean and
follow the rule of personal cleanliness. Harijans who eat carrion have
no right to enter temples. Having travelled widely, and after studying
history, I have found that those who eat carrion are despised everywhere. There is no doubt that those who are godfearing and in whom
wisdom and purity have dawned can give it up. Likewise, I request
them to give up drinking. I know that it can be argued that there are
many among caste Hindus who take alcohol; but it is not right to
follow them in their vices. He who takes alcohol loses his humanity.
He even forgets the difference between mother, sister, daughter and
wife. Although by birth I am a caste Hindu, by choice I am a Harijan.
Therefore, from this point of view, considering myself a Harijan, I
implore them to give up this vice. I know that alcohol is used even in
ther rituals. This is what some pseudo-pundits have taught them and
they have believed it. Therefore I beg of you to give up this vice
which makes beast of man. In fact, it is this thing which is untouchable. In the same way. Mahars, Chamars, Bhangis and others should
do away with the distinctions amongst themselves. This is the
Harijans’ share of duty in this work of self-purification.
Now, I wish to say something to the caste Hindus. I also want to
say what I conclude from this vast congregation that has gathered here
1

186

Vishnudas Udasi

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to hear my speech. Ever since I returned to India, I do exactly as my
conscience dictates. Let no one imagine that I do one thing but have
something else in my mind. I claim to believe in God, whether you
call him Khuda, Allah, or Ishwar. I stand in awe before Him. He is
witness to all my work. I have also taken a vow with Him as my witness
that I shall do Harijan service in a truly religious spirit. there are many
things I can do, but if I did them it would be my downfall. Out of the
prison I wish to do only one thing; otherwise my life is false. I
consider myself a layman, but layman or learned, it is the duty of
everyone of follow his dharma. I consider this work a religious duty.
Whatever I have learnt from my parents and teachers and from my
own experience, all this I would like to present before you. I have had
the reward of whatever service I have rendered before. God alone can
reward my service. At the moment, I wish to work only for the
removal of untouchability. If you like my views you can come and if
you do not like them you can avoid me. During these days, I have felt
your affection and therefore I shall bear it even if you abuse me today
and, if you beat me I shall bear that also and shall pray to God to
forgive you. But if you do not agree with my views, courtesy demands
that you should avoid coming here. I however see that you come here,
give money and jewellery gladly; I therefore take it that you are with
me. Are you paying my fees for the work I have already done ? I do
not require fees. God gives me my reward. But when you come here
in such large numbers and help me with money, etc., I conclude that
you are with me in whatever task I have undertaken now; that is, this
has become the sanatan dharma today. I have met a hundred and fifty
thousand people today. Are they all reformers ? No. They are
sanatanists and they are doing this work today. If today you do not
voluntarily take part in the removal of untouchability, tomorrow you
will have to do it against your will. When popular rule is established,
do you think the Harijans can be prevented from entering schools or
excluded from other rights ? There was a time when people would not
travel along with them in trains; why do they do it now ? In the same
way, I ask the mill-owners whether they do not touch the untouchables
? They do, but only for pecuniary gain. There is no virtue in this. I
say what you are obliged to do for pecuniary gain, could you not do
the same out of your own free will and because it is religious?
In the address presented to me on behalf of the Municipality, it
is stated that we should give up the move to have the law regarding
temple-entry enacted, because many people think that legal inter-

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

187

ference is undesirable in religious matters. I wish to tell them that the
Harijans have as much right to go to the temples for worship as we
have. But the draft of the Bill which has been presented has no
element of force at all. On the other hand it seeks to remove the
element of coercion which exists in the law as it is today. I myself do
not like interference by law in religious matters but how do these Bills
interfere with religion ? If any lawyer can prove this, I shall give it up;
but I know for certain that this is not the case. After all, I was myself a
legal practitioner once upon a time. Lawyers contend that, today even
if the public wish to throw open a temple to the Harijans and the
majority of the trustees also agrees to it, the temple cannot be thrown
open even if a single trustee raises objection. The law does not allow
freedom for independent decision, and so it does amount to coercion.
The aim of this Bill is to remove this coercion. Whatever fault there is
in the law can only be removed by law; there is no other way. It would
have been interference with religion if by law all temples were to be
thrown open; but there is no such provision in the Bill. There is
obviously no compulsion in this. The temples can be thrown open
only when the trustees or the public wish to do so. If they do not,
there is no compulsion. At the Bombay Conference the Hindu leaders
in the name of Hindu society took a pledge to secure for Harijans the
right to have darshan of the idol. The legal obstruction of fulfilling
that vow is to be removed with the help of law. That is all that this Bill
means. In this there is no interference by law in religion. Now the
members of the Municipality may ponder over my words.
When I visited the Harijans, they made several complaints and
asked me whether I considered those who were doing Harijan work as
true servants of the Harijans. I replied that I did not know about the
local workers but all those who join in any movement cannot be said
to be good and truthful. From their complaints I learnt that in
Malkapur Harijans are not allowed the use of lavatories. If this is true,
what a grave injustice it is that those who clean the lavatories cannot
use them. Tomorrow if they stop cleaning them what can you do ?
Caste Hindus are not even so organized as to be able to take up
mutual scavenging. No good can result from such behaviour. Similar
complaints have been made about a place called Monar. All others
can bathe in the water that flows there but Harijans are prohibited
from doing so. They can bathe only in the unclean water drained after
use by us for bathing. I do not know how far this is true, but if it is
188

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

true it is a great disgrace. Such water is unfit even for animals. We
wash even cattle with clean water. Are these Harijan brethren worse
than animals ? What is their fault ? And even if they have been at fault,
is this the treatment which should be meted out to them ? This has
become our daily conduct. Irreligion we have made our religion. I
shall also mention here the sad news from Rajputana that Harijans
have to drink from the water stored for cattle. If this is our religion, it
is doomed. Where there is so much hatred, so much antipathy, its
doom is inevitable. If we say that this has the sanction of the Shastras
and call this Hindu religion, I shall say that it is completely at variance
with universal experience and it cannot last long. We may deceive
ourselves, we may deceive others, too, but we cannot deceive God. In
my concept of Hindu religion, as I have learnt it through experience
and after deep study, there is no place at all for the present form of
untouchability; and therefore I have taken the vow that even at the
cost of my life, untouchability must go root and branch. Every single
breath of mine all the twenty-four hours seems to say “Remove
untouchability”. You can serve Harijans only by becoming their
servants. We have to become not the masters of Harijans, but their
servants. I did not ask you to sit and dine with them; although as is my
wont I accept from anywhere the type of food I allow myself if it is
cooked clean by anybody. But I must tell you it was wrong to have
sent away the Harijans in this contemptuous manner.
Kabir as well as other saints also have said that God lives with
him who is forsaken by the world. Whom the world shuns God
accepts. Such instances are to be found in all religions. I remember a
story of the days of Hazrat Omer. When one of his commanders sent
him 5,000 gold coins he started weeping at the sight. When his wife
asked him why he was weeping, he replied, “Till today God was with
me; today the world has come to me.” So, you have disowned our
Harijan brothers, but God is in truth with them alone. Therefore you
must remove the feeling of abhorrence that has crept into your hearts.
I have heard many people say, “As one sows in the previous
birth, so one reaps in this birth.” But it is not right to say so; it is
adharma. There is pride in this statement. When our parents or wife or
children are in trouble, do we say that is the fruit of their doings in a
previous birth and neglect them ? We then look after them and serve

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

189

them. Then why this indifference towards others ? I also believe in rebirth but it cannot be interpreted in this manner. This argument we
can apply to ourselves only. To ignore others on finding them in
trouble and to laugh at themand to tell them to “pay for the sins” of
their previous birth is to turn God, whom we call the Ocean of mercy
and justice, into a demon. I do not believe in such previous births.
Therefore, I beg you to think deeply over what I have said and, if you
are convinced, give up this hatred and contempt and this feeling of
high and low. If you are yourself convinced that this is the right thing
to do but you are afraid of the public, well, the public is here [with
you]. The truth is that the fear is in your own heart. If you give up
this fear and hatred, the blot of untouchability will be removed from
the Hindu religion and it will be for the good of us all.
Wherever I go, you give me money. Even to give money is to
help in the work for Harijans but please do not if you have Rs. 10
throw away a couple of rupees thinking that this is one way among
others of spending your money. No, even if you give one pice, give it
whole-heartedly, give it with love denying yourself some necessities.
He who gives a pice in this spirit will recover a thousandfold.
Therefore considering it a sacred cause, please help it as much as you
can.
[From Hindi]
Harijan Sevak, 8-12-1933

190

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

205. TELEGRAM TO SHRIKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
AKOLA,
November 18, 1933

SHRIKRISHNA
KATRA KHUSHAL
DELHI
1

GOD

BE

THANKED.

BLESSINGS.

CHIKHALDA TILL

MONDAY.

BAPU
From a photostat : G.N. 2401

206. DISCUSSION WITH SWAMI LALNATH
November 18, 1933
[The Swami] said that he wanted Gandhiji to give up his tour or give up talking
about the Bills and that, therefore, he was offering satyagraha and paying Gandhiji in
his own coin. 2

But this is not satyagraha but the negation of it. You want me
either to get you arrested by the police or to take the car over your
bodies. I would do neither. I would go on foot.Then perhaps you
would hold my feet and make me your prisoner.
Yes, we would hold your feet and implore you to stop this tour.

That would surely be violence.
I cannot hide our intention from you. We want to be hurt by the police or by
your volunteers. When this happens I know that you would give up the tour.

But I have told you that I shall certainly not summon the police

1

Brother of Brijkrishna Chandiwala, who had been seriously ill; vid “Letter to
F. Mary Barr”, 21-10-1933 and “Letter to Mathurdas Trikumji”, 15-11-1933 and
“Letter to Vallabhbhai Patel”, 4-12-1933, and “Letter to Kasturba Gandhi”,
7-12-1933.
2
Swami Lalnath had at Dhamangaon and Amraoti made abortive attempts to
hold up Gandhiji’s car by lying prostrate before it.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

191

and I shall not let the volunteers hurt you.
We must then continue to obstuct your passage.

You are very unreasonable. A satyagrahi must not be unreasonable. You want to provoke the public to violence. A satyagrahi
never tempts anyone to do wrong. And how can you resort to such
unbecoming behaviour, especially in religious matters ? No earthly
power can force me to act contrary to me convictions.
Then you should show us the better way.

I can ertainly do that. You should go back to Benares and ask
the Lord of the Universe to wean me from my error. You should fast
as I did.
That we have not the ability to do.

Then I am very sorry. I do not like this unseemly business. You
should go to your advisers and tell them to persuade me by argument
or prayer. If they cannot do so, they should tolerate what I am doing,
even as I tolerate their opposition. You can see that I am simply
putting the case against the evil before the thousands who come to
listen to me.1
Harijan, 1–12–1933

1

192

Vide also the following item.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

207. SPEECH AT AKOLA
November 18, 1933
Before I come to our main subject today it is necessary to say
something about the incident which took place while I was on my way
here. Some persons who have come from Kashi are accompanying
me. Amongst them is a Swami.They have a right to go with me in this
way. My tour is continuing at such a rapid pace that they cannot
follow me everywhere, they come where they can and lie down on the
road in front of the car in which I travel.Volunteers remove them and
the car continues its journey. The gentlemen do not abuse anyone;
they do not indulge in violence. And, I trust, the volunteers do not
beat them either. Today, too, they came to the gate. This pained me. I
have always been pained at the absence of civility in those who come
in the name of sanatan dharma. I did not like to continue my journey
after having them removed. Hence, I sent for the Swami who is their
leader and tried to reason with him.1 It is because of this that I am late.
I told him that it was not proper for those who claimed to safeguard
religion to act in this manner. As the author of the modern technique
of satyagraha I told him that their action did not amount to
satyagraha, that this kind of action would tire them. If they caught
hold of me, beat me up or abused me, I would not answer with
obscene language, but would tolerate all that with a feeling of love. I
would continue on foot, if they obstructed my car from going further.
The Swami then replied that in that case they would cling to my feet
and that I would have to walk over them. I replied that I would not do
so; nor would I seek the assistance of the police. That would not do
me credit. I would seek their help if I was afraid, but I have no fear
whatever. In my life, I have been beaten up, but I never asked for
police protection. Would I then stoop to do so in the evening of my
life while working for dharma? Hence, I requested them to give me
the way. I told them that they ought to have realized that in sanatan
dharma, in Hinduism, there is freedom to express all kinds of
opinions. Finally‚ the Swami went out and returned after consulting
his colleagues and said that if, today, I took another route they would
not obstruct me again, and their prestige too would be saved. I agreed
to it and took another route.
1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

193

The persons accompanying the Swami are young men full of
enthusiasm. Someone has put the false notion into their heads that I
am out to destroy sanatan dharma. They believe that what I say is
contrary to the Shastras. They have a right to believe this. If I am
mistaken, they should strive hard to convince me. That is the way of
Hinduism, and it is a civilized way. But I am not happy because
sanatan dharma is degraded by their uncivilized conduct. Hence I
would humbly like to say to those who were opposing me in the name
of sanatan dharma that they would be able to put a stop to my
activities by appealing to my reason, by touching my heart and not
through coercion or uncivilized conduct. I am one bound by a
pledge. It is my dharma to abide by the pledge I have taken in the
evening of my life. To you who come here to listen to me I pour out
my heart. It is in your hands whether or not to act in accordance with
what I say. God will know whether you put it into action or not; I shall
not be here to find it out.
This morning, some persons who were protesting stood in my
way with black flags. My dharma is not to be annoyed with them but
to have a feeling of love towards them. They may greet me with black
flags if they believe that what I am doing is improper. A servant of
Harijans should be indifferent to praise or blame. This rule applies not
only to me but to people all over the world who are engaged in public
life. Anyone who does not follow it is sure to feel miserable. Why
should I feel miserable at this ? What difference does it make to me
whether they wave black flags at me or white ? My work alone will
bring me praise or blame.
I learn that today the sanatanists burned my effigy. What does it
matter to me even if crores of my effigies are burnt ? It makes me
unhappy because it involves some waste of money. But I stand to lose
nothing on that account. If the people do not approve of what I say, if
they disregard it, I can exert no pressure upon them. I can hardly
force them to listen to me against their will. That is not my way of
action; mine is a straight forward path. Even if the Government did
not let them burn it, 1 those who wished to do so have as good as
accomplished it. If I look at a woman with a lustful eye, I have as
much as sinned against her. God is hardly going to forgive me
because I could not accomplish my evil desire ! He will argue that it
1

Someone in the gathering said that the magistrate had not allowed the
burning of the effigy.

194

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

was He who prevented the sinful act; I on my part had already
committed it. Likewise, does it matter if the gentlemen could not
actually burn the effigy ? So far as they are concerned, they have as
good as burnt it. Anyway it is all right if they burned it. Despite this,
for the sake of dharma, I do wish they had not done so.
The sanatanists have brought out a leaflet alleging they were
beaten up by the volunteers. If it is true, it was wrong on the part of
the latter to have done so. I will not tolerate it. I do not approve of
anyone wishing to protect me indulging in abusive language, rudeness
or physical violence. Biyaniji1 says the volunteers did nothing of the
kind. I wish only to warn the volunteers. Perhaps my sanatanist
brothers are irked by the large audiences at my meetings. Perhaps
they may try to prevent the people from attending. They have every
right to do so. Let no one obstruct the sanatanists, but we should try to
persuade them politely. If they are not convinced, let them do as they
wish. No one should inform the police. Let no one do anything to
protect me. God has saved me in similar circumstances a number of
times. So long as God wishes to take work from me He will keep my
body healthy and safe. When my life–span has ended, no power on
earth can keep me alive.
Entertain no doubt that the current movement is a test for Hindu
society. The whole world is watching whether Hinduism rids itself of
the evil of untouchability. If untouchability is wiped out of the hearts
of Hindus, a feeling of brotherhood would come to be established
between Hindus, Muslims, Christians and Jews. Untouchability has
spread its innumerable tentacles far and wide. It has spread even to
those whom we regard as belonging to other faiths. I do not regard
this as dharma. Hatred or contempt has no place in Hinduism. Many
shastris have informed me that there is no sign in the law books of
untouchability as practised today. However, even if it is there, we shall
have to reject it; otherwise we shall have to give up the claim that
Hinduism is basically a non–violent and tolerant faith. This movement
of ours is being carried on before the eyes of the world, not in
seclusion. It is your duty as well as mine to do whatever we do, in a
civilized, truthful, peaceful and courteous manner. I request the
sanatanists, too, to carry out their task in a similar manner. I find no
civility in the attempt to stop me car. They had better give up black
flags and the burning of effigies. Nowadays, black flags are used as a
1

Brijlal Biyani

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

195

mark of protest. When the satyagraha movement was on, black flags
were sometimes used to express protest, but I had not approved of it.
It is not a civilized practice. It bears no mark of satyagraha. A
satyagrahi’s dharma is to win over through friendship the heart of
anyone who has become an enemy and bring about a change of heart
in him. The rules of satyagraha do not vary when applied to dealings
between one Hindu and another, between Hindus and Muslims or,
between Indians and the British. The rules of satyagraha are equally
applicable to all. There can be no room in it for breach of the peace,
lack of civility, violence or hatred. Hinduism would come out triumphant if both the sanatanists and reformist Hindus acted in accordance
with it, regardless of whether untouchability remains or not. Hinduism
cannot survive if untouchability continues. However, it would be
welcome if both the parties kept to the path of truth. This is a tremendous movement in which twenty-two crores of Hindus are being
tested. It is also a test for Harijans. It is the caste Hindus who have
sinned, hence, it is they who have to atone for it. Since Harijans are
also Hindus, I say that it is a test for them too.
It is worth knowing what these ten or twelve people who have
come from Kashi want. They say that I am free to continue the work
of abolishing untouchability, I may carry on the work of temple–
entry, but that I should not plead with the people in favour of the Bills
on these two subjects which are before the Central Legislature, that I
should not endeavour to get them passed. Others too claim that
legislation will mean interference with religion. For the last two or
three days I have been hearing such echoes. I have answered them to
the best of my ability. We are bound by a pledge. Last year in September, representatives of the Hindus took a pledge under the
chairmanship of Malaviyaji Maharaj in Bombay. I had drafted the
original form of the pledge. The resolution which was passed was
almost identical with the one proposed by me. I had given my word to
Dr. Ambedkar and to Rao Bahadur Rajah that I was offering my life
as hostage to see it that the Hindu society abides by the pledge. Hence
it is my duty to persuade caste Hindus to do so . Both temple-entry
and enabling legislation are part of the pledge. The Temple–entry Bill
is harmless. Moreover, they are hardly likely to be passed because I
want it. If it were so, they would have been passed long ago. One of
the Bills has been published for [eliciting] public opinion. It is your
dharma as well as mine to work for its passage. It puts an end to the
legal obstacle. Those temples which, under certain circumstances,

196

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

could not, till this day, open their doors to Harijans will be permitted
to do so. Today, it seems, although many people may be in favour of
throwing open the temple doors, a single person can prevent it. This
Bill seeks to remove the obstacle. There is no coercion. Those who
believe that the image loses its sanctity by Harijans entering the temple
may stop going there. But the majority are of the opinion that God
does not come to dwell in the image until the Harijans are admitted.
What should those who believe this do ? If they did not have the legal
obstruction removed, their pledge would be broken. The Bill harms
no one. It has not the remotest suggestion of coercion.
The second Bill does not affect religious untouchability. It only
says that untouchability has no place in law, in law–courts. On the one
hand, we want the law not to interfere with religion and, on the other,
we seek to perpetuate untouchability through the civil code. How
could it be ? Lawyers point out that today untouchability is
sanctioned by law. It will be eradicated by having these two Bills
passed ; for that caste Hindus will have to undergo a change of heart.
The Bills seek to protect those who disregard untouchability as well as
the untouchables who enjoy no such protection today.
If we did not willingly abolish untouchability today, we shall
have to give it up under compulsion in the future. We did not
willingly let Harijans occupy the railway compartments ; today they sit
there in spite of us. Overwhelmed by selfish motives, we employ them
in the mills. There is no merit in doing an act grudgingly.
At present, we are perched on their shoulders, we ought to get
off. I ask you to contribute money in order to bring them justice. You
and I would not want to live in the homes where Harijans live. They
do not observe rules of sanitation, as they do not have the necessary
facilities. They are illiterate. The task of removing their hardships
cannot be accomplished without funds, hence I ask you for funds.
Please do not contribute grudgingly. This is not like throwing away
money on idle entertainment. This is an act of sacrifice, of dedication.
If you contribute in the spirit of sacrifice, I shall be convinced that
you have made a significant contribution. Even a cowrie given in a a
charitable spirit will suffice, whereas a rupee parted with in a niggardly
spirit has no value. The service of Harijans is after all the service of
God. But God gets His work done through man. He gets His work
done by one who feels His presence and fears Him. Your money by
itself is not going to be enough for Harijans. Your real contribution is
your sympathy for this cause. In the morning, Shrimati Durgatai
placed her gold bangles, silver mug and tumbler before me and said
that she had preserved with care these things which were dear to her ;
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

197

and that today she was giving them away for the service of Harijans. I
ask all men and women to make such a sacrifice.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 3–12–1933

208. LETTER TO GORDHANBHAI PATEL
[November 19, 1933] 1
BHAI GORDHANBHAI,

Manibehn writes to me saying that you were grieved at my
absence in Bombay at the time of the funeral. In a way I am happy
about it. Your grief suggests that you regard me as a member of the
family. You have a right to regard me as such. But if you regard me
as one of the family you should ask me when you fail to understand
my action. My differences with Vithalbhai had absolutely nothing to
do with my not going there. My present circumstances were the sole
reason behind my not going over. I am out of jail solely for Harijan
work. The programme had already been fixed. I would not be willing
to submit myself to such Government restrictions as do not deserve to
be endured. Besides, I could not see myself likely to be useful in any
other way. Again, my view of death as also my attitude towards
funeral rites were likely to render me of no use whatever. Therefore,
looking at it from any point of view, my attendance was not necessary,
nay, it would have been improper. Why, I would not have permitted
part of what happened. For me it should suffice to let you know that
my differences with Vithalbhai were not in the least instrumental [in
my decision]. You may not be aware that on receiving news of his
illness I had written to him to which he had promptly sent a long and
sweet reply. When his illness had aggravated, I had also wired to him,
to which again he had replied. He also asked you to keep me
informed about his health. Mistaking your wire to have been from
Gordhanbhai, the Secretary of the Mill–owners’ Association, I sent a
letter of thanks to the latter. He wrote to me that the wire was not from
him. I hope this explanation would pacify you. If not, please do ask
me again.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4 : Manibehn Patelne, pp. 156-7

1

198

Vide “Letter to Dahyabhai Patel”, 19-11-1933

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

209. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
(CHIKHALDA),

November 19, 1933
CHI. MANI,

You are doing well to give expression to all that you and other
relatives feel. I could not bear either Dahyabhai or Gordhanbhai misunderstanding me. If you are in Bombay, I think you will read my
letter 1 to Gordhanbhai. If you wish to say anything after reading it,
you may do so.
You must have got my letter. I see no need for me to write to the
Press. I don’t think it always necessary to reply every time I find
newspapers misunderstand my actions or deliberately misrepresent
them. If, however, you two, brother and sister, so desire, I will certainly
do it. My position is quite clear. There is considerable truth in what
Dahyabhai says. We can certainly point out blemishes in [ C.R. ] Das
and others. Is there anybody who is blameless ? But my not going
there has nothing to do with Vithalbhai’s shortcomings. He certainly
deserved the same honour that the other leaders got. His self–sacrifice,
determination, ability and his loyalty to the Congress were in no way
inferior to those of the others.
Your own generosity fills me with admiration. But mind you, it
is not peculiar to you. I have seen such generosity in countless
women. They are always ready to forget the wrongs done to them. It
is this virtue which is their special honour. But men have taken undue
advantage of it. But that is a different story. May I take credit for your
behaving so admirably in my eyes just now ?
Write to Wardha.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4 : Manibehn Patelne, pp. 115-6

1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

199

210. LETTER TO DAHYABHAI PATEL
November 19, 1933
CHI. DAHYABHAI,

You must have received my earlier letter1 . Enclosed is a letter to
Gordhanbhai. Give it to him after reading it. Do not forget that it is
your duty to strive with me if you are not satisfied [with my
explanation]. Pass on their letters to Ba and Mani.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4 : Manibehn Patelne, p. 156

211. LETTER TO JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
C HIKALDA,

November 19, 1933
CHI. JAYAPRAKASH,

I have your letter. On reading it I have come to the conclusion
that you should now withdraw yourself from the struggle. This
struggle will go on for many years. After you have paid all your debts
and the burden of earning a livelihood becomes somewhat lighter you
can join the struggle. Many people who would have wanted to take
part in the struggle have, for similar reasons, withdrawn themselves
from the scene. Those who plunge into the fight have to give up
attachment to the family. Our family system is in need of much
reform. But this is a separate question. You might consult Jawaharlal. I
have restrained many people like you. If you feel Prabhavati also
should be restrained you may do so. If you consider it necessary you
may see me about this. Do not decide in haste.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Jayaprakash Narayan Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

1

200

Vide “Letter to Dahyabhai Patel”,14-11-1933

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

212. LETTER TO KISAN GHUMATKAR
Unrevised

AS AT WARDHA,

November 20, 1933
MY DEAR KISAN,

Have mercy on a poor old man. Why do you doubt me when I
say I never was angry with you ? Did you give me any cause for anger
? Even now I do not know anything against you that would make me
angry. It is but natural for young people not to understand old people. How should you understand what it is to be without teeth or
muscle, or know at 20 what you would yourself feel when you are
four times twenty? Old men are not too deep for young people to
understand. They may be imbecile. Whatever your own experience in
other cases, it is inapplicable in my case.
How nice it would have been if you would have joined me at
Wardha. I would love to have you even now. But can you stand the
very heavy strain of the tour? Are you strong enough in body and
mind to be able to go through the eternal rush? 1 What does Dhurandhar say ?
I do receive news about Prema through the visitors who visit her
companions. But you should continue to tell me all you come to
know about her.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat : G.N. 9069. Also C.W. 9688

213. LETTER TO MANEKLAL KOTHARI
November 20, 1933
CHI. MANEKLAL,

I liked your long letter. The simpler you grow the better. Vocational training will preserve the children’s health, physical as well as
mental.
Your comparison between the Indian States and the British
1

The addressee’s health had suffered after imprisonment in Thana jail.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

201

[Government] is correct up to a point. But the reason behind this
[difference] is that the States on their part are enslaved. The master’s
shortcomings are always found doubled in the case of his slaves.
Hence what you experienced is due to the influence of the British
Government. This does not mean that the States were any better
before. But formerly their faults used to be removed jointly by the
ruler and his subjects. Today such a phenomenon is well nigh impossible, because there is rot at the root.
The introduction of machines will certainly bring about an
improvement in the economic condition of a few. Machines would not
provide employment to thirty crores of people. They ought to get
some additional work besides agriculture. And it cannot be anything
but spinning. It would therefore be better if you start using khadi in
your house. It is the experience of many that one can afford khadi if
one restrains one’s fondness for clothes. If all of you spin for some
time daily and have the yarn woven, you will find khadi quite inexpensive. Also, Purushottam, Jamnadas, etc., can help you in this
regard.
Ramdas is at Wardha. Keshu, Krishno are also there. Manu has
gone to Rajkot because Kusum is ill. May be you know it. Ba has
gone to Ahmedabad.
My health continues to be good. If you do not read the
Harijanbandhu, start reading it now.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Write to me at Wardha.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./XXIII

214. LETTER TO RADHABEHN M. KOTHARI
November 20, 1933
CHI. RADHA,

I have written a long letter1 to Maneklal, so I will not write a
long one to you. It will satisfy me if you serve as much as you can.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./XXIII
1

202

Vide the preceding item.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

215. LETTER TO KOTWAL
November 20, 1933
BHAI KOTWAL,

The work which has come to us unsought is swadharma.
Anybody who is wedded to an institution should not, as a general rule,
join the present battle. One’s dharma cannot be pointed out to one by
somebody else. He who has seen it adheres to it despite the opposition
of the whole world.
We should not sit in judgment over anybody. Every case should
ultimately be judged on its own merits. It is therefore dangerous to be
guided by solutions of hypothetical cases.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3604

216. LETTER TO VAMANRAO
November 20, 1933
BHAI VAMANRAO,

I have been able to take up your letter only today. What little I
have read about Shivaji was as a student at school. It is shameful but
true. Afterwards I learnt about him more from the elders. But when I
realized that British historians, particularly those belonging to the
official community, could not see things from our point of view even
if they wanted to, I adopted a yardstick: Without reading up any other
material I concluded that just the opposite of whatever I had read must
be true and I started believing that Shivaji was really a great king,
brave and patriotic. These qualities were more than enough to arouse
my feeling of reverence for him.
To expect more from me at this time is to be like a cruel
milkman who extracts the last drop of milk from the cow till she starts
bleeding.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 32846

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

203

217. LETTER TO VIDYA A. HINGORANI
November 20, 1933
CHI. VIDYA,

Why don’t you write ? What sentence did Anand get ? Are your
studies progressing well ? And your cooking ? Don’t be disheartened.
Know that there is virtue in eating what one has cooked with one’s
own hands. Have you secured a sewing machine ? Is the [sewing]
class going on ? How is Mahadev ?
Blessings from

BAPU

[P.S]
Ask Kanta as also the other girls to write.
From a microfilm of the Hindi : Courtesy : National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

218. LETTER TO DHIRU C. JOSHI
November 21, 1933
CHI. DHIRU,

I hope your anger with Rama has now left you. 1 Take care of
your health. Continue to write to me. Whether you are writing to
Rama or to me or to somebody else, you must see to it that your
handwriting is good. Ask Balabhadra to write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 5316

1

204

Vide “Letter to Dhiru C. Joshi”, 7-11-1933

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

219. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, MORSI
November 21, 1933
These differences are verily offshoots of the curse of untouchability, for they proceed from a sense of superiority and inferiority.
The fourfold division of varna is based on duty and not on right.
Dharma does not confer rights but lays down obligations. Where all
perform the duties that have fallen to their lot, no one is higher than
the others. Once we are able to purge ourselves of untouchability, and
with it the spirit of high and low, we shall realize the unity underlying
all races and religions. In spite of the differences of races and religions, we shall learn to tolerate and respect one another and consider
all human beings as children of one God and, therefore, brothers and
sisters of one another. God is the Creator of all life; all his creatures
are, therefore, equal in His eyes. Humanity is a gigantic tree having
innumerable branches and leaves, and the same life throbs through
them all. The realization of unity in diversity is implied in the removal
of untouchability.
Harijan, 1–12–1933
1

220. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
IN THE TRAIN,

November 22, 1933
CHI. KAKA,

You must have received the reply which I sent through Kishorelal. It was not right for you to have tried to climb the hill. You cannot get strength so soon. Be careful for some time yet about food and
going out.
I have not been able to reply to. . . ’s 2 son. Letters are
accumulating every day. The programme of the tour has been so
fixed that I get time to write letters only on the weekly silence day and
between 3 and 4 a.m. every day. I don’t see any possibility of being

1
The reference is to the bitterness between the local Brahmins and non–
Brahmins.
2
The name has been omitted.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

205

able to help. . .’s1 son just now. Whom can we appeal to for money ? .
. .’s 2 difficulty also has not been solved. must, therefore, rely on his
own efforts at present. If I can rest peacefully any time in future, I
may be able to do something for persons like him. But I am not likely
to enjoy such peace in my lifetime. If you think you must write to
him yourself, you may do so. I don’t know when my teeth will be
examined. I have been told that the condition of the teeth may be
responsible for the pain in the elbow. It is very unlikely to be so, for
there is no other trouble. The blood–pressure has disappeared
completely, and the weight is going up. I have already reached 109.
I also had a letter from Soman3 .
*
*
* 4
Chandrashankar is giving perfect satisfaction by his work. He
seems to have learnt very well the art of looking after physical health.
He is successfully copying Mahadev. I didn’t know that he could
write English so well. He has considerably lightened my burden. He is
always engrossed in work.
I am sure you read the Harijan regularly for accounts of the
tour.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C. W. 9480. Courtesy : D. B. Kalelkar

221. LETTER TO JIVANJI D. DESAI
IN THE T RAIN,

November 22, 1933
BHAI JIVANJI,

The Preface is not out of my mind. I understand what you say
regarding Ratilal. It is not possible to give him any advice. What is
destined will happen. If Baburao says anything, let me know. If the
previous power [of attorney] cannot be revoked, this one may not be
of any use.
Give me a report about S. in every letter. See him sometimes.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 9932. Also C.W. 6907. Courtesy :
Jivanji D. Desai
1
2
3
4

206

The names have been omitted.
Ibid
Ramachandra Soman
Some lines have been omitted.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

222. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKAR PATTANI
IN THE TRAIN,

November 22, 1933
SUJNA BHAISHRI,

I got your loving letter. I read the verse. Knowing that God is
behind all, good and evil, I remain unaffected. If He was behind good
only, I would certainly have felt uneasy. He alone is good. If I could
persuade you to join me in this tour, your health would automatically
improve. But I know that is impossible. I hope you glance through the
issues of Harijan.
Why doesn’t Ramabehn1 remember me ?
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 5931. Also C.W. 3247. Courtesy :
Mahesh P. Pattani

223. LETTER TO DR. JIVARAJ MEHTA
ON TRAIN,

November 22, 1933
DEAR JIVARAJ,

I have your letter. I had got your wire too. Let me know the
results of the investigations and when you are restored write and tell
me your conclusions. As for myself, I am doing splendidly.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS

[PS.]
You may treat Wardha as my address.
DR. J IVARAJ MEHTA
ALEXANDER R OAD
GAMDEVI, B OMBAY
From the Gujarati original: Jivaraj Mehta Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

1

Addressee’s wife

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

207

224. MESSAGE TO THE PEOPLE OF BERAR 1
November 22, 1933
In his message Mahatmaji says that the people of Berar gave an unlimited
response to his call for Harijan service. The organization was most efficient and
looked to all the comforts in the tour which has been a pleasant one.

The attendance at public meetings held throughout the tour was
the largest ever seen and it gives me cause to hope that untouchability
is fast dying.
Hitavada, 26–11–1933

225. LETTER TO N. S. HARDIKAR
AS AT WARDHA,

November 23, 1933
DEAR DR. HARDIKAR,

You promised “more again” in your letter, but the promise
has not materialized. Nevertheless, friends have been keeping me
informed of your progress, though for the last eight days I have had
no news of you. I wonder if you are still in hospital. Wherever you
are, I hope you have made steady progress.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
DR. N. S. H ARDIKAR
K.E.M. HOSPITAL
P AREL, B OMBAY
From the original: N. S. Hardikar Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

1

208

Given in an interview to The Times of India

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

226. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
Unrevised

R AIPUR,

November 23, 1933
MY DEAR MAHADEV,

On getting up at 3 a.m. I found your letter to Mira lying on the
little stool which is being carried from place to place as a footboard
for me to stretch my legs on. It took me nearly 40 minutes to go
through it and yet without reading your comments on the translation
of the verses specified.1 It would take me at least twelve hours to read
up my translation [of] the original and think out what I should say. It
will take at least another three hours to reduce them to writing. That
time I cannot give just now. Then there is the question—shall I help
you much ? I fear, not. For what you say is quite true. I ought not to
have yielded to Swami’s demand for my own translation except
perhaps for private circulation among friends. I realized my unfitness
for the task as I was proceeding but I continued. The defects you have
noticed are there. How can I give what I have not—scholarship ? Want
of good knowledge of Sanskrit was a great drawback. The remedy is
clear. You should go on with your translation taking such help as my
translations can give to bring out my thought but not always following
my translation. Give that rendering which is acceptable to you. Ignore
the notes where they are useless. Give your own where they are necessary. Having done that, take up the Gujarati, correct the translation
where it is defective and polish the language where it needs polishing.
Re-write and add notes where necessary. That will complete your task.
Then when the whole result comes into my hands, I shall work on it
and make such changes as I may deem fit in order to bring out my
meaning. This I can do easily. We must then bring out a revised
version of the Gujarati and publish your translation in English. 2 So
doing, you do not need to stop your work for want of my detailed
reply to your comments. I shall circulate your comments among
friends and get their opinion and let you have it all.
Your other messages will be attended to.
1

The addressee was translating Anasaktiyoga into English. Vide footnote 3
The English translation was published in 1946 under the title The Gospel of
Selfless Action or The Gita According to Gandhi
2

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

209

I am glad you are going through the trials of various sorts. Only
do not wash yourself out with mere literary work. You should take
plenty of exercise and keep the body in a fit condition. You must not
damage your eyes on any account whatsoever.
No more today.
Love from all.
BAPU
From a copy : S.N. 26906

227. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
R AIPUR,

November 23, 1933
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I got your letter. You have given two addresses. In your
previous letter you gave the Siwan address and in this one you have
given the Sitabadiara address. I am writing this letter at the latter
address.
I have already written to you about Jayaprakash. I addressed
that letter at Siwan. The present fight is not for people who have debts
to pay and wish to discharge their responsibilities towards their
brothers and sisters. This fight requires one to sacrifice one’s all. How
do a poor man’s brothers and sisters get education ? We should adopt
such a way that our brothers and sisters grow up in poverty and get
educated and start earning as soon as possible. That leaves the
problem of Father. The fifty rupees which he gets should suffice.
Both of you should renounce your share in his property. Jayaprakash
can remain in the present fight only if he is thus prepared to embrace
poverty. This is a soldier’s dharma. The other dharma is towards
one’s family. It also is worth following if one wishes to do so . When
it becomes an absolute dharma, it is in conflict with the good of
society as a whole. That is what we find among us today. It is the aim
of satyagraha to remedy this situation. But anybody who does not
understand satyagraha and still follows it fails in both dharmas for he
will remain discontented. If you do not understand anything in this,
you may ask me to explain again. But I don’t think you will find any
difficulty in understanding it.
I have already sent you the programme of my tour, and do not
repeat it here. There is nothing now which you should specially come

210

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

here to discuss with me. But I shall be in Jabalpur on Tuesday. Then I
go to Delhi.
My weight is 109 and the blood–pressure 155–100. The diet
remains the same.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3435

228. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
R AIPUR,

November 23, 1933
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

You really seem to have stopped writing to me. It was necessary
for Jamnalalji to resign even for his own peace of mind. The resignation was desirable from the point of view of its effect on others, too.
It has cleansed the atmosphere completely. A load is off Jamnalalji’s
mind and he feels much stronger now. I don’t wish to write more.
Please however have no doubts about the propriety of the step.
I hear that there has been a small breakdown in your health. Let
me know if there has been any such thing. If you can tell me your
weight, do so. Is there any trouble with your nose ? I hope you
wouldn’t think it necessary to keep back anything from me.
Mahadev is being tested well. I am glad about it. There are difficulties now regarding Gujarati letters. I intend to write to the Colonel1
in the matter, though I don’t like to do even that.
I have had no letters from Devdas recently. Khurshed is improving. She remained ill for a fairly long time. I can’t write more
since it is time for the post.
I am going on well enough. The crowds are as large as ever,
perhaps larger than before. And they are equally mad with love.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna patro–2 : Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 48

1

E. E. Doyle, Inspector–General of Prisons, Bombay

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

211

229. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETTING, RAIPUR 1
November 23, 1933
I have repeatedly said that this work can be done only by those
who sincerely believe untouchability to be a stain on Hinduism. This
is a movement requiring the change of heart of millions. It cannot be
led to success by any political manoeuvres. It can be done only
through self–purification. This is a great sacrificial fire in which we
have to burn our load of sins and come out purified. Those who do
not take to this work with faith and spirit will fail to move the hearts of
millions. We shall be nowhere if we deceive ourselves or the Harijans.
The success or failure of this movement depends on our getting the
right type of workers. We are on our trial today. If we miss today the
oppportunity that God has given us, we may never hope to get the
opportunity again in this generation. What we refuse to do voluntarily
today we shall have to do in future per force, and we shall repent for
having lost this opportunity. I pray to God that we may come out successful from this trial and save Hinduism and ourselves from destruction.
Harijan, 1–12–1933

230. SPEECH AT ALL–INDIA SWADESHI EXHIBITION,
RAIPUR
November 23, 1933
In a country where 95 per cent of the population live on the
land, even if all the processes of cultivation were carried on through
machines, there would still be need for a supplementary cottage
industry. The spinning-wheel supplied that supplementary industry to
the Indian peasant from time immemorial. Many minor industries are
nowadays suggested for the purpose, but none of them can be
universalized as the production of khadi can be. I consented to open
this exhibition, for I know that thousands of Harijans get their living
through khadi, which has saved them from destitution. We may revive
1
According to Chandrashankar Shukla’s report, the speech was addressed to
Harijan workers. However, according to The Bombay Chronicle, 29–11-1933, and
Hitavada, 3–12–1933, this was in reply to addresses presented by the Municipality,
the Local Board and other institutions.

212

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

many other indigenous industries, may even start new ones, but we
may not lose sight of khadi as the centre of all swadeshi.
Harijan, 1–12–1933

231. EXTRACTS FROM SPEECHES

1

[Before November 24, 1933] 2
Injustice is being done all the world over, but we have given to it
the sanction of religion. These distinctions have not been created by
God. The Harijans are on the lowest rung of the ladder not because of
any inherent defects but only because they have been kept down by
the so–called higher castes. God had bestowed on them the same
talents that He had given us, but we deny them the opportunities for
using them. They should surely have the same rights and privileges
and the same opportunities of growth that we enjoy.
We are now awake to the wrong we have done to them, and the
least we can do by way of penance now is to contribute money for
their uplift and to share with them all the amenities of life that we have
created for ourselves. We are all creatures of the same God and,
therefore, equal in His eyes.
From the money that you give for this cause, you will reap a
hundredfold, for it is like grain sown in good, manured soil. The
money spent after luxury and lust is, on the other hand, wasted like
grain sown in barren soil.3
I am told you have suffered heavily. But you should know that
no nation has ever come to its own without having passed through the
severest fire of suffering. Voluntary suffering only adds to our
strength. I, therefore, congratulate you for having suffered. But I
should also like to remind you that one of the causes that add to our
sufferings is this curse of untouchability. We have oppressed the weak.
We reap as we have sown. It is for us now to undo the wrong we have
done to the Harijans and remove the yoke of serfdom from their
1

Reproduced from Chandrashankar Shukla’s “Weekly Letter” which bears the
date–line “Raipur, 24–11–1933”. The places where Gandhiji spoke have not been
indicated.
2
Ibid
3
What follows was spoken at a village.
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

213

shoulders.1
Caste Hindus must first ask you to forgive the wrongs they have
done to you. But I should also tell you, as a Harijan by choice, that
you should give up your evil habits, especially carrion and beef–
eating. The whole world looks upon carrion with abhorrence. And
beef–eating should be given up because that is a sine qua non for a
Hindu. The cow is the giver of plenty, and by killing her we kill
ourselves. Then, I would urge you not to accept leavings. And, above
all, you should abolish the distinctions of high and low that have crept
in among yourselves. And these things you should do, not in a
bargaining spirit but because they are good in themselves. I would,
therefore, ask you also to give up drink, irrespective of the fact that
many other Hindus drink.
Harijan, 1–12–1933

232. CIVIL RESISTANCE AND HARIJAN SERVICE
A friend writes :2
I observe that there are some people in the Harijan service
organizations not working in the spirit in which you want them to, that is,
merely for the sake of serving Harijans. They are seeking its shelter in order to
satisfy other ambitions. . .I know that you do not desire civil resistance to be
mixed up with Harijan service organizations. If you propose to make any
public use of this letter you may emphasize this last point and make it clearer.
..

I am thankful to the friend for giving me the benefit of his
experience. It is a most difficult task to keep a big organization like
the Servants of Untouchables Society with branches all over India free
of all self–seekers and time–servers. I have discussed the subject fully
with Seth Ghanshyamdas and Thakkar Bapa. I know that they are
both anxious to keep the organization as pure as possible. Personally I
can do no more. It was because of my utter helplessness that I
undertook the fast of 21 days. On discovering impurities amongst
Harijan servants, I saw that it was no use merely writing about
impurities. I was searching for a way out of the difficulty. The reader
should believe me when I tell him that the fast was the last thing in the
world that I was thinking of, but as I have described in these pages, it
came to me all of a sudden and gave me great relief. I know that it did
much good. But, how far could the fast of a single mortal go ? Hence
1
2

214

What follows was addressed to Harijans.
Only extracts from the letter are reporduced here.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

it was that I developed the idea of a chain of such purificatory fasts.
The idea has by no means been dropped. It comes to me again and
again. But it does not admit of a mechanical organization. Several co–
workers are ready to inaugurate or take part in the chain after it is
inaugurated, but I have not yet found the way to begin it. The proper
way will have to come to me or to the co–workers before the chain
can be begun. Meanwhile I can only reiterate my conviction that
untouchability will not be removed root and branch except through
the service of men and women who take it up for its own sake and in a
religious spirit. Unless we have a fair number of such servants
throughout the length and breadth of India, we will never succeed in
changing the hearts of millions of human beings. The savarna Hindus
are at one end, Harijans at the other, and the evil custom of ages,
which has assumed the dignity of religious tenet, will not be uprooted
without penance and purification. Whilst it gladdens my heart that
thousands of people flock to the meetings that are being held in towns
and villages and that they willingly give their pices as a token of their
approval of the movement, I am painfully conscious of the fact that, if
the thousands were suddenly called upon to enforce in their own lives
what they seem to approve by their attendance at these meetings, they
would fail to respond, not from want of will, but from sheer inability. I
have discovered this again and again amongst my closest associates
who have frankly confessed their inability to enforce immediately in
their conduct what they knew was the right thing and what they knew
had to be done immediately. They had to put up a brave fight against
their traditional repugnance. The mere intellectual grasp that untouchability is an evil, corroding Hinduism, and that belief in it is tantamount to disbelief in God, His goodness and His Fatherhood, is not
enough to destroy the monster. The vicarious penance of the comparatively pure is needed to bring about a change in the hearts of both
savarnas and Harijans.
A movement, so grand and so pure, so religious and so
humanitarian, must not be exploited by anybody for his own end.
Certainly, not for its political consequences. It will be discovered, as
the movement progresses, that the political approach can only end in
accentuating the strife. It can only add to the confusion already
existing and add one more, if not many more warring parties, to the
existing ones. May God save us and save the movement from such a
calamity !
So far as the connection of civil resistance with the movement is
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

215

concerned, I am as emphatic as ever that Congressmen who desire to
offer active civil resistance should not accept office in the various
organizations, and much less can they be used for serving the purpose
of civil resistance. Civil resistance is a unique weapon, it does not
admit of alloy. It is a weapon of the fearless and, therefore, needs no
shelter; but it has to be wielded in the open daylight. Therefore, whilst
Congressmen who are also civil resisters on active service may do, as
they are bound to do, such service to the cause as they can, they may
not belong to the Servants of Untouchables Society or any of its
branches. By holding office in the organizations they will harm both
civil resistance and the Harijan cause. It would be like a man going to
a temple to pray and using the act of worship for advancing civil
resistance. Neither God nor man will be cheated in that manner and, as
I have said often enough in these columns, the great reformation of
Hinduism will not be brought about, if it is to depend purely upon
Congressmen. For, much as I would like to think that every Indian is
Congressman, I know that such is not the case. Nor is every Hindu a
Congressman, if only because every Harijan is not a Congressman.
Therefore, a Harijan organization must in the very nature of things be
strictly non–political and non–party and should contain in it both
Congressmen and non–Congressmen, office–holding being restricted
to those who are not active civil resisters and who will not exploit the
office secretly or openly to advance the cause of civil resistance.
Harijan, 24–11–1933

233. HARIJAN WORKER’S DUTY
A correspondent sends me the following questions for
answering :
(1) In the propaganda against untouchability, should a worker make use of the
Hindu Shastras and religious texts to show that Hinduism does not sanction
untouchability as we practise it today ?
(2) Should a Harijan sevak, even in his private capacity, take part in inter–
dining functions ?
(3) Should a Harijan who is employed as a domestic servant sit at meals
alongside all the members of the family ?

These three questions, the correspondent says, have been
seriously discussed in the columns of a newspaper and the readers
have been advised that Harijan workers ought not to make use of
religious texts in advocating the abolition of untouchability, and that,

216

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in the larger interest of the movement, the workers should not enforce
their views about inter–dining and the rest, even in their private
matters. I hold totally different views on these matters. For me, the
removal of untouchability is fundamentally a religious question.
Hinduism could not hold me if I believed that untouchability, as it is
practised today, was an integral part of it. That it has been handed
down to us as a custom is an undoubted fact, but so are many other
bad customs among which untouchability is the worst. It becomes
necessary, therefore, to show that it has no sanction in religion.
Whilst the Servants of Untouchables Society has very wisely
limited the scope of its corporate activities, it does not regulate or
restrict individual practice about inter–dining. The removal of untouchability does not require inter–dining with Harijans. Inter–dining is
not a universal obligation. A Harijan worker must be left free to dine
with whomsoever he pleases, and, therefore, with Harijans, without in
any way being regarded as being on that account a less effective
worker. My own practice is well known, and I should personally feel a
hypocrite if I suppressed it ‘in the larger interests of the reform’. I
should undoubtedly refrain, if inter–dining were a mere matter of
convenience or indulgence for me. Far from being either, I regard it
as a desirable and an inevitable social reform. But it should not be
mixed up with the drive against untouchability. The central point in
the untouchability movement is the removal of social and religious
injustice towards those who, being regarded as untouchables, are
debarred from public utilities and spiritual comfort within the religion
to which they belong. I should feel no deprivation if no one in the
world took food that might be cooked or touched by me. But it would
be a great deprivation to me if I could not send my children to the
public school, or could not rent a house in any locality open to the
other members of the public, or could not seek spiritual comfort in a
temple designed for the other members of my faith.
As to the Harijan employee, if the members of a family
employing a Harijan drew a line between him and non–Harijan servants, they would undoubtedly be guilty of observing untouc-hability.
But I very much fear that we are a long way from that bright and
happy day when we shall be all masters and no servants, or all servants
and no masters, all members of the human family, regarding ourselves
as blood–brothers and blood–sisters.
Harijan, 24–11–1933
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

217

234. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
[ AS AT] WARDHA,

November 24, 1933
CHI. AMALA,

I was glad you were doing so well. Did I say I would write twice
a week ? I thought I had said you could write twice a week.
Of course you may give as much time to Hindi as you like. Yes,
when you are quite fit, you will find your place wherever I put you.
Love.
BAPU
S MT. A MALABEHN
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM
WARDHA, C. P.
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

235 LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
November 24, 1933
MY DEAR CHARLIE,

I have just heard from Sir P. Pattani that he would begin to pay
Gurudev Rs. 1,000 per month from December till the Rs. 5,000 are
paid out.1 It will be all right now.
The enthusiasm of the people and the attendance are
phenomenal and exceed my expectations which were fairly high. You
will find it all faithfully described in the columns of Harijan which
as you must have observed has been transferred to Madras. The
people are paying handsomely. If these crowds are not an indication
that untouchability is fast going, I do not know what can prove it. It
must take time for the mighty reform to be felt.
Later,
The foregoing was written amid interruptions. Your letter written
during the voyage or in Bombay has just been received. About
Gurudev’s visit to Bombay I have written very little. I do not even
know what is going on. I can hardly read papers during this rush. But
1

218

Vide “Letter to Prabhashankar Pattani”, 4-11-1933

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of course he would be quite all right in so far as the reception is
concerned. Of money he is not likely to get much. My appeal about
Orissa is bringing very little.
Of course, Elwin should go his way and be left in God’s hands.
But friends must issue warnings when they have doubts as to the
propriety of actions on merits. It is difficult to say when it is God’s
voice and when it is not. Strangers have to judge every act on its
merits. This is applicable of course to my claim in connection with my
fasts. I wrote a long letter to E. on what appeared to me his hasty
departure from Matheran and avoidance of Wardha. I have not heard
from him at all after his going back to Karanjia.
I hope I shall not have to cable you to return. The Magistrates
have not worried me up to now. And when and if they do you would
be too late for guidance. You should therefore trust me to God even
as Efy is doing, even as you are trusting E. to God. I know that He is
guiding me.
Love.
MOHAN

[P.S.]
Send your letters to Wardha.
From a photostat : G.N. 983

236. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
November 24, 1933
MY DEAR AGATHA,

No long letter this week. Here is a letter 1 for C. F. A. The
cuttings will give you some indication of the progress of the tour.
These of course you will share with friends as you may think
necessary.
I do not think of the political atmosphere. It is as bad as ever. It
does not worry me much and it will not worry me at all if there was
chivalry and gentlemanliness on the part of the officials. The
insatiable desire for humiliating everybody and every organization is
terrible. But enough of this grumbling.
Love
BAPU
From a photostat : G.N. 1475
1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

219

237. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
November 24, 1933
CHI. VASUMATI,

I wrote several letters to you. I hope you got them. I got one
letter from you. You seem to have done quite good reading. It seems
you have given up the study of English. Tara has got one tooth
extracted and is suffering extreme pain. She had to be kept under
chloroform for one hour. She is a little better now. I have started a
long tour. Except for two days [in the week], I have to travel every
day. I am accompanied by Mirabehn, Om and Chandrashankar, and
of course Thakkar Bapa. There are others too, but you do not know
them. So far I have kept good health. Ba and Manibehn have gone to
Ahmedabad. Totaramji will take Hariprasad with him and go and live
in the Harijan Ashram. The Satyagraha Ashram has now become
Harijan Ashram. My weight stands at 108. My normal diet is milk,
oranges and one green vegetable.
I have dictated this letter to Om during my meal.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 9338. Also C.W. 584. Courtesy :
Vasumati Pandit

238. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, RAIPUR
November 24, 1933
Ever since I came to your province you have been showering
love on me and I am still bathing in it. Here also you have further
delighted me by presenting me this purse. You would be right if you
believe that you should give me money to please me, and especially so
if you fulfil one condition. It is that those who have given money
should feel that they have contributed to a yajna of self–purification.
The money that is given can only be a token of your contribution to
that yajna. But if they think that they have done all that they need to
by giving the money, it would be the worst characteristic of a clever
Bania. It would be as if by giving that money they had bought the
right to enjoy themselves as they wished. Such charity can be of no

220

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

benefit to the Harijans. I do not deny that money is very badly needed
for Harijan work; but it is more important for their service that you
should accept the Harijans with your heart. The real purpose of this
tour is that you should discard the notion of untouchability from your
heart and banish feelings of high and low. If you give me no help in
realizing that aim and give me only money, it would be difficult even
to use that money. If you do not know it, please note that at least 75
per cent of the money collected from this place will be used for the
Harijan work here. There are two conditions, however, and they are
also meant for the success of this work. In the first place, a good
scheme for the use of that amount should come from you, and along
with that there should be an indication of the persons who would carry
out the scheme. A scheme may be good on paper, but it will be useless
and will fail if there was nobody to implement it. That is why I said
that, if your heart is not behind your contribution, the money you
have given will be as good as useless. And if this happens, it would be
diverted to other places where better workers and better schemes are
forthcoming. You would not be happy if this happens. We who have
come here do not wish to do any such thing. Our intention is to use at
least 75 per cent of the money in the place from where it is collected.
If, however, you do not give your full co–operation in this work,
nothing can be done with the money alone.
It is a matter of joy for the country and for Hindus that at every
place people gather in such large numbers. I am working in the faith
that all these people come to the meetings to help me in my work of
removing untouchability. If they come because they think that I have
served the country in the past, and in order to praise my past services,
they are guilty of great deception. I think of no other work just now. I
have undertaken this tour only for Harijan work, and not to hear my
praises. Hence, only those who wish to help me in this work or
criticize it should attend the meetings. Those who wish to oppose the
work should express their opposition courteously and in a becoming
manner. In a religious cause, forgetting courtesy means forsaking
dharma itself. Rudeness and lack of courtesy go ill with religion.
Religion must be accompanied with gentleness, courtesy, culture and
compassion. I do not wish to waste my time.
It would no doubt pain me to know that the Hindu masses are
not with me. But it would pain me all the more if they attend the
meetings to deceive me and themselves. I have got to follow my
dharma even if everybody deserts me. The scriptures say that you
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

221

need not have anyone on your side for following dharma, that you
need God alone. Following dharma is a matter for each individual
himself. One must do one’s duty to the best of one’s ability. God will
look after the rest. The dharma of fighting untouchability is precious
like a gem. I have placed it before you. This is no ordinary gem
which can be used only by one person or which would wear off by
use. Millions can use the gem of dharma ; the more the people use it,
the brighter will it shine.
There is no doubt at all that unless we wipe out the blot of
untouchability from Hinduism, both Hinduism and Hindu society will
perish. Peoples and their religions are being compared and judged all
over the world. We are living in an age when we can travel to distant
places in a few days by train and go round the world by sea. And now
aeroplanes too are coming into use. In an age like this, all religions
are exposed to the eyes of the world. If we fail in this scrutiny we may
be sure that we are doomed. The world has a right to make such a
comparison. That which cannot be placed before the world and which
is not acceptable to reason and the heart cannot be sanatana dharma.
Sanatana dharma means imperishable Truth.
I was glad when I was told that Bharatdasji intends to throw open
his temple to Harijans. The site of the temple is very beautiful. I
performed the opening with God as witness. The Harijans had
cheerfully come in large numbers. The scriptures have laid down two
or three conditions for the Harijans or other people who visit a temple.
They must enter the temple with a pure heart and body. Observing
rules of personal cleanliness is as necessary in the case of Harijans as
in that of the other Hindus, and, therefore, they should be duly
observed by them. The second condition is that they should give up
eating beef and carrion. The latter is prohibited in every religion. I am
not aware of civilized and religious–minded people eating carrion,
anywhere in the world. It is abhorred by all mankind. Harijans must
give up these two things irrespective of whether or not they are
accepted by the caste Hindus. If they consider themselves Hindus,
they must give up beef also. Now there is a fourth thing, which I
cannot describe as an inseparable part of Hinduism, though it is so
according to me. And that is abstention from intoxicating drinks.
Other Hindus may or may not give them up, but you should definitely
do so. It is a very bad habit. A bad habit should not be copied.
Moreover, you want to progress, and so you must give up drinking.
Other Hindus will follow your example. Giving up intoxicating drinks

222

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

will save the country crores of rupees and change a man from a
monster into a human being. You must not consume the thing that
makes you forget how you should behave to a mother or a sister.
Those who are used to collecting and eating leavings must give up that
unclean habit for good. Eating the leavings is not for human beings.
It is the fault of the caste Hindus that you have got into this habit. In
their ignorance caste Hindu women give leavings to Harijans. Instead
of that, they should keep apart a certain portion every day for
Harijans from what they may have cooked for themselves. My mother
always used to feed us and take her meal only after keeping apart the
portions for the guest, the poor and the cow. It is a cultured tradition
in a good household that such portions be kept apart. Similarly, you
also should take out something for the Bhangi Harijans and give it to
them with love. It is not civil to throw food in the fold of the dress or
in a vessel from a distance. It is an act of contempt. There is no
politeness in it but lack of it. Caste Hindu women should give up
throwing leavings to Harijans and the latter should stop accepting
them. Harijan men and women who visit temples should observe the
rules that may be applicable to all the varnas equally.
The Satnami Harijans at Dhamtari told me the painful story
that the barbers and the washermen there do not work for them
because they are considered untouchables. Those who told me this
were as clean as ourselves. When I visited their dwellings, I found that
they were not more unclean than the houses of other Hindus. In the
course of my tours in the country, I have got an impression that the
houses of Bhangis are cleaner than those of other Hindus. It is
tyrannical that washermen and barbers should not serve such peple. It
is painful and a matter of shame for us that when such a great
movement of self–purification is going on barbers and washermen
should refuse to serve these people. I do not blame the washermen
and barbers for this. It is the doing of the so–called high–caste Hindus
who have misled them. They have put the idea into their minds that
they would be incurring sin if they worked for the Harijans. Since
they have got such an idea, they hesitate to serve the Harijans. This
should not be. Other people who know better should explain this to
the barbers and washermen. Educated young men from among the
caste Hindus should learn hair–cutting and washing clothes. And they
should go to Harijans and tell them that they are ready to cut their
hair and wash their clothes. If the educated people do this, the simple–
hearted barbers and washermen would do it too. When they find that
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

223

even the people who are not bothered about money are doing such
work, they also would do it. There is no question of religious
degradation in this. No sanatanist has told me that barbers, washermen,
doctors, etc., cannot serve Harijans. I do not know how the idea that it
is dharma to refuse such service originated. Such barbarism should go
forthwith.
[ From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 17–12–1933

239. LETTER TO SARALADEVI SARABHAI
[November 25, 1933] 1
DEAR SISTER,

I do not read newspapers. But I take it you came back on the
date mentioned in Mridu’s letter. Let me know about the condition of
your health.
I learn from Mahadev’s letter that your brother-in-law who was
at Belgaum suddenly died. I did not know about it at all. What
consolation could one give you?
You will all be well. You can treat Wardha as my permanent
address.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11139. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

1

224

From the postmark

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

240. SPEECH AT BALODA BAZAAR1
November 25, 1933
Gandhiji declared open to Harijans a private temple, saying that the temple
had on that day become a true abode of God with the Harijans’ entry into it. Asking
Harijans to observe three conditions of temple–entry, which apply equally to all
temple–going Hindus, he said :

I request you to contribute your full share to this movement of
self–purification, not by money but by a thorough cleansing of the
heart and body and by removing the evil habits that have crept in
amongst you. Though I admit with shame that the caste Hindus are
responsible for many of these evil habits, I should like you to do your
own part by giving up carrion and beef–eating and observing the
common rules of cleanliness. These three conditions apply equally to
all Hindus who want the right of worship in Hindu temples. I should
like you to give up drink also, irrespective of the fact that even some
caste Hindus indulge in that intoxication. You may not imitate their
vices. Drink is one of the most degrading of vices, reducing man to
the state of brute. It vitiates both body and soul. It spells utter ruin of
the moral and domestic life. I would, therefore, request Harijans in all
earnestness to give up that vice and set a noble example of selfpurification not only to caste Hindus but perhaps to the whole world.
Harijan, 8–12–1933

241. SPEECH AT BILASPUR2
November 25, 1933
You may know, if you do not know already, that I have been
closely assoicated with labourers ever since I went to South Africa.
Whenever I have gone among labourers, in South Africa, India or
whatever part of the world, they have recognized me as a fellow–
labourer and received me as one of themselves. You will perhaps be
surprised to know that even labourers in Lancashire instinctively
1

This appeared in Harijan under the title “Conditions for Temple–entry”.
Delivered at the B. N. Railway Labourers’ Federation. This appeared in
Harijan in two parts under the titles “A Great Equalizer” and “On Behalf of
Humanity”.
2

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

225

recognized me as one of themselves and flocked around me in
hundreds and thousands. The only difference between us is that I have
become a labourer by choice whilst you have been made labourers by
force of circumstances and would perhaps love to be masters if you
could. I early gave up the ambition of becoming the master for I
would then have belonged to an inconsiderate class and could not
have identified myself, as I do today to the best of my ability, with the
penniless pauper, the half–starved and the naked, the lowliest and the
lost. I want labourers not to deplore, much less to despise, their lot and
to realize the dignity of labour. It is meet that you have come forward
with your purse as a token of your sympathy with the Harijans. Who
has suffered so much as they ? They are at the lowest rung of the
ladder. The terrible hardships and privations they have to undergo can
never be imagined by those who have not been victims to them. Other
labourers may aspire to a mass wealth and to become masters some
day and thus to rise in the scale of social prestige; but the Harijans can
never entertain that ambition. The stigma of untouchability attaches to
them from the mother’s womb. They are born outcastes and remain
outcastes till death. They have to live in segregated areas and are
denied the amenities of life that the others enjoy. Even water, that free
gift of God, is denied to them. I ask the Labour Federation to abolish
all distinctions between Harijans and yourselves. I make the appeal
deliberately for, being in direct touch with the mill–hands in
Ahmedabad, I know that labourers do observe the distinction between
Harijans and non–Harijans. I expect labourers, more than all others, to
efface these distinctions. It has been my deep faith that we shall some
day achieve communal unity through labourers. I consider labour to
be a powerful unifying agent. It is a great equalizer. It should be a
matter of shame to have communal divisions among labourers, who all
earn their bread by the sweat of their brow and, therefore, belong to
one vast brotherhood. Let them, therefore, begin with a thorough
removal of untouchability. It will be a great step towards communal
unity. Once the bar sinister against Harijans is removed, the way will
be open for a wider unity among Hindus, Mussalmans and other sister
communities.
A Mussalman friend asked why Gandhiji, a national leader, had chosen for the
time being to work only among a section of the nation. This question drew the
following reply from Gandhiji.

I am trying to serve all communities today through this work.
They are branches of one big family. I have found in the Hindu
226

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

branch a disease which, if not removed in time, will spread through the
whole family and destroy it. The evil of untouchability has travelled
far beyond its prescribed limits. In trying to root out untouchability
among Hindus, I am trying to serve all the communities. Though the
method of achieving communal unity through conferences has failed,
I have not despaired of a heart–unity being achieved in the end. God
has sent me this work, and I am doing it in the faith that the way to a
real communal unity will be paved through it. It is thus to my mind a
service of the whole nation. The effort I made in 1920–21 to achieve
Hindu–Muslim unity will go down in history and will serve as the
foundation of the edifice of communal unity whenever it is achieved.
I have never repented for having made that effort. For me it was not a
matter of expedience. I am not aware of having done a single thing in
my life as a matter of expedience. I have ever held that the highest
morality is also the highest expedience. Some European friends assure
me that I am waging this war against untouchability on behalf of the
whole of humanity. Once this canker is removed from Hinduism,
Hindus, Mussalmans and others will sink their differences and will
embrace one another as blood–brothers, and all communities will feel
that they are all branches of the same tree.
Harijan, 8–12–1933

242. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
R AIPUR,

November 26, 1933
MY DEAR AMALA,

What have you done to your finger ? Dwarakanathji says you
have hurt yourself. I hope you are not overstraining yourself. I want
you to do everything with joy and infinite patience.
It appears that on the 15th December we shall be passing
through Wardha as was originally arranged. The programme was
altered so as to omit Wardha and go via Calcutta. But now the original
programme has been restored. While I admire your self–restraint in
not coming to the station last time, I would like you to come on the
15th, if you get Dwarakanathji’s permission.
I see that you are spinning much better than you used to, and
you have prepared your strand nicely and neatly. I am sure that by
proper application you would be able to spin finer, stronger and much
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

227

more even. I hope that there is not much waste nowadays and that you
know how to mend your wheel if it goes out of order. I hope you are
just as happy as our Japanese friend. You will be surprised to know,
when years ago in South Africa I first cut my own hair, it looked as if
rats had been at it. My lawyer friends cracked jokes at my expense.
But I survived their jokes and I was able to do much better next time.
The same thing happened with my first trial at ironing shirts and
collars. I do not mention this incident to induce you to repeat your
experiment. You should get your hair cut by the barber who gets a
fixed salary no matter how many heads he treats.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

243. LETTER TO M. BAPI NEEDU
November 26, 1933
MY DEAR BAPI NEEDU,

Please tell all the workers that I expect great things from
Andhradesha, not merely fat donations but also many pure–hearted
and self–sacrificing servants of Harijans.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU

The Hindu, 6–12–1933

244. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
R AIPUR,

November 26, 1933
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I got your letter.
Lakshmidas seems to have written what he did on the basis of
what Anandi might have told him. I hope you remember that she had
even come to know the name. But we needn’t worry about this.
Lakshmidas is not likely to misunderstand anything. I am sure that
you didn’t divulge the name.
I have written to Dwarakanath about the honey. I have asked

228

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

him to send a bottle with somebody to whichever place it may be
convenient to do so.
Jawaharlal writes and informs me that the Working Committee
will be meeting in Jabalpur on the 5th. He seems to be expecting that
you will attend. Do you feel inclined to come ? If you don’t wish to, I
will not mind. Come if you feel like it. This will mean that you will
have to leave that place on the 3rd or the 4th instead of on the 7th. I
certainly don’t like that you should sacrifice so many days from your
stay there.
Mathuradas is coming here tomorrow. I don’t know what brings
him here.
I observe that Om has a sharp intelligence. And she has simple
habits, too. She has fine health. She seems to be enjoying everything.
I also give her some writing work. She sleeps near me. Her capacity to
sleep is quite good ! She has won everybody’s love.
Has Janakimaiya recovered some peace of mind ? Is Kamla
progressing satisfactorily ? Can she walk ? How do Madalasa 1 and
Vatsala2 spend their time ? I send with this an improtant letter received
from Manilal. Keep it in a file. It contains some comments about the
Cow–protection Society and a list of the jewellery.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 2927

245. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
November 26, 1933
CHI. RAMA,

You may write to me. How do you feel there now, both
physically and mentally ? Is there any difficulty about the arm now ?
How is Vimu? 2 Does Dhiru write to you ? I hope you got Nanabhai’s
letter. There is no cause for anxiety.
What is Nirmala Joshi’s3 address ?
1
2
2
3

Addressee’s daughter, wife of Shriman Narayan
Vatsala Dastane
Addressee’s daughter, Vimala
Wife of Kevalram Bhimji Joshi

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

229

Did you get a letter from Chhaganlal? I am eager to know whether he
got my long letter. Ask Vimu to write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 5358

246. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
November 26, 1933
CHI. PREMA,

I got news about you from time to time from Sushila, and also
from some others. I am glad that you got my letter. Whether you
gained or lost, you will be able to judge only after you are released.
There is no doubt that the experience is invaluable.
I understood your time–table. I am very happy that you have
been able to preserve your health. The key was in your own hands
and I see that you have used it well.
What can I write about Harijan work ? It is going on. I have
been experiencing people’s boundless love. My body also has been
giving excellent service. The weight had risen to 110 lb. This is no
ordinary improvement. Chandrashankar is trying hard to fill Mahadev’s place. Mirabehn also is here. And there is Ramnath, whom you
do not know. Besides, there is Janakibehn’s Om. She is a brave girl
and also has a fine intelligence. God has kept her in excellent health,
too.
I don’t have time to write more now. I have to write many other
letters. It is only during the silence period that I can write most of my
letters.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 10352. Also C.W. 6791. Courtesy :
Premabehn Kantak

230

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

247. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
November 26, 1933
CHI. KAKA,

I never get time to write a sufficiently long letter to you.
I was shocked to read. . .’s1 letter. Is he really mad ? I hesitate to
believe that the lady yielded to force, though it is possible that she was
unwilling. Even if, however, it was a case of rape, she ought not to
resort to abortion. She should rear the child with love. However, she
must live away from her husband.
*

*

*

2

What happened about your teeth !
Do you still suffer from backache ?
I received the three books on astronomy.
I suppose Chandrashankar writes to you and gives you other
news.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C.W. 9475. Courtesy : D.B. Kalelkar

248 LETTER TO VIDYA R. PATEL
November 26, 1933
CHI. VIDYA,

How are you now ? Are your monthly periods normal ? Do you
pass normal stools ? Do you get any discharges in urine ? Do you
hear from Raojibhai ? What is your diet ?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 9635. Courtesy : Ravindra R. Patel

1
2

The name has been omitted.
A paragraph has been omitted.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

231

249. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
November 26, 1933
CHI. KANTA,

Are you getting well? Are you satisfied? What news about
Sumangal? Ask Prabha to write to me. Tell my walking sticks, Yashodhara, Lambus, Jekore1 , Meera, etc., that they should not expect separate letters from me, but that they will get replies from me if they write
to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

250. LETTER TO JANAKDHARI PRASAD
AS AT WARDHA,

November 26, 1933
DEAR JANAKDHARI BABU,

I have your letter. I wish that I could have a heart-to-heart chat
with you. I shall try to write to you at length in spite of the pressure
under which I am working. But I know that the letter will never yield
the result that a brief conversation can.
From your letter, I had gathered that you were not fit to seek
imprisonment, and knowing your domestic difficulties as I now do, I
feel that until those difficulties are satisfactorily solved you ought not
to think of imprisonment.
By labour I mean any kind of physical labour that you may be
able to perform. Such labour for you is tailoring, shoemaking and
any other healthy labour that you can think of. Whilst you will not
immediately earn much, it will mean a mighty revolution in your life.
Your children will then be brought up as labourers.2 As such they will
not have to struggle so much to live, as you do just now. And when
your attitude is changed, you will set for yourself and the whole
family the labourer’s standard of life. Your wife, if she accepts the
revolutionary change, will also be doing her share of labour.
1
2

232

Jayakunvar Doctor
Vide also “Letter to Janakdhari Prasad”, 15-10-1933

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You will be interested to know that my sister1 , because she will not live
in the Ashram, owing to non-observance of untouchability, earns
about Rs. 15 per month by grinding. Giri, who with her three
daughters and two sons was in the Ashram for seven years and whom I
declined to support on the breaking up to the Ashram, but whom I
advised to take to some labour is now earning from the labour of her
two daughters nearly Rs. 30 per month by preparing sweetmeats and
fritters for a hotel-keeper. And her son isearning about the same as a
carpenter. Dal Bahadur Giri was not a labourer. He was living an
almost aristocratic life. I believe that the widow and her daughters are
happy. They have not cut off all connections with me. Two daughters
are grown-up girls, marriageable, but have no present intention of
marrying. They can read and write but they have learned the dignity
of labour, and therefore are not a burden on society. Now I hope you
understand what I mean by physical labour.
Now for the education of your children. If you accept the
revolution that I have suggested, naturally the children will be brought
up by you. You will give them not merely a literary training but you
will give them also a training for labour with their hands. Immediately
you begin this life you will find it to be a pleasure and all your
difficulties will automatically be solved, and you will be rendering a
distinct service to society by setting a wise example. I do want you to
get out of the mood of despondency and helplessness. Do write again
if this does not explain all I mean.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Kuchh Apani Kuchh Deshki, p. 190

251. LETTER TO VIDYA A. HINGORANI
November 26, 1933
CHI. VIDYA,

I got your letter. Anand has escaped with a light sentence. Send
him my blessings. Have you received any letter from your father–in–
law? If you give up your inhibition, you will need no servant. God has
endowed you with money but what should a poor mother do ? Try to
stand on your own two feet, albeit gradually. Mahadev is growing in
1

Raliatbehn

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

233

age. He will not need much help for long. Dwarakanathji writes that
some arrangement has been made now. Don’t you churn butter ? Do
render some kind of public service and consider everyone around you
as your own. You must not worry at all; write to me at once if there is
anything amiss.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy : National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

252. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
November 26, 1933
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

Your letter. I sent a wire to Dr. Ansari immediately on getting it.
He must have seen you. What a pity that no one can be found in your
house or outside to recite the Gita. Tulsidasji has offered us a Gita in
the form of Ramanama to cope with such a situation. We do not have
to commit Ramanama to our memory—it is done no sooner than it is
uttered—what we are required to do is to commit it to our hearts.
Regard Ramanama as the true medicine for you. If God spares your
life, you should teach the small children of your family to recite from
the Gita.
What more shall I say ? You are with us every moment. You
have to course acquitted yourself well in the role of a worthy son. But
how shall I become a worthy father?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 2402

253. SPEECH AT RAJKUMAR COLLEGE, RAIPUR 1
November 27, 1933
When I received your invitation I felt at once that, if the
Reception Committee here could make the necessary time, I would
love to address this audience of students who, when they have finished
1

234

Published in Harijan under the title “Princes and Untouchability”

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

their education, will be called upon to bear a great responsibility and
burden. And it was a matter of great pleasure to me that the Reception
Committee was able to set apart one hour for this function. I thank
you, Sir, for having extended this invitation to me, thereby enabling
me to deliver my message to the youths who are at present under your
kind care. You were thoughtful enough to send a message to my host,
Shuklaji1 that, whilst I could address this audience in Hindustani if I so
chose, you would appreciate it if I addressed them in English; and you
were good enough, when I exchanged a letter with you, to tell me that
many of the boys under your care did not know Hindustani. I at once
decided to address you, in spite of my ordinary practice to the
contrary, in English. Your Principal inadvertently supplied me also
with a text for my message. I would like you, sons of Chiefs in these
territories, to remember that you would be expected not merely to
confine yourselves, in these days of progressive enlightenment and
rapid inter–communication, to your comparatively very small
territories, but you would be expected to extend your horizon; and if
you will do so, as I have no doubt you will be obliged to do by force
of circumstances, it will be necessary for you not merely to know the
languages of the province in which your lot is cast, but you will be
expected to know also the language that is most universally used in
this country. And you may not know, all of you, I am sure, do not
know, that over 22 crores of the people of this country know
sufficient Hindi or Hindustani to be able to understand what is spoken
to them and to express themselves, however broken their language
may be. No Indian having to shoulder the responsibility that you will
have to shoulder can possibly afford to ignore such a universal
language. There is a method in my mad love of Hindi. I am a lover of
the English language, and I would like to speak in the English
language as well as is possible for a foreigner to do and compete with
Englishmen. I know that I am far away from that consummation.
Whatever English I know is due to my having lived for years among
Englishmen and English–speaking men. I count hundreds of Englishmen and women as close friends. So you will not misunderstand me
when I tell you that it is your duty to understand Hindustani and I will
beg the Principal and his staff to realize the special condition of this
1
Delivered at the B. N. Railway Labourers’ Federation. This appeared in
Harijan in two parts under the titles “A Great Equalizer” and “On Behalf of
Humanity”.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

235

country and to feel with me that it is desirable for the Chiefs of India
to understand Hindustani, through which alone they can know the
India of the people.
This brings me to the central point of my message. We have
been in the midst of Englishmen in various walks of life. I have had
the painful duty very often of criticizing the policy of the rulers. I
have not minced words. I have spoken straight from my heart, but as I
have told you, I claim the closest friendship with hundreds of Englishmen. I cannot forget some of their priceless virtues. I propose to
single out one of them for you. In England there is a living family tie
between its noblemen and their domestic servants. It was a matter of
joy to me on visiting them in their homes to find that there was a
subtle bond of affection between them and their servants. There was
no untouchability there. What I have told you is literally true of
hundreds of the noblemen of England. Wherever I went, it was an
unexpected pleasure to me at the end of the visit ot be introduced to
the domestic staff not as inferior beings but as members of the family.
I wish that you would copy this virtue in your own lives. There is
unfortunately among us a feeling that Chiefs are Chiefs and they can
never make common cause with the ordinary people and so you find
the tragedy—however necessary it may be today—that special schools
and colleges have got to be built for you. You dare not, you will
not,go to common schools and colleges.You may not know that King
Edward and the present King, I am speaking subject to correction,
worked in the Navy as if they were ordinary sailors and that both
father and son shared the hardships of a sailor’s life. Will you do that
? You are confined as it were to hot houses and are taught to believe
that you have been gifted with special divinity by God. Believe me
there is absolutely no difference whatsoever between you and the
common folk except this that you have opportunities that are denied
to them. But if you do not make use of the opportunities God has
given you, it will be counted against you in God’s book of accounts.
Know that the essence of education lies in drawing out the very best
that is in you. You and I can take the positive comfort that is in you.
You and I can take the positive comfort that all of us have an equal
potential capacity for being good or bad. I, therefore, feel that all
your education will be vain, if you do not learn the art of feeling one
with the poorest in the land.
This brings me in the natural course to untouchability. In no
other part of the world has a patent evil like untouchability been
claimed to possess religious sanction as it has in Hindu India. But, if
you have agreed with me so far, you are bound to regard the Harijan

236

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

as an integral part of common humanity. You have to realize your
oneness even with him. It may be that your parents will dispute the
proposition that untouchability is an unmixed evil. You will then have
to show the courage of your conviction even as young Prahlad did.
The idea of hereditary superiority and inferiority is, in my opinion,
repugnant to the spirit of Hinduism which teaches oneness of all life
in unequivocal terms. The religions of mankind are being examined
and tested both analytically and synthetically. And I have no doubt
that, if Hindus cling to untouchability, Hinduism and Hindus will be
swept out of existence. I cling to Hinduism because it gives me all the
solace I need and because I have found in it no warrant for
untouchability as we know it today.
If I have invited you to copy the virtues of Englishmen, I
must with deference to English friends present here warn you
against their vices. That immortal poet–saint Tulsidas has left
us a verse1 full of deep truth. He says that we should live even
as the fabled swan does, sift virtue from vice and take the former,
leaving the latter alone. I would have you, therefore, to leave
alone their two national vices, drink and races. Many Englishmen deplore them. I have seen many an English home being ruined by the
craving for liquor and gambling at the races. And so have many princes been ruined by them. I hope that you will learn to shun these two
evils.
Harijan, 8–12–1933

254. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
November 27, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

Here is Gasavi’s letter. I am telling him, I see no objection to the
Party so long as it is not claimed as the Congress Party and that in any
case he should seek your advice.
I note that we are to meet at Jubbulpore on 5th December. I
shall try to give more time, if it is at all possible.
Have I not sent you the programme for C.P.? More than that
was not ready till now.
So you are being gradually disburdened of shares and the like. I
1

For the verse from the Ramacharitmanasa,

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

237

am not sorry. From my point of view the ideal thing would be a
voluntary surrender of all the property you have, either to an
institution or to those members of the family who do not want to
throw themselves into the battle which is bound to be prolonged and
perhaps increasingly bitter. In the final heat only those will be able to
stand who have no property and nowhere to rest their heads on. But it
is no use worrying over the future. Whatever happens you will be
found in the front rank.
I am glad that Mother is making steady progress. I wonder if
she knows all that is happening.
Yes, I did read your attack on the Hindu Sabha. It might have
been less fierce. The summary made you speak like a partisan.
Love.
BAPU

[P.S.]
You will find the dates in the enclosed programme.
Gandhi–Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

255. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
November 27, 1933
Did I tell you Jamnalalji’s Om was one of the party? She is a
gem—healthy, open, brave, willing and exceedingly intelligent. She is
only 15 but looks twenty. All the member of the party are happy but
she seems to be the happiest. Of Thakkar Bapa it is difficult to speak
in exaggerated language. He is the spirit of service personified. Most
methodical in his work, never allowing arrears, most considerate, yet
the most exacting. He knows no rest. He reads up correspondence in
the car. He has no time for chatter. He could not have made a better
secretary I have prized him always as a rare man but I have come ever
so much closer to him than before.
But I must stop now, hoping that you are keeping well.
Love.
1

BAPU
From a copy: C. W. 10756. Courtesy: Rajmohan Gandhi

1

238

Uma, youngest daughter of Jamnalal Bajaj

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

256. LETTER TO DUNICHAND
November 27, 1933
DEAR LALA DUNICHAND,

Please excuse the delay in replying. When I tour in your district,
I do not know any other house that would harbour me and then you
would be your own committee and therefore you will decide my fate
for your district.
Let me save a few pice by making this serve for both—you and
Mrs. Dunichand. She will be free to travel with me. Let her know that
we already make a big party and descend like locusts upon every
home we go to.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
LALA DUNICHAND
KRIPA NIWAS
AMBALA C ITY
(PUNJAB)
From a photostat : G.N. 5584

257. LETTER TO DUDHIBEHN V. DESAI
November 28, 1933
CHI. DUDHIBEHN,

I got your letter; I was waiting for it. How is your health ? I see
that other Ashram girls also are there. Who are they ? Look after all of
them.
Do you read or write anything ?
The Wardha address is given on the back.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C. W. 3188. Courtesy : Valji G. Desai

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

239

258. LETTER TO MAHENDRA AND SUDARSHAN DESAI
November 29, 1933
CHI. MANU AND MAVO,

I got the letters of you both. I am still not satisfied with your
handwriting. You should try to improve it. Write to me from time to
time. I often feel during the tour how fine it would have been if I were
going with you. I always enjoy moving around with children, especially on foot as during the Dandi March.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 3161. Courtesy : Valji G. Desai

259. LETTER TO GORDHANDAS PATEL
WARDHA,

November 29, 1933
DEAR GORDHANBHAI,

It was your duty to write the letter you did; it certainly was
your right. Your pain is deep. A letter from me cannot erase it, but
time will. It must have been a surprise to you that I did not attend
Krishna’s wedding. Garlands I send to many girls. On the death of
persons who are Hindus I never send wreaths. I did not send wreaths
for Motilalji, or Das or Lalaji or Lokamanya and I have never sent
wreaths on any occasion of death in India. Nobody felt the need for
my presence either. Before I expressed my opinion as to how Vallabhabhi should proceed, he had himself decided along the same lines. I
had a letter from him to this effect. But I do not expect to convince
you by arguments. Only believe me that the episode you refer to has
absolutely no bearing on the way I acted. I have tried to follow to the
best of my ability what I considered to be my duty towards Vithalbhai.
I did not come to Wardha for two days for rest. I got two days
for silence every week which I naturally spent at Wardha, because the
tour that week was to cover the Wardha district and the adjoining
areas. But that is not a defence. If I had considered it my duty to go to

240

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Bombay, I would have somehow managed it. But I did not consider it
my duty and that incident had nothing to do with it.
Blessings from

M OHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Vithalbhai Patel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

260. LET EVERY CASTE HINDU REMEMBER 1
That the following resolution was unanimously passed on his
behalf by the meeting of his representatives held in Bombay on 15th
September, 1931, Pandit Malaviyaji being in the Chair :
This Conference resolves that henceforth, amongst Hindus, no one
shall be regarded as an untouchable by reason of his birth, and that those who
have been so regarded hitherto will have the same right as other Hindus in
regard to the use of public wells, public schools, roads and all other public
institutions. This right shall have statutory recognition at the first
opportunity and shall be one of the earliest Acts of the Swaraj Parliament, if it
shall not have received such recognition before that time.

It is further agreed that it shall be the duty of all Hindu leaders to
secure, by every legitimate and peaceful means, an early removal of all
social disabilities now imposed by custom upon the so–called
untouchable classes, including the bar in respect of admission to temples.

Harijan, 1–12–1933

261. NOTES
THE LATE LALA GANGARAM OF S IALKOT

It was only through the kind offices of a friend that I came to
learn of the recent death of Lala Gangaram. He died on the 4th
[November] of heart failure, at the age of 60. I had the privilege of
meeting him in Lahore at the late Rambhajdutt Chowdhury’s house in
1919 when he was introduced to me as a thorough–going Harijan
worker. His was a life of dedication to the Harijan cause. He was
instrumental in founding Harijan colonies. His death is a distinct loss
to the cause. I offer my condolences to the family of the deceased and
to the Harijans who were under his special care.
1

This was repeated in the Harijan issues of December 8, 22 and 29 Vide also
“Resolution at the Hidu Leaders Conference, Bombay”,25-9-1932
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

241

AVOID WASTE

Reception Committees have been encouraging the habit of
presenting flower garlands and bouquets by everyone who will do so.
Such presentations are a waste of time and money in a tour
undertaken on behalf of the lowliest. If garlands must be presented, let
them consist of undamaged strands of yarn which can be used for
weaving. There are Harijan weavers who are idle for want of hand–
spun yarn. These will not weave mill–spun yarn. The best thing is to
avoid all garlanding. And where reception without garlanding is
considered impossible, let the garlands be accompained by money.
The practice of accompanying garlands with money became a feature
after Wun and it has already added a few hundred rupees to the
amount of donations received. Let the public note what one pice
means in this country and in the hands of the hungry and despised. It
makes the dole that charity gives per head to the famishing in flood–
stricken Orissa. Let the doubters see the hovels in which the Harijans
are living. Let them visit the low–lying Harijan lane of Hinganghat,
where in the rainy season it is hardly possible to exist. They will then
understand the value of the pice that goes into the pocket of a Harijan.
I would like the public to save their pice and give them to me for the
sake of Harijans. It will be part payment of the heavy debt caste
Hindus owe to Harijans.
Harijan, 1–12–1933

262. SCHOOL BOOKS
There seems to me to be no doubt that in the public schools the
books used, especially for children, are for the most part useless when
they are not harmful. That many of them are cleverly written cannot
be denied. They might even be the best for the people and the
environment for which they are written. But they are not written for
Indian boys and girls, nor for the Indian environment. When they are
so written, they are generally undigested imitations hardly answering
the wants of the scholars. In this country, wants vary according to the
provinces and the classes of children. For instance, wants of Harijan
children are, in the beginning stages at least, different from those of
the others.
I have, therefore, come to the conclusion that books are required
more for the teachers than for the taught. And every teacher, if he is
242

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to do full justice to his pupils, will have to prepare the daily lesson
from the material available to him. This, too, he will have to suit to the
special requirements of his class.
Real education has to draw out the best from the boys and girls
to be educated. This can never be done by packing ill-assorted and
unwanted information into the heads of the pupils. It becomes a dead
weight crushing all originality in them and turning them into mere
automata. If we were not ourselves victims of the system, we would
long ago have realized the mischief wrought by the modern method
of giving mass education, especially in a case like India’s.
Attempts have undoubtedly been made by many institutions to
produce their own text–books with more or less success. But in my
opinion they do not answer the vital needs of the country.
I lay no claim to originality for the views I have endeavoured to
set forth here. They are repeated here for the benefit of the managers
and teachers of Harijan schools, who have a tremendous task before
them. They dare not be satisfied with mere mechanical work resulting
in simply making the children under their charge indifferently and in
a parrot–like manner learn the books chosen anyhow. They have
undertaken a great trust wich they must discharge courageously,
intelligently and honestly.
The task is difficult enough but not so difficult as one would
imagine, provided the teacher or the manager puts his whole heart into
the work. If he becomes a parent to his pupils, he will instinctively
know what they need and set about giving it to them. If he has it not
to give, he will proceed to qualify himself. And seeing that we have
started with the idea that the boys and girls have to have instruction in
accordance with their wants, no extraordinary cleverness or possession
of external knowledge is required in a teacher of Harijan and, for that
matter, any other children.
And when it is remembered that the primary aim of all
education is, or should be, the moulding of the character of pupils, a
teacher who has a character to keep need not lose heart.
Harijan, 1–12–1933

263. A ‘DOUBLE HELL’
A Harijan servant in Orissa gives me a graphic description of his
visit to some Harijan quarters in Balasore District, near Bhadrak :1
1

The letter is not reproduced here. The correspondent, describing the
waterlogged, stinking Harijan quarters and referring to the article “Another Plague
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

243

Is it any wonder that we have malaria, plague, and cholera
rampant in our midst ? It is impossible to avoid these diseases so long
as we neglect these useful members of society, consign them to the
dirtiest places and, because of the monster of untouchability, we would
not teach them to do their work in a proper and efficient manner. I
suggest to workers all over the country that they must concentrate
their effort upon the plague spots which they visit. Let us not be
baffled by the vastness of the problem. Things will right themselves if
everyone will attend to the work that comes his way. I would,
therefore, advise the workers of Bhadrak to go to the merchants, make
out a simple plan of improvement, present them with a budget, level
up the ground, put up plinths and rebuild the fifteen houses. It cannot
be a heavy budget and I doubt not that by sufficient importunity they
will be able to raise a fund to reduce that plan to execution. The
donors will find that the donations are a sound investment in a health–
promoting project. It would be like putting their courtyards in order.
Harijan, 1–11–1933

264. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
ITARSI,

December 1, 1933
BHAISHRI VALLABHBHAI,

I am writing this letter at 3.15 a.m. in a dharmashala at Itarsi.
Mirabehn has gone to wash her face. After that we will pray, and then
leave immediately to catch the train to Kareli, from where we have to
go to Anantpur. Jethalal1 is working there. Yesterday we were at Betul,
and from there we came here by train, held a meeting and slept in this
dharmashala.
I got your letter. How much can we do to counter what is being
done by The Times of India ? Still I go on doing what I can think of.
I get very few opportunities to read newspapers these days. I feel that
the Harijan work is being indeed watched by Hari. The power that
draws hundreds of thousands of people at every place [that we visit]
will also expose the lies. If we remain careful enough and make no
mistakes, we shall have done our duty.
Spot” (vide p. 18), had written : “I have no doubt that if you could see this quarter. .
.you would call it a ‘double hell’.”
1
Jethalal Govindji Sampat. Vide “What I Saw in Anantpur”, 15–12–1933

244

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I know very well that your spirit is following me in my tour.
How do you know it is not protecting me ? Didn’t I see every moment
in Yeravda that you feel a mother’s love for me ? The same love is
visible in every line of your letters. And it is all–embracing. That is
why you are carefully watching every day from there.
Please don’t worry about me, nor about what is happening in
the country. This is God’s work. “Who can repair what has gone
amiss, O Lord ?”
We are in the train now. I take it that you will do whatever may
be necessary regarding your nose.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-1 : Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 49–50

265. REMARKS ON DHARMASHALA, ITARSI
December 2, 1933
We were given shelter in this dharmashala for which we are
thankful to its managers. I was greatly pleased to learn that Harijans
who observe rules of cleanliness are also admitted.
M. K. GANDHI
From a facsimile of the Hindi : Madhya Pradesh aur Gandhiji, p. 117

266. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
December 1, 1933
CHI. AMALA,

I have your letter. I call it good because it is truthful. I knew
you were deceiving yourself and me. Will you now tell me what your
nature demands? If it demands simply being in my presence, it cannot
be satisfied. If it demands more teaching work and a life natural to
most Europeans, I shall try to help you with hope of success. You
should confer with Jamnalalji when he returns. Meanwhile do so with
Dwarakanathji. You ought to be steady and brave. To desire to die is
cowardice. There is nobody about you who has any wish to repress
you. You have built in front of you a mountain of difficulties. Make
your choice resolutely and act.
It is nearing 3.30 a.m. now. I get up always as usual, at 3 a.m.
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

245

Just after washing I read your letter and began this. You must be wise
and sure.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

267. LETTER TO SURENDRA MASHRUWALA
December 2, 1933
CHI. SURENDRA,

I have your letter.
Yes, for the present you may build up your health. You may go
after Jamnalalji returns from the hill-station. There is no doubt that
just now there is no other duty for us except that of serving the
Harijans and going to jail. Even in respect of these two I see that very
few would now remain who would choose the second course.
Hardships in jails are likely to increase now. Life in jails requires the
utmost degree of physical and psychological tapascharya. Only a
handful of us, therefore, would be ready for jail-going now. Those
who do not understand the religious meaning of suffering in jail have
no place in jail at all.
There is no escape from undertaking fasts unto death. Whether
it comes today or tomorrow is another question.
The above portion was written at three sittings. This is the fourth. It is
3.30 in the morning. I am with Jethalal in his Ashram at Anantpur.
The solitude of the hour is perfect. Mirabehn and Om are sleeping on
one side. There is no sound except of their breathing. Now to resume
the question of the fasts. They, too, will come by and by. They will
commence when we are fit for them. Today foolish people are freely
using this most effective weapon, but everywhere I hear stories about
their fasts. Fortunately, few people can remain hungry for a long time.
Hence the number of those who merely copy the example of others is
insignificant. But their cases demonstrate that when used without
one’s being qualified for it the weapon has no value at all. It is such a
wonder weapon that it can never do harm. When an unqualified
person resorts to it, it will harm his health a little that is all. Such
people cannot even prolong their fast to the point of death. My
purpose in writing all this you is that we have nothing to think or do
except cultivating fitness. We should not even wish that the fasts

246

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

should commence. We should be ready, that is all. While I am alive, no
one else need on his own resort to a fast for the service of the Harijansor in connection with satyagraha for any other object. Tell
Durbari1 that he can write whenever he wants. He need have no hesitation at all. If he throws himself into service heart and soul, many of
the difficulties will solve themselves.
How do you use your time these days? What is your diet? You
must drink milk and eat ghee as you need to build up your helth. Do
not count the cost. They will be easily available. Therefore accept
them. If we do not get them, we should not feel disappointed. But
when they are available, we should regard it our duty to accept them.
When you have cultivated indifference to taste, it is unnecessary to feel
hesitant in such matter. If you do not get either of the two things in
jail, are you not going to do without them? “He whose understanding
is secure, who is undeluded, who knows Brahman and who rests in
Brahman, will neither be glad to get what is pleasant, nor sad to get
what is unpleasant.” 2 The body has been rightly compared to
Chintamani. If we look upon it as an instrument [of service] given by
God, we are duty-bound to take proper care of the God-given instrument. Even in jail you should not hesitate to inform the authorities
about your physical condition. After thus taking the necessary steps
for the protection of the body, we may sing, ‘Let this body perish or
survive.’
It is now four o’clock and the others have got up. Preparations have started for the prayer and so I must stop.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C. W. 10735. Courtesy: Gomatibehn
Mashruwala

268. LETTER TO VIDYA A. HINGORANI
December 2, 1933
CHI. VIDYA,

I hope you are in good spirits. Do you go out for walks ? What
do you eat ? Give up the craze for examinations; but do not give up
the love for learning. Whatever time you can spare, devote it to im1
2

A Parsi prohibition worker of Surat District
Bhagavad Gita, V. 20; for Gandhiji’s translation,

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

247

proving your Hindi. Once you have mastered Hindi, turn to English.
You may devote some time to English even now; but Hindi should
have precedence. Did Dr. Choithram get my letter ? Have you any
information ?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi : Courtesy : National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

269. SPEECH AT SAGAR
December 2, 1933
It is a good omen to me and to my cause and service of Harijans
that such a big rush of people has come for me. I believe that they
really want to drive out this curse of untouchability from the Hindu
society. All are equal in the eyes of God and they have equal right to
use public wells, schools and temples. The present movement is
directed towards self–purification and one should not think oneself
high or low in one’s estimation.
The form in which untouchability is practised in India is to be
found in no other country and it does not find support in the code of
Manu. I am not an atheist. I have fifty years of experience and have
not observed such distinction.
Replying to a long letter received from sanatanists, he said he had not
practised adharma. If he did so he would be guilty in the eyes of God and man alike.

Even if I am left alone, I will preach this very thing.
Continuing, he advised the audience not to insult or injure the sanatanists but
to love them as a mother loves her child. He firmly believed that a day would soon
come when the sanatanists also would be with him.
Turning to the Harijans, he advised them to cultivate habits of cleanliness and
give up carrion–eating and to abstain from drink. He dwelt on the efficacy of prayer
and advised the Harijans to pray every morning in Hindi, because no knowledge of
Sanskrit was necessary for prayer. He recalled his own 50 years’ experience and
showed how God had relieved him in moments of difficulties. While going to the
temples they should go after a bath and in clean dress.

The Bombay Chronicle, 8–11–1933

248

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

270. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, JABALPUR
December 3, 1933
If this effort to abolish root and branch the distinctions of high
and low succeeds, it will have a healthy reaction on all spheres of life,
and the struggle between capital and labour will cease and give place
to co–operation and concord between the two.1 If we have understood
the full implications of this war against untouchability, we should have
no difficulty in realizing that untouchability based on birth is only
one of the countless phases of that curse. We should thus be better
serving the cause of freedom and communal unity that I have at
heart. My faith in the movement has grown from day to day. I
implicitly believe that, if we succeed in abolishing untouchability from
Hinduism, all the quarrels between classes and communities that we
see today in India will cease. The differences between Hindus and
Mussalmans and between capital and labour will be composed. Once
the hearts are purified, it will be found easy to overcome all
difficulties in the way of a heart unity. The phase we are at present
dealing with does not exhaust all the possibilities of the struggle. The
untouchability as practised today in Hinduism is the worst of all the
phases. Masquerading under the name of religion, it has contributed
most to the degradation of man by man. I have said that untouchability is a many–headed monster and appears in many shapes and
forms, some of them so subtle as not to be easily detected. There are
many degrees in untouchability. I was conscious of all these implications when I took up this war and made up my mind to devote
my full energy, in the evening of my life, to this work.
All true scouts have my blessings. 2 In my many wanderings
over many parts of the world, I have come in contact with thousands
of boy scouts. True scouts are brave, considerate, courteous, and
intelligent. They should have a full sense of their duty. They have
been working to preserve order at the numerous fairs in the country
where millions gather. I would also like them to give a part of their
time to the service of the Harijans. Anyone who sees Harijan quarters
with my eye will be convinced that there is ample scope for service for
all who have the will and the capacity to do it. It does not require
extraordinary intelligence. The only thing required is a sense of
identification with the Harijans.
1

In an address presented by the local labour union, it was asked why Gandhiji
did not work for ameliorating the condition of labourers and protecting them against
exploitation by capitalists.
2
The National Boy Scouts had presented an address to Gandhiji.
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

249

There is no end of difficulties in the way, but there is not a
single difficulty for which there is no remedy. The beauty of a
religious movement lies in the fact that all difficulties blocking its
progress are automatically solved. God himself clears the way. His is
the guiding hand, we are but His instruments. If we gird up our loins
to fight this age-old sin against God and man and observe fully the
conditions laid down by Shastras and followed by sages of old and
humbly seek Divine aid in our undertaking, we are sure to win the
grace of God. These conditions require a thorough observance of
truth and non-violence and the utmost sacrifices and sufferings. If we
have all that and, above all, charity and goodwill for our opponents,
the difficulties, howsoever great, will surely melt away.
Harijan, 15-12-1933

271. TELEGRAM TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
JABALPUR,
December 4, 1933

BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
KATRA KHUSHALRAI
CHANDNI CHOWK, DELHI
YOUR WIRE LETTER. AM CONSULTING ANSARI. GOD BLESS YOU. WIRING LATER.
LOVE.

BAPU
From a photostat : G.N. 2403

272. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
JABALPUR,

December 4, 1933
BHAISHRI VALLABHBHAI,

We arrived at Jabalpur last evening. It is 6.30 just now. I got
your letter yesterday in Katni. I saw the work being done at Anantpur.
It is all solid, but for that very reason it is also slow. Jethalal is an
extremely efficient worker.
Gordhanbhai is very much displeased with my conduct. I am of
course trying to explain things to him. His idea is to spend the money
in foreign countries. I have advised him against doing that. He has not

250

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

consulted me yet regarding the will. If he does, I will naturally
remember what you have said in your letter. The whole thing seems
strange, but I wouldn’t be surprised if what we hear were really true.
Whatever it is, the truth will come out in time. The big guns are
expected today. I see that all will meet tomorrow.1 We shall be put up
at different places. Aunt is coming. Ansari also may come.
Brijkrishna is on his death-bed. You know that during the fast
he had looked after me with the utmost devotion. I keep myself
informed about his condition. There is a wire from Dr. Ansari saying
that there is a possibility that he may survive the crisis.
I learnt only from your letter that Mahadev had been given a
companion 2 . Joshi is keeping very well. I heard about Ba only
yesterday after we had arrived here. I am glad.
The Harijan work is progressing satisfactorily. So far everything
may be said to have gone well.
Blessings to you both from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2 : Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 50-1

273. LETTER TO GODAVARI
December 4, 1933
3

CHI. GODAVARI ,

I am longing to see you ever since I arrived. Rajendra Singh 4
inquired in the morning and I sent a message [for you] to come at 8
o’clock, but you have every right to come whenever you wish.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi : C.W. 9670

1

An informal meeting of the Congress Working Committee was being held at
Jabalpur.
2
Girdhari, J. B. Kripalani’s brother’s son
3
Wife of Seth Govinddas, who had been accepted as daughter by Gandhiji in
1932.
4
Gandhiji’s host at Jabalpur.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

251

274. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
December 5, 1933
CHI. AMALA ,

This is being written before morning prayer time. I have your
further letter. You must not conceal things from me or act unnaturally
to please me. That would be a wrong way to go about it. You will
please me most by being quite natural. Your own room is quite
untidy. You are not taking care of your finger. It is high time you got
well. You should go to a hill, if you cannot be better there.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

275. LETTER TO N. S. HARDIKAR
J[UBBUL] PORE,

December 5, 1933
DEAR HARDIKAR,

What has overcome you has been the fate of many hospital
patients. You will soon get over the mental weakness. If the surrounding atmosphere causes mental weakness, you must find your strength
from within.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
DR. N. S. H ARDIKAR
C/ O MR. M. P AI
KRISHNANIVAS
LINKING R OAD
KHAR, B. B. C. I.
BOMBAY S UBURBAN
From the original: N.S. Hardikar Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library

252

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

276. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, MANDLA1
December 6, 1933
I have said that those who come to these gatherings as an
appreciation of my political services and not because they believe in
removal of untouchability deceive themselves and me. I invite only
sympathizers and opponents to these meetings, the latter if they wish
to signify their opposition. I want you to be true to yourselves and
reject me if you do not see eye to eye with me in this matter.
There are two sets of pundits who give opposite interpretations
of Shastras. The layman then has to make use of his Godgiven reason
and choose between the two. 2 Untouchability, I have found, appeals
neither to the intellect nor to the heart. The essential urge of the heart
is towards compassion and sympathy for the sinner. Temples are
meant for sinners, where they can wash away their sins. What is the use
of temples to a liberated sinless soul, who sees God everywhere ? If
you believe that Harijans are in their present plight today as a result of
their past sins, you must concede that they have the first right of
worship in temples. God has been described by all the scriptures of
the world as a Protector and Saviour of the sinner.
There is untouchability in the Shastras in a particular sense.
Anger, lust and other evil passions raging in the heart are the real
untouchables. It is a prostitution of Shastras to interpret them as
sanctioning the distinctions we observe today. A true man of piety will
consider himself a sinner and, therefore, untouchable. We in our
haughtiness have hitherto misinterpreted the Shastras and have raised
a sin to the status of a religious tenet. I claim to be a true sanatanist,
because I make the greatest effort I can to live up to the truth as I see
it. Diversity there certainly is in the world, but it means neither
inequality nor untouchability. An elephant and an ant are dissimilar.
Nevertheless God has said that they are equal in His eyes. The inner
1
Earlier, the meeting was addressed by a sanatanist Swami with Gandhiji’s
permission. The burden of his speech was that the large gatherings came to pay
homage to Gandhiji as a political leader and not because they accepted his views on
untouchability.
2
In the address presented there was a reference to the debate between Shankara,
the reformer, and Mandanmisra, the formalist, which took place in Mahishmati, the
ancient seat of learning, now Mandla.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

253

oneness pervades all life. The forms are many, but the informing
spirit, is one. How can there be room for distinctions of high and low
where there is this all-embracing fundamental unity underlying the
outward diversity? For that is a fact meeting you at every step in daily
life. The final goal of all religions is to realize this essential oneness.
Harijan, 15-12-1933

277. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
December 7, 1933
F OR S HRIMATI KASTURBA GANDHI
F ROM M. K. GANDHI BY KIND P ERMISSION OF
S UPERINTENDENT, Y ERAVDA GAOL
BA,

You must have got the letter sent with Ranchhodbhai. Take care
of your health. Do not worry about anything. You shouldn’t go on
thinking about things. Trust my life to God. Can there be any better
protector than He? There has been no change in my food. Wherever I
go, pendas1 are kept ready for me. Generally I accept them, but
sometimes I refuse. My personal needs are looked after by Mirabehn
and Om. Mirabehn has only one thought day and night. She doesn’t
attend any meeting, but spends all her time in keeping things ready
for me. She keeps well. I had got cold but I am better now. I am in
Jabalpur today. Gopi’s parents live here. I met them and her younger
sister. Govinddas’s house also is in this town. Brijkrishna is still
seriously ill. Ask somebody to write to him. Prabhavati writes to me.
Take proper care about your food. If you need anything, get it
through Ranchhodbhai or Chimanlal. How is your mouth and the
foot? Who are your companions? Write to me at the Wardha address. I
hope all the women are in good health. Tell Amtussalaam that I have
written a letter to her. Ask Mani to write to me. I hope she keeps good
health.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, pp. 1-2

1

254

A sweetmeat

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

278. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
December 7, 1933
CHI.. NARANDAS,

I have discussed with Harakhchand and Jivanlal the proposal for
Purushottam’s betrothal. They are eager to settle another connection
and have pressed me not to enter into negotiations with any other
party for the time being. Accordingly, I am doing nothing for the
present. I feel sure that Harakhchand will offer his daughter. I think
you also know this. I think about you every day. I hope all of you are
well. As for myself, I am being protected by God.
Blessings to you all from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8393. Courtesy :
Narandas Gandhi.

279. LETTER TO BHAILAL M. PATEL
December 7, 1933
BHAI BHAILAL,

I got your letter. I am happy to learn that you have been doing
Harijan work with single-minded devotion. May your devotion remain
the same for ever and your work bear fruit.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati G.N. 3300.

280. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
JABALPUR,

December 7, 1933
BHAISHRI VALLABHBHAI,

I had a very long letter from Gordhanbhai which of course I
didn’t preserve. He had pointed out in it all my shortcomings and
contrasted them with Vithalbhai’s virtues. I had returned a very loving
reply to that letter. I have received no acknowledgment. As for the

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

255

money 1 which is lying with me, he had sent me an oral message. I told
Mathuradas in reply that I would not let it be used in foreign
countries. You must have seen that he has now made a public appeal
to me. We shall know the whole truth by and by. I hope to be able to
manage the situation well enough. You needn’t worry.
I will write regularly to Ba. This time she was not very willing to
go to jail. But God will see that everything is all right. Thakkar Bapa
had shown me your letter. It was not his fault at all. He tries hard
indeed to save me from all inconvenience. He doesn’t let any
troublesome people come near me. He saves me from a great many
things, but sometimes he is helpless. I am sure we shall learn from
experience and things will keep improving. Don’t worry about this
either. “God’s will be done.”
Kishorelal is ill. He is a little better now. He is in Bombay. Write
to him.
Jivraj’s 2 health seems to have been affected very much. He is in
Hotel Rugby in Matheran.
Mathuradas was in the crowd.3 He is still with me. He will remain
with me up to Delhi. His health also seems to have been affected. He
suffers from backache. He cannot move freely. If he takes rest I think
he will regain strength. It may be said that, at the meeting, they talked
a little and then left. Maulana Saheb and the Doctor tried to persuade
me not to be uncompromising. On my explaining my conflict of
duties, they became silent. The matter was discussed in minute detail. I
felt that Nariman had no sense. I told them:“If somebody writes
‘Whither India ?’ and another writes ‘Whither Congress ?’, I hope it
wouldn’t seem too much if I write ‘Whither Nariman ?’.” Jawahar is
indeed a jawahar4 . About Jamnalalji I needn’t write anything. He has
put on weight. His health is all right, more or less. Chikhalda benefited
him very much. The condition of his ear is as bad as that of your
nose. One is without nose, and the other is deaf. To whom may I
complain about these difficulties ? Please let me know, however, if the
injections help you now. I like your idea of trying neti 5 But who will
1
The reference is to the sum accumulated with Gandhiji from the monthly
instalments of about half the salary that Vithalbhai used to draw as Speaker, Central
Legislative Assembly.
2
Dr. Jivraj Mehta
3
He had attended the meeting of the Congress Working Committee.
4
Literally, ‘jewel’.
5
A yogic practice of cleaning the nasal canal

256

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

teach you the method ? I claim to be an expert in it. Can I not be
called there as one ? If you don’t know the correct way there may be
a little bleeding. Generally a straw is used in the beginning. I would
advise you not to do so. Fine cloth will suffice. If you do it slowly,
there will be no difficulty. Krishanadas1 Mahadev and Devdas were
taught by me. Devdas used to bleed, but the reason for that was
different. He had, therefore, to give up the practice.
Janakibehn had accompanied Jamnalal. The two left last
evening.
I learnt only from you that Giridhari was placed with Mahadev.
Surendra and Dubari2 are at Wardha. Both of them are well. Madhavji3
has just been released. He has come here to see me. He will leave for
Karadi today. He is all right. Chandrashankar is doing full justice to
his work. Kaka and Swami have gone to Matheran for four or five
days.
I will reach Delhi on the 10th.
Blessings to both from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2 : Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 51-3

281. LETTER TO SURENDRA MASHRUWALA
December 7, 1933
CHI. SURENDRA,

I have your letter. We live but for a moment, and live with our
labour or at any rate ought to do so. Only so shall we become fully
alive.
Do not be obsessed with the idea of the fast. One must be ready
for it and cultivate fitness for it, that is all.
I see no harm in both of you entering the temple 4 from there.
We have no money and should not have any. For that reason it seems
right to me that you should go [to jail] from there. Jamnalalji would

1
2
3
4

Once Gandhiji’s secretary
A Parsi prohibition worker of Surat District
Madhavji V. Thakkar
Meaning jail

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

257

not leave you in peace.
Madhavji wishes to go to Karadi. I approve. He is not at Wardha.
He has to choose his field of work, and therefore can choose only
Karadi. Moreover, it seems but proper that one of you three should go
[to jail] from there. Since Madhavji has money, let him go from
Karadi.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C. W. 10734. Courtesy: Gomatibehn Mashruwala

282. LETTER TO DURBARI
December 7, 1933
DEAR DURBARI,

I got your letter. Personally I like the idea of wearing the sacred
thread and vest. From your point of view it certainly cannot have any
religious significance. But respecting harmless customs is also
religion. You should meet members of your family if you can do so
without letting it interfere in any way with your mission of service.
Serving any of them individually is now outside your field of duty.
However, it is not proper for me to confuse your thinking. Your
dharma lies in what Surendra advises. He alone will save you.
However, you will have to give up the desire of living even with him. It
is not at all likely that you will be together in jail. Of course it would
be good if that happened of its own.
I am glad that your health has improved.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C. W. 10736. Courtesy: Gomatibehn Mashruwala

283. LETTER TO VIDYA A. HINGORANI
December 7, 1933
CHI. VIDYA,

I got your letter. When I advised you to give up inhibition 1 I
meant that you should not hesitate to take what help you need from
other brothers and sisters. One can get such help through heart-felt
humility. If you can’t get it, then do engage a maidservant. The
1

258

Vide “Letter to Vidya A. Hingorani”, 26-11-1933

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

attempt should be gradually to do away with the practice of employing servants and do all work by ourselves; but this is possible only
when your health improves. Do not think that I am asking you to do
everything all at once. Do it as your strength permits.
Have you understood me now ? Do write to me all details.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi . Courtesy : National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani.

284. SPEECH AT LEONARD THEOLOGICAL COLLEGE
JABALPUR,

December 7, 1933
I, who believe in the equality of the great religions of the world
and from my early days have learnt to honour other re- ligions as my
own, have no difficulty in inviting and taking the co-operation to the
followers of other religions in this movement. It is part of my nature.
This is essentially a matter of repentance on the part of the so-called
higher classes. They have to do re- paration for the wrongs they have
hitherto done to a portion of themselves on whose backs they have
hitherto ridden. It is an effort on the part of Hindu reformers to blot
out this shame from the face of Hinduism. I have not hesitated to say
that either untouchability lives and Hinduism perishes, or untouchability goes and Hinduism rises purified. It is a life-and-death
struggle bet- ween the darkness of superstition and the light of
reform. If this reform in Hinduism comes about, I have not the
shadow of a doubt that it will be a service not only of all the
communities of India but of the whole of humanity. I am not thinking
of achieving this reform by any form of compulsion, including legal.
It is said that, in trying to seek support for the two Bills now before the
Assembly, I am really supporting a policy of legal compulsion. I do
not want to repeat here the whole argument against that contention;
but I want to assure you that there is no compulsion in the Bills; and
those who care to study them will endorse my opinion. This must be a
reform from within. It is not a political movement. I do not want to
deny that it will have great political results, but I have never for a
moment thought of achieving through this movement the political rise
of the so-called upper class Hindus. It is to my mind a movement of
downright purification.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

259

Having made these introductory remarks, it is easy for me to tell
you on what terms you can give your assistance to the movement. You
should work in co-operation with and, if I may say it, in subordination
to the Society that has been formed for suppression and eradication of
untouchability, namely, the Servants of Untouchables Society. That is
to say, you should put your talents at the disposal of the Society. I do
not mean metallic talents. These have to come from those who have to
make repentance and reparation. I have seen during the few days of
my tour that millions are ready for the reform. They can tangibly
signify their support only by giving their coppers. But men and
women of intelligence are wanted to work for the Harijans in a variety
of ways. For the so-called caste Hindus to serve the Harijans in a
constructive manner is to get off their backs, to go down on their
knees to them, to treat Harijan children as their own and Harijan men
and women as blood-brothers and sisters. It is almost a superhuman
task and cannot be done without Divine aid. But Divine aid comes
largely through human agency. I confess that we have too few
teachers and other professional men and women in our ranks. We
want to cope with the ever increasing demand. I invite the aid of
agencies like yours in this work. You will now understand what I mean
by subordination. This is the right way.
But there is also the wrong way. You may choose to work
independently. You may have the conversion of Harijans to
Christianity. You may see in the movement a chance for propaganda.
If you work among the Harijans with such an aim, you can see that the
very end we have in view will be frustrated. If you believe that
Hinduism is a gift, not of God but of Satan, quite clearly you cannot
accept my terms. You and I would be dishonest if we did not make
clear to one another what we stand for.
Harijan, 15-12-1933

285. A LETTER
[Before December 8, 1933] 1
A public servant has no personal feelings to be considered. He
mu-st be a cypher. He can have no pride nor power nor prestige
except such as service gives him. He must [be]
—2 . Therefore, you may not be ruffled on my behalf or
1

This was published in a report date-lined “Harda, 8-12-1933”.
One “who is evenminded in praise and blame”, who “holds alike respect and
disrespect”. Bhagavad Gita, “Discourses on the “Gita”
2

260

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

on behalf of the cause. The cause is not in your or my hands. It is in
God’s all-powerful hands. You and I are His instruments. You must
rejoice in your humiliation and feel strong.
Harijan, 15-12-1933

286. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
December 8, 1933
CHI.. MARY.

We pass through Betul on 15th. I am quite sure that if I carried
on a propaganda for selling puff powder you will find me deserted
and pieless.
You are right about sword practice.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat : G.N. 6016. Also C.W. 3342. Courtesy : F. Mary Barr

287. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
December 7/9, 19331
CHI. AMALA,

Your letter. My blood-pressure fluctuates between 155 and 168.
Are you any the wiser for the information ? Why should you bother
about things you cannot understand! Ask me how I am and you will
get the answer. Let technical matters be left to the doctors. I have told
you that I am not going to drive you from the Ashram. If the life suits
you and you can confrom to the discipline, stay there by all means.
You must cook your own simple vegetable if the general thing
contains condiments. Or you may ask Dwarakanathji to have plain
boiled vegetable for you.
Ba is quite all right.
I hope you are eating fruit.
So you are teaching Sumitra English!
Love.
BAPU

1

The letter was written on December 7 and the postscript on December 9.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

261

[PS.]
You ought to come to the station on 15th. The finger should be
all right.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

288. LETTER TO KISAN GHUMATKAR
December 9, 1933
MY DEAR KISAN,

I had your letter today in the train. Unless you have already left,
I suggest your joining the Madras Mail at Wardha on 15th instant. I
take the Grand Trunk Mail at Delhi on 14th inst. I am glad you are
strong both in body and mind.
Love.
BAPU
S HRIMATI KISANBEHN
GANESH TERRACE
GIRGAUM BACK R D.
BOMBAY
C.W. 9689

289. LETTER TO RUKMINIDEVI BAZAJ
December 9, 1933
CHI. RUKMINI,

I got your postcard. During a tour how can one get time to write
letters ? Even today I have got only a few minutes and am using them
to write this. It is God’s kindness that Devendra is growing so well. I
hear occasionally from Radha. I have just heard that Santok’s mother
passed away.
I hope you get the Harijan.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 9155

262

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

290 LETTER TO NANABHAI I. MASHRUWALA
December 9, 1933
BHAI NANABHAI,

I got your letter. I have sent a wire to Vrajlalji. I hope Shanti is
recovering. One wishes that the children were as careful about their
health as they are about their studies. I had a letter from Gomati
regarding Kishorelal. He in not likely to become completely healthy
now. I also had a letter form Manilal and Sushila. I have written a long
letter to them.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 6690. Also C.W. 4335. Courtesy :
Kanubhai Mashruwala

291. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
December 9, 1933
CHI. MANU,

It seems you have completely forgotten me. You don’t even
reply to me. Shouldn’t you write at least about Kusum’s health ? How
is she ? I had a letter from Ba from jail. She is worrying about you
and Kusum. Write to her. How are you? How is aunt Bali ? I am
writing this in a running train.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Write to me at the Wardha address.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 2663. Courtesy : Manubehn S.
Mashruwala.

292. SPEECH AT JAMIA MILLIA, DELHI
December 10, 1933
I have learnt enough Urdu while I was in jail and if I happen to
go there again I shall come out as an Urdu scholar.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

263

Islam enjoins upon us tolerance towards others’ religions. It
doesn’t say that other religions are false. He alone who does good to
others is a true man. This is the principle of the Koran as also the
teaching of other religions. The students of the Jamia, I hope, will
spread the message of unity and freedom throughout the country.
I do not propose to attend the Hindu-Muslim unity conference.
I want unity of hearts among the followers of the two faiths so that
Mother India may attain freedom.
[From Hindi]
Gandhijiki Dilli Diary, Vol. I, p. 357.

293. SPEECH AT LABOURERS’ MEETING1
DELHI,
December 10, 1933
[Gandhiji] congratulated the organizers of his programme on the happy
beginning made with a visit to Harijan quarters and followed by the labourers
meeting.
Thanking them for the purse, the Mahatma said he knew that half the amount
in the purse was contributed by the employer (Mr. G. D. Birla) and half by the
labourers from the Labour Welfare Fund. To present such a big sum was the work of
rich persons and not of labourers, and besides this, most of them were Harijans and it
did not behove him to take money from them to remove the curse of untouchability. It
was the duty of high-caste Hindus like Mr. Birla to contribute money to wipe out
untouchability,and he hesitated to accept money from Harijans, but all the same he
accepted it, since they voulnteered it, but, added the Mahatma, he would have preferred
it if the Harijans had given up liquor or smoking and contributed those savings for
Harijan work. The money thus contributed would have been more helpful in the noble
mission. He recalled, in this connection, the contribution raised by Bhopal students
yesterday by raising a pie-fund.
Continuing, the Mahatma said the Hindus, in patronizing the Harijan
movement, were really doing a penance (prayashchitta) for their age-long sins, and
this penance must be sincere. If they failed to do it, God alone knew what their fate
would be.
1

About 5,000 labourers and others attended the meeting held in the Birla
Mills. A purse of Rs. 2,000 and an address on a banana leaf were presented to
Gandhiji. He remarked : “The idea of presenting the address on a banana leaf is very
good, but you should have given me some fruit to eat.” Soon after a basket of fruit was
brought.

264

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Referring to the Harijan reform work done in the Birla Mills, Mahatmaji said :

It is no news to me that you have wiped out untouchability in
the Birla Mills. Ghanshyamdasji has merely paid the debt that he owed
as a high-caste Hindu to the Harijans and as a millowner to labourers.
It was the religious duty of every Hindu, be he a mill-owner or poor man, to
root out untouchability from this land. In doing so, they were merely doing their duty
and did not deserve any thanks.
Continuing, the Mahatma sounded a note of warning in the following words :

Wipe out untouchability or Hinduism will be wiped out from the
world.
Referring to some sanatanists, who did not agree with him in this reform
movement, Mahatmaji said :

I have tried my best to persuade sanatanists to my view and have
given my best attention to their arguments, but they have failed to
convince me by a single proof from the Shastras giving sanction to
untouchability.
Continuing, the Mahatma appealed to the labourers to give up liquor, smoking
and other evil practices and lead a pure life internally as well as externally. He laid
stress on God’s worship and added that faith in God alone could put an end to their
sorrows. He concluded with a prayer for the welfare of labourers, saying that he also
regarded himself as a labourer by choice. It was better to be a labourer than to be an
employer. (Cheers)
The Mahatma humorously remarked :

I feel very much tempted to finish the fruit, but give it to Harijan
children and they will reach me.
The Hindustan Times, 11-12-1933

294. DISCUSSION WITH HARIJANS
DELHI,
December 10, 1933
Q. Do you consider temple-entry as the only way to solve our troubles ?

A. It is my firm belief that caste Hindus will not have fulfilled
their obligations till they have opened all their temples to Harijans. It
is immaterial to me whether Harijans come to worship in those temples
or not. It is a matter of sheer justice and penance for caste Hindus. It
is repugnant to my sense of justice that Harijans should be excluded

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

265

from places of worship which are open to other Hindus. I would not
consider untouchability as having been eradicated, unless and until the
bar against Harijans’ entry into temples is removed altogether.
Q. Will you not help us in our economic distress ? To us economic uplift is the
chief thing.

A. The economic uplift has not been overlooked. But I should

not be satisfied if you were given crores of rupees and yet were still
considered untouchables, or if palaces were built for you and you
were still kept out of the pale of Hindu society. I should be satisfied
only when you are put on a par with caste Hindus in every respect.
Thus economic uplift is only one of the many items in our programme.
Q. We should not conceal from you our misgivings about the money collected
by you being properly used for our welfare. It depends upon your getting honest
workers to work out the scheme, of whom there are very few at present. Would you not
then put the funds into our hands to be used according to our discretion ? We must tell
you frankly we do not trust the present workers.

A. I do not mean to say that no Harijans can take part in the
disbursement of the funds. But as the whole reform is conceived as a
matter of penance and reparation on the part of caste Hindus, they
have to find the best way of using them. They must be guided by the
advice of Harijans, but the actual administration of the funds has to
rest with them. I may assure you that the least part of these funds will
be spent for propaganda. By far the greater part will go directly into
the pockets of Harijans. I have no reason to believe that all those who
are doing Harijan service today are actuated by selfish motives. There
must be a few cases where workers are not as you and I would have
them to be, but the majority have taken up this work in the proper
spirit. Many of them are of unimpeachable character and would do
credit to any movement. Apart from all this, however, I want you to
visualize the conditions of thousands of Harijans who are so
suppressed that they have fallen below the average standard of humanity. They are voiceless. They consider themselves sub-human. In
Orissa, some years back,1 an old man came to me with a straw in his
mouth. I tried to awaken in him the sense that he was my equal as a
human being. Another Harijan came to me in Cochin all trembling
1

266

In December 1927; vide ,”Our Shame and their Shame

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

with fear. He was considered invisible in those parts and was afraid of
coming into the world of touchables. These people are a standing
reproach to us. In the work I am doing, I have these in mind. This
service, then, has been taken up, not so much to please Harijans as to
discharge a peremptory obligation. We want to wipe out our shame
and to die in that effort if need be. We are striving to the best of our
ability to render you selfless service, but if Harijans do not accept it, I
shall know that we are too late. But the month’s experience convinces
me that the vast majority gladly accept this service. We do not wish to
leave a single phase of your life untouched. We approach you as
servants and not as patrons.
Q. You have only added a new name ‘Harijan’ to the many names we already
had. Even this new name is significant of our separateness from the others. Unless
this sense of separateness goes, in fact as well as in name, how are we to be satisfied ?

A. The name ‘Harijan’ was suggested by one of your own class.
Thousands have welcomed the name as a good substitute for the
offensive names ‘untouchable’ and ‘avarna’. So long as untouchability is not completely removed, a name to distinguish you from
others will be required, and an inoffensive name is any day better than
one that stinks in the nostrils. When untouchability is gone and
Harijans are merged into the Hindus, I do not know by what name—
Harijan or Hindu—the whole community will choose to call itself, but
till that day comes, distinguishing names will have to be used. You
should know that I have become a Harijan by choice and am trying to
serve you as one of yourselves; and I am sure that the sevice will, in
the end, be accepted by all Harijans, if I have offered it in a selfless
spirit. I would plead with you for a little more patience to see what is
being done. The Harijan Sevak Sangh has no other end in view but
your good.

Harijan, 22-12-1933

295. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
DELHI,

December 10, 1933
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,

I got the letters of you both. Which remarks of mine hurt so
much ? I don’t remember what I said to Kishorelal, but I have never

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

267

thought you timid or cowardly. On the contrary, I have always been
proud of your courage.But I do think that you are too dependent on
others, that you do not have sufficient capacity to think for yourself.
But that is not your fault. Partly it may be mine. You have nothing to
feel ashamed about. I wrote a long letter to you by the last mail, from
which you will be able to know clearly my views in this regard. Even
your seeking my advice from here is a sign of your feeling of
dependence.
If you make a mistake, I will not blame you even in my
thoughts. I would do that if you betrayed the trust reposed in you. I
do wish that you should keep the promises which you may have made
to the people or to friends. I am not at all afraid of your present
course. At the most the result would be your financial ruin. Let it be
so. But don’t let people think that you acted foolishly. If you feel that
you have made a mistake, admit it and free yourself. It is not as easy
for me to give advice in this matter as you seem to think. If it were so,
why wouldn’t I advise you immediately ?
And now regarding your expenses. My remarks were not meant
as criticism nor did they express my pain. I only wished to say that,
having lived there in a certain manner, you could not easily change
your mode of life here. I don’t wish that you should try our manner
of life here at the cost of the health of all three of you. You yourself
have calculated your monthly requirement at Rs. 150. I have put it at
Rs. 200. But now even Rs. 150 can be obtained only as a favour. I
would rather that you lived on plain fare than that you should depend
on anybody’s favour. In short I am not satisfied with your way of life.
I know that Sushila is much more careful than you in this matter.
After reading your letters, I even felt like sending a cable to you
asking you not to worry. But with whose money would that have been
? How can a poor father send a cable to reassure his son? I, therefore,
content myself with this letter. Have no fear of me, either of you. Live
as both of you may think proper. Even if you cannot continue to live
there despite your sincere efforts and come over here, God will
provide you means of livelihood. Do whatever you do after
independent thinking.
Nimu is pregnant again. Ramdas feels extremely miserable. I
have tried to comfort him. A man and a woman cannot succeed in this
aim without hard effort. But Ramdas is a weak man and thinks too
much, so that even his weakness makes him unhappy.

268

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Probably you know that Lakshmi also is pregnant. I came to
know these facts about both of them only recently. I come to know
about such things only after some time. Ba is happy in jail. Manibehn
is with her. I am all right.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 4812
Blessings from
BAPU

296. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
DELHI
December 11, 1933
CHI. RAMA,

I will write a long letter to Joshi. It seems that Dhiru feels weak.
If you write to him regularly, I think he will be all right. I am glad that
he seems to like the place.
I feel greatly relieved to know that you are happy there. Work
hard and serve well. Learn everything you can. Ask Vimu to write a
letter to me.
I now get letters from Ba. Her going to jail seems to have
pleased the women very much. Mani is still with her.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 5360

297. LETTER TO VIDYA R. PATEL
DELHI

December 11, 1933
CHI. VIDYA,

I got your letter. It is good that you are under the special care of
Ramabehn. Obey her. I have advised Dwarakanath that for some time
you should be kept on milk, fruit and vegetables. That will improve
your blood. You also require steambaths and hip-baths. The eyes
should be sprinkled with warm water four or five times daily. The
water must be clean.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C. W. 9639. Courtesy : Ravindra R. Patel

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

269

298. NOTE TO VIDYA. A. HINGORANI
BIRLA HOUSE,
NEW DELHI,
[December 11, 1933] 1

What is it you want ? It is a matter of a few days. But I don’t
wish to keep you if that upsets you or makes you unhappy. After all,
later on you have to go to Wardha. But if you want to go to Multan I
would not stop you. I want to make you happy and brave somehow. If
I send you back to Wardha, I will do so only after making all the
arrangements, otherwise we shall see what can be done. I will not send
you to Bhavnagar. Dudhibehn’s programme is not certain. As long as
I am here there is no such hurry. Shall talk tomorrow in the morning
after my silence is over.
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy : National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

299. TELEGRAM TO BHULABHAI DESAI
NEW DELHI,
December 12, 1933
BHULABHAI D ESAI
WARDEN R [ OA]D, B OMBAY 11
JUST HEARD YOUR ARRIVAL. HOPE COMPLETELY CURED.

GANDHI
Bhulabhai Papers. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

300. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
DELHI,
December 12, 1933
BA,

This is the second letter to you in jail. I hope you are getting
Jam-e-Jamshed 2 and Harijanbandhu now. Write to me if you want
anything else. Mathuradas is still with me. I arrived in Delhi on the
1

The source has “December 1934”, which seems to be a slip. In December
1933, Gandhiji was in Delhi from 10th to 14th. And his silence day fell on the 11th.
Vide also “Letter to Vidya A. Hingorani”, 25-12-1933.
2 A Gujarati daily published from Bombay

270

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

10th. I shall be leaving for Andhradesh on the14th and Mathuradas
will go to Bombay. Do not worry about me in the least. I will write to
you regularly and tell you exactly how I am keeping. I take milk,
mavo, etc., in sufficient quantity. The cold which I had has disappeared. Dr. Ansari is here. I am staying this time with Ghanshyamdasji. Jamnalalji also is likely to arrive here today. Prabhudas and his
wife also are here. He will settle and take up some work somewhere on
this side. Do not worry about Manilal. I have written to him a long
letter. I don’t wish to suppress him. Santok’s mother has passed away.
I have written a letter to her today. Brijkrishna is seriously ill. He is
confined to bed. He is being treated by Dr. Ansari. They are hopeful
that he will get all right. Radha seems to have fallen ill again. If you or
any other women want anything, write to me about it.
I hope your jaws are functioning all right. How is Mani’s knee ?
Have you with you anything to read ?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, p. 2

301. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
DELHI,

December 12, 1933
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I got your letter, as also Jayaprakash’s. If both of you come to a
firm decision that you would dedicate yourselves to service, I shall
have nothing to say. I only explained to you both that it was not
morally wrong to do one’s duty towards one’s own family, but that, if
one wished to follow the path of service, one must renounce such
private duties.1
If you try to do both, you will probably fail in both. There will
be no difficulty in sending Rs. 50 every month for Rajeshwar. 2 But
that does not satisfy me.What arrangement have you made for your
own expenses ? What have you decided regarding the debt ? By
solving these problems anyhow, you will not have solved the basic
1
2

Vide “Letter to Prabhavati”, 23-11-1933
Younger brother of Jayaprakash Narayan

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

271

problem. But I will not dwell further on this matter. I don’t wish to
discourage Jayaprakash. We should hope that, since his motive is pure,
everything will be all right.
You have not yet gone and seen Mother. You should do so now.
Since your visit to me has been delayed so long, I shall now be far
away. If you do not wish to get arrested there, you may come and see
me during my Andhra tour, and then from Wardha you may go
wherever you like. I think it would be best to go to Bihar. If you
decide to go to Bihar, it is not very necessary for you to come and see
me. If, however, you are very keen to come, by all means do come. I
leave it entirely to your own wish. I shall be in Madras on 20, 21 and
22. I will start from here on the 14th. From the 16th to the 19th, I
shall be around Bezwada. I shall be back in Andhra from 23rd to 31st,
and the headquarters will be at Bezwada. You may now decide as you
like.
Vidya felt bored and has come here. She has brought Kanta
with her. I have not decided yet whether to let Vidya go to Multan or
ask her to return to Wardha.
Om has been with me. I continue the same diet. The quantity of
milk varies from three pounds to one pound. The cold which I had
has gone. The weight was 108 pounds when I was weighed in
Jabalpur. I have not been weighed after that. You need not worry
about me at all. God will keep me in whatever condition. He wishes
and get work done through me as He wills.
Could you see Rajendrababu ? Did you see Father ? How is he ?
I hear from Ba from time to time. Mani is still with her. Sushila,
Pyarelal’s sister, is here. Her mother also is here. I have not met her
yet.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 3436

302. LETTER TO JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
DELHI,

December 12, 1933
CHI. JAYAPRAKASH,

I have your letter. Your debt has thrown a new light on the
situation and I have tried to explain to you your duty. Borrowing
from another source does not solve the main problem. How will you
repay the loan? What has been arranged about your expenses? I am

272

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

hoping that it will not be difficult to arrange for Rs. 50 to be paid to
Rajeshwar1 every month. I shall have a talk about it and let you know
more definitely.
I hope you are now better. Father too will be well. I have written
in detail to Prabhavati. So I stop here. Also I do not have the time for
more.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Jayaprakash Narayan Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

303. LETTER TO KANTI GANDHI
DELHI,

December 13, 1933
CHI. KANTI2 ,

I hear that your teeth have become infected. But generally I feel
satisfied with the reports I hear about you. I assume that you will get
this letter. I often think of you. Somanji wrote to me about you and
your companions and said that you had read and studied well. My
tour is a difficult one, but it is progressing satisfactory. People come
to the meetings in large numbers.
I am sure you know that Ramibehn’s Kusum is ill. Radha is ill
again. So far I have been able to bear the strain of the tour.
Blessings to all from

BAPU
From Gujarati : C. W. 7284. Courtesy : Kanti Gandhi

1
2

Rajeshwar Narayan, addressee’s brother
Son of Harilal Gandhi

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

273

304. DISCUSSION WITH SANATANISTS
DELHI,

December 13, 1933
I claim to be a sanatanist as I consider my conduct to be in
consonance with the spirit of the scriptures. 1 You may, if you like,
reject my claim. I have studied the Shastras to the best of my ability
and have arrived at the conclusion that untouchability is repugnant to
the spirit of Hinduism.
They, however, contended that no one could be called sanatanist who did not
believe in untouchability, shraddha, idol-worship and other outward observances.
Gandhiji retorted that the only true test of sanatan dharma was the touchstone of truth.
He added that the outward observance was nothing if a man lived a crooked life. What
did outward form avail to a man who was a drunkard, rake and gambler ?
When he was told that the attempt to have temples opened to Harijans was
bound to lead to bloodshed, he said that was practically impossible, as there was no
compulsion contemplated by anybody. No temple was to be opened where the
overwhelming opinion of temple-goers was not in favour of such opening.

Harijan, 22-12-1933

305. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, ALIPUR
December 13, 1933
I would ask you to believe me when I say that there is no
political motive behind my Harijan work. The political consequences
of the removal of untouchability have no attraction for me. Indeed, I
believe that, if we approached this question with a political motive, we
should fail to serve the Harijans and we should damage Hinduism.
That real removal of untouchability will have political consequences is
true enough. A duty religiously performed carries with it many other
important consequences. ‘Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and
everything else will be added unto you’, is to my mind a scientific
truth.
I must remind you of the pledge given last year in your name.
1

The sanatanists had contended that Gandhiji had no right to call himself a
sanatanist.

274

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You will remember that a meeting of representatives of Hinduism was
held in Bombay in September last year, Pandit Malaviyaji being in the
chair. Among other things they resolved that untouchability, being a
blot on the Hindu religion, had to be removed and that Harijans were
entitled to the same public utilities, and in the same manner, as caste
Hindus. There was in that Resolution a special reference to Hindu
temples, and legislation was contemplated if it was found to be
necessary for attaining the end. It is, therefore, the bounden duty of
every caste Hindu to fulfil the pledge by throwing open to the
Harijans temples, well and other institutions precisely on the same
terms as they are open to caste Hindus.
The Hindustan Times, 14-12-1933

306. DISCUSSION AT SERVANTS OF UNTOUCHABLES
SOCIETY MEETING 1
DELHI,

December 13, 1933
Regarding the utilization of collections made during the tour Mahatma Gandhi
said that 75 percent of these collections would be spent in the locality concerned so
far as possible provided a suitable scheme was prepared and approved by the Central
Board. The Provincial Boards should, however, not neglect their ordinary collections
in the hope of getting money out of his collections. He stressed :

You dare not utilize any part of these collections for propaganda or office administration. They can be utilized to the single pie
for constructive work alone. I am not touring India to finance your
offices or to help your propaganda but to raise money enough for
constructive work alone. You should collect money separately to meet
the expenses of your office administration. If you do work out of the
funds that I raise, the money paid by the public would be returned to
them hundredfold. It should, therefore, be zealously guarded and
cautiously spent.
Asked as to what opinion he could express about the work done so far,
Mahatma Gandhi replied :

You cannot get any compliments if you want to get them. But I
can say that you could have done the work much better and as for the
future I can only say that you should do better than in the past.
1

Gandhiji had addressed the Central Board of the Society.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

275

Regarding the question of democratization of the constitution of the Society,
Mahatma Gandhi said that the present constitution should be worked democratically
rather than bringing in a constitution demorcratic in form but autocratic in spirit.
His Holiness Garmuria Gosain of Assam and Mr. D. N. Sharma explained that
ex-tea-garden coolies belonged to various provincess of India and were mostly
Harijans. Their population in Assam was 10,50,000 out of whom only 5,000 were
literate. They were commonly addicted to liquor or other such vices. They had been
economically exploited by Kabulis and Marwaris.
Mahatma Gandhi said that he knew about this deplorable state.

It is a social problem but to me it seems that the harvest is ready
but the labourers are few. We require workers to solve this question. It
cannot be solved by law. It requires work in the midst of these people
from day to day without expectation of immediate result. It would be
better to prepare statistics of these men by provinces so that a way
might be found out to invite workers from other provinces to go there
and work. Money alone will not give the kind of workers required. If
I succeed in reaching Assam I will study the conditions and try to
raise some local workers. If I fail in this, I would have no doubt that
Assam is the most backward of all provinces. The question is, however,
not only of untouchability but of a different type, but if Assam
produces the proper type of workers there will be no difficulty in
getting funds enough for carrying on that work.
The Hindustan Times, 16-12-1933

307. SPEECH AT STUDENTS ’ MEETING, DELHI 1
December 13, 1933
It is no exaggeration to say that our relations were as intimate as
between blood-brothers.2 His burning patriotism, his great sacrifice
and his unsurpassable love for his children, whom also he gave to the
service of the motherland, ought to be as patent to you as they were to
me. I had the good fortune to be in the closest touch with him ever
since I first knew him up to the moment of his death; and I could see
that every moment of his life his thoughts were given to the nation he
served so singularly. To him swaraj was no distant dream; it was his
very life-breath. His hankering after freedom grew in intensity from
day to day. It is, therefore, in the fitness of things that you should
1
2

276

The meeting was held in the Hindu College.
Gandhiji had unveiled a portrait of Motilal Nehru.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have before your eyes the portrait of such a great patriot, so that you
may be constantly reminded of his sterling qualities and try to
assimilate them in your own lives. No lip homage paid to a patriot you
admire will be of any use to you, if you do not mean to imitate the
virtues that made him great. Your keeping his portrait before you
must be significant of your resolve to follow in his footsteps.
Remember, too, that he was above all distinctions of high and low. He
never gave a place to untouchability in his long and varied life. He
had the heart of a prince. He knew how to earn as well as to give away.
He then asked the students to give a more tangible proof than money of their
love for the Harijans by clearing the Augean stables, in other words, the Harijan
bastis of Delhi. He had seen the terrible contrast between the palaces of New Delhi,
where money had been poured out like water, and the veritable hells in which the
Harijans were forced to live; and he spoke with an agony too deep for words.

I saw three bastis out of four, one of them being the worst of all.
One cannot imagine, unless one has been with one’ own eyes, that
there can be such a place for human habitation. I have no words to
describe the filth and ugliness I saw there. It is enough to give one a
feeling of nausea. You should gird up your loins and clean these
plague-spots. I was happy to learn that there are among you students
who have a desire to serve the Harijans by physical labour also. When
you have removed the filth from the bastis, you will discover many
other ways of most useful service.
Harijan, 22-12-1933

308. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
DELHI
Wednesday, December 13, 1933
I have just read Sir Mohammed Iqbal’s answer1 to Shri
Jawaharlal Nehru’s indictment2 of the communal spirit whether
among Muslims of Hindus in so far as they may be represented by
their sectarian organizations. Reluctant though I am to intervene in the
controversy, I may not leave unchallenged the statements made by Sir.
Mohammed Iqbal ragarding me.
1
2

Vide Appendix “ Mohammed Iqbal’s Statement”, 6-12-1933
For extracts from Jawaharlal Nehru’s statement, vide Appendix III.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

277

My position in London 1 was clear. I was helpless for effective
action on communal matters without Dr. Ansari. I was bound by the
Congress mandate and before I could recommend any modification I
should need Dr. Ansari’s guidance. Having forfeited, for the time
being, Maulana Shaukat Ali’s confidence, I told Muslim friends that
Dr. Ansari held ‘my conscience on Muslim matters in his pocket’ and
that therefore they should co-operate with me in securing his presence
at the Conference. To this they would not agree, unless I would first
accept their demands. My effort having failed, I tried every other
resource at my disposal to achieve real unity and hopelessly failed.
The offer to act as camp-followers to the Congress seemed then,
as it has proved since, to be a mockery. Behind the talks, there was an
oppressive sense of unreality. What Sir Mohammed Iqbal calls two
conditions attached to my personal acceptance of Muslim demands,
were no conditions but the necessary consequence of my acceptance.
Political unity was desired for a political end which for me, as for any
Indian be he Hindu, Muslim, Christian or any other, could only be
complete national independence in the fullest sense of the term.
Muslim demands were presented for arriving at common action.
Muslim friends in London were playing other minorities against the
vital national interest. If they accepted me as their ally, as I offered to
be in uttermost sincerity, my alliance could only be for combating
every force that was inimical to India’s freedom. It was, therefore,
necessary to fight the spirit of separateness, no matter from what
source it arose.
No Muslim had defended separate electorates as a thing good in
itself. Even in their case, Muslim friends had admitted it as a necessary
evil to be tolerated for a temporary period. The doctrine, therefore,
did not admit of indefinite extension. The demand put forth on behalf
of the so-called untouchables was clearly anti-national. But if it was
consistent with national interest or was necessary for the protection of
the Harijan interest, my resistance was truly inhuman as Sir Mohammed Iqbal characterizes it. But in that case, Muslim friends should
not even have offered to be neutral if I accepted their demands. But I
hold that my resistance was not only not ‘inhuman’ but it was
conceived in the best interests of the Harijans.
I claim to be a Harijan by choice. I do not yield to the tallest
1

278

At the Round Table Conference in 1931

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Harijan in the desire to conserve the Harijan interest. Evidently Sir
Mohammed Iqbal has had no time to follow what I have done or am
doing in this behalf. Had he even cursorily followed my doings, he
would not have allowed himself to say, as he has said, that “Mr.
Gandhi has made it a mission of his life to prevent the fusion of the
untouchables with the other communities and to retain them in the
fold of Hinduism without any real fusion between them and even the
caste Hindus.” He should know that the rooting out of untouchability
is the aim of my life which I have persued without interruption for the
past fifty years and that I have claimed and am fighting for the same
rights without reservation for the Harijans that the caste Hindus have
in matters religious, social and political.
My work about Harijans is purely religious. It has no political
motive behind it. It is essentially humanitarian in the highest sense of
the term. It is a movement of internal reform in Hinduism. It is one of
expiation and reparation by caste Hindus for inhumanities heaped
upon the outcastes of Hindu society. My Hinduism, like my nationalism, is not exclusive or inconsistent with the interest of any portion
of humanity. I would refuse to call that freedom which may involve
the sacrifice of Muslim or any other interest that is not hostile to the
freedom of India. I approached every question in London in that
spirit.
My belief in the necessity of communal unity is just as firm as
ever before. What could I do now, it may be asked. My position is the
same now as before. I would accept any solution that may commend
itself to the Muslims as a whole and that is not in conflict with any
other national interest. Naturally, I endorse the suggestion made by
Shri Jawaharlal Nehru. Nothing can be fairer. As a nationalist I claim
to represent all communities equally, the largest as well as the smallest.
The Hindustan Times, 14-12-1933

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

279

309. SPEECH AT HARIJANS’ MEETING, DELHI1
December 14, 1933
It is not to keep you segregated that the schools are being
opened and wells are being dug for you. All this is being done
because I cannot bear to see you get no water at all. How can I tolerate
that the Harijans get water from the same trough from which dogs and
cattle drink water ? You belong to the cities and perhaps get water
from the taps. But in villages, the caste Hindus are so arrogant that
they do not permit the Harijans to go near the wells at all. Even when
they give them water, they do so from a distance and with words of
abuse. You and I ought not to tolerate such a thing. Wells are being
dug for Harijans not to keep them as untouchables, but in order that
they may at least get clean water. And these wells are not exclusively
for the Harijans. Others too can draw water from them. But the
Harijans have a right to use them. They oughts not to have to take
water from a trough. The fact is, we have not been able to dig as many
wells for them as are needed. And you also see that many caste
Hindus are voluntarily opening their wells for the use of Harijans. The
same is true about schools. Our efforts to get Harijans admitted to the
general schools are continuing. But till such time as we can get
Harijans admitted into all general schools, the question is whether we
should open separate schools for them or let their children remain
without education. That is why we are opening schools for them.
Other children also are welcome to join these schools. But the Harijans
at any rate have the fullest right to join them.
By calling you Harijans, we have given you a sweet name in
place of an offensive one. Many Harijans have accepted it. It is a
better name than the offensive word “untouchable”. And the name
was suggested by a Harijan. It at least avoids the discourtesy involved
in addressing somebody by an offensive name. When untouchability
has disappeared, either all Hindus would call themselves ‘Harijans’ or
the Harijans would be completely absorbed in the Hindu society. The
third alternative is that the Hindu community itself would be wiped
out. But it is to avert this danger that a great effort is being made
1
The address presented by the Harijans of Shraddhananda Nagari suggested that
separate wells, temples and schools should not be opened for Harijans as this would
mean their separation from the Hindu fold.

280

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

today. That is the work being carried on by the Harijan Sevak Sangh
for the eradication of untouchability.
I am happy that I have come to the Shraddhananda Colony. Is
there any Hindu who is unfamiliar with the name of the late
Shraddhanandaji ? There can hardly be anyone who feels the love and
kindness for Harijans which Shraddhanandaji did. He was extremely
unhappy that the Hindus in their arrogance had created a class of
untouchables. The Hindu community will have to wash away that sin
or perish. You should help in washing off that sin. Take this message
to other Harijans, too. Contribute your mite to this yajna of selfpurification which is being carried on. Maintain both outer and inner
purity. Give up eating carrion and beef. These three things you must
definitely do. The fourth thing is that you must give up liquor. Give it
up even if other Hindus drink. You have been degraded by others and
you have to rise by your own efforts. That is why I appeal to you to
give up liquor. Please do this much and persuade other Harijans also
to do it. You have presented a purse to me. But I do not want a single
pie from the Harijans. It is we who have to give to you. We owe you a
debt. However, I have accepted the purse since you have given it. The
sum would be returned to you many times over. It is, however, not
necessary for you to give anything.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 24-12-1933

310. SPEECH AT WOMEN’S MEETING, DELHI
December 14, 1933
In the eyes of God who is the Creator of all, His creatures are all
equal. Had He made any distinctions of high and low between man
and man, they would have been visible as are the distinctions between,
say, an elephant and an ant. But he has endowed all human beings
impartially with the same shape and the same natural wants. If you
consider Harijans untouchables because they perform sanitary service,
what mother has not performed such service for her children ? Does
she then become an untouchable on that score ? As she can become
pure after a wash, sweepers also can come under the same rule.1 It is
the height of in- justice to consider the Harijans, who are the most
1

These two sentences are from The Hindustan Times, 15-12-1933.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

281

useful servants of society, as untouchables and outcastes. I have
undertaken this tour to awaken the minds of Hindu sisters to a sense
of this sin. It can never be an act of merit to look down upon any
human being as inferior to us. We are all worshippers of one God,
whom we worship under different names. We must , therefore, realize
our essential unity and give up untouchability as well as the spirit of
superiority and inferiority between human beings.
Harijan, 22-12-1933

311. WHAT I SAW IN ANANTPUR
Anantpur is a little village in Saugor District, C. P. (Hindi),
containing 177 houses with a population, therefore, roughly of 885. It
is 35 miles from the nearest railway station. It has no Post or
Telegraph Office. There is a weekly service from the nearest Post
Office, Relly, 12 miles from Anantpur. It is a typically poor village of
poor India. The villagers are occupied not more than four months in
the year. There was hardly any supplementary occupation for the
villagers as a whole before an event that happened four years ago.
It was in 1929 that a young man, with a single-minded zeal
rarely surpassed, chose Anantpur for his experiment, after a year’s
travelling in search of such a village. He is khaddar mad. He believes
in the message of khaddar even as much as perhaps I do. I doubt if he
would not replace ‘perhaps’ by ‘if not more than’. I would submit to
his correction, if he made it. His faith in himself would put to shame
the tallest among us. He believes that the only permanent cure for the
enforced idleness of the peasantry of India and their consequent
chronic poverty is the universal adoption of the spinning-wheel. His
name is Jethalal Govindjee. He does not know English. He is no
Gujarati scholar. Himself a town-bred man, by dogged pertinacity he
has inured himself to the hardships of village life and lives like, and in
the midst of, villagers. He has three companions with him. He is a
thorough believer in one thing at a time and, therefore, will not pursue
other social service, no matter how tempting it may be. If the
spinning-wheel is well-established in every cottage, he thinks that all
the other problems that puzzle and drag down villagers will solve
themselves. He will say : ‘I shan’t preach temperance or thrift to the
villager, for no drunkard will take to the wheel if he will not give up
his drink, and to preach thrift to a pauper is a mockery. It will be time

282

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to preach it, when I have put a few coppers in his pocket. Since I
believe that every revolution of the wheel will mean a revolution in his
daily life, I am going to be patient with his vices and many drawbacks.
And I have faith that, if I am a clean man, my cleanness cannot but
touch both the inside and the outside of the villager.’ With varying
fortunes, but with an unvarying faith, he and his companions have
plodded for the past four years. Their formula is Self-dependence writ
large. Khadi must support itself. The way to make it do so is for the
villagers to spin, and weave too if possible, for their own use. They
may sell only the surplus, as they do with the grain they grow. No
cloth can be cheaper than that spun and woven in one’s home, even as
no bread can be cheaper than home-baked from grain grown in one’s
own field and ground in one’s own home. The business of these
servants of the villagers is merely to instruct and help. They visit every
cottage and offer to teach them ginning, spinning, carding, weaving
and dyeing. They improve their wheels and manufacture new ones for
sale only from the material available in the village. This has given
extra work to the village carpenter and the village blacksmith. Every
item is well thought out. They have an almost complete record of the
condition of every cottage and its dwellers. They have made a fairly
accurate study of the villagers’ wants and woes, customs and manners,
and have published their report in Hindi. Their workshop is a busy
hive. Work is being done in a neat and methodical manner. A
common log-book is kept containing a day-to-day summary of the
work done by each worker. I have mentioned only four foundation
workers. Needless to say they have raised workers in seventeen villages
they are serving within a five-mile radius of Anantpur.
A word as to the condition of the cottages I saw. I visited over
six, including one belonging to a Harijan. I may not omit to mention
that the Harijans have been found to be the readiest to take to the
message.
The cottages I saw were low roofed, with walls made of mud.
There was no ventilation in them worth mentioning, no boxes, hardly
any metal pots. The inmates were in rags, except where they had made
khaddar for themselves. The only belonging I saw consisted generally
of empty mud granaries to contain grain for the year. One room
served as kitchen, dwelling and the rest. Their beds were straw covered
with rags, again except where they had woven khaddar for themselves.
Their food consists of jawar chapatis and a pulse, with or without oil.
Of milk and ghee they hardly ever have anything. The Chamar whose

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

283

cottage I saw was an exception. He sported two cows. Whether he or
his children ever get a drop of milk for themselves is another story.
The villagers were poorly fed and worse clothed. Some children go
stark naked from year’s end to year’s end. They warm themselves in
the sun by day and before a wretched fire at night. There are families
in Anantpur who, I am told, started this khaddar industry literally with
an investment of one pice for cotton. This was doubled the next day
by the sale of yarn spun from one pice worth of cotton and thus by
progressive realization they are able now to have their own clothes.
I translate the following from the leaflet prepared for the
occasion of my visit :
The following is the cost of the complete outfit :
Ginning machine
Rs. 0-7-0
Carding bow with gut and striker
’’ 0-9-6
Spinning-wheel with spindle
’’ 0-6-6
Winding frame
’’ 0-1-0
Handloom for 32 inches width with all accessories
’’ 3-0-0
Total
4-8-0
We serve seventeen villages lying within a five-mile radius,
containing 1,100 cottages with a population of 5,500 in round
numbers. As a result of our labours, eighty per cent of the population
have learnt spinning, sixty percent have learnt carding.
Over hundred persons have learnt weaving.
The average strength of yarn has now reached fifty-six, the
average count ten.
Their average working days are hundred and twenty during the
year, the balance of the time lying quite idle. Of the idle hours, now
an individual gives on an average five hundred hours during the year
to khaddar work. Our ideal is to reach 1,600 hours per year.
The progress of our work now depends upon our ability to raise
more workers. We have today three principal workers, three assistants,
five sub-assistants, five helpers and four candidates.
Our average monthly expense is Rs. 325 found by the All India
Spinners’ Association.
I bring this great experiment to the notice of the public to show
not only what it means to Harijans but also to all villagers. The aim of

284

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the experiment is not exclusively Harijan service, it is service of the
under-fed and the under-clothed, exclusively through the spinningwheel. I have known nothing simpler, cheaper and yet more effective
than this experiment of village uplift through khaddar. The progress
seems to be undoubtedly slow just now, but I expect that it will be
found to be the quickest in the end.
Harijan, 15-12-1933

312. THINGS TO REMEMBER
During the past month of touring there has been a great deal of
waste of time, a great deal of anxiety to the organizers and a great and
unnecessary strain on my very limited physical resources, owing to the
mad rush made towards the passing car. I cannot recall occasions
when people near me have not trodden on my naked toes or scratched
my legs. God has saved me from serious injury hitherto. But the
crowds can take no credit for the immunity. Their affection is mad.
And madness can do nobody any good. The thing can be easily
managed if the volunteers will act in a business-like manner and will
not themselves, like crowds, go mad as they often do. People cannot
be instructed on anything all of a sudden. Leaflets containing detailed
instructions should, therefore, be issued to the public and read and
explained to them by volunteers as they come to the venue of
meetings. The very best arrangement of the kind was made at Harda.
Although the party was taken through a crowded and decorated
bazaar, it took no more than ten minutes to pass through. In other
places the same distance has often taken more than half an hour.
Success at Harda was due not merely to previous preparations, but also
to volunteers with one continuous rope held by them being posted at
regular intervals, thus making it impossible for anyone to break
through the lines. Let me now without further comment tabulate the
instructions which I suggest for general adoption.
(1) Leaflets containing detailed instructions should be issued to
the villagers in simple language easily to be understood by them.
These should be read to the parties as they stream in from villages.
(2) Crowds that gather at stations awaiting my arrival should
stand in rows upon rows without causing inconvenience to the
passengers and without moving from their places when the train
steams in.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

285

(3) A few minutes before the arrival time, volunteers should be
posted in front of the crowd with a continuous rope, held waist-high in
their hands in order to avoid the people behind unconsciously moving
towards me and the train.
(4) Volunteers should on no account fall prostrate before me.
(5) Volunteers should never lead or take part in the various
cries. Apart from its interfering with efficient service, their leading or
participating in them robs the cries of spontaneity.
(6) Volunteers should not shout their instructions to the public,
but should pronounce them with deliberation and gentleness. Only
one volunteer detailed for the purpose should pronounce them.
(7) The public should be requested not to crowd round the cars.
(8) Volunteers should not board my or any other car, except
when asked to do so by a responsible member of the Reception
Committee.
(9) The public should not gather at the stations which I may be
passing through between 8 p. m. and 6 a. m., and in no case should
they shout the usual cries at night. Such shouting during night betrays
want of consideration for the passengers and the party whom they
profess to respect.
(10) Those who gather at stations whether by day or night
would do well to remember that I am not conducting a tour for
receiving addresses. It is intended to be wholly a call for self
purification, an invitation to the so-called high class Hindus to repent
of the wrong done by them to Harijans and for making collections on
behalf of the cause. Therefore, those who gather at the stations are
naturally expected to bring or collective donations for Harijan service.
Harijan, 15-12-1933

313. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
Unrevised

December 15, 1933

MY DEAR AGATHA,

I am writing this in a moving train in the early morning. Mira is
just now off writing regular mail letters. She cannot combine nursing,
cooking, bottle-washing, proof-reading for Harijan and European and
American correspondence, without breaking to pieces.

286

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Your letters are valuable.
What you say about Bhulabhai Desai’s work does not surprise. I
had expected nothing less.
As to the imaginary interview in Rome, of course, I never saw
the reaffirmation by the Rome pressman.1 I was in prison. But if I see
the first statement and the reaffirmation, I would be able to throw light
on it. That those who won’t believe will receive no help is only too
true. But that does not matter. I must satisfy honest doubters. The
quickest way for you is for yourself or some friend to secure the
Times file and copy the two statements and send them on to me before
3rd August next2 . Long enough notice for you!
It will be a good thing if your effort results in Bose being
allowed to go to England. Why he is kept out [of] London I cannot
understand.
The usual cuttings accompany this. The orthodox opposition to
the reform is slowly getting out of the bewilderment in which the
phenomenal mass attendances at the meetings found it. Though they
are very few so far as I can judge they have money to sustain them.
They are therefore trying to create disturbances at meetings. But I
hope to be able to cope with the opposition.
The political situation remains much the same as before. The
official mind is revealed in the speech of the Commissioner of
Burdwan.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat : G.N. 1476

314. LETTER TO HORACE G. ALEXANDER
December 15, 1933
MY DEAR HORACE,

Agatha has sent me your letter to her about that imaginary interview in Rome. It is wonderful how journalim has become degraded.
Thank God the bulk of mankind remains unaffected even by the most
widely read newspapers. But this reflection in no way absolves me
1

Signor Gayda; vide “ Cable to Croft”, 17-12-1931 also “Letter to Sir Samuel
Hoare”, 6-3-1934.
2
The date on which Gandhiji’s term of imprisonment would have expired;
vide, “Statement to the Press”,14-9-1933

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

287

from having to deal with the particular allegation. If Agatha can trace
the two statements of the Rome journalist, I can deal with the matter at
once.
I hope both you and Olive1 are keeping well.
Love to you all.
BAPU
From a photostat : G.N. 1422

315. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
December 15, 1933
CHI. AMALA,

I was desappointed not to see you. 2 I wrote in answer to your
fear that I would not 3 drive you out. You must compose yourself and
live and think and speak naturally. If you love me, you cannot fear
me.
I have no blood-pressure. Do write.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

316. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
December 15, 1933
MY DEAR CHILD,

I had your touching letter. Well, you have to rejoice in your
suffering both mental and physical. You must now do what satisfies
your own inner voice. And the end will be all right. Of course Maria4
will be cut up. But we are all in God’s hands, not a blade moves but
by His command. If we had all our own ways, the world will go to
pieces. It is perhaps as well that our wishes are often frustrated. It is
the test of our loyalty to God that we believe in Him even when He
refuses to fulfil our wishes. I want you therefore to enjoy perfect
1

Addressee’s wife
Vide “letter to Margarete Spiegel”, 7/9-12-1933.
3
This is underlined in the source.
4
Anne Marie Petersen
2

288

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

peace even while things seem to you to be all going wrong.
My prayer, my thoughts and my love are with you. For the rest
weekly Harijan is my weekly letter to you as to many friends and
companions.
BAPU
From a photostat No. 123. Courtesy : National Archives of India. Also My
Dear Child, p. 102

317. LETTER TO J. S. HOYLAND
December 15, 1933
MY DEAR HOYLAND,

You asked me some time ago,whether you could publish those
hymns. Of course you can, provided that you give me no credit for
the composition. You may say in the introduction that I had prepared
a rough translation for the use of English friends but principally for
Mira and that you had worked upon the translation.1
I receive your postcards lovingly signed by so many friends. I
know that my work finds a place in your silent prayer meetings.
Love to you all.
BAPU
From a photostat : C.W. 4510. Courtesy : Woodbrooke College, Birmingham,
and Jessie Hoyland

318. LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI M. THAKKAR
WARDHA,

December 15, 1933
CHI. MAHALAKSHMI,

Do not worry about the children. Nor about Madhavji.
I have had a discussion about the children. If Madhavji wants to
do what seems to him his dharma, don’t stand in his way. If you wish
to come and see me you may come wherever I am.
Blessings to all sisters from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 6824

1

Vide 1st footnote of ” Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 12-4-1933

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

289

319. DISCUSSION WITH A SANATANIST1
[Before December 16, 1933]

You should realize that there are shastris who claim to be sanatanists and who support the reformers’ contention. How am I to reject
their testimony as false? They fortify me in my opinion that
untouchability has no sanction in the shastras. I do believe in the
Vedas, the Upanishads, the Smritis and the Puranas. But to me the Gita
is the key to a knowledge of the Shastras. It enunciates the principles
on which all conduct must be based. It sums up the whole of the
Shastras and, therefore, absolves laymen from having to explore the
other books. But I go a step further. The Vedas are not the four books
known as such. They contain only fragments of the originals. Eternal
truth cannot be buried in or confined to printed books. The Vedas
are, therefore, indefinable and unwritten. They reside in one’s heart.
And our Shastras tell us what discipline and study are necessary for
opening out the heart for receiving the truth. One’s experience,
therefore, must be the final guide. The written word undoubtedly
helps, but even that has to be interpreted and, when there are
conflicting interpretations, the seeker is the final arbiter. I had to make
my choice. Years ago I made it and came to the conclusion that the
Shastras did not countenance untouchability as we practise it today.
Harijan, 22-12-1933

320. SPEECH AT HARIJAN WORKERS’ MEETING
VIJAYAWADA,

December 16, 1933
It gave him great pleasure, [Gandhiji] said, to have met them all and witnessed
the evidences of their literary powers. He had always known, he said, that the people
of Andhradesha were good at composing poems and rendering them sweetly and as
such he could not help feeling that the recitations witnessed that evening were to
some extent useless. Poetry and art should be the vehicle of truth and never be utilized
for flattery. For, such a use of poetry would not only make for degeneration of the art
but would also be a violation of truth. Now that they were all engaged in a movement
for the purification of Hinduism, he expected everyone so engaged to tread the path of
1

Who met Gandhiji on the way to Vijayawada, formerly known as Bezwada.
Gandhiji reached there on December 16.

290

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

truth. He had great expectations of Andhradesh and he knew she could rise equal to
them. 1

Be you caste Hindu or Harijan, let what contribution you are
making to the Harijan cause be absolutely unalloyed. There can be no
room for selfishness, hypocrisy, untruth and violence in such a
movement. As a religious movement it ought to touch the hearts of
Harijans and savarnas alike. For hundreds of years considerations of
high and low have gone deep into our hearts. Religious weapons alone
kill untouchability.
An array of Hindu saints and sages have taught us that penance
was the only way to protect and purify religion. Needless to say that
there can be place for selfishness and egoism in a penance. I hope and
pray that those engaged in Harijan service will be guided by the purest
of motives.2
He appealed to all those savarnas and avarnas who were engaged in this work
to realize the paramount importance of self-purification and to look upon this work as
a shuddhiyajna. 3
Mr. Shambu Sastri asked if Gandhiji accepted the authority of the Vedas.

Most certainly.
You respect them and abide by them?

Certainly.
The next question was whether he would accept the position that Harijans if
admitted to temples should also abide by the injunctions of Shastras by which
temples were regulated.

All Shastric rules that apply to savarnas when observed by
Harijans must enable them to get entry into temples.4
All my past and present actions have been in accordance with
religion as I have understood it. I have no doubt that the present
endeavour for the removal of untouchability has Vedic authority
behind it. I must, however, admit that there are two schools of thought
on this question. Both claim to be sanatanists and base their opinions
on the Hindu scriptures.
I hold that those who are conducting this drive against
untouchability as a religious movement must treat their opponents
1
2
3
4

What follows is from The Bombay Chronicle.
What follows is from The Hindu.
Gandhiji then invited questions from those present.
What follows is from The Bombay Chronicle.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

291

with tolerance give them always a dispassionate and patient hearing
and in no case show any anger in word or deed. We are out to convert
them. Let us seek their help and co-operation too. I implicitly believe
that they will one day join us if only we worked with scrupulous care
in a religious spirit. Our hearts should be full of love for them and if
we are pure we are sure to win their hearts.
The Hindu, 17-12-1933, and The Bombay Chronicle, 20-12-1933

321. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, VIJAYAWADA
December 16, 1933
After apologizing for his inability to make himself heard by them all,
Gandhiji acknowledged with thanks the several addresses presented to him and their
monetary accompaniments.

But would it not have been better if all the purses had been
pooled into one ? We could have saved several precious minutes
thereby but it is our misfortune that it was not done. People wish to
present addresses and purses each in his own name or in the name of
his village,although all of us belong to the same country and are in the
same condition.
Proceeding, Gandhiji stated that so far Bezwada had contributed in cash about
Rs. 3,982-8-0 and he was sure that before he left them, the figure would be rounded off
into Rs. 5,000. This he knew would not be a great thing for the town to do. In this
connection he could not help feeling the absence of Messrs A. Kaleswara Rao and
Pattabhi Sitaramayya. But, they must pursue their path of duty and not drop Harijan
work which had now become widespread and was an important item of work. Unless
they destroyed the evil of untouchability, Hinduism, he feared, would die out. It was
not dharma to consider a fellowman an “untouchable”. Harijans must have all rights
that Savarnas enjoyed. They had committed a great sin by having kept Harijans out
of their rights all these ages. savarnas must, therefore, he said expiate for the sin by
undergoing a prayashchitta. Wherever he had gone on this tour he had witnessed huge
concourses of people at similar meetings and he took it as a mark of their approval of
the work he was carrying on. That people contributed their mite also pleased him. To
the Harijans he would appeal for support not in monetary shape but in co-operating in
this shuddhiyajna by observing external and internal purity. Internal purity could be
attained by thinking of God and Ramanama and external purity through bath and other
means of clean living. He would appeal to such of the Harijans as were addicted to
drink, and eating carrion and cow-flesh, to give up these. No one who was addicted to

292

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

these could be considered to be a Hindu and he could not be admitted into temples.
Drinking was a heinous sin and a man under its influence could not distinguish
between mother and wife.
Before concluding, he referred to the address presented on behalf of the Andhra
Hindi Pracharakas’ Association and said that he was immensely gratified to see the
work carried on in Dakshina Bharat for promoting Hindi. He was also glad to note
that in this matter Andhra led the rest of South India. He appealed to them all to help
in the propagation of Hindi as it was an effective means of serving their country and
their nation.

The Hindu, 17-12-1933

322. SPEECH AT MUDUNURU
December 17, 1933
Addressing the gathering, Gandhiji expressed his regret at not being able to
stay in their midst longer than a few minutes or go into the temples for want of time
and also the difficulty of getting out of and into the car at every place. He wished to
save as much time as posssible as he had to cover a number of villages. If, therefore,
he did not enter the temples, let them not go under the impression that he did not wish
to enter the shrines of God. He was sure that the work he was doing was his work. he
wished to open as many of the temples in this country as possible to Harijans. He
hoped that Harijans would offer worship at the temples daily along with their other
Hindu bretheren observing all the regulations that applied to savarnas and all the
rules of cleanliness. By so doing and by giving up (where they were addicted to the
habits) drink and carrion or beef-eating Harijans would be promoting real purification
to Hinduism.1

The Hindu, 18-12-1933

1

Gandhiji then declared open to Harijans two temples.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

293

323. INTERVIEW TO “THE HINDU”

1

S IDDHANTHAM,

December 17, 1933
May I ask a few questions on some points that strike me as worthy of being
brought to your notice ?

[GANDHIJI :] Most certainly, I am ready. Go ahead.
In a recent meeting which he addressed in Madras Mr. M. K. Acharya has stated
that 95 per cent of the Harijan do not want ‘ the Gandhian creed‘. What is your view
on the matter ?

I do not know what ‘the Gandhian creed’ is. If I do not know it,
how do the Harijans know it or Mr. Acharya himself? I do not claim
anything special to me. There is no such thing as ‘Gandhian creed’ so
far as I know. I know only this. I am engaged in giving Harijans clean
water. I am engaged in giving them facilities for education. I am
engaged in finding accommodation for them in public caravanserais
where they cannot get it. I am engaged in weaning them from drink
and carrion. Do they not like all these? I am engaged in teaching
them the elementary rules of hygiene. Do they not want it ? I am
engaged in telling them what the fundamentals of Hinduism are and
in having public temples thrown open to them. Mark the distinction.
They may not want to enter these temples and if somebody said that
they do not want to, I will not be able to prove conclusively to the
contrary, though the prima facie evidence that I have is all in my
favour. Whenever they find temples are thrown open to them, they are
simply delirious with joy, as I found them to be today when I opened
two temples 2 and entered them with them. I do not care whether they
want to go to the temples or no. I simply feel that savarnas should do
their duty. There is nothing ‘Gandhian’ about it. Every Hindu who
believes that untouchability must go must understand this work.
It was observed by another person that Gandhiji being a believer in varnashrama, which was but a graded system of untouchability, he was not qualified to tackle
this problem. What do you think of this view ?

For me varnashrama does not mean a graded system of
untouchability. I have explained what I mean by varnadharma. It does
1
2

294

Its special correspondent met Gandhiji in the afternoon.
Vide the preceding item.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

not mean to me grades at all. It is not a vertical division. It is a horizontal one. In my view, all varnas stand absolutely on the same plane,
i.e., of equality. Hence there can be no question of untouchability.
Varnadharma is a mighty economic law which, if we subscribe to it,
would save us from the catastrophe that is in store for the world. I
have sufficient warrant in Hindu scriptures for saying that Brahmins
and scavengers are absolutely on a par in the eyes of God.
It has been suggested in some quarters that the Harijan movement is a form of
civil resistance propaganda and that by this tour you are promoting civil resistance.
What is your opinion on this suggestion ?

Then I am between two crossfires. Congressmen accuse me of
having damaged the cause of civil disobedience by taking up this
whirlwind campaign. Those who suspect me of ulterior motives accuse
me of strengthening civil disobedience. I am unmoved by these
charges or insinuations, and can only re-declare that I have absolutely
no ulterior motive. It is a peremptory religious call which I am
obeying. The tens of thousands who attend the meetings do not even
hear the expression ‘civil resistance’ from my lips. This is purely a
religious revival. This does not mean that I have changed my views on
civil resistance. The very science of civil resistance demands absolute
honesty. If I use this campaign for furthering civil resistance, I should
be guilty of dishonesty. Civil disobedience does not need such
dubious aids.
What do you think of the progress of Harijan uplift work in the provinces
you have toured so far ?

My impressions are altogether happy and, if they are continued
in the other provinces, I would have no hesitation in saying that
untouchability is fast dying out. On no other basis can I account for
the tens of thousands of people who flock to the meetings and give
me their coppers, well knowing what these are to be used for.
The Hindu, 18-12-1933

324. SPEECH AT MASULIPATAM
December 17, 1933
Replying to the addresses and acknowledging the purses and other presents,
Gandhiji said that on reaching Masulipatam his first thought was of Dr. Pattabhi
Sitaramayya. He was sure the Doctor’s spirit was pervading at the meeting though he

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

295

was not physically present in their midst. He thanked the District and Taluk Boards
and the people of the district for the work they were doing on behalf of the Harijans.
But he felt that so long as there was even a single temple which admitted savarnas but
remained closed to Harijans, which benefited the former but did not equally benefit the
latter, there would be no rest for him nor should there be any for them. If distinction
of high and low, touchable and untouchable continued amongst Hindus, he was sure
Hinduism would slowly die out.1

We shall dig our own grave if we do not purge ourselves of this
curse of untouchability, we shall have to pay with bitter tears if we in
our pride miss the God-given opportunity today. We should have no
peace till this monster is buried and those whom we have hitherto kept
under our heels are put on a par with us in every respect. Let us awake
to the sense of this sin and save, before it is too late, ourselves and our
religion from going to perdition.
The Hindu, 18-12-1933, and Harijan, 29-12-1933

325. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
AS AT WARDHA,

December 19, 1933
CHI. NARAHARI,

I am starting to write this letter at six in the morning in Masulipatam. I get up daily at three and try to write as many letters as I can.
The writing is interrupted at six, and at seven generally travelling is
resumed. On Mondays and Tuesdays there is no travelling. Today is
Tuesday, and so I have been able to continue to write. (After I had
written so far, Malkani and Bapi Needu came up and took half an
hour of my time.)
I had preserved your long letter. Your work seems to be going
on very well. I hope it will continue in the same manner. There are
ebbs and tides in Mahadev’s work. He loudly sings “All days are not
alike”. (Another interruption, and I gave 20 more minutes to Venkatappayya.) Mahadev is now realizing the truth of that line in his own
experience. That is how all of us learn and grow.
Anandi and others are fairly well settled. Proper arrangements
have been made for their study. Ramanama also is being taught by
1

296

The following is from Harijan, 29-12-1933.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Shankarbhai and a music teacher. I get letters from Vanamala and
Mohan. Mani has joined them. Bablo also is there, and so are
Qureshi’s children. N. has run away. Her son is in Sharda Mandir. Ba
has been taken to Yeravda.
All the questions which you have asked regarding spinning are
relevant. But those problems cannot be solved at present. I can’t write
about them now, either. I have in my mind the solutions of all the
problems. Whether they will work or not can be discovered only when
they are tried. If I am alive, I will explain them some day and, God
willing, we will even try them.
Kaka’s health is fairly good. He must have gone to Ahmedabad
now. He was happy to stay with Swami for a few days. I have not
heard from him recently.
Kishorelal is quite ill. He is confined to bed.
What experiences of the tour should I describe ? The crowds at
the meetings are larger even than before and contribute generously to
the fund.
Surendra and Durbari are at Wardha. They will probably go to
Karadi now. Both are fairly well. A large number of girls have joined
at Wardha and requests are still being received. Vinoba continues to
live in the hamlet. Balkrishna cannot be described as enjoying normal
health. The same is true about Chhotelal.
Blessings to all from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati , S.N. 9061

326. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
December 19, 1933
BA,

I got your letter today. The letter addressed to Sabarmati must
have been received. I will continue to write to you regularly. I will
write every Monday or Tuesday, for on those two days I get some free
time. Take care of your health. I will send the slivers. If I don’t have
any extra stock with me, I will get them from some source and send
you. I have been having some blood pressure. I was examined by Dr.
Ansari in Delhi. Do not at all worry about me. I will surely write to

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

297

Manilal and Sushila every fortnight. I wrote to them long letters. I will
send your blessings to everyone. Do not worry about anybody. I have
written to Manu also regarding Kusum. The latter is really ill and may
or may not survive. Kishorelal has been having fever intermittently.
He is in bed. Brijkrishna also has been bed-ridden for a long time.
Devdas is well, and so also Rajaji. Give my blessings to all the women
there. I hope all of them are doing physical work and maintaining
good health. Ramanama is an unfailing remedy. I had prepared an
abridged Gita for Ramdas. It is being printed. When it is ready, I will
send a few copies there. If you want anything else, write to me.
Address your letters always to Wardha. I hope you are supplied
newspapers.You have asked for a discourse from me. I will not send
one this time. I will see if I can do so next week. It is certainly very
good that you read the Gita regularly. Who teaches you to read it ?
What food do you get there ? You remember don’t you, that you can
write to Premlilabehn1 or Trivedi 2 for anything that you may want.
You will have fewer visitors there and so the best course will be that
you should write one letter to me and receive one from me every
week. However, you may do as you like. Om is all right. Premabehn’s
friend, Kisan, has joined me recently. You remember her, don’t you ?
She is very hard-working and has been well educated.
Blessings from
BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, pp. 2-3

327. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
MASULIPATAM,

December 19, 1933
BHAI THAKKAR BAPA,

The accompanying letters are for your information.
Bhagwanji’s argument is perfectly correct. I will write to him a
1
2

298

Premlila Thackersey
Prof. Jayashankar P. Trivedi of Agriculture College, Poona

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

suitable reply. Such activities will certainly be undertaken.
I have still not received a copy of the resolution passed by you.
Shouldn’t you send me one formally ? I shall be able to know about
my duties from its wording.
The work here is progressing rapidly. Malkani is fast becoming
an accountant. He has also become a newspaper correspondent. If he
maintains good health, he will work to the best of his ability.
The crowds at the meetings are as large and the contribution as
generous as in the C.P.
I have still not been able to observe the four-hour rule. Nobody,
however, is to blame for that. Such a rule can only be an ideal. In any
case, God will ordain everything as He wills. I learnt as long ago as my
young days to live according to Mira’s bhajan :
Hari has tied me with a slender thread,
I let Him pull as He wills.

I, therefore, don’t experience any difficulty. He who enables us
to sit and to walk may also put us to sleep.
I should like you or Ghanshyamdas to see the members of the
Delhi Municipality about the quarters of Harijans in Delhi . They
must be improved.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 1134

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

299

328. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
December 19, 1933
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I got your letter written from Patna. Since you have started the
injections, it would be better to complete the course. Perhaps you may
benefit. I myself, though, have little faith in it. But once we have
started a thing we should go to the end.
There will be no difficulty in sending Rs. 50 every month to
Rajeshwar. I have discussed the matter.
I have already explained in my previous letter 1 about your
coming to see me. If your health has deteriorated, won’t you have to
pay all your attention just now to proper treatment ?
Do you experience any difficulty in seeing Rajendrababu ?
I have not weighted myself recently, but my health is quite
good. The blood pressure has returned to my normal. It is 158-109.
Om is fine. Kisan has joined me now. I am sure you know her.
She is the woman who had started crying in Bombay. She is a close
friend of Prema. She was also in jail with Mirabehn. She is a Maharashtrian, and is a highly educated lady. She is very eager to serve.
She joined me at Wardha. Suman’s place is taken by Ramnarayan.2
Keep on writing to me.

[PS.]
20-22, Madras,
23-January 3, Andhra Desha, Headquarters Bezwada.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 3437.

1
2

300

Vide “Letter to Lakshmibehn M. Sharma”, 6-5-1933
Ramnarayan Chowdhary

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

329. LETTER TO VANAMALA N. PARIKH
December 19, 1933
CHI. VANAMALA,

Bravo! You have started signing in English now! After some
time, I suppose you will even be able to detect mistakes in my English.
I hope you are working hard enough to accustom your body to bear
strain. What have you been studying ? Ask Mohan to write to me.
Sultan 1 Bablo, Hamid2 and Vahid 3 also should write to me. Do you
remember that you did not complete your letter ?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : N. G. 5783. Also C. W. 3006. Courtesy :
Vanamala Desai

330. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI P. PANDYA
December 19, 1933
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

I am late in replying to your letter, though I had intended to
reply quite soon. What you have suggested is right. But carry out your
idea tactfully and without using compulsion. Very few non-Harijans
will join. For them the rule will be compulsory. For the Harijans, the
problem will be one of education. You cannot use compulsion on
them. They will gradually learn to use lavatories. In the locality where
Ramji lives, we may certainly construct lavatories if it is possible to
introduce them there. Parikshital, Jethabhai and you may discuss the
matter and do what you think best.
Do not give up your interest in the Vadaj school. The number
of children attending it should increase. Don’t leave even the grown
ups. This will of course require patience on your part. Give up desire
for the success of your work. Write to me from time to time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : C. W. 364. Courtesy : Bhagwanji P. Pandya
1
2
3

Children of Gulam Rasul Qureshi
Ibid
Ibid

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

301

331. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
December 19, 1933
CHI. SHARDA ALIAS SHARDAGAURI

alias SHARDAKUMARI,

Why should not my letter to Anandi be considered as addressed
to all of you ? Supposing I write all the names in the same letter?
Once you all have considered and made her your elder, how can you
now complain ? Which question of yours did I leave unanswered ?
I am glad to hear that you are studying well. But what about
your frequent illnesses ? Does it mean that you go on forgetting as
you go on learning ?
What do you eat ?

From the Gujarati original: C. W. 9965.
Chokhawala.

Courtesy: Shardabehn G.

332. LETTER TO VIMALCHANDRA V. DESAI
December 19, 1933
CHI. NANU,

I got your letter. Your handwriting still leaves much to be
desired. If you realize that one should write every letter in a word as
carefully as one draws a picture, you would take pains to write a
beautiful hand.

From a photostat of the Gujarati : C. W. 5757. Courtesy : Valji G. Desai.

333. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
December 19, 1933
CHI. HEMPRABHA,

Your letters are coming infrequently now. I do not worry as I
have understood the reason. I hope that you at least have not been
hurt over my Bengal tour. How is Arun1 ? And how are you keeping
now ?
1

302

Addressee’s son

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

So far my tour can be said to be proceeding very well.
Moreover, God is giving me the energy for this hectic travelling.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G. N. 1705

334. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA AND RAMAKRISHNA
CHANDIWALA
December 19, 1933
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

How is it that I have received so far no letter or wire ? I hope
that a suitable house has been found and your health is improving.
Send me all the news. It will do if I get a post-card daily and a wire
when necessary.
Blessings from

BAPU
BHAI RAMAKRISHNA OR SHRIKRISHNA,

Discussions should be avoided in the presence of Brijkrishna.
Stick to Doctors Ansari and Sen.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G. N. 2404.

335. LETTER TO TOTARAM SANADHYA
December 19, 1933
BHAI TOTARAMJI,

I got your letter. I like the scheme. It must be implemented as
far as possible.
I trust the children from Utkal give you satisfaction.
Hariprasad must be engrossed in service.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G. N. 2537

336. LETTER TO KALYANJI V. MEHTA
December 20, 1933
BHAI KALYANJI,

I got your letter. I am writing this reply in a running train. I did
hear about you from time to time. I hope your health is good. You
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

303

have been exercising good self-control in not coming to see me. We
can’t have any money to waste. How is Kunvarji ? Napoleon has
stopped writing to me now. Is Mithubhen all right now. How is the leg
? Write to me from time to time.

From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 2710.

337. REPLY TO CIVIC ADDRESS, MADRAS
December 20, 1933
MR. MAYOR, COUNCILLORS AND FRIENDS,

I deeply appreciate the honour you have done me this morning
by presenting me for the second time with an address.1 It is always a
matter of great pleasure to me to visit the South because, as you know,
I have relations with the South of a very long stand-ing. I came in
closest touch with the indentured Indian people in Natal as early as
1893 and some of you may recollect that my first contact in Natal was
not only with the South Indians but with the Tamil Indians, and the
very first case of distress that I had the good fortune to handle was
one in connection with a Tamil.1 Ever since that the South has bound
me with ties not to be surpassed by any other part of India.
You, Sir, may not know, but some of the Councillors and some
of the other citizens will perhaps recall the fact that when I first had
the honour of receiving an address at the hands of this great
Corporation, among the several names that I registered for myself was
that of an expert scavenger. It was at that time that I referred to the
condition of your public streets and how those streets were used for
insanitary purposes, even by men who should know better. I expect
that there has been a vast improvement in that direction. But today my
mission of scavenging is of a special character, a deeper character and,
as I found it, of a purely religious character, taking religion in its
broadest sense, not in the narrow sectional sense in which we, at the
present day, unfortunately use the term.
The reform I am aiming at today concerns a body of scavengers belonging to the Hindu society and does not make it none the
less religious in the broadest sense of the term. I feel that it is a deeply
humanitarian mission to which I have not hesitated to invite the co1

The Corporation had presented an address to Gandhiji on March 7, 1925; vide
“ Speech in Reply to Corporation Address, Madras”, 7-3-1925
1
Balasundaram; vide An Autobiography, Part-II, Ch XIX,

304

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

operatioon of non-Hindus within, necessarily, the limits that I had the
pleasure of mentioning before a body of mis- sionaries, I believe in
Jubalpore.1 As days advance, you will under-stand what this scavenging mission stands for. It stands for abolishing the distinctions of
high and low which untouchability undoubtedly means; but you will
not expect that, on my entering the Tamil land, I should give an
elaborate view of what I consider is the duty of the Hindu humanity
towards useful servants of society. That I must reserve for another
occasion.
Be it enough for the present, Mr. Mayor and Councillors, for me
to thank you once more for the address that you have been good
enough to present to me. I hope that I will carry with me throughout
my tour your sincere prayers in the mission that I have undertaken.
The Hindu, 20-11-1933

338. SPEECH AT ALL INDIA SWADESHI EXHIBITION
MADRAS

2

December 20, 1933
MR. PRESIDENT AND FRIENDS,

I have started out in Madras under happy and good auspices. I
had the honour of receiving an address from the Corporation and now
I have the honour of receiving another address from the Southern
Indian Chamber of Commerce at the hands of my friend Mr. Jamal
Sahib.3 I have the pleasantest recollection of the long conversations
with him in London not more than 18 months ago or something like
that. We dicussed then things of interest common to the whole of
India and now I find myself again in his company. With your blessings, friends, I look forward to the success of my mission in Madras
and later on in the whole of Tamil Nadu.
You have, Sir, asked me to declare the Swadeshi Exhibition
open. All of you may not be aware that I am a man who thinks and
chooses things. I regard myself somewhat as an expert in matters of
swadeshi. I have been instrumental also in organizing more than one
exhibition of this kind in India. You cannot have everything that
grows or is manufactured in India exhibited. You will naturally have
1

Vide “Speech at Leonard Theological College”, 7-12-1933.
Gandhiji opened an exhibition organized by the Madras Mahajan Sabha in
the morning.
3
Jamal Mahomed
2

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

305

to make a definite choice in things if you are to make an exhibition
of this character of educative value for the public. For instance, you
would not exhibit any seeds that grow in India like grass. You have to
pick and choose those seeds and grains which you want to introduce
to the public. I have given, friends, only an illustration out of many
that crowd my memory now. I have spoken about this in order to
introduce to you a very delicate thing.
I do not accept invitations to open all and every swadeshi
exhibition. I want to know whether the delicate wines produced in
India are exhibited also. If they are, naturally, the fanatical prohibitionist that I am, I will say to you: “Thank you, but I can-not open
this exhibition, where wines, which are harmful to the moral and
economic well being of the country, sparkling though they may be,
are exhibited”. Not equally on the same lines, but somewhat on those
lines, I object also to open exhibitions where mill cloths, may be
hundred percent swadeshi, are exhibited. I do not say it is injurious in
the same sense that wines are. But if I am expected to open an
exhibition of manufactured mill-cloths—and not things made in
cottages in India—you will make a very poor show. I do not want to
pit myself against mill-cloth. What I want to say is this. If you go into
the history of the mill industry in India, you will discover it does not
need a swadeshi exhibition for its distribution. The mills themselves
are their own swadeshi exhibition. They have got all the facilities of
their own. But what of khadi ?
I do not want to say I have opened a swadeshi exhibition where
all sorts of things are exhibited. It must be an exhibition, not only for
your edification but of instruction to those to whom it should be
useful. I have opened exhibitions in other places and I have been
asked to open in a very big city like this a swadeshi exhibition. I had
therefore to introduce this word of caution. Now, do you or do you
not think of the various needs of the Harijans ? As you know, I am
under a self-imposed vow, during seven or eight months that remain
for me, to do some kind of propaganda work for Harijans. I have
restricted myself predominantly to do Harijan work and no other
work. I can talk to many people on varied subjects and there is no end
to the varied subjects that do or can interest me. At the present
moment, I propose to confine myself to the few things that are
necessary for the Harijan cause.
What can a swadeshi exhibition do for Harijans, you may ask.
I think khadi has got a great deal to do with it, because the
introduction of hand-spinning and hand-weaving of cloth, you will
be surprised to know, has brought a ray of comfort and light into the
dark homes of thousands of Harijans. I had the good fortune to go to
306

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

many Harijan homes even during this brief tour and discovered the
potency of khadi for Harijans. You will also be surprised to know that
there are many things—I hope those things are exhibited here—at
which Harijans have worked for the most part, if not entirely. There is
the leather industry. The leather industry will be nowhere in India but
for the initial work which the Harijans put into it. You will not expect
me to take you into the history of it; my friend, Jamal Sahib, will give
you chapter and verse about it. But I can tell the history in terms of
rupees, annas and pies. Not less than nine crore rupees worth of hides
go out of India which, if we are to deal honourably by Harijans, will
all be absorbed in India, or at least not leave the shores in the raw state
in which the hides are now sent. I can multiply instances. But I do not
want to detain you or detain myself.
I have great pleasure in declaring the Exhibition open and I
hope you will take advantage of this Exhibition, make it of educative
effect, interest yourself in these things that have been brought to the
stalls and trace the history of their manufacture and then you will be
surprised at the resources the poorest country in the world has at its
disposal if we would only work at them intelligently and also work in
co-operation with the downtrodden millions in India. If you would get
off their backs and treat the Harijans, the Mahars and the other
oppressed and depressed classes as our own comrades entitled to the
same privileges and the same honour that we claim for ourselves, then
in spite of the tremendous handicaps under which we are working this
land of ours can become a land of plenty, a land of prosperity and not
of downright pauperism in which the country now is.
I thank you for inviting me to open this Exhibition and I hope
the public will generously patronize it.
The Hindu, 20-11-1933

339. SPEECH AT WOMEN’S MEETING, MADRAS
December 20, 1933
SISTERS,

It gives me great pleasure to be able to renew your
acquaintance. This is not the first time that I am addressing a meeting
of ladies in Madras. I have before me an extremely heavy programme
to be gone through inside of forty minutes. Therefore you will excuse
me for being very brief.
I have come here to ask you to do one thing. Forget altogether
that some are high and some are low. Forget altogether that some are
touchables and some are untouchables. I know that you all believe in
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

307

God as I do, and God cannot be so cruel and unjust as to make
distinctions of high and low between man and man and woman and
woman. This untouchability is the greatest blot on Hinduism. And I
have not hesitated to say that, if untouchability lives, Hinduism dies. If
only to use man’s language, God has been patient with us but I have
no hesitation in saying that even God’s patience can be exhausted,
and He will no longer be patient with this atrocity that man is doing
towards man in Hindu India.
Gandhiji made a break in his speech at this juncture and said :

You have not given me the purse.
Dr. Muthulakshmi Reddi immediately handed to Gandhiji the purse, saying
that it contained cash to the extent of Rs. 430.

You have given me a lean purse. But lean or fat the purse is
meant to serve Harijans.
Dr. Muthulakshmi Reddi said that many of them had contributed liberally to
the purse that was going to be presented to Gandhiji at the public meeting at Tilak
Ghat.

That is the excuse you want to give; all right, I see you are all
for equality with men.
I regard this purse as token on the part of the donors of their
desire to do some slight reparation to those whom we have injured in
the name of religion.
Well, anyway, ladies have parted willingly with their jewellery,
some with their rings, others with their bangles and necklaces and
so on and I invite you to do likewise, but on this understanding, that
the jewellery you may part with is not to be replaced and that you
should consider the giving as a privilege in connection with the
Harijan movement. I conclude with a prayer to God Almighty that He
may bless this effort and that He may so change your hearts that you
will forget the distinctions between touchables and untouchables.
There is one thing which a sister wants me to say and which I
gladly do, namely, to put in a word on behalf of Hindi. I expect that
some of you would like to serve in other parts of India, in the
northern parts of India. You cannot mix with the masses in the North
unless you understand Hindi. Know that 22 crores of the people of
India know and understand Hindi. Enlightened sisters of the South
cannot neglect the language of the 22 crores.
Well, I have finished, and those who want to part with their
jewellery can do so.
The Hindu, 20-11-1933
308

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

340. SPEECH AT STUDENTS’ MEETING, MADRAS
December 20, 1933
STUDENTS AND FRIENDS,

You are not new to me nor am I new to you. I remember you
well. In 1896 when, of course, many of you were not even born, I
made the acquaintance of the students of Madras, when I was an
unknown man to you or for that matter to anybody else except those
who are called the ‘coolies’, that is to say, the people of Tamil Nadu. I
was even at that time known somewhat amongst them, but I remember
what a welcome you gave me at that time. I thank you for the purse
that you have given me as also for the address you have presented to
me. I do not need to argue with you, and to convince you that
untouchability is the greatest blot on Hinduism. I do not need to
convince you that after all the education you have received, if you
believe in the distinction between man and man, all your education is
worthless; but I do want you to realize, if you are convinced, as you
state in your address you are convinced, that untouchability is an evil,
which we should get rid of. I want you to serve the cause; I want you
to serve the Harijans. I had expected you to say in your address in
what way you had served them. When I received an address from the
students of Delhi, they told me in what way they were serving the
Harijans of Delhi, and even the Harijans outside Delhi in the villages. I
hope you will follow their example. They did not pretend that they
had done wonders. They made some time ago an humble beginning. I
wonder if you also had made an humble beginning—I wonder if you
know how much you can do in order to ameliorate the conditions of
Harijans and how much you can do by silent service to rid ourselves,
our society, of this blot. The way to convince the society that untouchability cannot be a part of religion and that it is a hideous error is
for you to develop character. You will show it in your own lives that to
believe in some people being touchable and some untouchable is not
only not religion, but it is the reverse of religion. Whereas, if you had
no character to achieve or lose, naturally people are not going to put
any faith whatsoever in you. You have got to move the masses. You
have got to change the hearts of the masses. Never mind what the
orthodox people who claim to have studied the scriptures may have to
say; they do not represent the masses nor do they represent the real
interpretation of the scriptures as I hold it. It may be that I am in
error, but in any case there are a few people who react upon the
masses, as you can also react upon the masses. I promise you that in
the end only those who are working among the masses will be the
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

309

deciding factor. Masses will not argue. They will simply want to know
who are the men who go to them and tell them that untouchability in
which they have believed for such a long time is an evil,and if they
find that those who have approached them, and told them that
untouchability is an evil have credentials, they will listen to them, and
if they have no credentials they will not listen. This is an incredibly
simple proposition that I have been putting before you which each
one of you can test for yourself.
How can you serve these men, who are living in your midst? I
have shown a way for the many students that I have addressed. Take a
broom and a bucket in your hands, not by way of tamasha, not by
way of a spectacle, but sincerely, and work with the broom and the
bucket and clean out all those dirty places of Madras. Go in their
midst and wean them from drink, teach them the elementary principles of hygiene and sanitation, to which most of them are utter
strangers, be it said to our disgrace. Having considered that they were
beneath our attention, that they were the lowest people on earth,
untouchable, unseeable and unapproa-chable and so on, we had come
to the conclusion that we need not attend to them nor take care of
what they were doing. They took us at our word and thought they
were not human beings, and that they were hardly animals, and so
they neglected themselves. They simply eked out a miserable
existence. It is in the midst of these people that you have got to go,
and bring to them a ray of light. I hope that you will go to these
places, and bend your backs and work in their midst, and assure them
that you are there not with any mental reservations, nor with any base
motives,but with pure motives and serving them with the motive of
taking the message of peace and love in their midst. If you will do that
you will imme-diately find that their lives are transformed as also
yours. I do not ask you to steal a single moment from the hours that
you may need for your studies, but I ask you to utilize your idle
moments, and I have no doubt that if each of you will examine
yourself, you will find that every day you have so many idle
moments. I do not ask you to give all your moments, but if you will
combine and will serve the Harijans in Madras, you will find a
revolution in their lives as also in your own lives. May God enable
you to understand this! May God give you the strength to follow this
message.
One thing more I have to tell you. I have lodged a complaint
against the students of Madras, namely, that, although they claim to be
part of India, and not particularly Madras, how can they neglect,
especially I say to my sisters, the language that over 22 crores of

310

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Indians understand, namely, Hindi ? You have got in Madras the
Hindi Prachar Sabha giving you all the facilities to learn Hindi. I
know that many students have taken advantage of the facilities, but I
am sorry to tell you that that is not enough. I had expected that your
address this time would be presented written in Hindi, and I had also
expected that you would call upon me to speak in Hindi. But I had to
give it up at once. I am now engaged in one mission and one mission
alone and therefore without taking much of your time and my time
on a discourse on Hindi, I began with the burden of my subject. I
close with this warning that when you begin to take upon your
shoulders the burden of the country, you will find what a great
handicap you are labouring under if you do not know Hindi or Hindustani. I thank you once more.
In conclusion, Mahatmaji said that he hoped that the students would relieve
him of the burden of the address. He would auction the same. As no bidders were
forthcoming, Mahatmaji said that ladies could also bid giving their jewels. He was
willing to give away the address for a pair of bangles or a ring. Thereupon two ladies
in the gathering sent up one bangle each. Miss Swaminathan gave away a pair and
took away the address.

The Hindu, 21-12-1933

341. SPEECH AT WOMEN’S MEETING, MADRAS1
December 20, 1933
DEAR SISTERS,

The Reception Committee of the Harijan Sevak Sangh has left
very few minutes for me; hence eager though I am to make your
acquaintance more fully than I can during the few minutes, I must
restrain myself and run away from you after saying a few words. It
gives me great joy to know that many of you are Harijans sisters. If
any demonstration was needed, this very meeting is an ocular demonstration; but for the knowledge that some of you are Harijan sisters I at
least should not know which are Harijans and which are not. It shows
that untouchability cannot be God appoin-ted institution. It is an
institution appointed by man at his worst. And it is for savarna Hindu
men and women to rise in revolt against that institution and blot it out.
It, therefore, gives me pleasure to receive for the Harijan cause this
1

Address on behalf of the Mother’s Association and the Harijan women were
presented to Gandhiji.
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

311

little purse from the Mother’s Assocation.
But I want to say one word now to the Harijan sisters. I
want them and I want the menfolk among Harijans to play their
part nobly in this movement of self-purification. There are three or
four things which undoubtedly demand attention. One thing is the
observance of the elementary laws of sanitation, purification of the
body. Those laws you should conform to. Then there is the question
of carrion-eating and beef-eating and I know some Harijans take to
these evil habits. These two things must be given up. The fourth thing
is not special to Harijans because many so called high class indulge in
the bad habit that I am about to mention. And that is the drink evil.
No matter what the so called high class Hindus may or may not do,
you, at least, should tell the menfolk; and if you are also given to that
habit then you yourself give up that habit altogether. Having worked
for the last 50 years amongst the poor people and amongst those who
are given to drink, I know what I am talking about. I saw in Natal, in
South Africa, our own sisters dead drunk and wallowing in the gutters.
When they were dead drunk, they did not know the distinction
between good and bad. You will, therefore, save yourselves from it if
you are addicted to that habit. May God give us all, Harijans or not,
the strength to follow the message that I am endeavouring to give
throughout the length and breadth of India.
The Hindu, 21-12-1933

342. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, MADRAS 1
December 20, 1933
This is a wonderful demonstration that you have made of your
affection. I hope that every one of you realizes the seriousness and
magnitude of the mission that I am trying to carry out in the name of
God, for His sake and for His forsaken children whom we have come
to understand as ‘Harijans’. There can be, in God’s eyes, no distinction between man and man even as there is no distinction between
animal and animal. Had God designed one part of humanity to be
lower than the other. He would have put some distinguishing mark
upon parts of our bodies whereby these distinctions could have been
unmistakbly seen, felt and demonstrated.
Go where you will from end of India to the other, you will fail,
1

The meeting held at Tilak Ghat on the Triplicane Beach was attended by over
one lakh people.

312

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

as I have failed, to notice any such distinguishing feature in connection with those who call themselves high caste Hindus and those
whom high-caste Hindus describe as ‘untouchables’, ‘invisibles’ and
what not.
I therefore ask you seriously to consider this urgent question. I
have said, and I repeat what I have said from a thousand platforms
before this vast audience, that if we do not remove root and branch
untouchability from our hearts, we are a doomed race, and Hinduism
like many other ‘isms’, will perish and the discredit will be ours.
In the midst of this din and noise, I must not put before
you the implications of this great movement. Suffice it to say that
when untouchability is removed from our hearts Harijans will
feel the glow of freedom, and then we would treat them as we do ourselves, we would know that they have the same rights absolutely and
without exception as we have, and that ‘Harijans’ would be subject to
the same discipline that savarna Hindus are. If by God’s grace this
message reaches your hearts,we shall forget all distinctions of high
and low.
Now I would like you kindly to disperse quietly so that I too can
go safely to my car. You must kindly go back to your homes. The
proceedings are finished.
The Hindu, 21-12-1933

343. SPEECH TO CHILDREN1
MADRAS
December 21, 1933
Little children, boys and girls, only one word. Remember that
little children also have to play their part in this movement of
purification. And the only thing that I want to say is : ‘Children, be
always good and always remember God in all troubles.’
The Hindu, 21-12-1933

344. SPEECH AT ROBINSON PARK, MADRAS
December 21, 1933
I thank you sincerely for the addresses that you have given me.
I thank you equally for the purse and the gifts that you have
1

Gandhiji visited the Bharat Sabha, Vellala Teynampet, which was running a
night school and religious classes for Harijans.
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

313

presented to me. All these moneys will be used for the uplift of
Harijans. For this great movement of self-purification, I want men and
women to take their full share. Let us shed all our vices and bad
habits. Let us pray to God that He may give us pure minds. If any one
of you is addicted to carrion-eating, give up that bad habit. Observe
the rules of hygiene and sanitation. Educate your children, and give
up the drink habit, if you are in the habit of drinking. It is one of the
greatest enemies of the human race. That many savarna Hindu drink
spirituous liquors is no reason for Harijans to drink it. It is drink that
makes men mad and makes them forget the distinction between wife,
mother and sister. May God give strength to you to go through the
process of purification. Now, you will excuse me for not giving up
more of my time. I have still a big programme to carry through.
Finally, I ask you to give me free passage without any noise. I thank
you for this magnificent demonstration of your affection and interest
that you take in this movement of purification. May God bless you.
The Hindu, 22-12-1933

345. SPEECH AT LABOURERS’ MEETING, PERAMBUR1
December 21, 1933
FELLOW LABOURERS,

I thank you for the address you have given me.
If you will make common cause with labour all over India, you
ought to be able to understand Hindustani. Unless you do that there is
no junction between the North and the South. But that is not the
burden of my mission tonight. Tonight I want to tell labour that
labour at least should have no distinctions of high and low.
Having lived in the midst of labour for the last forty years, I
know to my great sorrow that among labourers also there are
distinctions. There are Harijan labourers and non-Harijan labourers.
Even among non-Harijan labourers there are distinctions. You must
forget these distinctions. Harijan labour and non-Harijan labour are
all absolutely one. I say to those of you who claim to be Hindus that
there is no warrant in religion for untouchability as we observe it
today.
It is impossible that God who is the God of justice could
possibly make those distinctions that man observes today in the name
1

In reply to the address presented by the Madras and Southern Mahratta
Railway Employees’ Union.

314

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of religion. Lastly, those who are given to carrion-eating or beef-eating should give these up and if labour is to come to its own, you must
give up the wretched habits of drink and gambling. I know that these
two vices have degraded labour and desolated many homes among
labourers. I therefore hope that you will give up the evil habits of
drink and gambling. May God give you the strength to shed the evil
of untouchability, drink and gambling.
The Hindu, 22-12-1933

346. NOTES
GARLANDS

It is devoutly to be wished that organizers will wean people from
presenting me with garlands of flowers. If garlands must be presented,
they should be of charkha-spun, even, strong and fine yarn, which can
be used without difficulty for weaving purposes. Garlands are not
produced without money or, which is the same thing, labour. All the
money and all the labour available is required for Harijan service.
And, in any case, I cannot afford to have labour or money spent for
my pleasure, vanity or glorification. The showering of flowers is an
injurious custom. The hard stems of yellow flowers, when they are
thrown from a distance are calculated to break eye-glasses and injure
the eyes. My eyes have, more than once, narrowly escaped damage
from these stems.
Let the money thus saved be used for adding to the purses
collected. Indeed, I notice that there is room for economy in most
arrangements. Motor-cars are used too lavishly. Only those of the
local persons whose presence is necessary should accompany me from
place to place. Workers are trustees for the Harijan cause, and as such
they are expected to guard the Harijan chest with greater care and
vigilance than they would bestow upon their own.
AUCTIONS AND JEWELLERY

I have seen a paragraph in a newspaper adversely criticizing my
appeal to the women for gifts of jewellery and my auctioning things
received as donations. Indeed, I would like the thousands of sisters
who attend my meetings to give me most, if not all, of the jewellery
they wear. In this country of semi-starvation of millions and insufficient nutrition of practically eighty percent of the people, the wearing
of jewellery is an offence to the eye. A woman in India has rarely any
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

315

cash which she can call her own. But the jewellery she wears does
belong to her, though even that she will not, dare not, give away,
without the consent of her lord and master. It ennobles her to part
with, for a good cause, something she calls her own. Moreover, most
of this jewellery has no pretension to art, some of it is positively ugly
and a harbinger of dirt. Such are anklets, heavy necklaces, clasps worn
not for adjusting the hair, but purely as a decoration for unkempt,
unwashed and often evil-smelling hair, or row upon row of bangles
from wrist to elbow. In my opinion, the wearing of expensive
jewellery is a distinct loss to the country. It is so much capital locked
up or, worse still, allowed to wear away. And in this movement of selfpurification, the surrender of jewellery by women or men I hold to be
a distinct benefit to society. Those who give do so gladly. My
invariable condition is that on no account should the jewellery
donated be replaced. Indeed, women have blessed me for inducing
them to part with things which had enslaved them. And in not a few
cases men have thanked me for being an instrument for bringing
simpli-city into their homes.
Now a word about auctions. I have seen nothing wrong about
them. They set up a healthy rivalry and are an innocent method of
evoking the generous impulse in man or woman for a noble cause. I
have resorted to the method now for years without ever noticing the
slightest civil effect produced by these auctions. Why is it wrong to
pay a price beyond its intrinsic value for an article which one prizes,
even though it be as a memento, if it is not wrong to pay fabulous
prices for worn-out manuscripts of authors reputed to be great ?
Surely, the price of an article is what a man voluntarily pays for it.
And let it be remembered that people who bid at my auctions do not
pay fancy prices for pleasing me. I know they do not. I can recall
occasions when I have not been able to induce bids, even though the
audiences have been otherwise as enthusiastic or responsive as
anywhere else.
ABUSE OF F ASTING

Cases of abuse of fasting have recently come under my
observation. One person wrote threatening to fast if I did not send my
autograph, three if I did not visit their places during the tour and
another if his village did not produce Rs. 5,000 for khadi, Harijan and
kindred constructive activities. I have no doubt that all these are
instances of abuse of fasting. Why should I give my autograph, or visit
316

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

a place or workers find money under threat of a fast ? There should
be a moral obligation on the one against whom a fast is taken. Fasts
are legitimately taken in the interest of some public good or for doing
service to those for whom they are taken. I am well aware that the
dividing line between use and abuse is often too thin to be noticeable.
The better test, therefore, perhaps is whether the person fasting has
undergone the requisite discipline for taking fasts calculated to
influence conduct other than his own. In the cases quoted, so far as I
can see, there was utter absence of qualification or previous preparation. Moreover, legitimate fasts, even if repeated by many, should
be capable of response. In the cases under consideration, if a thousand
persons asked for my autograph, or a thousand workers in a thousand
village desired my visit to their places or a worker required poor
people to pay the money he wanted, it is clear that response might
easily be a physical impossibility.
Harijan, 22-12-1933

347. SPEECH AT GEORGE TOWN MEETING, MADRAS
December 22, 1933
FRIENDS,

Up to now we have done no business. What has happened is, the
precious few minutes that are at my disposal have been taken away in
the reading of addresses. Therefore, before I get the right to speak to
you, I must do some business. (Laughter) I must ask you now to
dispossess me of all these trinkets that have been given to me and
exchange them for pure gold. (Renewed laughter) Then, I cannot be
guilty of stealing away this diamond ring; and I shall, therefore, have
to offer it to you.
I shall now begin the business portion of the meeting.1
Gandhiji then spoke a few words in Hindi, thanking both the donors and the
successful bidders for the help they had thus rendered for the cause of the Harijans.
This was a great punyakaryam 2 , he said; and in such acts of service, they must feel a
pride. He exhorted them to remove from their hearts notions of high and low because
of birth. Untouchability, he reiterated, was a great sin; and whoever made a resolve to
rid his heart of this impurity of treating a certain section of his brothers as
untouchables was really a better man. Gandhiji then explained in a few words why he
called untouchables Harijans. He had learnt in Tamil a great saying—
1
Gandhiji then auctioned the articles presented to him. Several ladies offered
him jewellery.
2
Meritorious act

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

317

Dikkatravarukku deivametunai

1

, and this indeed was the justification for the name

‘Harijan’ as applied to this class of unfortunate people. It was not his own coining; it
was an untouchable who persuaded him to use it. He then concluded with an appeal to
their hearts to cleanse their religion by removing the blot of untouchability.

This is a great yajna; and and I wish to God that He gives you
wisdom to take your proper place therein.
The Hindu, 22-12-1933

348. SPEECH AT JAIN MANDIR, MADRAS

2

December 22, 1933
Now I proceed to business. You people go to far-off lands
exploiting people and amassing wealth. I am now going to exploit
you.
The audience greeted this statement with laughter and cheers. Putting up for
auction an ivory casket, Gandhiji said :

What will you give for this ?
The first bid for the casket which would be worth roughly Rs. 15, was Rs. 101
by Mr. Ramnath Goenka.

Get along, Rs. 101 is nothing for you, Gujaratis assembled here.
Rs. 201 was the next bid.

Shall I let it go . . . Once, . . . twice, . . . I will not yet say
“thrice” . . . . There is yet time. . . . A few hundred is nothing to
you.
You know I have come on a mission of reform. It is the cause of
Truth, as I see it, and I appeal to you to help in it. The purse you have
presented me is a poor one compared to what you can afford.
Proceeding, Gandhiji said that the work of Harijan uplift he was now engaged
in was a sacred one. So far as he could understand the spirit of the Vedas, he saw
nothing to warrant distinctions of high and low, touchable and untouchable. In the
eyes of God, according to true advaita 3 , all men were equal. It was only maya that
made them see such distinctions between man and man. They must no longer consider
their fellow-men as untouchable or unseeable. Could any man say that his head or eye
or ear was superior to his hand or feet or any other part of his body ? All were equally
important. Similarly every section of society was important as any other and they
must look on all men as equal. He saw nothing in this doctrine that was against the
dictates of dharma. He had full confidence that the work he was carrying on was God’s
1
2
3

318

“God is the help of the helpless.”
The Gujarati, Marwari and Sindhi residents welcomed Gandhiji at 9.30 a. m.
Non-dualism

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

work and that it was the path of Truth. He prayed to God to confer prosperity on them
and he appealed to them to utilize their wealth in the service of Truth and their fellowmen.

The Hindu, 22-10-1933

349. SPEECH AT VAISHYA ASSOCIATION

1

MADRAS

December 22, 1933
Since ancient times, we have been taught that before God,
elephant and ant, Brahmin and Shudra are alike. So also are they alike
before a samadarshi’2 or seer. What a pundit or sage does, a prakrit
or man of the world should do. Religious injunction is the same for
both. You cannot teach truth to a pundit and untruth to a prakrit man.
Vaishyas believe that untruth will do in business. But this is not what
the Shastras or dharma teaches. In the universal religion, there is
neither high nor low. The distinction between high and low is the root
of all our sorrows. The abolition of untoucha-bility is a shuddhiyajna3
for Hindus. What you gave today is your share in the shuddhiyajana
and is the earnest money of your pratijna.4
You ask me whether purification can come from inner or outer
forces. The question is well put. Purification by outer means is
valueless. If I forced you to bow to me, it would be against dharma. It
is only by the inner effort that religious objects can be achieved.
I beseech you to do that willingly today, which you will be
compelled to do hereafter.
The Bombay Chronicle, 27-12-1933

350. SPEECH AT ANDHRA MAHA SABHA, MADRAS
December 22, 1933
After unveiling the portrait, Gandhiji said that Mr. Nageswara Rao Pantulu in
flesh and blood was different from Nageswara Rao Pantulu in canvas. The latter
1
The Southern India Vaishya Association presented an address to Gandhiji.
The speech, delivered in Hindi, was translated into Telugu by K. Nageswara, Rao
Pantulu.
2
One who sees all as equal; vide “ Discoures on the Gita”, 29-9-1926
3
Purifying sacrifice.
4
Pledge; the reference is to the pledge taken at Bombay on September 25,
1932; vide “ Resolution at the Hindu Leaders Conference Bombay”, 25-9-1932

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

319

became a static personality. Ever since he had known Mr. Pantulu he had one
speciality about him and that was that Mr. Pantulu always believed in giving himself
away to those who needed him or his help. Mr. Nageswara Rao Pantulu had told him
that the bulk of the profits he made from ‘Amrutanjan’ 1 went to the relief of the
distressed, to help those who were in need. Mr. Nageswara Rao Pantulu had absolutely
no other purpose. Mahatmaji prayed that Mr. Nageswara Rao Pantulu might continue
to evolve from step to step till at last everybody could go to him and get comfort and
help. They must all translate in their own lives all the noble qualities that they found
in or imputed to Mr. Nageswara Rao Pantulu.

The Hindu, 22-12-1933

351. SPEECH AT HINDI PRACHAR SABHA CONVOCATION 2
MADRAS,

December 22, 1933
After apologizing to the graduates and pracharaks 3 for his inability, due to
pressure of time, to hand over to them their respective degrees in person, he assured
them of his congratulations and blessings. He had very little by way of advice to give
them for what there was to say had already been said by Mr. Tripathi.4 But one point
he would like to emphaize—about the need for following that advice. Hindi prachar
in South India, and as he had seen, more particularly in Andhradesha, had made steady
progress; but he would not be satisfied unless Hindi was understood by everyone to
such an extent that not one would desire him to speak in English. His appeal to them
was to push on with their work with courage and determination. They had started well
and he hoped they would carry it on. It was stated that Hindi presented some peculiar
difficulties to people of these parts of India. Perhaps this was true to some extent. But
he felt no Indian language would present any insurmountable difficulty to an Indian.
There was an element of Sanskrit common to all Indian languages which, so far as he
could see, should make it very easy for them to gain at least a working knowledge of
any Indian language. They found no difficulty whatever in mastering a foreign
language like English or even such difficult languages as Tamil. Why should Hindi,
therefore, present any great difficulty to them ? It was the language of 22 out of the 35
crores of India’s population, and it was bound to be the common language of India.
It was stated by some, Gandhiji said, that Muslims could not understand Hindi
and they understood only Urdu. But he could see no difference between Hindi and Urdu
as they obtained among common folk. In Islamic books and a section of Muslims, it
was true that a large percentage of Persian and Arabic words were employed thus
1

Trade name of a balm
Gandhiji presided over the third annual convocation of the Dakshin Bharat
Hindi Prachar Sabha held at the Gokhale Hall.
3
Trained teachers; literally, ‘propagators’
4
Ramnaresh Tripathi, who delivered the convocation address
2

320

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

rendering Urdu difficult for Hindus to understand. Similarly, some Hindus also use a
large percentage of Sanskrit words in their books and conversation, making them
difficult for Muslims to comprehend. But when he talked of Hindu and Urdu being
identical he was not referring to this kind of Hindi or Urdu. He referred to only the
language in vogue among common folk in North India, which contained a good
mixture of Sanskrit, Persian and Arabic words and still was understood by everyone,
Hindu or Muslim. It was this language he wanted every one of them to learn to
understand and speak. Unless they did this, he was afraid people from the South could
not touch the heart of the masses in the North and vice versa.
The Hindi Prachar Sabha, he said, had been working in Dakshin Bharat for
over fifteen years and yet, he asked, what had people done to avail themselves of its
services and, by learning the language, to promote Indian national unity ? Did they
not find time and money to waste on the races, cinemas and amusements ? Could they
not spare a part of these for the learning of Hindi ? He had heard the Sabha was in need
of adequate accommodation and had been trying to acquire buildings of its own but
could not for want of funds. If everyone came forward to learn the language paying a
small sum for the Sabha’s services the necessary money could easily be found and the
Sabha need not continue expecting help from Northern India. It was the duty of South
India to make the Sabha self-dependent. He would therefore repeat his appeal that
South Indians must one and all avail themselves of the Sabha’s services and help in
this national work. 1

The Hindu, 23-12-1933

352. REPLY TO DEPRESSED CLASSES DEPUTATION

2

MADRAS,

December 22, 1933
Come in Rao Bahadur. Can I give you a chair ? Now, Rao
Bahadur, I have got your letter. Shall we begin with it ? Or what shall
we do ? Just as you would regulate the proceedings.
“Will you permit its reading ?” Mr. Srinivasan submitted. Gandhiji said :

Yes, you please.
. . . Mr. Bashyam Iyengar threw out a hint that the letter consisted of six
typed pages.

It all depends on Mr. Srinivasan, who is the Chairman here. But
so far as I am concerned, I have read it from top to bottom.
1

Gandhiji then auctioned the shawl, the convocation ‘robe’, which had been
presented to him at the beginning of the proceedings.
2
The executive of the Madras Depressed Classes Federation waited in
deputation on Gandhiji in the evening. The deputation consisted of R. Srinivasan, V.
Dharmalingam Pillai, Swami Sahajananda, P. V. Rajagopala Pillai and Pushparaj.
Others present were; V. Bashyam Iyengar, President of the Provincial Board of
Servants of Untouchables Society, K. Nageswara Rao Pantulu, V. Venkatasubbiah, K.
Bashyam and R. V. Sastri, Editor, Harijan.
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

321

Mr. Srinivasan suggested that it might be allowed to be read for the benefit of
his colleagues as there was hardly time to circulate it to them. Gandhiji asked Mr.
Pushparaj to go ahead.

You will excuse me, If I am not attending to it. Because, I have
almost got it by heart. In the mean time, I shall be putting my papers
in order.1
The best thing would be for me to take up point after point and
deal with it. What you say about the Poona Pact is common ground
between us; and I entirely endorse the view that if savarna Hindus do
not work the Pact in the manner it is intended it should be, it can
become nugatory and of no benefit whatsoever.2 I will admit that in its
entirety.
How far the Central Board at Delhi or the Provincial Boards
will be able directly to affect the elections, I do not know. I
think it is a very difficult and delicate subject. Therefore what I have
directed is that with these elections generally we should not interfere.
But we do interfere where injustice is done to a Harijan candidate.
When that happens, as it did in Bombay, we try to set it right.
Gandhiji related the Bombay incident at some length and mentioned his efforts
in effecting the withdrawal of the candidate (for election to the Legislative Council)
who had ranged himself against one who was a member of the Servants of India
Society, uniformly known to be decisively friendly to Harijan interests.

In Delhi there was the danger of the Harijan candidate not being
elected to the Municipality. We intervened and room was specially
made for the Harijan candidate. In Cawnpore, there was a Harijan
candidate and it was wrong for savarna Hindus to have opposed him.
I came to know about it after the election. The gentleman who was
defeated wrote to me; and I replied that it was wrong on the part of the
savarna rival to have so ranged himself against the Harijan candidate.
We tried our best to get this gentleman resign his seat. At that time it
was not successful. What has since happened I do not know. There are
other instances, as well.
I give these instances to show that where there is a Harijan
candidate, whose bonafides is not impeached in any manner
whatsoever, the Central Board have tried to influence the savarna
Hindu candidates to withdraw from the contest. But where Harijan
candidates are opposed to one another, or when savarna Hindus are
1

The letter was then read out and Gandhiji gave the reply.
The deputationists had apprehended that the Yeravda Pact would not be
effective in view of caste Hindus’ “tactics and unfair methods” and that they could be
prevented from electing men of their choice.
2

322

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

conducting the elections, the Board does not interfere—which you
really want the Board to do. You desire that the Board should so
regulate the elections or so influence the elections, as to have the right
type of men elected. But, I think, the Board will then lose its influence.
Today the Board is daily rising in influence, because of its absolute
neutrality except where, as I said, a Harijan stands to suffer. That is the
line of demarcation we have placed. If you examine the situation, I
have no doubt you will agree with me.
If you want to make this Board an effective instrument of
service, it must keep itself apart and aloof from politics, and when the
level of our character rises and the root that lies at the heart of
untouchability is affected and expelled, there would be levelling up of
everything all along the line. That is my hope. But with these lapses of
mere moral character, the Central Board should not interfere. Once we
endeavour to do that, I think, you would find that the whole of the
structure will fall to pieces.
The Board is absolutely unaffected by politics; and, as I have so
often said, the Harijan movement is purely religious. If I succeed in
doing so, and If the Board accepts that policy in all sincerity and
works it out earnestly, you will find nothing better for our purpose.
The movement will become purer, and the Board would be wiser and
achieve its ends quicker for its aloofness and abstention from direct
intervention in politics.
Passing on to the next point raised in Mr. Srinivasan’s letter, namely,
economic condition of Depressed Classes and the removal of untouchability, in
general, through the instrumentality of the Government, Mahatma Gandhi said that
he totally agreed with them—that the Board should not do a single act which would
interfere with the encouragement afforded by the Government; and the Board, he
assured, would not do it, no matter what views he held in connection with the
Government.

There is no doubt I have been holding very strong views against
the present system of government. It is a mischievious system, taking
the interests of India as a whole. But I cannot possibly apply that
doctrine in connection with Harijans, unless I would so throw myself
in the turmoil and resist the Government, there also. I cannot do it.
I say, honestly, I could not possibly resist doing it, if the
Harijans were capable of looking after themselves, as you [Mr. Srinivasan] are and as Mr. Pushparaj is. That is, so far as you individuals
are concerned. Taken as a mass they are absolutely helpless. When
they can help themselves, stand equal to savarna Hindus and brush
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

323

shoulders with them, I shall be at ease and then say : ‘No; I cannot
look to your interests.’ That I cannot possibly do.
Let them take all the advantage they can from the Govern-ment
and let them take all the advantage they can from the savarna Hindus.
The two mixed together will enable them to redress the balance
somewhat. Even then, I do not believe they would be able to redress
the balance because this crushing down that has gone on for ages is
not going to be lifted off entirely in a few years, no matter what
atonement is done by savarna Hindus. It would take a long time
before the Harijans come to their own and feel they are just as good as
they might be.
I can give you this absolute assurance that I shall never interfere
with the policy of the Government in so far as the Harijans
are concerned. Here also I will say I am conducting this tour in a
manner so as to disarm all suspicion; and I will never take advantage
of the Harijan movement in order to further the aims of the Civil
Disobedience Movement. It would then not be civil but criminal. I do
not ask your word of certicate. But I do say that I have never had any
criminal intention in all my life. In order to justify that civil nature, I
am keeping this Harijan cause apart. If, on the other hand, I wanted to
use it for a political purpose, I would not have hesitated to make an
open declaration that ‘of course, I am going to use the Harijans for
conducting the civil resistance movement’. No; emphatically no. On
the contrary, those Harijans who are living with me, and who,
according to their declarations, owe their all to their association with
me, pleaded with me to allow them to join the movement, when I was
disbanding the Ashram. ‘Why do you keep us aloof ? Are we less
patriotic and less capable of offering resistance ?” You dare not do
it,’ I warned, ‘because’, I said, ‘you, as represen-tatives of Harijans,
would be putting yourselves in the wrong.’
The Servants of Untouchables Society is today under the control
of men who cannot afford to offer civil resistance. Messrs A. V.
Thakkar and G. D. Birla are the moving spirits there. Not only that; all
Congressmen, who have got this civil resistance in them and wanted to
do so, are also prohibited from taking office in the Central Board,
Provincial Boards or any of their branches.
There still remains one question as to the activities of the Society
and its relationship with the Government. There again, I would say,
‘Do not put that weight on the Board’. If you do that, it would lose its
324

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

universal influence. I want the Board to have a universal influence and
its influence felt effectively everywhere. In matters you have mentioned, the Board will never interfere with the Government. The
government may even adopt measures that may be harmful. Then it
will be for you to put your foot down. We should not do it. There
again I endorse what you [Mr. Srinivasan] have said in your letter.
In your politics also you say you must be allowed to develop
along your own lines. I entirely grant it. There will be no interference
on the part of the Board. So then, when the Government’s policy is
questionable in connection with Harijans’ interests, it will be for you
and for you alone to decide whether to resist it, even by constitutional
and legitimate means. But so far as the Board is concerned, I will say,
‘We have drawn the line of demarcation and there we stand.’ If they
do stand, I know the Board will command the respect of the Government also. So all along the line, they will be acting on the square—all
right angles and no acute angle.
Now, to education.1 On this subject, I think the Central Board
can present you with an absolutely good record. Everywhere
scholarships are being given freely. So many hundreds of Harijans are
now in receipt of scholarships which they cannot get from the
Government or any other agency. We never say to a single person :
‘Do not go to the Government.’ That is not a policy which is
applicable to this Board. We encourage them to seek assistance from
the Government departments. Where there was not enough, the Board
supplemented it, We have done it in so many cases. That is our policy
in connection with education.
Then, ah! you say that repatriation is the result of my activities
in South Africa. 2 That is a very unkind cut. (Laughter) I say that
history will give a different verdict.
When I landed on the South African soil in the year 1893,
repatriation was on the anvil. Do you know that a Bill was actually
passed in the Natal Legislative whereby every Indian, who after
finishing his indenture wanted to settle in Natal, was required—to do
what ?
1

The deputationists had complained that the policy of admitting Harijan
children into common schools, where caste Hindus predominated, was not working
well and was not conducive to the educational progress of the Depressed Classes.
They sought Gandhiji’s help in raising funds for scholarships, stipends and for
establishing hostels.
2
The deputationists had stated that those who had been repatriated from South
Africa as a result of Gandhiji’s work were undergoing great suffering and hardship for
want of employment.
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

325

MR. R. SRINIVASAN : Pay poll tax.
GANDHIJI : How

much ?

MR. SRINIVASAN : £ 1 a head.

No fear. They stipulated £ 25. I resisted it. The original
intention was that after indenture had been finished, they must go
back. That is to say, indenture should expire in India. I promoted
petitions in the Natal Parliament. I did it through the mercantile
community, as it was not possible for me to do it through indivi-dual
Indians at that time. The provisions were altered in conse-quence; and
that is a matter of record. Therefore you will see, historically,
repatriation was taking place when I went to South Africa; and on my
going there, it became impossible. You then express your fear that this
untouchability movement may end as the movement in South Africa
ended. I wish it ended like that. (Loud laughter) Repatriation is now
voluntary and repatriates get money compensation. In 1893, it was
involuntary and compulsory without any compensation whatsoever. If
that was the crime I have committed—(Renewed laughter)—I plead
guilty.
Winding up this part of the discussion, Gandhiji said that the scheme of
repatriation had proved a failure. He knew it was a failure because he was in
correspondence with those who could speak with direct knowledge in South Africa. He
was guiding Indians there to the extent he could; and warning them against coming to
India where they would be outcastes even among outcastes. In these circumstances, he
said, he had nothing to repent for, in regard to South Africa.

Let me now come to the temple-entry question; and I will at
once say that I accept your point.1 If you say you do not want it at all,
I agree. But it is due to the savarna Hindus to say, ‘Come to our
temples. They are as much open to you as they are to us. It is entirely
your choice whether you will enter or not’. I do not invite Harijans to
take part in this agitation for temple-entry. But you can signify your
approval, if you wanted, that this is also your right, but you may not
exercise it. Or you may take a different attitude. That is entirely for
you to consider. But so far as I am concerned, it is simply a one-sided
thing. It is a matter of repentance for savarna Hindus and a change of
heart. You are entitled to come to those places which you consider to
be our sanctuaries. You have just as much right as any savarna Hindu.
When that right is recognized, it is for you to exercise that right or
not.
About the drink evil, Gandhiji said that he was always circumspect and careful
1

The deputationists had stated that they were not opposed to temple-entry but
it was not advisable for them to take active part in the movement.

326

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in offering advice to this community. 1 He was aware that it was prevalent among
other communities. But only the Harijans, who were under the great handicap of
having to fight uphill, could not afford it. They had got to be, like Caesar’s wife,
above suspicion.

The savarna Hindus may wallow in lakes of red water; but you
must fly away from it. I do not, however, want to wound your
susceptibilities. I tell you, gentlemen like you may take it amiss; but
the large body of Harijans don’t. After all, you and I know that I have
been working in their midst for years and years in order to wean them
from drink. Therefore, I think you ought not to seek to restrict my
freedom. You can certainly warn me; and I accept it—shall shape my
language in such a manner that it does not offend any person
whatsoever; and you may take it from me that I would not say a single
word to offend anybody.
Lastly to the name Harijan. You say that the Depressed Classes
were not consulted. They consulted me. That is the point. (Laughter) I
have visited all parts of India. ‘Why are we called Harijans?’ I am
asked. Why should they not have a better name ? That is the
generality of feeling. ‘For Heaven’s sake do not call us coolies,’ they
pleaded. At one time this word had a particular significance. A whole
race was called by that name. If it was not now used it does not mean
there has come about a change of heart. The offence to the ear has
been removed. That is what the new name has achieved. It is not, as I
said, my coining. An untouchable pleaded with me not to be known
by an expressioon of eternal reproach. ‘Depressed’ or ‘Suppressed’
reminded them of slavery, he very rightly said. ‘I have no name to
suggest; will you suggest?’ I asked. Then the man suggested
‘Harijan’. He quoted in support from Narasinh Mehta, the Gujarati
poet who had used it in his works. I jumped at it. I knew also the
Tamil saying Dikkatravarukku deivame tunai. Is not ‘Harijan’ a
paraphrase of it ? They are God’s chosen, who are outcastes. That is
what ‘Harijan’ signifies as applied to suppressed classes.
The certificate you have given in the last paragraph of your
letter 2 is too early for me. You all have listened to what I have had to
1

The deputationists had complained that there were several communities
which were addicted to drink and other evil habits and, therefore, to stigmatize the
Depressed Classes alone was unfair and unjust.
2
The deputationists had thanked Gandhiji for starting an unprecedented
movement in the cause of their community which had given ‘a great impetus to the
caste Hindus to banish untouchability’, and wished his mission a successful end.
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

327

say to the points raised. We shall all work together with the same end
in view. I am sure God is with us; and therefore success is assured. I
have no misgivings at all. I know untouchability is dying. To me the
monster seems to be still taking a few breaths; but they are last
breaths. (Loud applause)
MR. R. SRINIVASAN: I hope so.

Yes; we can honestly hope.
The Hindu, 23-12-1933
353 . INTERVIEW TO “MADRAS MAIL”
MADRAS,

December 22, 1933
Asked about his statement 1 that he had given Pandit Jawaharlal a power of
attorney to act for him as leader of the Congress. Party, Mr. Gandhi said that he had
noted the Pandit’s reply and the implication that he was joking when he made the
statement.

That is not wholly true. There was and is a serious background
to my statement. Having abandoned politics for the present, and
decided to devote myself to the elimination of untouchability from
Hinduism I cannot govern the Congress Party. When I am asked by
individuals to give my views privately on some point at issue I may do
so, but I am not in a position to define or discuss policies. This is
Pandit Jawaharlal’s work. And I have no desire to interfere with his
absolute discretion. Hence my remark about power of attorney.
Will not the Pandit’s well-known communist leaning mean that Congress
policy will be given a communist bias under his guidance ?

No. I do not think so. Jawaharlal is too honest a man for that. I
do not think he will depart from the fundamental Congress policy
without giving ample notice to his colleagues. I do not think that
Jawaharlal’s own views are yet sufficiently crystallized to make any
fundamental departure from Congress policy likely. He is a firm
believer in socialism, but his ideas on how best the socialist principle
can be applied to Indian conditions are still in the melting pot. His
communist views need not, therefore, frighten anyone.
Reminded that the masses cannot be expected to make fine distinctions
between ideological discussions and frank exhortations to pursue certain courses,
1

According to a report in The Hindustan Times, 15-12-1933, concluding the
discussion with workers in Delhi on December 14, Gandhiji had said that he “had
given general power of attorney to Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and asked those present to
discuss everything concerning the Congress and other things with Pandit
Jawaharlal”.

328

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Mr.Gandhi admitted that there was always a danger of the crowd misunderstanding a
speaker’s purpose but declared that it was not Jawaharlal’s intention to inflame
crowds.
Conversation then turned on communist opposition to large estates, which,
apparently, Jawaharlal shares.

I do not think that the land should be parcelled out. It would be
a serious loss if the influence of the big hereditary landholder were
wholly destroyed. I do think, however, that the actual cultivator should
have a title in the soil, and a larger share of its produce. At present, in
many places, he gets far too little. He should get a fair share and not a
bare maintenance.
Referring to agrarian movements in various parts of the country, Mr. Gandhi
declared :

Whatever the Government do, this tremendous awakening is not
going to die out. It has come to stay. What has impressed me most is
that it has been accompanied with so little violence, thus constituting
an unconscious manifestation of the effectiveness of non-violence.
Asked whether he had contemplated the danger of middlemen, in the shape of
money-lenders or marketing agents, etc., acquiring a foothold between the landowner and the cultivators as a result of recent land legislation, Mr. Gandhi replied :

It would be a deplorable thing if the middlemen got hold of the
land. We must safeguard the interests of the actual cutlivator, by which
I mean the man who himself tills the land. He may employ many
labourers to assist him, but so long as he works on the land himself he
fulfils my definition of a cultivating occupant.
My work for the Harijans is purely religious. It has no political
motive behind it, and is essentially humanitarian. It is in no sense of
the term a political movement.
But you will not deny that the movement must have political consequences ?

That is true. I do say that, though such political consequences
will be by-products of the movement, they do not constitute its
purpose. Any religious movement must have repercussions on other
aspects of life, for religion in its broadest sense governs all departments of life.
Mr. Gandhi admitted that the movement was liable to exploitation for
political purposes, and was aware of the assertions, voiced recently by Sir N. N.
Sirkar, that its purpose was to consolidate Hinduism againt the other minorities, but
he firmly and emphatically denied that he had any such object. In fact he declared that
he differed from the Hindu Mahasabha in this regard.

The Hindu Mahasabha’s activities are essentially communal, and
are designed to further Hindu interests as distinguished from other.
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

329

The Harijan movement has no communal bias. It aims at the internal
reform of Hinduism, at ridding it of artificial distinctions of high and
low. I am fighting for the same rights, without reservation, for the
Harijans that caste Hindus have in matters religious, social and political. I am not aiming at increasing the numbers of Hindu voters as
such. So far as one single person can, I am trying to keep this movement entirely free from politics.
When the scribe1 referred to the view held by many members of the minority
communities, Muslims, Christians, etc., that the political effect of the movement,
and the political end sought by others, whatever Mr. Gandhi’s own purpose may be,
is to secure the domination of a consolidated Hindu majority, overwhelming all
minorities by its numbers, Mr. Gandhi repeated his resolve to keep the movement
free from all taint of politics.

I want to absorb Christians, Muslims and others, as one
indivisible nation, having common interest, then minorities will not
feel themselves to be minorities. If untouchability is abolished, the bar
to closer intercourse between Hindus and the minorities will disappear,
and with its disappearance will come a new unity of aim and interest, a
new oneness. This Harijan movement is in no sense exclusive. It aims
at removing untouchability in every shape and form.
Reminded that Dr. Moonje recently declared that Hinduism included all,
Muslims, Christians, Parsis, and the rest, Mr. Gandhi replied :

The object of Dr. Moonje differs greatly from mine. They are
haggling over seats in the Legislature. That movement is solely
political, mine is non-political.
To question whether he approved of the bullying methods of some of his
lieutenants in the matter of temple-entry, Mr. Gandhi forcibly replied :

If anybody in the Harijan movement tries to use force he is
acting against my wishes. I try to keep the movement from descending to low levels, but there are difficult elements in any move-ment.
For myself, I refuse to open a temple unless satisfied that the wish that
it should be opened to Harijans is general. Recently I refused to open
a temple because the trustees seemed to be sharply divided. Only
where temple-entry is approved by an overwhelming majority of the
actual worshippers and by the trustees of the temple, will I consent to
open it.
Asked for his views on the Temple-entry Bills now before the Legislative
Assembly, Mr. Gandhi declared that the Bills were necessary to free the hands of
1

330

The correspondent

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

trustees and worshippers who might be willing to open temples to Harijans but were
prevented from doing so by judge-made laws.

Unless we free Hinduism from these restraints it will become
stagnant, and perish.
Unless we can root out untouchability from Hinduism it must
perish, it will deserve to die, and I will not regret its passing away. Untouchability must go. What I say to Europeans is : ‘Come down and
work with us as free citizens, rather than as members of the ruling
classes.’
Mr. Gandhi said that he was amazed at the warmth of the welcome that Madras
had given him, at the size of the crowd on the Triplicane Beach on Wednesday
evening.

It took me 30 minutes to reach the platform, and 45 to return
from it to my car again. There were over one lakh of people, and it
did good to see how Harijans and caste people mixed together in the
crowd. That would not have happened a few years ago. Untouchability is going.1
Madras Mail, 22-12-1933

354. INTERVIEW TO “THE HINDU”2
MADRAS,

December 22, 1933
As usual I have experienced nothing but deep affection from
the people wherever I have gone. But I must confess that I was unprepared for the demonstration at the Beach and the demons-trations
that I witnessed during the visits to several labour areas. The numbers
that attended these demonstrations everywhere exceeded past records.
Whilst there is no doubt that personal affection and attachment
had to do a great deal with them, I am convinced that the vast mass of
humanity that seemed to cling to me fully understood and appreciated
what I stood for and what I had come for. If their religious sense had
revolted against the drive against untouchability, the exhibition of
their affection, even if I could not have lost it altogether, would have
been tempered with moderation and restraint, if not reasonable coolness. I am used to reading the mass mind by taking at a sweep the expression in their eyes and their general demeanour. I could find no
1
2

A cutting of this report was enclosed with “Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru”.
Given on the eve of Gandhiji’s departure from Madras.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

331

trace of disapproval of what I have been doing in connection with
untouchability. The manner in which they came forward with their
contributions when I asked for them was also significant and went to
strengthen the impressions I have given. I am, therefore, filled with
hope for the future.
I feel that even in the South untouchability is shaken to its very
roots. I would like to say to my sanatanist friends that I have no desire
whatsoever to wound their susceptibilities. I want to find points of
agreement; and I know there are many. The points of disagreement
are few. If my approach to them cannot bring about immediate
agreement, I know that time will, if I have patience which I feel I have.
I would like to add one word as to the behaviour of the Police.
Today was really a trying time for them, as I had to pass through the
business parts of George Town; and it gives me pleasure to be able to
say that their behaviour was friendly and helpful. They became as it
were one of the people and handled them in a gentle manner. I am
grateful to them for this exhibition of friendliness.
The Hindu, 23-12-1933

355. MESSAGE TO TAMIL LOVERS’ CONFERENCE
December 22, 1933
I hope that the love of Tamil lovers will prove lasting and stand
the severest strain. The superficial knowledge that I have of Tamil has
enabled me to appreciate the beauty and the richness of the language.
To neglect it would appear to me to be criminal.
M. K. GANDHI1
The Hindu, 23-12-1933. Also C. W. 9699. Courtesy : Madras Library
Association

356. SPEECH AT GUNTUR2
December 23, 1933
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

Guntur is not new to me. I thank you for your address and the
purse you have offered to me. The lawyers of Guntur have subscribed
1

The signature is in the Tamil script.
Gandhiji’s speech in Hindi was translated into Telugu by
Venkatappayya.
2

332

Konda

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

a sum of Rs. 145. I myself was a lawyer once. I say I cannot accept
such a small sum from the lawyers. They are not so poor. I understand from this that the Guntur lawyers have not interested themselves
in the Harijan cause. This sum of Rs. 145 can be given by a single
vakil. I ask them, ‘What are you going to do ?’ I know the lawyers of
Guntur. That is why I am telling them so. Last time when I was here,
they gave me a bag of money. All days are not alike. Then money
was plentiful, now a little scarce.
I have just visited Mr. Punna Rao’s Gurunatheswara temple at
Tilakpet. Because of the name given to the deity, the temple has
become unpopular as the deity was named after the paternal uncle of
Mr. Punna Rao. In truth, there is nothing wrong in the name ‘Gurunatheswara’, though the name “Gurunath” may be wrong. In my
opinion God should not be named so as to perpetuate the memory of
a human being. It is not proper that the name of the donor should go
with the charity. This is my personal opinion. The name of the God
should not really matter. Mr. Punna Rao, the late Gurnadham’s
brother’s son, has told me that he has no objection to change the
name of the deity. The deity will hereafter be called ‘Gouri Vishweshwara’. I have signed the paper containing the new name.
Mr. Punna Rao wants to throw open the temple to the Harijans.
But I have asked him not to do it now and for this reason. Templeentry and change of name at one and the same time is not desirable
under the peculiar circumstances of the case. I am not against any
temple being thrown open to the Harijans. But I am not for
compulsion. When the bhaktas and the trustees are willing, the temple
should be thrown open to the Harijans. Now that the deity’s name has
been changed, the trustees and myself are anxious to see how many
of you will visit the temple. Three months hence from today, i.e., on
the 23rd of March next, this temple will be thrown open to Harijans. It
cannot be done unless public opinion favours it. If public opinion
favours it, the temple will be thrown open on the 23rd of March next,
by which time I hope the issue will be settled. I hope you will attend
this temple from now on and witness the entry into it by the Harijans
on the 23rd of March next.
If the savarnas do not do justice to the Harijans the Hindu
religion will perish. No religion perishes owing to extraneous causes.
It lies in nobody’s power to do it. But a religion will perish if those
who follow it tread the path of adharma.
The Hindu, 24-12-1933
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

333

357. SPEECH AT HARIJANS’ MEETING, THALLAPALEM
December 23, 1933
It gives me much pleasure to be able to come here. But I must
also tell you that it gives me much trouble. The car could not
negotiate its road to my satisfaction. Therefore, most of the way I had
to walk. Walking itself is no trouble. But the fact is I had no time and
yet I have to come here. The promise having been made, I have to
fulfil that promise.
By cutting the knot, I have performed the opening ceremony of
the Harijan Ayurvedic Kuteeram. I hope it will be a proper institution
for healing the ills of those surrounding this place. Though, through
the kindness of the organizers of this function, the address has not
been read to you, I have read it. The address is a report of your
present activities and somewhat your hopes for the future. I do wish
that your hopes for the future may be fulfilled, but as a worker of 50
years standing I want to utter a word of caution.
You have a very ambitious programme and if the managers
or trustees of your programme are vigilant, painstaking, honest and
men of unimpeachable character, it is just possible that you can
work up the programme. But if there is want of vigilance, want
of care, want of honesty, want of ability, I promise that not even
one item of your programme will be fulfilled. For my part, I will
appeal to the Harijan Sevak Sangh to give you an equal contribution
for the work you might do. Well, I can make this promise on behalf of
the Harijan Sevak Sangh, viz., that if you will produce a workable
scheme and men of character that will satisfy the Harijaan Sevak
Sangh, and if you produce proper accounts which can be inspected
from time to time by the Harijan Sevak Sangh, certainly the Harijan
Sevak Sangh will be able to render you help, financially. Therefore, if
you do not receive help from the Harijan Sevak Sangh you will have
to blame yourself and not the Harijan Sevak Sangh. But you will be
able to get help from the Harijan Sevak Sangh if you satisfy the
conditions I have suggested. As far as I know from the previous
history of the Harijan Sevak Sangh it never went back from the
promises it made.
The Harijan Sevak Sangh has enough of money to satisfy your
wants.
To those who have assembled here I appeal to make use of all
the institutions that may rise in your midst in every legitimate way
possible. I want to hear of Harijan institutions coming into being here

334

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and everywhere. The object of the Harijan Sevak Sangh is not to
displace your labours but to supplement them. The Harijan Sevak
Sangh will have more than justified its existence if it will be able to
serve Harijans properly. Therefore, you can easily under-stand that
the reputation of the Harijan Sevak Sangh depends entirely upon your
hands and your own approval.
One thing more I would like to say and that is the same I have
been repeating everywhere. That is this. In this movement of
purification Harijans will have to play an honourable and valuable
part. I repeat that you should all observe, if you have not already been
observing, the laws of hygiene and sanitation. It does not mean that all
savarna Hindus are living in sanitary conditions. As a Harijan by
choice, I ask you to rise above these things and purify yourselves,
unmindful of what savarna Hindus do or what they are. Similarly if
there are any Harijans, who are eating carrion and beef, I invite them
to give up these habits and, if they have never touched these things, I
want them to become missionaries and do propaganda work against
such habits. And then comes the drink curse. If you are, or any one of
you, addicted to drink, give it up, for drink is a poison. You should
not take that poison because many savarna Hindus also take poison.
You do not want to sink with savarna Hindu but you want to swim
with them, and if you have developed vigorous arms and can swim
well, savarna Hindus will also rise; I know for certain that the time is
coming in the near future when the Harijans will be able to help
savarna Hindus out of the mire in which they are falling. Therefore I
want every Harijan to work in robust faith.
To savarna Hindus I want to say one word. If you do not forget
all distinctions of high and low, rid yourselves and your hearts of
untouchability altogether, you and I and the Hindu race will perish. I
want you to believe this although thousands of persons may say
anything to the contrary. What I say is out of rich experience.
The Hindu, 24-12-1933

358. TESTIMONIAL TO P. M. RAO
December 23, 1933
Shri Poovada Mrityunjaya Rao was most attentive during my
day’s tour through Guntur District.1
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C. W. 9755. Courtesy : Andhra Pavilion in Gandhi Darshan,
Delhi, 1969-70
1

Gandhiji had covered Guntur District by car on December 23 in one day.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

335

359. SPEECH AT PEDDAPURAM
December 24, 1933
FRIENDS,

Let me tender you my congratulations on the most admirable
arrangements made in order to secure a straight passage for me to the
meeting place. You can well imagine that I have very limited energy
to work my way through pressing crowds. It was therefore most refreshing for me to find here that I had not to push my way through
crowds. I thank you for the several addresses and the purse just
presented to me and I thank you also for the restraint with which you
have refrained from desiring to read those addresses.
You know the purpose of this tour. I want you to join me in
driving out the curse of untouchability. I want you to join with me in
whole-heartedly believing that untouchability as we practise it can
have no religious sanction. The very thought that any single human
being can be born untouchable is most debasing. We are too near our
own times to notice how Hinduism is disintegrating under the load of
this heavy curse and I must repeat here what I have said from a
thousand platforms that if untouchability is not removed, Hinduism
dies. It therefore gladdens my heart when I see such a large number
of people gathering at this meeting and giving their coppers. But I
must not detain you and detain myself discoursing on this problem of
untouchability.
I have a heavy programme in front of me for the day. I will
therefore close by repeating my thanks to you for the admirable
arrangements, the address and the purse, and by the prayer that God
may give us sufficient strength to go through this process of
purification.
I would like to give a few brief minutes to the sale of these
frames containing the address and to the sisters here to discard their
precious ornaments. If any of you have not contributed to the purse
and desire to pay your share to this purse, you will kindly do so. But
now these two frames have suffered a reverse. The glass is broken. Let
this be a lesson for the future that no frames are presented to me. I
know that Andhra is an artistic province of India. You must therefore
discover the artistic and simple method of framing the addresses you
present.
The Hindu, 25-12-1993

336

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

360. SPEECH AT GOLLAPALEM
December 24, 1933
I first learnt to beg pennies from indentured labourers in South
Africa. Such collections have always been charged with refreshing
blessings. I cannot recall a single instance of a man or a woman who
repented for having given to me. Causes for which I have begged were
good. The Harijan cause for which I beg now is undoubtedly the best
for which I have begged. I am now inviting savarna Hindus to a
purificatory rite and to repentance. Whatever little a savarna Hindu
does for Harijans, he does to uplift himself or herself and Hinduism.
The Bombay Chronicle, 27-12-1933

361. SPEECH AT RAMACHANDRAPURAM
December 24, 1933
I am grateful to you for your addresses of welcome 1 and the
money you have given me. But what you paid does not satisfy me. I
expect more. I am now disposing of the two addresses presented to me
in auction.2
I congratulate you on the excellent arrangements you have
made for holding this meeting. This place is richly endowed by
nature; and beautifying things is a special characteristic of nature. By
God’s grace, you have not spoiled the beauty of nature but
maintained it intact. All of you know that you have in your midst an
ashram known as the Valmiki Ashram. I have just visited that Ashram,
which gives shelter to Harijan boys, and I had the pleasure of hearing
the bhajans and keertans sung by those boys. I was very much
impressed by them. They have presented me with a beautiful address
in which they ask for your support. The Ashram stands in need of
your support—from all of you; it deserves all the support that the
people of the taluk give it.
Nature intended all human beings to be equals; but man in his
arrogance has created invidious distinctions by classing some as high
and some as low. God does not recognize these inequalities. You may
1

Presented by the Ramachandrapuram Taluk Board and the Hindi Premi

Mandali
2

After the auction, Gandhiji’s speech in English was translated into Telugu by
B. Sambamurti.
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

337

see anywhere or anything in nature, but you cannot see this kind of
inequality which man has created. So unless you eradicate the evil of
untouchability, you cannot establish equality, which is nature’s law. I
ask you all to join me in my prayer to Almighty to give you strength
and courage to eradicate the curse of untouchability entirely. I do not
want to detain you longer. If you succeed in collecting any more
money among the ladies, you will please bring it to me.
The Hindu, 26-12-1933

362. SPEECH AT RAJAHMUNDRY

1

December 24, 1933
I would ask you to kindly listen to me for a few moments. I
thank you for all these addresses and several purses. It gave me very
great pleasure to be able to renew my acquaintance with Rajahmundry
and its citizens. You have taught me to expect great things from you
and I hope that you will in this Harijan cause, live up to the
expectations that you have raised.
I see here the address pesented by the Hindu Samaj. I have gone
through its programme that was sent to me. It is an ambitious programme; but no programme whether ambitious or unambitious can
possibly be fulfilled without the necessary change of heart amongst
the millions of savarna Hindus. Untouchability is like a slow poison
killing the Hindu body, and even as you cannot sustain a body that is
slowly perishing, you will not be able to sustain this perishing
Hinduism unless you remove the curse of untouchability.2
I am too sorry to have to inform you that it will be impossible
for me to go on with my speech unless I secure complete silence on
your part. Now by the time you sit down, I propose to do a little bit of
work and therefore I propose to put up this address by the
Municipality for auction.
The Hindu, 26-12-1933

1
2

338

The speech was translated into Telugu by B. Sambamurti.
At this stage there was some disturbance and commotion in the gathering.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

363. REPLY TO HARIJAN DE`PUTATION1
R AJAHMUNDRY,

December 24, 1933
One important question that you have raised is that the Harijan
Sevak Sangh should be principally manned and managed by you.
That shows that you have not followed the pages of the Harijan. That
shows also that you have not understood the origin of the Board. The
Board has been formed to enable savarna Hindus to do repentance
and reparation to you. It is thus a Board of debtors and you are the
creditors. You owe nothing to the debtors, and therefore, so far as this
Board is concerned, the initiative has to come from the debtors. You
have to certify whether the debtors discharge their obligation or not.
What you have to do is to enable and help them to discharge their
obligations; that is to say, you can tell them how they can discharge
their obligation, you can tell them what in your opinion will satisfy the
great body of Harijans. They may or may not accept your advice. If
they do not, naturally they run the risk of incurring your displeasure.
A debtor may go to a creditor and say to him, I have brought so much
money, will you take it ?’ The creditor may say, ‘Off you go; I want
full payment or none.’ Or the creditor may say, ‘What you have
brought is not part payment, but worse.’ All these things you,
creditors, can do. And so, when this Board was established and some
Harijan friends wrote to me, I told them that Harijans should form
themselves into advisory boards or boards of inspection. I want you to
understand this distinction thoroughly. You will please see that there is
no desire not to accept your advice or co-operation or help. I am only
putting before you the true and logical position. This is a period of
grace that God has given to caste Hindus, and it is during this period
of grace that they have to prove their sincerity. And I am moving
heaven and earth and am going about from place to place, simply in
order that this obligation on the part of savarna Hindus may be fully
discharged.
A member of the deputation then suggested that the Board should appoint
advisory committees of Harijans of its own selection.

Do not ask the Board to select a committee of Harijans, but
select your own committee and say to the Board you have elected
1

A deputation of Harijans from East Godavari District met Gandhiji at Rajahmundry.
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

339

these members and it should carry on correspondence with them.
There is another danger in the suggestion. There may be factions and
divisions among you. Different committees may be appointed by
different factions. The Board may recognize all of them. But that will
be unfortunate. Let there be no quarrels among you. Present a united
front to the debtors. The debtors may put you against one another,
though the Board, if it is worth its name, will not do that. The
Congress has been able to present a united front. Today, the Congress
is full of simple men like you and me. You should have a body of
business-like men who will put down with a strong hand all quarrels
among you. Then you will dominate the Board without being on it.
Do not be easily satisfied. Tell the debtors you are not going to be
satisfied with 5 shillings in the pound but that you must have 20
shillings in the pound. This is not a matter for bargaining.
Harijan, 5-1-1934

364. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
December 25, 1933
CHI. AMALA,

I have your letters. Whatever I did was done out of pure love.
That you did not feel the love is my misfortune. Anyway you need
not fear a repetition of the performance. You shall develop in your
own way. You know what is wanted. You will do it after your style not
mine. Only keep your mind and body fit. Do your Hindi in your own
fashion. Take care of yourself and your things. Keep your room and
yourself tidy. You should select good and easy Hindi books.
Do write fully and freely. Your letters have not hurt me. I am
first class.
Love.
Speigel Papers. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.

340

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

365. LETTER TO TARABEHN R. MODI
R AJAHMUNDRY,

December 25, 1933
CHI. TARA,

It was good news that the trouble about your teeth is over. Your
decision to go to Ahmedabad only after seeing Ramniklal is correct.
Now that the complaint about your teeth has disappeared, your health
should improve still further. Keep Ramniklal informed. I deliberately
don’t write to him. From the religious point of view, [my tour] is
progressing very well. The body also gives excellent work. You must
write to me twice or thrice a week.
Blessings to all from

BAPU
C HI. T ARABEHN MODI
C/ O DR. S HANTILAL
R EVASHANKAR JHAVERI’S BUNGALOW
S ANTA C RUZ
From a photstat of the Gujarati : G. N. 4178. Also C. W. 1677. Courtesy :
Ramniklal Modi

366. LETTER TO KUSUMBEHN DESAI
R AJAHMUNDRY,

December 25, 19331
CHI. KUSUM,

I have replied to your letter by wire. You have woken up too
late. You stopped writing to me. Every day I hoped I would get a
letter from you, but it seems you have resolved not to write. When I
got your letter, I already had a long list of recruits. Among them there
are three women; Mira, Kisan and Om. In all we are nine. What work
do you do at present ? How do you spend your time ? Does Pyarelal
write to you ? How is he ? Do you read Harijanbandhu ? My health is
fairly good. It can stand travelling all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 1849
1

The source has “December 26”. However, Gandhiji was at Rajahmundry on
December 25 in the morning and then left for Sitanagaram.
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

341

367. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
December 25, 1933
CHI. RAMA,

I got your letter. It is certainly good that you try to work with
the arm only little by little. There is plenty of other kind of work for
you to do.
You should not mind if Dhiru feels unhappy at being separated
from you. If his health remains good, he will in time become selfreliant in Bhavnagar. Dudhibehn’s company is bound to benefit him.
Moreover, Kusum also is there. Let him, therefore, stay on there
permanently. It will be enough if you continue to write to him
regularly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 5361

368. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
December 25, 1933
BA,

You must have got the long letter which I wrote to you last
Monday. This Monday we are in Sitanagaram. It is situated on the
banks of the Godavari. It is a small village, in Andhradesha, and has
an ashram in it. Being a village, it is completely peaceful. We came
here in a boat. The river is quite big and, therefore, small steamers can
sail on it. We visited Madras and spent three days there. Sastri was of
course there. I met Jethalal. Gangabhabhi lives in the city itself. I met
Jethalal’s wife, too. Both are in good health. Jethalal gets a pay of Rs.
150 and is, therefore, quite happy. I met Urmiladevi’s son also. There
was a large number of visitors. Lakshmi is quite well. Papa also is in
Madras. Lakshmi stayed with me all the three days. She was happy in
the company of Mirabehn, Kisan and Om. We shall be meeting once
again, for my tour of that part is incomplete. My health is all right. I
was again examined by two doctors. There is, therefore, no reason at
all for you to worry about me. Have Dahibhen’s teeth improved? Do
you get the Jam-e-Jamshed ? You asked for something like a

342

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

discourse. I think I must give you one today.
The chapters of the Gita recited today were IX, X, XI and XII.
In Chapter IX, the Lord says that those who worship Him attain to
Him. 1 In Chapter XII, He explains who should be called a bhakta.2
The beauty of the description is that it does not contain any quality
which even the most ignorant person cannot cultivate. Any man or
woman who strives unaided by another can become a bhakta and be
one with the Lord. The qualities mentioned are these. The bhakta has
ill will for nobody but is a friend of all and has compassion for all; he
has no feeling of personal attachment towards anything or anybody, is
devoid of ego, is equal-minded to happiness and unhappiness and is
of a forgiving nature. He is ever contented, is self-controlled and
keeps his vows; he has dedicated his mind and reason to God. He
causes pain to none and has no fears and worries, desires nothing, is
pure in mind and heart and skilful in work, has renounced everything
and treats friend and enemy with equal regard, is indifferent to respect
and disrespect, bears heat and cold, is unmoved by praise or censure,
looks upon wherever he happens to be as his home, that is, has no
home of his own, doesn’t speak unnecessarily and has a steady mind.
Such a person [says the Lord] may be described as my bhakta. If all
of you reflect over this deeply, you will realize that anybody who
wants can become a bhakta without help from any other person.
Blesssings to all from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, pp. 3-4

1
2

IX. 29
XII. 13 to 20

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

343

369. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
S ITANAGARAM,

December 25, 1933
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

You waited for a letter from me and I waited for one from you.
I was under the impression that I had not received a reply to my letter.
We are touring with such speed that I can’t remember dates or days. I
don’t remember, even, to whom I have to write and what. That I am
past sixty may also be one reason for this.
Chandrashankar has unnecessarily alarmed you about [my
rising] at three. If I did not get up at that hour, I would feel very
uneasy. You should insist, rather, on my going to bed early. That rule
is certainly not being observed just now. Still, all the doctors tell me
that my health has remained very good so far. Nor do I write as many
letters as you think I do. I write only such letters as I must. If you
were with me, you also would press me to write some of them. I must
admit that your complaint that I left you alone [in jail] is just. But the
problem will be solved by and by, I am sure. Stop worrying about me
completely. I don’t overstep the limits of my health. If you saw how I
work, you would admit that I was taking very good care of it. Or truly
speaking I should say that God has been preserving it. What would He
do, however, if I opposed Him ? That He has been saving me from
serious dangers is a sign that I have lost myself in Him. In Madras I
was in danger every day of getting crushed, but I was saved. That was
not man’s doing. It was God’s will. The rule about five hours has
been observed mostly on paper only.
I will certainly write to Ba every week. So far I have not let a
single week pass. God will keep her firm. Who else can do that? There
is no cause at all for worrying about Mani.
I had sent a wire immediately to Kanjibhai1 , and I had received
a reply both by wire and letter. I have again replied by letter and said
that he should not come thus far for my sake. If, however, he himself
1

344

Kanhaiyalal Desai of Surat

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

thought it necessary to come, he might certainly do so. I have even
given him [convenient] dates. I forgot to mention all this in my letter
to you. His letter was a fine one.
I think it will be difficult to meet Raja, though Lakshmi saw me
in Madras. She is running the sixth month and cannot, therefore,
move about freely. She keeps good health. Raja wants the delivery to
take place under his care. Devdas also will go to Madras. Lakshmi was
in good spirits. Raja will be released on 6th February.
. . . ’s 1 condition is the same that it has been. He is
discontented with himself. He is miserable because. . . . is again
pregant. He cannot exercise self-control and afterwards he feels
unhappy. I have tried my best to comfort him. But on the whole he is
better where he is.
Princess Aristarchi writes to me every week without fail. She
sends money too. There is no limit to her kindness. She is now
helping Trivedi’s Manu . . . . 2 I have written to the Princess and
requested her to explain to him his duty. It is true that Manilal and
Sorabji3 are quarrelling with each other. Their quarrel is about the
policy to be followed there. I couldn’t advise either of them in this
quarrel. But I have written to Manilal and told him that he should
follow what seems right to him, without departing from civility. I have
advised him not to make the quarrel a personal affair. I believe their
differences will be resolved.
Gordhanbhai continues to write about Vithalbhai’s donation. I
have not read all that he has written. I will take a suitable opportunity
to reply to him and then keep quiet. I had a very sweet letter from
Subhas. I did send it to the Press. I am sure it must have been printed.
The tour is going on very well. There is no heart-burning
anywhere. So far I have not met people in the South bent on creating
trouble. About the future, God alone knows. The crowds are as large
as ever. We are in Sitanagaram today. There is perfect peace here.
This is a small village. Today is my silence day. Tomorrow also I shall
be here. If I had not got these two days at one place, it would have
1
2
3

The names are omitted in the source.
Omission as in the source
Son of Parsee Rustomji

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

345

been difficult for me to go on with the tour.
I met Sastri1 in Madras for an hour or so. It was just a
friendly meeting. Munshi 2 and Lilavati3 came and saw me there.
Munshi seemed to be in good health. There was a wire from Bhulabhai. He has not recovered completely.
Kaka and Surendra Mashruwala are in Gujarat.
Kishorelal has still not recovered. Swami is in a place between
Sanoli and Bombay. I suppose you hear about him.
Have I told you that Kisan is in the party with me? She is a very
good young woman. Being a friend of Prema, she couldn’t but be so.
Blessings to all from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2 : Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 53-7

1
2
3

346

V. S. Srinivasa Sastri
K. M. Munshi and his wife
Ibid

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

370. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
December 25, 1933
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

I started to write a long letter to you, and dictated a page of this
size. That was in Jabalpur. Then I could not proceed further with that
letter. And now I am writing this one. It is the night of silence day, in
Sitanagaram. The silence is not yet over. I will break it at 9.30 p.m. It
is 8.30 p.m. only. It is not incorrect to say that I can write only on
Mondays and Tuesdays. I always get up at three in the morning and
write what I can between then and prayer-time. I may, of course, be
interrupted even during that period. When I am in a train, sometimes, I
cannot even get up at three.
I am having a wonderful experience during this tour. The
crowds are larger than they used to be in the past. But these numbers
may easily deceive us, for we have to reach crores of people. Nor is it
that all the people who come immediately change their way of living.
The only consolation is the thought that this propaganda does not
seem to displease all these hundreds of thousands. We can therefore
hope that sooner or later the practice of untouchability will disappear
completely.
You should make your study of the Gita thorough in every
respect. You should master both the grammatical construction and the
literal meaning of the verses. I am sure you can recite the verses with
correct pronunciation of the words. Again, the other reading may be
limited in extent but it should be deep. A person who digests one
book knows more than another who reads a thousand without
digesting any of them. Do you have a spinning-wheel with you ?
Wardha seems to have agreed with Vimu and Rama in every way.
Rama’s hand may become completely all right. Dhiru seems to be
happy in Bhavnagar, but we cannot still feel that the problem about
him is solved. He is still weak, but his health is much better than it
used to be. Dudhibehn does of course look after him carefully.
Kusum also is there. Nanabhai, too, takes care of him. Balabhadra is
very happy there.
Appa Patwardhan has come here to see me. He will leave now.
Kisan has joined me from Wardha. She is a friend of Prema and is a
very good young woman. She has, however, become a little weak
physically.
Chandrashankar is carrying the burden of two journals quite
well. This time Thakkar Bapa’s place is taken by Malkani. The work
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

347

is going on well. Ramnarayan also is helping. Kishorelal has been ill
and suffering a good deal. He has been getting fever and it does not
leave him. Brijkrishna also was seriously ill. He is improving now. His
life was actually in danger. But, then, is there anyone of whom that is
not true ? However, people who are not so ill that they have to remain
in bed do not think that their lives are in danger.
Ba is having a holiday in Yeravda, so to say. Dahibehn’s1 teeth
are giving her trouble. Shanta and Lalita are quite well. Dwarkanath
seems to be managing the affair at Wardha fairly efficiently. And
there is also Lakshmibehn who, as you know, has identified herself
with the Ashram. Kaka and Surendra Mashruwala are in Gujarat.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 5314

371. LETTER TO DUDHIBEHN V. DESAI
December 25, 1933
CHI. DUDHIBEHN,

I have not heard from you for some time. You should write to
me regularly. For my part I may not be able to write to you
sometimes in all this rushing about of the tour.
Look after all the children. You should not forsake your duty
towards Kusum because of anything that Jamna might say or write to
you regarding her. Even if Kusum loves adornment I would not let
her satisfy her desire. That is my weakness. As for you I cannot
imagine that you could love adornment. Ask the children to write to
me. I am not writing separately to them this time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 3190. Courtesy : Valji G. Desai

372. LETTER TO GOVINDBHAI R. PATEL
December 25, 1933
BHAI GOVINDBHAI,

On receipt of your letter I inquired and learnt that an invitation
had been received from Pondicherry, and most probably I shall be
visiting the place. If I go, I should certainly like to call on Shri
1

348

Wife of Raojibhai Nathabhai Patel
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Aurobindo. It would be a great disappointment to me if I could not
see him. If, therefore, you can arrange for a meeting without much
fuss, please do so. After the programme is finalized, I also will write
and request for an interview.1
Blessings

from

BAPU
S HRI GOVINDBHAI
S HRI AUROBINDO ASHRAM
P ONDICHERRY
From the Gujarati original : C. W. 10739. Courtesy : Govindbhai R. Patel

373. LETTER TO VIDYA R. PATEL
December 25, 1933
CHI. VIDYA,

I got your letter. I am glad that you have improved, even if it
was with the help of medicine. What we want is that you should
improve, no matter how. Write to Manu from time to time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 9636. Courtesy : Ravindra R. Patel

374. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
December 25, 1933
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have received your letters. But where do I have the leisure to
write replies? Today being a silence day, I am scribbling as many
letters as possible.
You should take money from the Harijan Fund account with
Jamnalalji to meet the cost of the tin sheets sent to Nasik and to make
1

According to the addressee, the contents of this letter were conveyed to Shri
Aurobindo through Mother, and Shri Aurobindo wrote in pencil on the note saying :
“You will have to write that I am unable to see him because for a long time past I have
made it an absolute rule not to have any interview with anyone—that I do not even
speak with my disciples and only give silent blessings to them three times a year. All
requests for an interview from others I have been obliged to refuse. The rule has been
imposed on me by the necessity of my sadhana and is not at all a matter of
convenience or anything else. The time has not come when I can depart from it.”
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

349

up the deficit Gosibehn has in the Harijan budget, then let me know
how much money is still left. I think it is only proper that Gosibehn is
paid every month. I shall continue my efforts to raise money from
Bombay.
In what form a reply should be given about Vithalbhai is a real
problem. I shall think over it.
I have not seen Munshi’s statement. He has talked to you. He
has also told you many other things about himself. I have told him to
do what he thinks proper. I also said that I had no intention at the
moment of guiding anybody.
The newspapers say that Jivraj has taken charge. If the reports
are correct, congratulate him. I was a little worried. Surely he is taking
some rest? What does he have to do?
I have not been able to write to Gokhale, Bapa and others. I
hope to write to them tomorrow.
I had known about the Orissa Committee at Ahmedabad. It will
be good if some money is collected.
Do take rest and get rid of your pain.
Taramati must be doing well.
Brijkrishna seems to have fully recovered. There was a telegram.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

375. LETTER TO VIDYA A. HINGORANI
December 25, 1933
CHI. VIDYA,

I got your letter. It is good you have gone to Father’s. I shall
send you out when you are physically fit. I prefer Wardha but if you
would rather go to Bhavnagar, I shall send you there. Now at least you
should improve your health, do some physical labour, give up
worrying and crying. Learn English and Hindi. Go on writing to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi : Courtesy : National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

350

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

376. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
December 26, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

Here is a cutting from the M. Mail1 Though the whole
conversation practically referred to you and your views, naturally the
interviewer could not reproduce it all. I was shown the proof. It is a
fair presentation of the substance of what I said. Please read it
carefully and correct me where you find me to have erred about yourself. There is a great deal of misunderstading about you in our circles
too. But it does not worry me.
You will find also the programme2 so far as it goes.
I hope Mother is progressing.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

377. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
December 26, 1933
DEAR DAUGHTER RAIHANA,

I had no idea that you were confined to bed. I thought :
‘Raihana has now forgotten Bapu.’ As for me I had no time when I
could write. It is God’s grace that you are now all right.3
I had a long letter from Hamida. I have replied to her. Kamaladevi and I talked about many things. I have often thought about you
during the tour. I yearned to hear you sing: “Arise, awake, O
Traveller”, but how could I hope for such good fortune ? I even felt
the wish to join your band singing bhajans. My party includes Kisan
and Jamnalalji’s Om. Where has Father gone? Give my sincere
greetings, vandemataram, love, etc., to him and to Mother. Blessing to
Saroj 4 and you, and a kiss to Kamalmian.
BAPU
1

Vide “Interview to Madras Mail”
Vide Appendix “ Bapu’s tour Programmf”,
3
Up to this the letter is in Urdu.
4
Saroj Nanavati
2

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

351

[PS.]
I hope you read Harijan regularly.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 9655

378. LETTER TO KALYANJI V. MEHTA
December 26, 1933
BHAI KALYANJI,

Does death spare anybody ? Who knows what our plight would
be without that friend ? I want all of you, and particularly Napoleon1
to console yourself with the thought that her death was release for
Gangaba. Who would listen to this philosophy of mine on such an
occasion? But my wisdom about death is not derived from Shastras
only and, therefore, I offer such consolation on all occasions of death.
Soldiers like us ought to know its true nature. There can be no doubt
that Gangaba’s soul rests in peace. No evil can ever befall one who
had struggled even a little to be good while living. Mahalakshmi’s
malaria can be cured with proper treatment.
Blessings from

BAPU

KALYANJI MEHTA
C/ O DR. N ATHUBHAI DAYALJI P ATEL
BACK VIEW
OPPOSITE C HARNI R OAD S TATION GARDEN
BOMBAY
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./XXII

379. LETTER TO RANI VIDYAVATI
December 26, 1933
CHI. VIDYA,

Your letter has been lying with me for so long, but how to
reply? I have to attend to heavy correspondence during travel. There
is no other remedy to improve your health.
The work of Harijan service is not difficult for you. Try to
improve the conditions of the Harijans right where you are living.
1

352

Chhotubhai K. Mehta, son of Kunvarji

Mehta

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Keep writing to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Rani Vidyavati Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi National
Museum and Library

380. LETTER TO SWARUPRANI NEHRU
December 26, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

I was happy to receive your letter. Well, we cannot expect now to
regain full strength, but you have no longer any reason for worry.
Krishna is happy. Ask Sarup to write to me occasionally, Krishna too
should write. Does she plan to stay there for a few months ?
May God give you peace.
My tour is progressing satisfactorily though it is quite taxing.
By the grace of God the body has withstood it so far. Ba’s letters keep
coming. She is cheerful.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
[From Hindi]
Indira Gandhi-Gandhi Papers. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Also G.N. 11407

381. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, ELLORE
December 27, 1933
I wish to thank you all for this great reception which is an
exhibition of your great affection. I thank you for the various purses
and addresses including one from the Municipality and another from
the District Board. You will not expect me to refer to the details of the
various addresses in the too short time before me.
My first and sacred duty is to unveil the portrait of the “Lion of
the Punjab”, the late Lala Lajpat Rai. You will not expect me to
recount before you his many valuable qualities and services. I had the
privilege of enjoying his confidence till he died. He was the President
of the historic session of the Congress in 1920. Today to me and to
you the one outstanding quality of his is his unadulterated love for the
untouchables. He has taught Hindu India to keep to its sense of duty
to the so-called untouchables, the Harijans. Lajpat Rai always
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

353

proclaimed that untouch-ability was the greatest blot on Hinduism. If
he had done nothing else, we, Hindus, should revere his sacred
memory for his war against untouchability. Who can deny his services
to the country, his bravery and his fearlessness ? It was not by an idle
epithet that he was called the “Lion of the Punjab”.
I must pass on to other things. You will be pleased to know that
Mulpuri Chukkamma even from Vellore Jail thought of Harijans and
out of her poor belongings she sent me this ring. Her letter bearing
the signature of the Superintendent of the Central Jail is here with me.
Who can help deriving inspiration from such acts ?1
Wherever I go, I find evidence of enthusiasm on the part of the
people, readiness on their part to open out their hearts to the so-called
untouchables, the Harijans. Wherever I go, I find a readiness on the
part of the people to part with their possessions, to part with their
coppers, with their silver, with their gold and women are not behind
men in making their sacrifices. I know for certain that they know for
what purpose they have given their bangles or their rings or whatever
they hold very dear. They know that all these moneys and all these
ornaments are being given in order that Harijans may be served. This
cause, the more I think about it the more I feel, is a cause for all
humanity and for all time. If Hindus succeed in exorcizing this devil
of untouchability, if they succeed in transforming their hearts and if
they succeed in purifying themselves of this blot, I have no doubt
whatsoever that we, all the communities belonging to different
religions, will live in happiness, contentment, peace and real friendship
of the heart. I have no doubt whatsoever that, if we achieve full success
in this mission, in this war against untouchability, as I have said, I have
no doubt that we shall be able to achieve the heart unity. Suspicions
will melt away before the sunshine of mutual trust, mutual affection
and mutual respect. Let us, therefore, you and I and all, pray to God
Almighty that He may bless us with sufficient strength and wisdom to
see this error and correct it, no matter what it was. Let us remember
that all these centuries we have suppressed a portion of ourselves and
in so doing we have degraded ourselves, and we have depressed
ourselves. No power on earth has yet succeeded in suppressing any
portion of humanity without degrading itself and without depressing
itself. The more I see, the more I feel that, if we do not drive away this
untouchability, Hinduism itself will perish and it will be a loss not only
1

354

What follows is from The Hindu,

29-12-1933

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to us but it will be a loss to the world. A religion that owes its
inspiration to the Vedas, to the Upanishads, to the Puranas, to
Ramayana, why should that religion perish—for what purpose, for
what reason, except that we did not observe the message of the
Upanishads, that we did not observe the grand message, the grand
proposition enunciated in the pages of the Vedas, the Upanishads that
God alone is and no one else and nothing else ? Do you suppose the
preachers of that one God, God of Justice, preached that there could
be any divisions of high and low amongst ourselves ? It is an
impossible thing. The more one thinks about these things, the more it
is surprising that a people so cultured as Hindus are supposed to be,
should have hugged untouchability as a part of their religion. And
remember lastly that all the religions in the world are today in the
melting pot. They are all being critically examined and tested and
public opinion will not forgive you and me if we do not energetically
drive away this evil from our midst. I must not now take any more of
your time on untouchability.1
Mr. Gandhi then said that as he was speaking at Ellore, the headquarters of the
Andhra Provincial Anti-untouchability Association, he wished to draw attention to
the fact that he had received some complaints against some of its office-bearers. Mr.
Gandhi said that he and Mr. Thakkar, the vigilant Secretary of the Central Board,
found after investigation that there was absolutely no foundation for the charges
made. He always kept his eyes and ears open for receiving any
bona-fide
complaints, but he insisted that anybody who complained should do so on two
conditions. Firstly, he must announce his name to the public instead of sending
anonymous letters and secondly he must substantiate all his allegations by
unimpeachable evidence.
Mr. Gandhi delivered his speech in English and before closing he said that it
was a great regret to him to have done so, even in Andhradesha where Hindi had
progressed very much. He had to speak in English to facilitate translation. It would
not at all be difficult for the Andhras to learn Hindi as many of the words were derived
from Sanskrit out of which the Telugu language was formed.

The Hindu, 28-12-1933 and 29-12-1933

1

The following is from

The Hindu,

28-12-1933.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

355

382. SPEECH AT WOMEN’S MEETING, VIZAGAPATAM
December 28, 1933
The Harijan cause is like fire. The more ghee you put into fire,
the more it requires. So also, the more you give to the Harijan cause,
the more it requires. Those who give to the cause gain, they never
lose; and those who do not give undoubtedly lose. What you gain by
giving is merit. What you lose by not giving is your self. For men and
women belonging to savarna Hindu castes have been persecuting
Harijans now for ages. And if we are just now passing through evil
times, I am convinced that our treatment of Harijans has not a little to
do with it. I have, therefore, been asking the women of India to drive
away the ghost of untouchability from their hearts. It is wrong, it is
sinful, to consider some people lower than ourselves. On God’s earth
nobody is low and nobody is high. We are all His creatures; and just
as in the eyes of parents all their children are absolutely equal, so also
in God’s eyes all His creatures must be equal. Therefore I ask you to
believe me when I tell you that there is no sanction in religion for
untouchability. I would, therefore, ask you to give a place in your
hearts to all the Harijans around you. Welcome Harijan children in
your own homes. Go to Harijan quarters and look after their children
and their homes; speak to Harijan women as to your own sisters.
This cause of Harijans is essentially for the women of India to
tackle; and I hope that you, the Hindu women of this place, will do
your duty. I hope those of you, who have the wish and the ability to
surrender all or any part of your jewellery, will do so. There is one
condition attached to the gift. If you give anything whatsoever, it must
not be replaced. I want you to feel that you personally have given
something to this cause, which you cannot do when you give rupees
or notes. For they come from either your parents or your husbands.
But jewellery is your own property. When you surrender your
jewellery without any intention of having it replaced by your parents
or husbands, it is definitely your own sacrifice. I want you all who
have understood the spirit of the message I have delivered to you to
make that definite sacrifice.
Harijan, 5-1-1934

356

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

383. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, VIZAGAPATAM
December 28, 1933
You drove me today, on my alighting at the station, through a
row of Harijans who were being fed at that time through the charity of
some townsman. Whilst he may be entitled to thanks for his liberality,
I must confess that it was not a soul-stirring scene. I hung my head in
shame as the car was driven through the road along which Harijan
men and women were feeding. Just imagine how you and I would feel
if some insolent person drove his car through the road where we were
taking our meals. I know the custom under which caste dinners are
given. All traffic along the road on which dinners are given is entirely
prohibited, so that it is possible for diners to have their meals and to
be served in perfect peace. As I have said repeatedly, this movement
of purification goes down to the roots of our hearts. I have not asked
savarna Hindus to appear as patrons before Harijans and throw the
leavings of their dishes to them. But I have invited them to open out
their hearts to Harijans and to ind there a sanctuary for them. But what
I saw today was like the act of a patron towards his dependents. And
do you know, not only my car was driven through the rows of people
taking meals, but other cars followed and the crowd also followed
these cars. And I noticed that it was a hard thing for those poor people
to protect their food from dust blowing on it. It was not, to say the
least, a becoming performance. And you can now understand my
grief at having been obliged to witness it.
I know there was no evil intention behind this act. I know also
that there was not a single person who had any desire to insult these
Harijans who were given free meals. I understand also that those who
took me through that road thought it would please me to drive
through the rows of Harijans taking meals. I know it was nothing but
simple thoughtlessness. As we have been told by Shastras, to live a
religious life is like walking on the edge of a sword. And in a
worldwide movement like this of self-purification among millions of
human beings, a single thoughtless act takes the shape of sin. Every
act of ours, therefore, in connection with this Harijan movement has to
be dictated and dominated by punctiliousness, extreme caution and
inward searching. Having witnessed this scene, I thought it would be
wrong on my part not to make a public reference to it. By drawing
your attention to it, I have endeavoured to warn the public taking part
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

357

in this movement of self-purification against a repetition of the scene
of this morning.
This brings me to what we are doing today through the length
and breadth of India. I have not the shadow of a doubt that
untouchability is an unmitigated curse on Hinduism. If the Shastras
represent the will and wish of God, there can be no warrant whatsoever
in them for untouchability, for which you find no parallel in any part
of the world save India. It is bad enough when dictated by selfish
motives to consider ourselves high and other people low. But it is not
only worse but a double wrong when we tack religion to an evil like
untouchability. It, therefore, grieves me when learned pundits come
forward and invoke the authority of the Shastras for a patent evil like
untouchability. I have said, and I repeat today, that we, Hindus, are
undergoing a period of probation. Whether we desire it or not,
untouchability is going. But if during this period of probation we
repent for the sin, if we reform and purify ourselves, history will
record that one act as a supreme act of purification on the part of the
Hindus. But if, through the working of the time spirit, we are
compelled to do things against our will and Harijans come to their
own, it will be no credit to the Hindus or to Hinduism. But I go a step
further and say that if we fail in this trial, Hinduism and Hindus will
perish.
Harijan, 5-1-1934

384. NOTES
S OME QUESTIONS

It is wonderful how the very same questions are being asked
again and again at the different places visited by me and this by those
whom one would expect to be readers of Harijan or otherwise to be
acquainted with what I have said on those questions. But so long as
they continue to be asked, I suppose I must deal with them and hope
that the readers who are familiar with them will not mind the trespass
on these columns. I need not repeat the questions. The following
answers will suggest the kind of questions asked.
1. There can be no compulsion in the matter of temple-entry.
2. No temple wil be opened to Harijans without the approval of
a clear majority of trustees or an overwhelming majority of persons
believing in temple worship and entitled to use the temple in question
358

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

for purposes of worship.
3. There is no compulsion whatever in the Temple-entry Bill or
the Anti-untouchability Bill. Harijans should be subject to the same
rules of admission as are applicable to the other Hindus.
4. If anybody satisfies me that the Shastras enjoin untouchability as it is observed today, I shall at once give up the agitation.
5. But my settled conviction is that modern untouchability is an
inhuman institution having its root in selfishness and the desire for
exploitation of fellow-beings found to be amenable to suppression.
6. The untouchables are made and unmade by census enumerators and commissioners as has been abundantly proved in these
pages.
NO TOYS P LEASE

Andhradesha easily beats other provinces in presenting toys and
the like. Some produce little silver cups, some trays, some other fancy
things not easily portable. I cannot induce buyers on the spot to bid
for numerous things and however tempting they may be for the cause,
they become a nuisance to carry and keep count of. I would, therefore, advise organizers to discountenance, if not forbid, such gifts. In
several places heavy frames and portraits have been presented. They
become a positive burden and are unsalable in the market. On no
account should frames be presented. I would like the tour to retain its
serious character and be business-like involving little or no waste in
any matter. I may mention incidentally that, in presenting purses,
bank-notes should be used wherever possible, instead of coins. In swift
travelling, covering ten to fifteen places in a day, it is difficult to count
all the cash from day to day and keep accurate accounts. In any case,
the accountants, devoted though they are, are over-worked and often
have to keep late hours in order to keep themselves up to date. Big
organizations like the All-India Harijan Sevak Sangh cannot be efficiently and yet cheaply conducted without attention to minutest details
and without the intelligent co-operation of the workers and volunteers
taking part in it.
Harijan,29-12-1933

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

359

385. MARWARI RELIEF SOCIETY
This Society was established in Calcutta in1923. In the report on
the flood-relief work in Orissa sent by Sjt. Harakhchand and published in the Harijan Sevak, there is a mention of this Society’s
valuable services. On my way to Bezwada from Delhi the other day,
some workers of the above Society met me at Palwal station. They are
helping the flood victims in the district of Gurgaon. At the station
they gave me a report containing a detailed account of their work and
told me : ‘If you read this, you will know that we made no distinction
between untouchables and others; in fact we paid special attention to
the poor helpless Harijans.’ The account of the services rendered
from November 19, 1933 to December 13, 1933 is to be found in this
report. The Society’s volunteers worked in 144 villages. They
distributed 2,809 quilts, 1,846 shirts, 1,256 skirts and 872 maunds, 5
seers of grain among 4,098 flood victims. They distributed medicines
to 3,052 patients suffering from itch, cholera, cough and other
maladies. Wherever needed, the sick were given milk, barley, sago and
other things. Houses damaged by floods are being rebuilt. The
Society is working in seven places: Palwal, Dighout, Bannikheda,
Banchari, Hodal, Hasanpur and Gulabad. I thank the Society and the
young volunteers who are working in the above seven places. The
number of Harijans and non-Hindus helped by the Society is also
separately given in the report. As long as this pernicious tendency
towards discriminating between man and man persists, even in times of
common relief operations, so long, unfortunately, separate mention of
Hindus, Harijans and non-Hindus is and will continue to be necessary
in this unfortunate land.
[From Hindi]
Harijan Sevak, 29-12-1933

386. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
December 29, 1933
CHI. MANUDI,

I felt happy after reading your long letter. I daily think about
you. Tell Kusum that I cannot help her now. What will it avail her to
think of me ? Let her go on repeating Ramanama. It will give her
360

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

peace of mind. You should teach her to do that. Sing the Ramadhun
to her. You can sing many bhajans. What can I say to comfort aunt
Bali ? If I were free from other duties, I would go to her and help her
run her home and free her from her worries. But it is impossible
during this life that I can even stand in such relation to her. What you
write about death is perfectly true. It will come to all of us sooner or
later.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 2664. Courtesy : Manubehn S.
Mashruwala

387. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
December 30, 1933
CHI. AMALA,

Let us be natural. You should write when you feel like writing
and let me write when I can spare a moment. Not a day passes when I
do not think of you. I am glad you are making steady progress. I
would like you to feel perfectly safe and free from nervousness. You
should tell me all about your pupils. Do you see Ramdas and his wife
often ?
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
I am keeping excellent health, diet remaining the same.
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

388. LETTER TO RUKMINIDEVI BAZAJ
December 31, 1933
CHI.RUKMINI,

I got your postcard. You do not seem to have received the
postcard I wrote to you on my way here. I have had no letters from
Santok for some time. You did well in meeting Jamnalalji. Have you
learnt the Marwari speech ? I am sure you have acquired perfect
command over Hindi now. Besides Om, Kisanbehn is accompanying
me. Has Om written to you about her ? She is a friend of Premabehn’s. I have caught cold.
Blessings to you both from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 9156
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

361

389. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
December 31, 1933
CHI. KANTA,

I had expected your letter. Write regularly. Give me news about
Vidya, Shanti, etc. Om and Kisan are quite happy. Kisan probably
does not remember you. What did you do at Banaras? I am sure you
will have met Sumangal.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

390. LETTER TO JOACHIM ALVA
[1933] 1
MY DEAR ALVA,

When I tell you that I am writing this between 3 and 4 a.m.,
before the morning prayer, you will understand the pressure under
which I have to cope with my correspondence. That is the reason for
the delay in replying to your letter. It was good of you to let me have
that excellent letter. I suppose you do know that I tried to meet you at
Yeravda and then you were removed.
I trust you are a regular reader of Harijan.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Permanent address Wardha, C.P.
From a photostat: C. W. 10959. Courtesy: Joachim Alva

1

This was sent to the addressee after his release from Nasik Jail, where he had
been interned in 1933.

362

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

391. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
C UDDAPAH S TATION,

January 1, 1934
BA,

Send me a copy of the discourse I sent you last time.1 I got your
letter only today. I am writing this letter on my silence day. Do not
worry about Manilal. I am sending your letter to him. You need not
get alarmed by what Pragji said. Both are mature persons. If they have
made a mistake they will correct it. Arrangement has already been
made for jame-e-jamshed. Mathuradas informs me that this has been
done, and so I have done nothing further about it. I hope you get it
now. All the same, I am inquiring again. I will try about the Ramayana and the Bhagavata. Don’t feel the slightest hesitation in writing
to Premlilabehn for anything you want. After all, what are you likely
to want ? What few things you want she will send with great love. But
about anything which you do not require immediately, it will be
enough if you write to me. I will then make the necessary arrangements. Can you use your dentures ? Do you gargle with potassium
permanganate water ? Thakkar Bapa is not in the party with me this
time. He will meet me on the 15th. Just now Malkani is with me. He
also is working very hard, along with the others. Chandra-shankar
keeps fairly good health. Om and Kisan are taking good care of their
health. Om works as hard as she can. She is a simple-hearted and
straightforward girl. And so is Kisan. Surendra has regained his
strength.
The Andhra tour ends on the 3rd. After that we shall go to
Mysore. Wherever I go, there is bound to be a lot of activity and some
hardships too. But I am carefully protected by everybody and so
don’t feel the hardships much. As Mirabehn looks after the smallest
detail, I don’t feel the discomfort of travelling at all. You will be
permitted to receive a letter from me every week only if you forgo
your right of receiving visitors. I for one will go on sending a
discourse every week. Be satisfied with visitors who come to see the
other women. However, do as you wish. If you are keen on having
visitors, there would be many ready to go. They would even wish to
go. We have deliberately made it a practice to receive the fewest
1

Vide “Letter to Kasturba Gandhi”, 25-12-1933

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

363

possible visitors. But let me know your wish without any hesitation.
Janakibehn is all right. I think I have already written to you about her
son Ramakrishna’s tonsils being removed. Kamala has now resumed
solid foods. Kishorelal is still not free from fever. But there is no
cause for worry. These days my silence commences on Sunday night.
I, therefore, don’t speak till Monday night. The silence will be broken
today at ten minutes past nine. Hence I shall hardly have to speak to
anybody, since soon after it will be time to go to bed. I have to get up
at three in the morning. Brijkrishna’s fever has come down. But he
has yet to regain strength. Hemibehn is no more. Now the discourse.
Last time I wrote about the attributes of a bhakta. I also
explained that there could be no bhakti without service. This time I
will write about how one can serve, since people frequently ask me
that question. Some say that service is possible only under certain
conditions. Some others that it is possible only after certain studies. I
explained last week that these were wrong notions. One can serve
under any conditions. If we offer up to Shri Krishna all our gifts and
possessions, we shall get full marks. Anybody who can give one crore
but gives only half a crore, will not get more than 50 marks. But he
who has only one pie and gives it will get 100 marks. If, therefore,
you and the other women prisoners there behave in this manner
towards the women with whom you come into contact or towards the
officials, you are fufilling the dharma of service. Behaving towards the
officials in the spirit of service means never wishing them ill, showing
them due respect and not deceiving them. All the rules should be
obeyed and the women undergoing imprisonment for criminal offences should be treated as if they were your blood-sisters. If you let
them feel your love and see your purity of heart, that also will mean
practising the dharma of service. In both cases one’s motives must be
clean. If a person behaves in a good way with a selfish motive or
through fear, his actions cannot be reckoned as service. We often see
one person doing a thing with a selfish motive and another doing the
same thing with a benevolent motive. There can be no room for selfinterest in anything done as an offering to the Lord. One who serves
in this manner daily gains more strength. His studies and his work,
both are inspired by the motive of service. Even the laughing or
playing,eating or drinking of a person who is thus dedicated to service
are informed with the spirit of service. All his actions, therefore, will
be innocent. The Lord always gives to such bhaktas the strength they
need. You probably remember the three verses in the women’s prayer
364

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

which have a bearing on this. They are as follows :
As for those who worship Me, thinking on Me alone and nothing else,
ever attached to me, I bear the burden of getting them what they need.1
With Me in their thoughts, their whole soul devoted to Me, teaching
one another, with Me ever on their lips, they live in contentment and joy2
To these, ever in tune with Me, worshipping Me with affectionate
devotion, I give the power of selfless action, whereby they come to Me !3

Refer to the Anasaktiyog for the meaning of these verses. You
will find them in Chapters 9 and 10. Remember that we read the
Gita to put its teaching into practice. All that I have said above is, you
should know, on the basis of the Gita.
Blessings to all from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, pp. 4-6

392. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
January 1, 1934
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I could not reply to your letter earlier. I get the time only at 3
a.m. or when I am travelling in a train. This I am writing in a train.
There is no question of your doing anything else till you have completely recovered your health. If Father can spare money, you certainly need not hesitate to ask him for help. I don’t know how he is
financially placed at present. You should ask him and find out. One
need not hesitate to ask one’s father about his financial condition. If
he is not in a position to give you any help, you may let me know. I
will make some arrangement immediately.
I wrote the above in the train. I will now complete the reply.
I hope Jayaprakash is benefiting from the treatment. You have
not told me in your letter how both of you meet your expenses, nor
what steps have been taken regarding the debt.
I am in good health. There has been no change in my diet. I
have not been weighed lately but I think the weight must have increased. Mirabehn’s health is fairly good. She doesn’t do anything
1

Bhagavad Gita, IX. 22, X. 9 and 10 ; vide “Discourses on the “Gita”,
28-8-1926
2
ibid
3
ibid
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

365

except looking after me. She doesn’t attend meetings. Om and Kisan
help her. They attend meetings sometimes. Kisan’s health is improving. Ramnarayan doesn’t seem to be keeping well. He will carry on as
long as he can.
Ba writes to me from time to time. Rama, Ranchhodbhai’s1
daughter, has got married. She and her husband came to me at Ellore
for my blessings. I have not heard from Manibehn at all.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3438

393. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
January 1, 1934
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,

I have not yet received the letter which is due from you. I hope
you got the long letters which I wrote to you. Ba is worrying about
you a great deal in jail. She has been upset by some things that Pragji
has said. She believes that you, Manilal, have quarrelled with everybody there. I do not believe this, of course. I merely write what Ba has
written to me. She has asked me to convey her exact words. Since she
is in jail and can write only one letter, I naturally feel that I should
satisfy her wishes, whatever they are. That is the only reason why I
have mentioned this.
I keep very good health. The details are always given in
Harijan.
Nanabhai continues to be in poor health. Kishorelal has been
having fever for a long time and it does not go. I inquire and get
reports about him regularly. I trust he will be all right in a few days.
Santok’s mother has passed away. Kashi’s sister, Hemi, is also
dead. Devdas is well. After his release, he will go to Madras to be with
Lakshmi at the time of her delivery.
I don’t think it is necessary for me now to write anything about
the differences among you there.
1

366

Ranchhodlal Sheth, a mill–owner of Ahmedabad
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Om has made a copy of Ba’s letter and so I am sending the original to
you. Earlier I had intended to send it to Ramdas.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 4813

394. LETTER TO PESTONJI
January 1, 1934
BHAI PESTONJI,

Kakasaheb has written a special letter to me about you. I shall
certainly be happy if you join me. If you find it convenient, you may
complete the whole tour. Our mode of living is, of course, simple. We
travel by third class and work hard day and night. We have to do
physical work and make do with whatever food and accommodation
we get. If you are physically strong and if your mode of living is
simple, you will feel no hardship. If you have the courage, come and
have this experience. I would certainly welcome a young man of your
ability and straightforwardness. Send a wire if you decide to come. We
shall be touring in Mysore State for about seven days. If, therefore,
you come, buy a ticket for Bangalore. You will know there where I am
touring. Send a telegram to me at Bangalore. I will get it wherever I
am and will make the necessary arrangements. Someone will meet you
at Bangalore station. You will not be stranded even if the telegram
does not reach me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 8046

395. LETTER TO SURENDRA MASHRUWALA
January 1, 1934
CHI. SURENDRA,

I learn that you started crying and returned to Bombay out of
fear of being beaten. There is no reason for you to feel upset or
ashamed about it. Have you not read how scared I used to be at the
age of seventeen or eighteen ? I would however also advise you not to
go to jail out of a false sense of shame. This time a few will have to go
to jail repeatedly. If on examining yourself you now wish to return
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

367

home, you may do so. Serve there and go to jail when God prompts
you and gives you full courage. Remember that God always gives the
strength to bear physical pain to those who have surrendered themselves completely to him. But such strength is not acquired by
thinking. It is a gift from God, which His devotees invariably receive.
Follow the course which you find the easiest for yourself. Write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C. W. 1527. Courtesy : Manubehn
Mashruwala

S.

396. LETTER TO VIDYA A. HINGORANI
January 1, 1934
CHI. VIDYA,

I have your letter. It is not a reply to my letter. Perhaps you got
it late.
I was of course confident that Kakaji would send you a reply
and that too a good one.
If you have to go to Karachi, then do travel alone in daytime.
Do not fear anyone. Have faith that God is there to protect us. I want
to see you fearless, industrious, sociable and physically strong. And I
have no doubt that you can be.
How is Mahadev ? How much milk does he take ? Does he
trouble you now ? Do you take him for outing ?
What is the news about Anand ? What do you study ? Read
Hindi books daily. Study English also as much as possible.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Multan is near to you. It would be good if you meet Devdas.
But meet him only when you really wish to. He is in the New Central
Jail. Om [and] Kisan are well.
From a microfilm of the Hindi : Courtesy : National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

368

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

397. LETTER TO LAKSHMI GANDHI
January 1, 1934
CHI. LAKSHMI,

Though we could not talk much, your three days’ stay brought
me satisfaction. Your depression ought to disappear. I am enclosing a
copy of the letter received from Ba. Read it if you can and send it on
to Devdas.
Ask Papa1 to write to me. A letter for Anna2 accompanies this.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 2003

398. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
January 1, 1934
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

What is this ? I got a wire but no letter followed it. The wire
being reassuring I take it that you are now wholly free from fever. But
I want a letter with all the facts. Do send me a wire first if you have not
written already. It will be all right to address it to Bangalore, rather
Bangalore City. We are all well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 2405

399. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
C UDDAPAH (ANDHRA),

January 2, 1934
CHI. VALLABHBHAI,

Today I am writing this letter at 3.20 [a.m.]. After cleaning my
teeth, I thought of you first. I find this the most quiet time for writing.
I will of course have a nap during the day. Today also there will be no
touring. Please don’t worry about me at all. I really keep good health.
Since you don’t write about yourself, I wonder whether you are
keeping back anything from me. Please don’t.
1
2

Addressee’s sister
C. Rajagopalachari; the letter is not available.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

369

I have been writing to Ba every week and will continue to do so.
As desired by her, I send her some discourses on the Gita just as I
used to do from Yeravda Mandir.
Mahadev is now permitted to write and receive only one letter.
He tries to include several in one. He will get others’ letters through
Jivanji. He is being tested severely indeed. I am sure he will get an
M.A. degree even in this. He is buried in the translation of the Gita.
You know Kishorelal’s condition. He refuses to part with his
fever. He himself has now appointed a committee consisting of Nath1
Swami and Gomati. He will abide by their advice.
I got a letter from Ba yesterday. Om made copies of it, one of
which I am sending to you. Om is a very active girl. Besides, she is
eager to learn everything as quickly as she can. Being frank and truthful, she is progressing very well. Kisan’s health is not as good as it
used to be. Otherwise she also is a hard worker. Both the girls are
extremely simple in their habits. They have become intimate friends.
Radhakant Malaviya came yesterday to see me. He has brought
with him a scheme for preserving milk in dry ice and wants my help
in carrying it out. But to ask for my help in such an enterprise is as
futile as to churn sand for butter. Probably you know that he has been
to England for practical training.
Malkani has been working very hard. He is filling Thakkar
Bapa’s place well enough. The entire staff works sincerely and
leaves nothing to be desired. So far the work has been progressing very well.
. . . 2 is now showing his teeth. He has . . . 3 under his complete
control. He doesn’t intend now to give the sisters their share. He got
the power of attorney given by . . .4 to all three revoked and got a new
power of attorney executed exclusively in his name. When I wrote to
him protesting against all this, he gave me an evasive reply. I have now
writen to Nanalal. But I don’t think it will have any effect.
Anandi, Bablo. Babu, Mohan, Vanamala, Bachu and Amina’s
children are making good progress. Ramnarayan Pathak 5 gives three
hours every week. Jamnadas [Gandhi] remains what he has been, thin
and weak. He seems to be uneasy too. I think I wrote to you about the
1

Kedarnath Kulkarni, Kishorelal Mashruwala’s guru
The names are omitted in the source.
3
ibid
4
ibid
5
A Gujarati writer, then professor at the Gujarat Vidyapith, 1920-28
2

370

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

death of Santok’s mother. Prabhudas will settle down to khadi work in
some village near his father-in-law’s place. If he continues to be in
Almora, the expenses would go up very much.
Having thus remembered the family budget today, I end this
letter here. I am writing to Mani, but I hope her plight is not similar to
Mahadev’s. Let me know if you have any information about it.
To you both or rather to all,
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2 : Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 57-9

400. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
C UDDAPAH1

4 a.m., Before Prayers, January 2, 1934
CHI. MANI,

I do not know whether I shall be able to hear directly from you
now. I do get news of you from Father, but that is not enough to
satisfy me. I, therefore, write to Dahyabhai for more. Write to me if
you can. Keep your body and mind fit. I am doing well enough. I
write a long letter to Ba every week as a regular thing. Nothing more
today.
Address your letters to Wardha..
Blessings from

BAPU
S MT. M ANIBEHN P ATEL, P RISONER
HINDALGA C ENTRAL P RISON
BELGAUM

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2 : Manibehn Patelne, p. 116

401. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
January 2, 1934
MY DEAR DAUGHTER,

I must write in English as I must write during the few moments I
have to spare. You may not blame me if letters I write do not reach
1

The source has “Kadkha”.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

371

you. But you have lost nothing if any letter has not reached you. I am
moving about so rapidly that there need be no surprise if some of my
letters go astray without anybody’s fault. But my not writing does not
mean that I do not constantly think of all of you. I do. But I write
sparingly for want of time and in order to enable others to have a
chance of writing. My letter to any one of you should be regarded as
letters to all.
By the time you are discharged I shall be travelling in the extreme south of India. If you think that it is worth while coming all the
way merely to see me, you shall come. I would strongly advise you to
restrain yourself and do all the talking through corres-pondence.
Of course you should see your mother and also Narandas. They
are both within easy reach. But the final decision rests with you. My
advice to all the others is just what I am giving to you.
I am glad you have kept so well.
I have heard about Velanbehn and Durgabehn, also Lilavati.
They must all write to me when they are discharged. I hope you have
all made the best use of your time.
My health is excellent. The last weight was 108 lb. My food is
milk and oranges and one green vegetable plain boiled without salt. I
take other fruit when it easily comes my way. This is either fresh
grapes or pomegranate. Generally speaking I take no dates at present.
I do not seem to need them. My work commences at 3 a.m. and ends
generally at 9 p.m. Of course I try to get some sleep in the middle of
the day.
Your Hindi writing as also your Gujarati is not bad. I hope the
Ramadan fast has not weakened you. Has Amina been taking it ? Tell
her I often receive news about her children who are getting on nicely.
I have just got a report from their Urdu teacher.
Love to you all
BAPU

[PS.]
Om and Kisan are with me, keeping well.
From a photostat : G.N. 289

372

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

402. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
January 2, 1934
DEAR SATIS BABU,

Your letter of 30th ultimo has given me much relief. The money
you have recieved was meant to ease some pressure. It was the utmost
that could be given to you. I hope your workers will succeed. It is
most exacting and exasperating work. They must be prepared to take
insults as cheerfully as they would take cheques and bank-notes.
I like the idea of Dr. Roy personally fixing the tour programme.
I see in the papers received today that he had a serious accident. I
hope it is not so serious as reported. I have wired but you will give me
full details.
I am glad you have regained your weight. But 128 is not
enough for your build. There is no reason why you should not have
your fine muscles which you used to have before. Regarding the body
as God’s instrument, you are bound to keep it as fit as it is possible to
keep it consistently with the obvious and necessary limits.
I hope Arun 1 is doing well. He has to attend on me when I tour
in Bengal. But he won’t be allowed if he is in a weak state of health.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
What about Bengali Harijan ?2
From a photostat : G.N. 1626

403. LETTER TO DUDHABHAI M. DAFDA
January 2, 1934
BHAI DUDHABHAI,

I got your letter. By God’s grace everything will turn out well. I
came to know only yesterday that Lakshmi3 is expecting. I have
advised that if Manjukeshabehn offers to shoulder the responsibility,
1

Addressee’s son
Since Bengali Harijan could not support itself, Gandhiji had advised the
addresse e to discontinue its publication
3
Addressee’s daughter who was brought up in the Sabarmati Ashram
2

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

373

Lakshmi may go to Bardoli for her delivery, otherwise she should get
herself admitted in the Vadilal Hospital at Ahmedabad. It has all the
facilities, and some Ashram women also are working in it and they will
be able to look after her. Let me know if you have any suggestion to
make in this regard. I will decide finally after I hear from Maruti1 and
Laskhmi. I have made the necessary arrangements for you to get a
copy of the Harijanbandhu. Let me know if you do not get it. What
help did Sunderjibhai give ? Let me have his address. I have forgotten
it completely. A girls’ hostel is being run in the Sabarmati Harijan
Ashram. Are you willing to send the girls there ? If yes, I may inquire.
They may admit them there. My blessings to all the children.
Blessings from

BAPU
S JT. D UDHABAI MALJI
HARIJAN TEACHER
S ATHRA
BHAVNAGAR S TATE
KATHIAWAR
From a photosatat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3251

404. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
January 2, 1934
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I spoke to Shankaran. I also had a talk with a lawyer who is a
good man. We came to the decision that Sasmal’s help should be
sought. Calling upon the services of a lawyer from outside is correct.
There are few lawyers in Madras handling criminal cases, and such as
there are, are not of the first rank. That is why people have to look
outside. But you have nothing to do right now. If there is anything, I
shall let you know. Tell Shankaran that as he has met me, you are not
required to do anything.
As for Ba’s inquiry, I am not aware of any good books in
Gujarati except Tribhuvandas’s Nani Shikhaman. A book of this kind
is needed for Maruti’s Lakshmi. Do you know of any such book?
Write to me if you know of any. Which is the best book of this kind in
English? Consult Jivaraj. It is very good that he is well settled. How is
1

374

Lakshmi’s husband
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

his health? Do you meet Kishorelal often? How is your own health? I
have written to Jamnalalji in connection with the money to be paid to
Gosibehn for the Harijan work.1 Taramati and the child will be doing
well.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
This is Om’s effort.
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

405. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
January 2, 1934
CHI. HEMPRABHA,

I have your letter. Khadi too is in the hands of Rama. Khadi will
flourish if it has Rama in it and that is possible only when we have
Rama in us. Let us therefore make all efforts for khadi but let us not
worry about it. Rama will do the worrying. The right to worry is His
only, our dharma is but to serve. The less you worry, the greater will
be the success. But I want to see you cheerful in spite of failures.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 1706

406. LETTER TO HARIJAN WORKERS,
C UDDAPAH,

January 2, 1934 2
GANDHIJI
: The Harijan movement goes to the root of the evil.
If untouchability goes, the castes as we know them today go.3
HARIJAN WORKERS : Surely not.
G. I talk of the extreme form of untouchability. But the evil is so
widespread that in some form or other it runs through the whole
Hindu social system and corrupts it. The distinction of high and low is

1

Vide, “Letter to Jamnalal Bajaj”, 31-12-1933
Extracted from Chandrashankar Shukla’s “Weekly Letter”
3
A Harijan worker had asked whether Gandhiji wanted the caste system to
2

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

375

at the bottom of untouchability. If the extreme form goes, the rest is
bound to go. If it does not, our movement will be a mere camouflage.
So long as the idea of high and low is not abolished, untouchability
cannot be said to have been abolished.
H. W.

What, then, of the varna which you seek to defend ?

I do. But you must know my definition of it. It is as
different from the present caste system as chalk is from cheese.
Varna say I understand it is an economic law which operates, whether
we know it or not. Conformation to it will bring happiness to mankind. Disregard for it is disrupting society today all over the world.
Varna is the antithesis of the doctrine of ‘might is right’. It abolishes
all distinctions between high and low.
G.

H. W.

But nobody gives the meaning you give to varna.

G. That

may be. Evolution of human thought is evolution of the
meaning of words. I have no difficulty in seeing my meaning in the
original mantra from which the theory of varna is derived,1 nor in the
Gita verses referring to varna. 2 . Regulations about dining and
marriage have no direct connection with varna. The distinguishing
feature of varna is occupation.
H. W.

Then you will restrict everyone to his father’s occupation ?

Neither I nor anybody else can impose the restriction on
anyone. Varnadharma is not a man-made law to be imposed or
relaxed at his will. It is natural to man in his regenerate state. He may
disregard it to his cost. Everyone is free to follow or disobey it. It was
discovered in India and followed more or less faithfully and
knowingly for centuries. It is being followed ignorantly and helplessly
even now by the bulk of the people. In the eye of that law, Brahmin
and Bhangi are absolutely on an equal footing. A Bhangi who does
his work willingly and faithfully will find favour with God. A Brahmin
who, no matter how learned he may be, does not follow his calling will
incur divine displeasure. The law does not confer privileges, it defines
duties. Truest democracy can be evolved only by a due recognition of
and obedience to the law. Thus, in my opinion, there is no evil in
varna. The evil consists in considering one varna as higher than
another.
G.

H. W.
Surely, the varna that you describe exists only in your imagination !
What we see around us is the solid fact of hundreds of castes, each claiming to be
higher than some other.
1
2

376

Rigveda, x, Purushasukta
Vide, for instance, Bhagavad Gita,

IV.

13.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

G. That is unfortunately so. I am simply answering your question
and showing you the vital difference between caste and varna. Castes
are a human manufacture, are daily weakening and have to go. Varna
as defined by me may be said to exist in my imagination. Its
definition is not imaginary. It is inherent in the mantra on which it is
based and is given in so many words in the Bhagavad Gita.
Harijan, 12-1-1934

407. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, CUDDAPAH
January 2, 1934
1

Replying to the addresses and acknowledging the purse and other presents,
Gandhiji said that the Cuddapah Municipality built beautiful houses for the Harijans
under their employ. The quarters were kept clean and tidy. He was very glad to find a
co-operatvie society and a temple in their midst, and adequate water facilities.2

This place is well worth a visit. I congratulate the Municipality
on having provided to the most useful servants of the town quarters
the like of which I have not so far seen anywhere during the tour. I
wish other municipalities would follow your example.
Gandhiji then appealed to the audience to co-operate with him wholeheartedly
in ameliorating the conditions of Harijans.

The Hindu, 4-1-1934, and Harijan,

12-1-1934

408. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
December 31, 1933/ [January 3, 1934] 3
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I got your letter written from Calcutta. I could not judge from
the letter whether or not you had met Satis Babu during your stay
there. I suppose you did meet him. You haven’t mentioned anything
about your health, either. Write about it in your next letter. The fact
that Shivprasad escaped unhurt is indeed a remarkable thing. The tour
is progressing very well. My body is standing the strain better than I
had expected. There is, therefore, no cause at all for worry. Om is
doing well enough. She is not a girl who will let others worry for her.
She is slowly getting trained for the position of secretary. She is not
1

Presented by the Municipality, the Depressed Classes Association and the
District Board
2
The following paragraph is from the Harijan.
3
The postscript was written on Wednesday, which fell on January 3, 1934.
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

377

vigilant enough to satisfy me, but I don’t wish to goad her to be more
sharp at the cost of her health. I ask her to do only as much work as
she can do without strain. I am sure you know that Kisan is accompanying me. She is a very good girl. She has become very friendly
with Om. Her health went down in jail. Before that she was fairly
strong and was quite smart. The tour seems to have benefited her. At
present Malkani is with me. I needn’t say anything about him. He is
working hard. Damodar is working satisfactorily. He has proved his
sincerity and capacity. Did you send the sum which was to be sent to
Delhi from the Harijan account ? Gosibehn will have to be paid
something every month. Pay that also from some account. Pay her
what Mathuradas suggests. She should have been given the full
amount from Bombay, but the people there are not giving it. I will
write now, but while the correspondence is going on she must get the
amount from somewhere.
Blessings from

BAPU

PS.
Before Morning Prayer, Wednesday
How is it that Janakibehn complains against your temper ? If
there is any truth in her complaint, overcome your weakness. I asked
Om and she also tells me that sometimes you make even Madan
Mohan weep.
Tara has always been a sincere worker. If she keeps good health
she will fully prove her worth. I had a wire from Dr. Sharma (of
Delhi). He has sold his property for Rs. 10,000 and paid off his debt.
Now he wishes to come and live in the Ashram. He will come with his
wife. I have advised him to write to you. I think he should be taken in.
If he proves worthy, well and good. Otherwise he will be asked to
leave the Ashram.
I hope you work with due regard to your health. Janakibai
Soman1 wishes to stay there. Could she be accommodated where
Vidya and the others were ?
From a photost at of the Gujarati: G. N. 2928

409. SPEECH AT PEDDAVADUGURU
January 3, 1934
Mahatmaji thanked the people for the address and the purse and said that he
1

378

Ramachandra J. Soman’s mother
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

would not have any objection for earmarking the sum1 for the Kesava Vidyanilayam—
a residential school for Harijans in memory of the late lamented P. Kesava Pillai—
provided a workable scheme and workers were forthcoming. The moneys that were
collected would of course be spent for imparting education to Harijans and providing
other facilities for their uplift. Neither grants of money nor mere removal of physical
untouchability were sufficient to complete the process of purification which the
savarna ought to undergo to atone for their past sins and neglect. What was
necessary was to banish the very idea of distinction between high and low, touchable
and untouchable from their thought. This was easy if people could control their mind.
But generally the reverse was true and hence the difficulty. Hinduism would suffer
extinction if untouchability continued to exist. He prayed the Almighty to give them
the will and courage to serve the Harijan cause and remove the evil.

The Hindu, 4-1-1934

410. EXTRACTS FROM SPEECHES TO WOMEN2
[Before January 4, 1934] 3
The real ornament of woman is her character, her purity. Metal
and stones can never be real ornaments. The names of women like
Sita and Damayanti have become sacred to us for their unsullied
virtue, never for their jewellery, if they wore any. My asking from you
your jewellery has also a wider significance. Several sisters have told
me that they feel all the better for getting rid of their jewels.4
I have called this an act of merit in more ways than one.
No man or woman is entitled to the possession of wealth, unless he
or she has given a fair share of it to the poor and the helpless.
It is a social and religious obligation and has been called a sacrifice by
the Bhagavad Gita. He who does not offer this sacrifice has been
called a thief.5 The Gita has enumerated many forms of sacrifice; but
what greater sacrifice can there be than to serve the poor and the
needy ? For us today there can be no sacrifice higher than to forget
the distinctions of high and low and to realize the equality of all men.
I also wish to bring home to the women of India that real
ornamentation lies, not in loading the body with metal and stones, but
in purifying the heart and developing the beauty of the soul.
1

Of Rs. 1,116
Reproduced from Chandrashankar Shukla’s “Weekly Letter”
3
The source does not mention the dates or the places of the meetings, which
were held in Andhra. Gandhiji left Andhra on January 4.
4
What follows was spoken at another meeting.
5
III 12
2

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

379

On one occasion he recalled to them the sacrifice of the late Shrimati
Annapurna Devi,1 who was the first in Andhra to set to her sisters a noble example of
sacrifice and service, and said:

The very first day she met me she took off her ornaments—not
one, but all. The women who witnessed the scene were amazed at what
was happening. And then there was a shower of ornaments. And do
you think she looked less handsome because of her having given
away the ornaments ? Rather she looked to me more handsome. The
English language has the proverb, ‘Handsome is that handsome
does.’
Harijan, 12-1-1934

411. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
TUMKUR,

January 4, 1934
CHI. MARY

No letter from you for a long time. Duncan got on very well. He
was with us all the way and I saw him just for a second even in Adyar,
for I happened to visit Adyar at the instance of Mrs. Wood. Do tell me
how you are getting on. I hope Chandra is flourishing, and causes you
no bother. I am sending this to your village address though you
should now be in Wardha. I hope your eyes are behaving better.
Love.
BAPU
S HRIMATI MARY BARR
C/ O S HETH DEEPCHANDJI
BETUL, C.P.
From a photostat : G.N. 6017

412 SPEECH AT DODDABALLAPUR
January 4, 1934
Gandhiji thanked the citizens for the purse and hoped that every one of them,
if they had not already done so, would get rid of untouchability from their hearts. He
read in their address that there were
800 Haijans living in Doddaballapur and
that fifty per cent of the Harijan children were attending schools. They were entitled
to congratulations on this account. But they could not possibly give themselves
satisfaction by showing that so many Harijan children attended Harijan school. It was
absolutely necessary for them to teach Harijan boys and girls and for this it was
1

380

Vide, “A Good Servant Gone”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

necessary for them to root out untouchability from their heart. It was wrong to
consider a single person as untouchable. They should all forget that any single human
being was lower than themselves. In conclusion, Gandhiji hoped that God would give
them all strength to blot out the curse of untouchablility.

The Hindu, 4-1-1934

413. DISCUSSION WITH WORKERS 1
TUMKUR,

January 4, 1934
Questions were put to Gandhiji about temple-entry by Harijans. Gandhiji said
that the opposition to temple-entry was on the wane and that he found practically no
opposition through out his present tour to his work.
Asked what they should do if the majority were in faovur of temple-entry and
the State remained neutral, Gandhiji said :

Let the majority and the minority fight it out. The State will not
interfere. Only when the majority and the minority come to a clash,
will the Government interfere and that too to maintain peace and
tranquillity. The majority cannot be obstructed by the minority.
To another question, Mahatma Gandhi replied that there was no such
thing as utter majority.

The Hindu, 5-1-1934

414. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, TUMKUR
January 4, 1934
It gives me great pleasure to renew my acquaintance with you. I
am not new to you, nor are you new to me. But the mission that brings
me here today is different from the mission that had brought me here
years ago.2 Your address itself has made clear what I expect of you. I
thank you for the purse that has been presented to me on behalf of
the Harijans this afternoon. In your address you have recounted many
of the virtues to which I might even be a stranger. You have showered
upon me compliments that may be wholly undeserved. You have been
good enough to admit that you are getting more and more convinced
1

These included K. Ranga Iyengar, T. Subramanyam and Narayana Setty.
Gandhiji had visited Mysore State in connection with Deshbandhu Memorial
Fund collections and stayed at Nandi Hills from April 19 to the end of August 1927 to
recoup his health; vide Vol. XXXIX.
2

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

381

that the eradication of untouchability from our society will not only
purify Hinduism, but will transmute our national weakness into national strength and bring about greater solidarity among our people
professing different religious faiths. After that admission I had
expected a recounting on your part of the many things that you might
have done on behalf of the Harijans. You express regret that, barring a
few individual efforts, you have done little yet for the removal of
untouchability. Happily the best of our ability requires the
purification of our own hearts. If we really mean that on God’s earth
there is no one low and no one high, we shall accomplish the mission
that has brought me here today. This belief in the distinction between
the high and the low has eaten into the very vitals of Hinduism and
what I have stated from a thousand platforms is but this simple truth
that, if we do not now get rid of this canker, there is the impending
danger of Hinduism itself perishing. I therefore hope and pray that
every one of those who are here present at this meeting will realize the
truth of what I have said and will make the best possible effort to get
rid of this curse of untouchability.
Proceeding, Mahatmaji expressed his regret at not being able to visit all parts
of the town as he would have wished. Owing to physical weakness, it was not
possible for him to visit public institutions doing useful work. He hoped that the
people of Tumkur would take the will for the deed.

The Hindu, 5-1-1934

415. SPEECH AT WOMEN’S MEETING, BANGALORE1
January 4, 1934
SISTERS,

It gives me much pleasure to see you again after a lapse of
many years. You have in the opening portion of your address
expressed anxiety about my health on account of the constant travels.
Who would show anxiety, if not you the mothers of India, for your
children ? And I am one among the millions of your children. But
you should know that the way you can relieve my anxiety is by doing
according to the message that I have come to tell you. You can relieve
my anxiety by paying handsomely for the mission that I am conducting. Sisters in other parts of India, having felt the same anxiety
1

The meeting, at which 5,000 ladies were present, was held in the R.B.A.N.M.
High School compound.

382

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

that you feel, have showered their jewellery, their bangles, their rings,
and their necklaces on me. The silver and copper that you may give
me is, truly speaking, according to our custom, not your property.
That belongs to your parents or to your husbands. But what I want is
something that you can definitely call your own and that can only be
your jewellery. But the giving up of your jewellery is the least of all
the things that I want you to do. It can only be a singing of your
determination to carry out the message to its full extent. And that
message is that you should consider the Harijans as your own blood
brothers and blood-sisters and as your own children. It is wrong and
sinful to consider a single human being as an untouchable. God has
created all men and women alike. Although our forms may be
different and our dispositions may be different we are still, at the
bottom, one. Even as the leaves of one tree are one, whether they are
small or big, so I want you to have no distinction of untouchable and
touchable. And that is what I call purification of the heart.
The Hindu,
5-1-1934

416. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, BANGALORE
January 4, 1934
FRIENDS,

I am deeply touched by your welcome. I do not want all this
enthusiasm of yours and all this exhibition of affection towards me to
waste away without turning them to good use. If you therefore have
patience with me for a few brief moments, you will see that I turn all
that enthusiasm and affection to good account. What I am about to do
will also be a test of the genuineness of your enthusiasm and your
affection.
You know the message that I want to tell you. I would like us all,
every one of us, to purify our heart of the curse of untouchability. In
one of the many addresses that I had the honour and pleasure of
receiving today after entering the border of Mysore State, it was truly
stated that this curse of untouchability had permeated Hindu society
to such an extent that it almost ruled our lives and the signatories to
the address were good enough to say that the message I was trying to
deliver to the Hindus of India was producing its effect and went on to
admit that, if we could but get rid of this poison of untouchability, all
our differences even between different communities would vanish.
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

383

There you see what I am asking every one of us to do. I am pleading
with you that we should get rid of this position of untouchability all
along the line, so that we won’t have only a particular class labeled as
Harijans but we should all become Harijans, namely, and truly,
children of God.
Today if we appeared before our Maker with this uncleanliness
in our hearts, He will disown us because we have ourselves become
disinherited. And this little purse that you have given me, I regard as
earnest of your determination that you will henceforth cease to regard
any being on earth as lower than yourselves. If among earthly parents
there is no grade among their children, do you think that God has
grades among His children, the God Whom we consider as the One
and only Being, if He may be called a being, Who holds the scales of
justice absolutely even ? If you have actually understood the spirit of
my message, you will understand when I say to you that those who
give to the Harijan cause gain. I go further and contend that you can
never give to much too this cause.
The Hindu, 5-1-1934

417. PLEA FOR CATHOLICITY 1
During my frequent travels I have noticed that the reception
committees are not too mindful of expense in catering for the wants
of guests. They will insist on producing sweets or other delicacies and
a multiplicity of dishes. I have firmly discountenanced these at all
times, but this time when I am making collections for the Harijan
cause, which I regard as a mission of penance and purification, I feel
pained when there is any attempt at lavish hospitality. In two places I
observed that Gujarati cooks were brought in to produce Gujarati
dishes. I regard this as a wholly unnecessary procedure. I believe that
we should be able to accommodate ourselves to the food eaten in the
provinces other than our own. I know that this is not so simple a
question as it appears. I know southerners who have made a Herculean
effort to take to Gujarati food and failed. Gujaratis will not take to the
southern mode of cooking. Bengal produces dainties which the other
provinces will not easily relish. If we would be national instead of
provincial, we would have to have an interchange of habits as to food,
simplify our tastes and produce healthy dishes that all can take with
impunity. This means a careful study of the foods taken by different
1

384

A Gujarati version of this appeared in Harijanbandhu, 31-12-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

provinces, castes and denominations. Unfortunately, or fortunately,
there are not only different combinations in different provinces, but
there are different styles in the same province, among the different
communities. It is necessary, therefore, for national workers to study
the foods and the methods of perparing them in the various provinces
and discover common, simple and cheap dishes which all can take
without upsetting the digestive apparatus. In any case it must be a
matter of shame for workers not to know the manners and customs of
different provinces and communities. In liberal household cooks
ought to be able to cook foods eaten in the various provinces. Why
should not a Gujarati be able to produce dishes which a Tamilian or
an Andhra or a Bengali ordinarily eats ? I know that we cannot meet
at the top. Nor is such a meeting necessary or desirable. Rich people
will have not only provincial combinations but specialities designed
for their own households. These cannot be universalized. What can be
and should be aimed at are common dishes for common people. This
I know is easily possible if we have the mind. But to make this
possible, volunteers will have to learn the art of cooking and for this
purpose they will have also to study the values of different foods and
evolve common dishes easily and cheaply prepared.
I have strayed somewhat from my main purpose which is to ask
organizers of the tour in the provinces not to pamper us but to be
rigorously simple and economical in catering for us. We are or
profess to be conducting a mission of self-purification and representing the cause of the outcastes of Hindu humanity. As such we have
no right to the satisfaction of any but the barest wants and creature
comforts. Fried things and sweets must be strictly eschewed. Ghee
ought to be most sparingly used. More than one green vegetable
simply boiled would be regarded as unnecessary. Expensive fruit
should be always avoided. I know that I am the culprit in the matter of
fruit. Friends would pamper me and go out of the way to procure the
richest fruit for me. I can only assure them that I do not need any
other fruit than oranges, which experience has proved to be necessary
for me. In spite to all my vaunted abstinence,I know that of my party I
am the costliest member to feed. I am sorry that it should be so, but
mother goat to whose milk I owe my bodily strength and sister orange
who keeps me fresh cannot compete in cheapness with rice and wheat.
Let not my numerous hosts, however add to my indebtedness by
importing tempting superfluities. Let them not pander to my weaknesses, if they will help me to do my duty towards Harijans.
Harijan, 5-1-1934

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

385

418. LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI M. THAKKAR
January 5, 1934
CHI. MAHALAKSHMI,

Did you get the letter that I wrote to you in jail ? I still do not
know what happened to Madhavji finally. You should not worry at all
about the children. Please have faith that what Madhavji has done after
careful thinking and after consulting me is right. Neverthless, do what
you wish. I want complete freedom of thought and action for women.
Write to me every thing.Let me know also how you spent the time
and what you read in jail. Read the back numbers of Harijanbandhu.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat fo the Gujarati : G.N. 6825

419. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
January 5, 1934
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I got your two letters on successive days.
I have arranged with Ghanshyamdas about Rajeshwar. Send me
his address. Since when has he not been receiving the money ?
To which question about Jayaprakash and you have I not
replied ? My impression is that I have replied to all questions arising
from your letter. It is possible, though, that you did not get that letter.
If that is so, please ask me again.
Since you have started on the medicine, try it out. I also don’t
have much faith in it. I very much wish that Jayaprakash and you
should be all right. I do not think that you are at all ill. But if the
doctor says you are, what is one to do ?
I have not been weighed recently. But I keep good health. I also
eat well.
Brijkrishna may be said to have recovered completely. He walks
about a little now. Devdas was released unexpectedly.1 I don’t know
anything more.
Ba writes regularly. Kisan will continue to accompany me for
1

386

On January 2, 1934
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the present. She is well. She also helps a little in the work. Vidya did
not keep good health and the girl with her turned out to be a thief.
She has, therefore, left and gone to her father.
I understand about Rajendrababu. Tell him that I have written to
him.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat to the Gujarati : G.N. 3439

420. LETTER TO V. L. PHADKE1
January 5, 1934
BHAI MAMA,

I have your letter. I have suggested not that the management of
the institutions should be handed over to the Harijan Sevak Sangh but
that the Harijan Sevak Sangh should provide their expenses. From
now on, therefore, it will be necessary to satisfy the Sangh. When
somebody provides us funds it is only fair that we satisfy them about
the way we spend the funds and the way we run the institutions.
Sardar did not mean by the words used in his letter ‘the other
world’. He meant ‘in jail’ or ‘outside jail’. Is not that, too, ‘the other
world’ ? We can call it ‘the other world’ on the earth. But you need
not get alarmed or start worrying because of that. For the present, you
are expected to devote yourself exclusively to your [work] 2 . Those
who wish to go to ‘the other world’ on the earth will certainly get
their turn. It is a matter of a few days only. You must be getting the
news about me from Harijanbandhu.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3827

1

Secretary of Antyaja Seva Mandal and founder of the Harijan Ashram at

2

The source is illegible here.

Godhra

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

387

421. LETTER TO JIVANJI D. DESAI
MYSORE

January 5, 1934
BHAI JIVANJI,

I have gone though the report of the discussion with me about
cow-protection. It is accurate. You may, therefore, use it if you wish.
Has the Municipality taken over control of the Vidyapith library
or did we ourselves rearrange the books ? Has the construction of the
library building started ? If not, ask Balubhai when it will begin and let
me know.
Have any machines been left in the press or have they all been
confiscated.
Has anything been done about the books to be published ?
Blessings from
BAPU

[PS.]
The report1 of the discussion is enclosed.
I hope Kaka got the letter which I wrote to him. In it I have
written something for you to convey to Mahadev.
From a photostat of the Gajarati : G.N.
Jivanji D. Desai

9933. Also C.W. 6908. Courtesy :

422. LETTER TO CHHOTUBHAI KUNVERJI MEHTA
January 5, 1934
MY DEAR NAPOLEON,

I have your letter. Why do you say you do not know what to
write? Smart children like you can write a lot. You can write about
your studies, your friends, your experiences.
I hope Gangaba’s 2 going has not grieved you. There was a
girl called Lucy. She had six brothers and sisters of whom some had
died. Still she used to say that they were seven. 3 That implied great
wisdom. For, it is not through the body that somebody is a brother or
a sister. It is through the soul dwelling in the body that one is a
1

This is not available.
Addressee’s mother
3
The reference is to William Wordsworth’s poem “ We Are Seven”.
2

388

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

brother or a sister. And the soul does not die. It only changes its
abode. Just as man does not live in a useless house, the soul also does
not continue to dwell in a useless body. Gangaba will live on in a new
body. Why should you grieve for her?
It is our selfishness that makes us cry. But you are brave, and so
selfishness will not come near you at all.
Can you understand this? Do write to me from time to time now.
Tell Kunverji also that he should write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Motanan Man, p. 65

423. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
MYSORE,

January 5, 1934
CHI, BRIJKISAN,

I wrote you two letters. Your letter does not acknowledge either.
There is no village by the name of Srinagar in Andhradesha, so your
letter must have been sent to Kashmir. The address I sent you was
Sitanagaram. God has been very merciful in making you rise from
your death-bed. Now you must be very careful and make your body
sturdier than before. You must follow Dr. Ansari’s instructions to the
letter. Why did Ram Babu leave off ? For how many months have you
rented the new house ? What is the rent ? I am taking the touring well.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 2406

424. SPEECH AT HARIJANS’ MEETING
MYSORE,

January 5, 1934
You should conform to the rules of hygiene and sanitation—
internal as well as external. Internal sanitation consists in taking the
name of God—the first thing to be done after getting up in the
morning. That is the breakfast for the soul.
When he was told that the Harijans of the locality had given up beef-

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

389

eating, he added :

It is a matter of deep joy to me and congratulation for you that
you have given up beef-eating. I would like you to be able to say the
same thing about drink. What is the use of paying for some coloured
water which makes us so mad that we forget the distinction between
mother, wife and sister ? I have heard Harijans telling me that drink is
prescribed for them on occasions of marriage and death. I can tell
you, without fear of contradiction, that is a suggestion of the devil. It
is nowhere written in scriptures. I would ask you, brothers and sisters,
not to go near the devil. I hope you will take my advice to heart and it
will give me great joy when you will be able to say that you have
given up drink also.
Harijan, 12-1-1934

425. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, MYSORE
January 5, 1934
It has given me much pleasure to renew acquaintance after six
long years. As you are aware, I came to Mysore State in order to
regain my health that I had lost during the tour which I was conducting at that time. And naturally I have the most pleasant recollections
of my stay in Mysore. From His Highness the Maharaja Saheb and his
Dewan and other officials to the subjects of H.H. the Maharaja Saheb,
I experienced nothing but the warmest affection. You can, therefore,
understand more fully probably than before how much joy it must
have given me to have come in your midst again You have added to
the joy and pleasure by asking me to perform the ceremony of
unveiling a portrait of the late Sjt. Venkatakrishnayya, the Grand Old
Man of Mysore. I congratulate the artist upon his effort, because it is a
faithful representation of the figure which was quite famliar to me.
Perhaps, all of you do not know that I had the pleasure and privilege
of seeing the Grand Old Man of Mysore in flesh and blood during
my last visit. I had then become acquainted with his many virtues. I
knew than that he occupied a unique place in your hearts. I am quite
sure you do not expect me or want me to recount his many virtures.
You who were on the spot knew them much better than I could
possibly do during a brief visit. I only hope that those of his virtues
for which you and I prize his memory will be translated into our lives.
We may not flatter ourselves with the belief that we have discharged
the obligation to his memory by your inviting me to unveil this
390

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

portrait and witnessing the ceremony and by my unveiling it.
I must now pass on to the mission that has brought me here. The
Municipal address reminds me that I should see things which are
worth seeing, so that I may carry away happy impressions of the effort
that has been and is being made here on behalf of the Harijans. The
Reception Committee with very great forethought had arranged to
take me, before bringing me to this meeting, to various cheries1 and
showed me the improvements made during these six years. And you
are quite right in thinking that after an examination of these places I
should carry away nothing but happy impressions of what has been
done on behalf of Harijans. I must congratulate the State and the
Municipality of Mysore on the neatness and cleanliness I observed in
all the places visited this afternoon. And I am glad for the assurance
that the Municipality will not lose any time in looking after the
domestic comforts of the Harijans of this city. In my opinion,
sweepers in every city are its noblest servants. It must be a matter of
humiliation and shame to have the sweepers and scavengers consigned
to the dirtiest places and utterly neglected. In my opinion, they hold
the key of the health of every city in their pockets. Any city that dares
neglect its scavengers and sweepers commits the crime of neglecting
the health of its citizens.
But my mission covers a much wider theme than the economic welfare of Harijans. We are, no doubt, bound to jealously
guard their economic and educational welfare. But this is not
enough, if we are do reparation to Harijans for the untold hardships to
which we have subjected them for centuries past. They are entitled to
precisely the same rights and privileges as any other citizen. And as
Hindus they are entitled to the same social amenities and religious
privileges that any other Hindu is entitled to. My mission, therefore, is
to invite savarna Hindus to wash themselves clean of the guilt of
untouchability. And if, during the short period of grace open to
savarna Hindus, they fail to do this duty, I have not the shadow of a
doubt that Hinduism will perish. You can now understand that this
cannot be done by a municipality or even the Maharaja Saheb
himself. If you and I will not change our hearts, what can even Rajas
and Maharajas do ? It is, therefore, my privilege, as it is my duty, to
invite you to cleanse your hearts of untouchability, the distinction of
high and low. If you understand thoroughly the spirit of this message,
1

Localities

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

391

the change of heart is an incredibly simple performance; and you can
see in the twinkling of an eye how, if this change comes about in
savarna Hindu hearts, the economic, social and religious progress of
Harijans must follow. It will then be a sign and seal of this change of
heart. All these purses you have been kind enough to give me I
consider as an earnest of your determination to make that change of
heart. May God give you the strength to do it and save Hinduism
from impending doom.
Harijan, 12-1-1934

426. EXTRACTS FROM SPEECHES 1
[Before January 6, 1934]
You should know that our duty to Harijans does not end with
giving them good houses or giving them separate wells, schools and so
on. If we gave them all these and still kept them untouchables, it
would only mean replacing iron chains by golden ones; but the slave
would still be a slave. Harijans must have all the amenities that we
enjoy. But I go further and say, you must absorb them, you must
bridge the gulf that lies today between them and you. The purification
we are striving for is not complete till we have purged our hearts of
this distinction. You and I may not be satisfied with anything less.2
You, mothers, should wash your children every day, and
so should you wash yourselves. In the morning you should have
what I call internal wash, that is to say, the first thing you should do on
getting up is to take Ramanama and then pray to God that you should
pass the day in sacredness, so that no wrong word may pass your lips
and no wrong act may be done by you. And then you should give
yourselves an external wash.
At Anantapur 3 , opening a water-tap for them, he said :

May this water be the water of life to you. Water is an emblem
of purity. Just as we purify the body by bathing with water, so can we
become pure in heart by a morning wash, i.e., by taking the name of
God.
I am trying every moment of my life to be guided by ahimsa,
1

Reproduced from Chandrashankar Shukla’s “Weekly Letter”, which bears the
date-line “Bangalore, 6-1-1934”
2
What follows was addressed to Harijan women at another meeting.
3
On January 3.

392

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

by love. I am essentially a lover of peace. I do not want to create
dissensions. And I assure those who oppose me that I shall not do a
single thing which I know may be contrary to truth and love.1
But we have created a hope in the hearts of Harijans. They have
begun to feel that they are going to be freed from this serfdom. I
expect of you that you will fulfil it. It is said in all religions of the
world that, if the poor are deceived, if the hopes given to them are not
fulfilled, they heave a sigh of despair, a curse. And I have no doubt
that, if, after all that we have said and promised, we play false, the
curse of these poor people is bound to descend on us and we shall
perish.
Harijan, 12-1-1934

427. LETTER TO PARIKSHITLAL L. MAJMUDAR
January 6, 1934
BHAI PARIKSHITLAL,

At the moment I cannot think of anything that I can do from
here about the laws regarding Bhundi Bhunchhi2 . You have done the
right thing in writing to the Dewan. Please let me know if there has
been any reply from him. If I get an authoritative report on the
subject from a newspaper correspondent in Kutch, I would publish it
in Harijan. Is the report that you have received authentic ? Please
inquire and let me know. Try and get a copy of the legislation. Most
probably it was published in Navajivan. The cheque which Chhaganlal Joshi has sent to you is an instalment of that sum of Rs. 5,700. I
had made arrangements for it before I got your letter regar-ding the
use of a disinfectant. Hence the cheque. I will discuss the matter
further when I meet Thakkar Bapa on the 16th.
Blessings from

BAPU
S JT. P ARIKSHITLAL MAJMUDAR
HARIJAN ASHRAM
S ABARMATI
GUJARAT
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3999

1

This was said at a meeting held in Nellore on December 30. What follows was
said at another meeting.
2
A tax impossed by the Kutch State on members of the Meghaval caste who
were parties to a widow-marriage; vide , “‘Bhundi Bhunchhi’”
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

393

428. SPEECH AT STUDENTS’ MEETING, BANGALORE
January 6, 1934
A servant of Harijans must be above suspicion like Caesar’s
wife. He must have a character above reproach. His eyes must be clean
so that they may not offend. His hands also must be clean and his
touch must be pure and gentle. His heart will not harbour a single
impure thought. His ears must be turned to listen to the music of the
spheres, his feet will take him to the purest work, never to dens of evil
and he will give his ear to all he hears but will spare his voice.
In the end Gandhiji exhorted them to join one of the greatest of reform
movements in modern times.

429. LETTER TO GOVINDBHAI R. PATEL
January 7, 1934
BHAISHRI GOVINDBHAI,

I have your letter. I had received the postcard, too. I wrote a
long letter to Shri Aurobindo four days ago asking for an interview. I
am now awaiting a reply. You may, if you wish, send me any literature
which you think I should read.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original : C. W. 10740. Courtesy : Govindbhai R. Patel

430. SPEECH AT APEX BANK HALL, BANGALORE 1
January 7, 1934
My connection with the co-operative movement is of a perfunctory character. I tried to understand it as interpreted by Sir Daniel
Hamilton I know what boon it can become to agriculturists. I wish to
tell you what I said long ago at a co-operatives’ meeting at Bombay,
when I had the honour of being invited by Lord Willingdon . . . . It is
necessary for co-operative societiesto trace the course of every pice
lent. Find out what the borrower is doing with his money. This
thought has never left me.2
1
An address was presented to Gandhiji at the Provincial Co-operative Apex
Bank Hall.
2
What follows is from The Hindu.

394

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Gandhiji made a touching reference to the late Mr. K. H. Ramayya,
Registrar of Co-operative Societies. He said that while he was in Bangalore six
years ago, he used to meet the late Mr. Ramayya often and used to cut jokes with him.
It was only yesterday that he had learnt of the passing away of Mr. Ramayya.
Mahatma was really sorry for this. The great work that he had done for the cause of
Co-operation in the State was
too well-known to need repetition by him.

The Bombay Chronicle, 9-1-1934, and The Hindu 8-1-1934

431. SPEECH AT CIVIC RECEPTION, BANGALORE
January 7, 1934
I am deeply grateful to the Bangalore City Municipality for
presenting me with this address. You have reminded me in your
address that you were good enough to do me the honour of giving me
such an address when I was in your midst last time. And it flatters me
to see that I still retain a corner of your hearts. I tender you my
congratulations upon all the things that you have done and are doing
on behalf of the Harijans whose cause has brought me here. I tender
also my respectful congratulations to His Highness for the liberality
with which his Government has been dealing with this problem. You
have admitted in your address that, while so much is being done by
the Municipality for the Harijans, much more yet remains to be done.
It would be wrong on my part if I did not re-echo that sentiment
expressed in your address. During the morning peregrinations, I had
the painful duty of witnessing some of the habitations occupied by the
Harijans. It is difficult to call them even huts. I had, therefore, not
hesitated to describe them as ‘holes’. These holes are no protection
whatever to the Harijans against wind, rain and sun. These dwellings
are built of debris, which the Harijans could lay their hands upon.
You have every right to pride yourselves upon the beauty of
Bangalore. I am free to confess that Bombay cannot be described
as ‘Bombay, the beautiful’. There are such hideous and ugly spots in
Bombay that it is a misnomer to call that city ‘beautiful’. Comparative
speaking, therefore, I have no hesitatio whatever in giving Bangalore
the first prize for a beautiful city. But I would like you not to be
satisfied with the comparative merit. I would like you to set before
yourselves a minimum standard of comfort for the poorest of your
citizens.
Proceeding, Mahatmaji thanked the citizens for the kind invitation extended
to him to come over to Bangalore and stay for a short time after his all-India tour.
VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

395

I have experienced so much kindness and so much attention that
I assure you that I need no temptation whatever to bring me here if
only the call of duty enables me to take advantage of your hospitality
and your climate.
Mahatma Gandhi next said that the touching reference in the address to the
absence of his wife had moved him deeply. They had taken the way that duty had
shown them. Her duty had taken her away to Yeravda and his duty had him in their
midst. He assured them that nothing would give them both greater pleasure than to
enjoy their hospitality once more.

The Hindu, 8-1-1934

432. SPEECH AT TEMPERANCE ASSOCIATION,
BANGALORE
January 7, 1934
It is a matter of pleasure to me that you have invited me to meet
you and say a few words on the subject of temperance. Some of you
perhaps know that this is one of the matters that I took up before I was
known to anybody and before I had conceived the thought of
entering the political arena. When as a young man I went to South
Africa, I observed that the coolies, indentured Indians, were fast going
down owing to the drink habit. The law in South Africa made it a
crime for indentured Indians to carry drink home. They could drink
as much as they liked at the canteen. The result was that many women
were found literally lying in gutters. It was not a thing of which any
Indian could be proud. I pleaded with the Government, but mine was
a voice in the wilderness. So the thing went on. But it made a lasting
impression on my mind. I knew what I had to do when I came to
India after a long exile.
I am not a temperance man. I am a prohibition man. I
fought with my countrymen in South Africa and said, “We should
not fight for an equal right to drink.” I could not persuade them
for a long time, but I did succeed in persuading a majority of them
that to fight for rights was one thing and to fight for indulgence in
vice was another. If the whites were not punished by the State for
drinking, we could not plead for the same exemption. Here, in India,
the Government are trading in liquor. I know from bitter experience
of Harijans that they drink in spite of themselves. I have in mind an
esteemed co-worker in Calcutta, namely, Satis Chandra Das Gupta. He
396

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

gave up a remunerative job. He was and is still considered the righthand man of Dr. Roy. He gave up his chemical work and today he
lives near bastis. He administered pledges to Harijans not to drink.
These they broke again and again. That broke his heart and he fasted
for 15 days. It had a marvellous effect on the Harijans. They said they
would not now go back on their pledges. Satis Babu had to go
through that agony. It was a joy for him. A worker who fights drink
tooth and nail has to go through this. Many Harijans have said to me,
“Take away this temptation from us and we shall be all right. Do not
put it in our way.” When we are not able to control ourselves in so
many things, how much less can the Harijans and the labourers
control themselves ? I have lived, eaten and drunk with them. They
have no places of recreation. They live in wretched holes. They have
no money to spend for creature comforts. What little they get,
therefore, goes to canteens. I only give you the description to show
you how keenly and bitterly I feel in connection with the drink evil. I
have not the shadow of a doubt that we shall not be able to combat
this evil successfully till prohibition comes. I have fixed views about
prohibition. I have given you the result of my experience that, without
prohibition, it is impossible to bring about sober habits among the
labouring population in India. And I have observed that the Harijans
are most addicted to this vice. India is a country in which total
prohibition can succeed. People are not habitually given to drink. It is
not a fashionable vice. The climate does not demand its use. But
government revenue is touched by prohibition. Therefore they say,
“Find other sources of income before you ask us for total
prohibition.” I say, “If you get revenue from impure sources and
then say, ‘Replace this revenue,’ you cannot be heard. There should
be no bargaining about it.”
Harijan, 19-1-1934

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

397

433. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, BANGALORE1
January 7, 1934
It gives me very great pleasure to see Mr. V. P. Madhava Rao 2
present here. I had the pleasure of meeting him six years ago when I
was in your midst. That, in spite of his advanced age, he should have
come here to give me his blessings must move the hardest heart. I
regard it as a blessing for the Harijan work I am doing and it is a
matter of great joy and solace that such a great gathering of learned
men of Mysore who have seen so much life should be here to bless his
movement. But, I miss the presence, at this meeting, of Mr. Humza
Hussain, who was the Chairman of the Reception Committee when I
came here six years ago. I have a vivid recollection of his many
kindnesses and how I wish he had been here at this meeting to greet
me as on old friend. May God give his soul peace.
I am very grateful to you for the purse that you have presented
me. I was almost going to say a “good purse”, but I have hesitated to
use this adjective, because I know that the citizens of Bangalore are
quite able to put together a larger purse and I know that by the time I
say goodbye to you, I shall have many generous contributions to the
cause of Harijans. After all, it is the least reparation that we can do to
these brothers and sisters whom Hindus have systematically
suppressed.
I have read your address from top to bottom. And I congratulate you and the Maharaja Saheb’s Government on the many things
that you have been able to recite in that address. But, neither the State
nor the people of Mysore nor I can find any cause for satisfaction
unless untouchability is entirely rooted out from our hearts. While I
gratefully acknowledge all that you have done for Harijans, I ask you
not to rest content till all Harijans enjoy all the rights that savarna
Hindus enjoy in all walks of life. Let us undergo this necessary
purification, while there is this brief moment of probation still left
to us by God. Be sure, if you fail in this hour, God’s wrath will swiftly
descend on the Hindus.
But, one word to Harijan brothers and sisters. You cannot be
free from this self-purification. You too have to make your sacrifices
at the common altar. And that consists in the strict observance of
1

Held at the National High School in the evening, the meeting was largely

attended
2

Retired Dewan of Mysore, Travancore and Baroda, chairman of the Mysore
State Harijan Sevak Sangh.

398

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

sanitation, internal and external. Secondly, in giving up carrion and
beef-eating wherever that habit still persists. In every part of the
civilized world, carrion is abhorred with detestation. It is considered
unfit for human consumption. And no one can call himself a Hindu
and partake of beef. The sacredness of the cow and her worship is an
integral part of Hinduism. Thirdly, I would ask every Harijan man and
woman present here to give up the habit of drink. Let no Harijan say
that savarna Hindus also drink. It is no answer. I would beseech you,
as a fellow Harijan by calling, to shun all the vices of savarna Hindus.
In spite of all the reparations that savarna Hindus make to you, in the
presence of God after all, in the ultimate end, your salvation rests in
your own hands. It was therefore a matter of great joy when day
before yesterday1 Harijans gave me their assurance that they had given
up beef-eating and would try to give up drink. Let us all pray to God
that He may give strength to the Harijans to carry out their resolve to
leave off drink.
The Hindu, 8-1-1934

434. TALK WITH HARIJAN WORKERS2
BANGALORE,

January 7, 1934
It is for you to supplement the work done by the State. 3 You
may find workers to go and live in the midst of Harijans. This is
merely all illustration. The rule is, you begin where the State ends.
The State cannot attend to individuals. That is the prerogative of
private persons. Each worker should measure his own capacity. We
must not do anything for spectacular effect. Our work may not be
pretentious, but it must be solid. We have to come in intimate touch
with the people—savarnas as well as Harijans. Such contact with the
people can never be established by the State. That is essentially the
work of the Social reformer. Temple-entry work is to be done by
workers specially qualified for that work. If they show character, it will
move the Harijan mass. The workers must not go in the midst of
Harijans as strangers or patrons but go as friends and servants. Such
work is being done in Wardha. If there is one true worker, he will
mutiply himself.
Harijan, 19-1-1934
1

Vide “Speech at Harijans’ Meeting”
Extracted from Chandrashankar Shukla’s “Weekly Letter”
3
Gandhiji had been asked, “When the State is doing so much, what are we to
2

do ?”

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

399

435. NOTE TO N. R. MALKANI
January 8, 1934
MY DEAR MALKANI,

Here is some solid work for you. Prepare a statement about the
two untouchability Bills, give the text of the two Bills, procure
Government circulars and keep with the statement all the literature
available.
BAPU
From a photostat : G. N. 904

436. LETTER TO PARVATIBEHN P. DESAI
BANGALORE,

January 8, 1934
CHI. PARVATI, 1

I have your letter. I had news of Pragji for the first time from
you. Do you have any friends in Dharwar ? Let me know whenever
you get a letter from there. When was he taken to Dharwar ? Keep me
informed about yourself and the children. Address your letters to
Wardha. Did you write the letter yourself or did you get it written by
somebody else ?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 5036

437. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
BANGALORE,
January 8, 1934
BA,

I have still not received your letter, but I believe it will reach me
after some wandering. I hope you are getting the newspaper now. You
must have received the Bhagavat and the Ramayana. Write for
anything else you may wish to have. I had a letter from Manilal, as
also one from Sushila. They are both well. Manilal is unperturbed and
asks you not to worry about him. Sita is growing up fast. She is always
playing about. Devdas has been released earlier than expected. He has
gone to Ahmedabad. I had a wire from him. Perhaps he will visit you.
1

400

Wife of Pragji Desai
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

There were letters from Ramdas and Nimu too. I keep on writing to
Manu, but again there has been no letter from her. Kishorelal’s fever
has come down a little and so it can be hoped that he will have fully
recovered in a few days. There is nothing but good news about Mani.
Om, Kisan, Chandrashankar, etc., are all well. I am in Bangalore today.
Everyone has been inquiring after you. Shankerlal and Gulzarilal
have come here. There is to be a meeting of the Panch regarding the
workers’ wages. Tomorrow is Tuesday, and so it will meet tomorrow.
Afterwards I have to go to Malabar. I will be going to the area which
you once visited. Urmila Devi’s1 son has a job in Madras now. I keep
good health. There is no cause at all for worry. At every place people
come in large crowds and give me purses, jewellery, etc. Kanti is better
now. I see that Bal will be seeing me in a few days. His health also is
quite good. I hope all of you there are well. What progress have
Shanta and Lalita made in their studies ? And now the discourse.
Today I will write something about what the Gita says
concerning yajna. The subject is introduced in Chapter III. In that
chapter the Lord says that he who eats without performing yajna
eats stolen food 2 . This is a very serious statement indeed, for
eating stolen food is like swallowing raw mercury. Nobody can digest
it and, if anyone eats it, he will get eruptions all over the body. Hence
Akho Bhagat has said : “Eating stolen food is like swallowing raw
mercury.” If, therefore, a person stops performing yajna even for a
while, he becomes a thief. All of us should know that this yajna
means. Fortunately for us, it is easy for all whose heart is in the right
place. It requires no wealth, no intellect nor education. Yajna means
any act of service. Only about a person whose whole life is a ceaseless
yajna can it be said that he does not eat stolen food. Hence those who
do just a little work as yajna may be said to be not guilty of theft to
that extent. Looking at the matter from this point of view, we see that
all of us are guilty of theft more or less. Our yajna can be said to be
perfect only when we have shed all selfishness. To do this means to
give up the sense of ‘I’ and ‘mine’, to cease feeling that this belongs
to me and that to somebody else, that this is my son and that
somebody else’s. There should not be even a trace of such a feeling
in one’s heart. He alone can do this who offers up his all to Shri
Krishna. He who has done that does everything with God as witness, as
1
2

Sister of C. R. Das
III. 12

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

401

His servant and in a spirit of service. Such a person is always happy
and peaceful in mind. Happiness and sufferring are the same to him.
He uses his body, mind, intellect, possessions—all that is his—for the
service of others. All of us cannot do such perfect yajna. If, however,
we have the aspiration in our heart to serve the whole world, what work
is there which most people can do and which would include service to
the whole world ? Asking this question, we found that the answer was
spinning, which is the work that countless people can do in the spirit
of service. One who spins will have done that much labour for the
service of the world. But I mention this only as an example. What I
wished to explain was the meaning and importance of yajna. I shall be
satisfied if I have been able to explain it.
Blessings to all sisters from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, pp. 7-8

438. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
BANGALORE,

January 8, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

After completing a letter to Ba, I am writing this to you. It is
now past four in the afternoon. It is my weekly Silence Day. We are in
Bangalore today. Tomorrow there is a meeting of the Panch to
consider the demand of the [Ahmedabad] mills for a reduction in the
workers wages. Shankerlal [Banker], Gulzarilal and others have
already arrived. The mill-owners will arrive tomorrow. I have told
them that I would be able to give five hours for the meeting. We are
leaving for Malabar tomorrow night.
The pressure of work remains heavy. But I keep good health.
Subba Rao 1 came and examined me yesterday. He was pleased. The
blood pressure was 155-100. This is excellent. At the moment it is
expected that Thakkar Bapa will meet me in Calicut on the 16th.
I am staying here in a State building2 , the same where I had put
up before. The people’s enthusiasm is great. The Dewan came and
saw me. He talked a great deal about you. He has sent his salaams to
you. He shows very great love.
1
2

402

A noted physician of Bangalore
Kumara Park
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I had a letter from . . . 1 He wanted my permission to sell off
his car. Soon after, I got a wire from Thakkar Bapa, informing me that
he was really willing to sell it. I, therefore, gave my consent, although I
didn’t understand the position at all. In such matters I depend entirely
on you. I, therefore, often follow the example of Ekalavya. He made a
clay image of Dronacharya and learnt archery by practising before it
so that he could become Arjuna’s equal. I form a mental image of
you and consult it. Assuming that you would advise me to give my
consent in this matter, I sent a wire saying yes.
Napoleon2 has been very much affected by the death
of Kunvarji’s wife. I see this from his loving reply to my letter
of condolence. I have written to him again. I see from . . . ’s 3 letter
that he is not happy. I have asked him what the reason is.
Munshi has resumed practice. You must have read about Jivraj.
Dr. Bidhan may be said to have returned from the jaws of death.
He tells me so in reply to a wire which I had sent to him. A bone is
fractured. He will have to be in bed for some 15 days at least.
I had a letter from Mama in which he has referred to a letter of
yours. He says that it is not practicable now to collect separate
contributions and keep separate accounts for the Harijan work, nor
will the people give such contributions. Hence, for Navasari, Godhra
and other centres for which separate funds and accounts were being
maintained, budgets within our means have been passed and it has
been decided to obtain the money from the funds of the Harijan
Sevak Sangh. The control of the institutions concerned will not be
changed. The only change will be that they will receive reasonable
grants and will run under the supervision of the Harijan Sevak Sangh.
Their independent existence will in no way be endangered. Mama has
volunteered to devote himself wholly to this work for the present. I
plainly refuse to guide anbody. I don’t feel inclined in my heart to do
so. If you have any questions to ask or wish to know more about the
Harijan Sevak Sangh, you can write to me. I don’t know what I
should tell you. If, however, you give me the slightest indication as to
what you want, I will give, that is, send all the required information.
You need have no fear that I myself will write out the reply. I spare
my hand and brain unnecessary exertion and economize time in
1
2
3

The name is omitted in the source
Chhotubhai K. Mehta
The name is omitted in the source.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

403

doing my work.
Devdas has been released before his time. There was a wire from
him. He will of course come and see me. The wire was sent from
Ahmedabad. Most probably he will pay a visit to Ba.
Manilal and Sushila write to me. His affairs are all right. Keshu
also has got a good job. Ramdas is very much upset. He can enjoy no
peace of mind at all.
It seems that Kishorelal is steadily improving. Brijkrishna has
survived. He can walk a little now. Jamnalal has a cold and so on.
Shankerlal thinks that his health is certainly not too good. But his
weight has increased and he has now reached about 200 lb.
Om and Kisan are quite well. And so is Mirabehn, of
course.
Blessings to both from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 59-61

439. LETTER TO SHANTIKUMAR MORARJEE
January 8, 1934
CHI. SHANTIKUMAR,

I am often hoping for a letter from you and when I don’t get
any I take it that you have refrained from writing out of consideration
for me.
I hope the operation1 went off well. Please write or get someone
to write to me sometimes. Normally, I am told, it is a simple operation.
I suppose you do read Harijan. God is protecting my health.
Blessings to you both from

BAPU

[PS.]
It is safer to write at the Wardha address.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C. W. 4721. Courtesy : Shantikumar
Morarjee.
1

404

The addressee had been operated upon for hernia.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

440. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
January 8, 1934
BHAISHRI MUNSHI,

I have your letter. I have not received Lilavati’s so far.
I will send you the literature on the Bills regarding
untouchability. If I cannot get a whole loaf of bread I shall be willing
to accept even a quarter. It is only when I am offered instead of bread
a stone purporting to be bread that I refuse to accept it. But I have no
fear that you will ever give me a stone instead of bread. Please,
therefore, continue to give me whatever you can.
I see no harm if a party like the one you suggest comes into
existence. Please go through the changes that I have made in your
draft.1 The reference to civil disobedience is not proper. An element
of corruption had certainly crept into it. But even a reference to that is
completely out of place in this draft. Our opponents are bound to take
advantage of it. We might even take that risk if such reference were
relevant. Nor was corruption the cause of my suspending that part of
civil disobedience which I have done.
This party is not being formed in order to attract other parties to
it. The reason for forming it is that those Cogressmen who do not or
cannot take part in the civil disobedience movement desire to ensure
their continued [political] existence and to do some service. I,
therefore, consider any reference to other parties as unnecessary.
After the party is formed, it may start negotiations with other parties
for any purpose. What its name will be will have to be thought over.
Just as you thought it proper to consult me, I would advise you to
consult Jawaharlal too. If you endanger your health by running about
too much, you are going to hear from me.
Blessings to you both from

BAPU
From Gujarati : C. W. 7530. Courtesy : K. M. Munshi

1
The addressee, along with Rangaswamy Ayyangar, had prepared a draft
scheme to revive the Swaraj Party as the constitutional wing of the Congress and had
submitted it to Gandhiji.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

405

441. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
BANGALORE,

January 8, 1934
CHI. RAMDAS,

I got both your letters. Do not worry about your having opened
Manilal’s letter. You are free to open any letter. How can I possibly
keep anything secret from you all. You fear your own shadow,
fancying a whole lot of misfortunes. Both of you have resolved to stay
on there and have the necessary experience. You should therefore
stick to the place now. Go on cheerfully doing what you can and be
happy. If you do that, you will certainly get over your diffidence.
I may say I have now begun to understand why you suffer.
Without knowing it, you are trying to appear better than you are, wish
to do so, but you should check such a wish. One should not feel
miserable at what one is. One should try to improve oneself but
should not worry ifone fails. That is the essence of the Bhagavad
Gita’s teaching and therein lies true. Humility you have in ample
measure but you feel sore in your mind fancying that you lack
something. To do so is the very opposite of humility. Humility always
makes one contented with what one is. Why should you, seeing
someone’s palace, pull down your little hut? Why should you not
think of your hut as much better than a palace? It is not true that those
who live in palaces are happier than those who live in huts. Happiness
consists in being contented.
Why need you feel sore over your inability to overcome your
impure thoughts? Everyone in this humility world is full of blemishes.
Out of countless persons who try to overcome their impure thoughts,
only one succeeds in doing so. The vast majority should be satisfied
with doing the best they can and leave the result to God.
You need not feel the least constraint in writing anything to me.
You should make it a rule to write to me at least once a week. You will
feel light in your heart if you do so. Never entertain such futile
thoughts that you could not write to me because you were unworthy.
Should you on your own think yourself unworthy, or feel so only if I
thought you unworthy? Will you try to curb my thoughts? If God
thinks me worthy, why should I think myself to be unworthy? God
never regards anyone as unworthy. How, then, could parents with feet
of clay think their offspring unworthy? Are they themselves likely to
be so perfect that they can claim the right to judge their offspring and
406

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

think them unworthy? No one is competent to judge who in this world
is worthy and who is not. All of us being imperfect, we should bear
with one another and do the best we can and purify ourselves. Parents
have no right to sit in judgment over their offspring, nor has a
husband the right to sit in judgment over his wife. This is implicit in
ahimsa. Therefore overcome your sense of frustration and take heart.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

442. MESSAGE TO THE PEOPLE OF MYSORE
January 9, 1934
I carry with me very pleasant recollections of my brief stay in
the State. I hope the people of Mysore will keep up their reputation
for being enlightened by removing untouchability root and branch.
The Hindu, 10-1-1934

443. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, PALGHAT 1
January 10, 1934
Early in the morning, I entered Malabar—with due deference to
our friends who call themselves sanatanists—the land of inequalities.
As I was passing by familiar places the face of a solitary Nayadi,
whom I had seen during the previous visit, rose before my eyes. 2 It
was about ten or eleven in the morning when, in the midst of a
discussion about untouchability, unapproachability and invisibility, all
forms of which are found in no part of the world except in Malabar, a
shrill voice was heard. Those who were talking to me said, ‘We can
show you a live Nayadi.’ The public road was not for him. Unshod,
he was walking across the fields with a noiseless tread. I went out with
the friends and saw the Nayadi. I asked him to come and talk to me.
Evidently he was frightened and he did not know when a blow would
descend upon him. Trembling he talked to me. I told him that the
public road was a much for him as for me. He said, ‘It cannot be so. I
1

The meeting, held at 8.15 in the morning, was attended by about 4,000
persons. Addresses of welcome were presented to Gandhiji by the Municipality and
the Taluk Board.
2
Vide, “Speech at Public Meeting, Palghat,15-10-1927

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

407

may not walk on the public road’. I close that scene and ask the
sanatanists or anybody else to show me the authority in defence of
this inhuman conduct. You will find me smiling with you, laughing
with you, and cracking jokes with you, but you may also know that
behind all those jokes and smiles and laughs, the face of the Nayadi
and that scene will keep haunting me throughout my tour in Malabar.
As I was coming here, I was greeted by black flag demonstrators
mixed with national flag demonstrators. I tell you that I appreciated
the black flag demonstrators more than the national flag demonstrators because I could see untruth in its nakedness behind the black
flag. What if those who had black flags had smeared themselves as
Brahmins do ? He is no Brahmin merely because he carries a black
flag or red flag and has marks on his forehead. Brahminhood is not
known by external marks. The scriptures I swear by and in whose
defence I would love to die tell me that he alone is a Brahmin who
knows Brahman. Brahminhood is the essence of humanity, selfeffacement, pity. All those
virtues which our ancestors have taught us to prize have to incarnate
themselves in a Brahmin. He is a Brahmin who is a living treasure of
scriptures, but not he who makes a demonstration of untruth by
carrying a black flag.
I have come to Malabar to speak out of the very depths of my
soul. There are many things in Malabar over which, as you know, I
have gone into raptures. You have scenery which is second to none in
the world. Man, if he behaves himself, can live an easy life in Malabar.
Woman in Malabar is the freest in India. All the women I have seen in
Malabar have a majesty which has always commanded my respect. As
you know, I had the pleasure of meeting the ex-Maharani of
Travancore. Her simplicity commanded my admiration and at first
sight I fell in love with her. But there is nothing to be proud of in the
Malabar untouchability. It is the vilest thing on earth. I want you to
wipe out this shame of untouchability from Malabar; and if you can
do it, the whole of India naturally will follow; and you can do it if you
will. I have entered Malabar in high hopes. It is for you to fulfil it or
frustrate it. Only write down this prophecy in your hearts that, if
untouchability as we practise it today lives, Hinduism perishes. I ask
you to believe in what I am saying and to save Hinduism from
impending doom. You have the opportunity of making your choice.
Make it now or never.
Harijan, 19-1-1934
408

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

444. SPEECH AT WOMEN’S MEETING, PALGHAT 1
January 10, 1934
Do you know why I have come here ? I have come here to ask
you to do penance. I have come here to ask you to forget that there
can be a single human being who can be called ‘untouchable’. You,
the women of Malabar, are freer than any women in any other part of
India. And if you choose to, you can save Hinduism from peril. Even
if millions of people came and said that untouchability was a divine
institution, I will repeat it is an institution of the devil. I have just now
come from a little settlement where I saw Nayadi brethren and some
sisters. It is your shame and my shame that they have got to live on
a little rice thrown at them from a distance. I have nothing
more to say to you. And if you want to commence by doing penance,
then you will commence by discarding your ornaments and silver to
contribute funds to help these helpless human beings.
The Hindu, 12-1-1934

445. SPEECH AT MEETING OF NAYADIS, KUZHALMANNAM
January 10, 1934
Well, I have received this address, which I suppose you have not
read. Therefore whatever is written in the address will have very little
value and this I regard as a breach of truth. As a matter of fact, if you
would have read this address to me in Malayalam, then I might have
known that you represented your own feelings and it would have
some educative value. Also, your lot was not unknown to me. I have
just now come to Malabar, as I am touring in other parts of India for
one purpose only, namely, to abolish distinction between Nayadis and
non-Nayadis. There is no sin as great as unapproachability or
untouchability. So long as Harijans are crushed by that devil called
untouchability, we have to work to crush that devil. I want that
untouchability must be wiped out of Hinduism, or Hinduism would
perish. I would like you to take part in the movement for purification
in the best manner possible, taking advantage of every other facility
that might be offered, in the way of education, to your children and
yourself. If you are given to the habit of drinking, you must give it
1

The meeting, held at Gowder Picture Palace, was attended by about 1,000

women.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

409

up; if you do not observe the simple laws of hygiene you must
observe them. You must also observe sanitation and must be clean
both externally and internally.
The Hindu, 11-1-1934

446. SPEECH AT WOMEN’S MEETING, GURUVAYUR
January 10, 1934
FRIENDS,

I thank you for the address presented to me and the purse. This
is the first place in Malabar where an address has been presented by
women. By that if you mean that you represent the women of the
taluk, then it means that men have no addresses to present to me. It
may be that you are not touched by the spirit of self-purification. I
see that the women of Malabar have not summoned sufficient strength
to present an address both on behalf of men and women. The women
must lead the battle against untouchability. In point of education,
Malabar women are much more advanced than their sisters in other
presidencies. I want you to turn this to the best possible advantage.
When I put to auction articles presented to me I hope that women
would put to shame men by taking them for higher prices. I can point
out that you can commence this today by offering one bangle,
necklace, etc. But you are smiling or laughing. I take it seriously.
Women in less advanced parts of India like Madras and Andhra
commenced to bid by offering two or three bangles. I shall be
presently putting the women’s spirit to rest as soon as I finish a few
remarks. I want to tell the sisters who have gathered here that after I
entered into Malabar this morning I have been considering what
special message I can deliver, because Malabar shows this disease of
untouchability in a most aggravated form.
I feel that if the women of Malabar determine to work for this
cause with redoubled energy, this devil can be wiped out. In others
parts of the world, women won their rights by making sacrifices and
suffering. But for Malabar women it should be a double speciality,
and that for the simple reason that the women of Malabar occupy in
India a most unique position. Therefore, if the women of Malabar led
a battle against the devil of untouchability, it would be wiped out
soon. It is only in Malabar, I discovered on entering, that they are
dressed in spotless white garments. It is only of late that the fashion
has grown among women of wearing variegated colour garments. Yet,
I have noticed that colours are not so much loved in these parts as one
410

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

would find in other parts of India. I do not know the secret of your
domestic life. But I have flattered myself with the belief that this white
garment of women of Malabar represents their internal purity. I hope
that my belief would be well-placed if untouchability is removed root
and branch in Malabar. I suppose, in point of education, the women
of Malabar will carry the palm. What I want the women of Malabar to
do is to save Hinduism from impending danger. I would like you to
throw over board your laziness and indifference whatever it may be. I
would like you to keep watch very vigilantly as you would do over
babies. You will treat your babies with affection. It is not so with your
religion. The more vigilant you are, the more scientifically precise
you would be. Before you, the women of Malabar, lies a mission. Will
you try to abolish the distinction between high and low ? Believe
me, those whom we are considering as lower than ourselves are not
lower in the estimation of God. The prevalence of untouchability is
due to insolence which leads to devilish interpretation of religious
books. I have never been in the habit of using exaggerated language
and if I may seem to be using strong language, I feel that this conviction of mine is a very fundamental one. What I have stated in
addressing women applies to men also. You are not free from disbelief. Religion requires more men and women to guard it. To put it
briefly, the present movement stands for self-purification.
The Hindu, 12-1-1934

447. LETTER TO YVONNE PRIVAT
AS AT WARDHA, C.P.

January 11, 1934
MY DEAR BHAKTI,

It is just 3.20 a. m. and I have finished reading your letter
undated. Women will not think of dates! They work for eternity and
therefore they disregard human divisions of time!
Your accusation is, from your point of view, justified. We have
been rushing at such a speed that it has become impossible to keep
pace with the correspondence. Your letter (previous) is lying with me
somewhere but I had no time.Today for very shame I take your letter
first in order that it may not go into a bottomless file. Though neither
Mira nor I have written to you for some time, you are ever before the
mind’s eye. Your inseparableness, your ever genial faces and your

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

411

readiness for sacrifice—these and many such things are a perpetual
reminder to me of the times we had together.
I know you are doing good work there. I did read about the
church people’s revolt against Hitler.
I expect to hear more about the result of Ceresole’s 1 visit to
Germany. Do please give my love to him.
I am surprised to learn that you are not getting Harijan regularly. I am writing to the Editor at once.
I hope both of you are prospering in every sense of the term.
I say nothing about me, as you will learn all about me from
Harijan.
With our love to both of you.
BAPU

[PS.]
Devdas has just come out of prison. Ba, Pyarelal and Mahadev
are still in jail.
BAPU
From a photostat : G. N. 2337

448 SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, GURUVAYUR2
January 11, 1934
FRIENDS,

I would like you all to give me perfect silence.3
We have here a forcible illustration of the age-old truth that
‘Man proposes but God disposes’. I had hoped to be able to speak to
you on subjects of the greatest importance to you, to me and to the
whole of the Hindu world. Instead of being able to do that, I have
been obliged to devote precious forty minutes to a scene that I
witnessed this morning.4 I found two fellow countrymen lying here,
stretched on the platform, one of them bleeding through the mouth
and both of them apparently senseless. The first thing, therefore, that
1
Pierre Ceresole, a Swiss conscientious objector to war, who founded the
International Service.
2
The meeting was attended by about 2,000 people.
3
This sentence has been taken from the Hindu report.
4
Just before the meeting started there had been a scuffle between the
volunteers and two sanatanists, Radheswara Sastri and Kalpanathji, resulting in
serious injuries to both.

412

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

fell to me to do was to give the best attention that was possible for me
to these fellow countrymen. And so they have been sent under the
charge of Prof. Malkani to the dispensary here for medical attention.
In so far as a lay nurse like me can judge, I do not think that their
lives are in any way in danger. And let us all pray that they may soon
be up and doing.
I understand from the two other friends who have come here on
behalf of the All-India Varnashrama Swarajya Sangh that they had all
come here on behalf on this Sangh. They had as perfect a right to
attend this meeting as any single one of you. They had a perfect right
to stage a hostile demonstration, if they intended to, on a peaceful
footing. However repugnant it might appear to me that those who
represent sanatan dharma should resort to such demonstration, I
perfectly recognized their right to make such a demonstration yesterday at Palghat, and I had no hesitation in making public refe-rence at
the meeting there to their demonstration more than to the
demonstration of those who had come to greet me out of affection for
me and sympathy for the cause. And I gave then and there the reason
for my saying that I appreciated this black flag demonstration more
than the demonstration of affection. I must not repeat the reason here,
but I must refer you to the public speech1 , if at all it finds publication
in any of the local journals. Here I want only to say that it was a
matter of deep grief to me to find that these two countrymen were
hurt, no matter for what cause, no matter by whom. If any single
volunteer or any single person connected with the organization of this
meeting had any hand in assaulting these friends, I have no hesitation
in saying that he has disgraced the cause and has hurt Hinduism,
which he thought he was serving.
I have said repeatedly that this cause of Hinduism can only be
served by men and women who are above suspicion and who have a
character to keep and to lose. In a movement of self-purification there
is no room for a hasty word, for a hasty action, for abuse, certainly not
for bodily harm. And if there are any persons here present who were
instrumental in causing hurt to these countrymen of ours, whose lives
should be as dear to you and to me as our own blood relations’, then I
invite them to purge themselves of that guilt by making a public
declaration of their having done this injury and taking the pledge
never to repeat such a dishonourable act.
1

Vide “Speech at Public Meeting, Palghat”

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

413

Keenly and deeply as I feel the taint of untouchability and
deeply as I feel convinced that, if this untouchability is not removed
root and branch from Hinduism, Hinduism is bound to perish, I would
not have untouchability removed by force or show of force or
compulsion of any kind whatsoever. Removal of untouchability is not
a matter of law or of compulsion. Removal of untouchability is a
matter of change of heart, perfect purification on the part of millions
of Hindus. And that can only be brought about by the sacrifice of
thousands of workers themselves, and not by causing injury to other
people. Hence has every scripture that I have read pronounced from
the house-tops that religion can only be defended by tapascharya. I
will, therefore, beseech every one of you, who crowd round me
wherever I go, to remember that this movement is a movement of
personal, individual self-purification and self-conviction. And if you
cannot approach this question from that point of view, I would far
rather that I was deserted by you and that all the meetings were
deserted by you. And if any man or woman is eager to come and
listen to me or to give me an ounce of milk, he or she should do so,
provided he or she has got that complete identification with the cause
and a perfect spirit of self-purification.
Having said this and having made this declaration of my faith
under the shadow of the great temple of Guruvayur, I would like to
make this appeal from the bottom of my heart to those who are
organizing the activities of the Varnashrama Swarajya Sangh, and
kindred bodies also, to understand that they will not defend what they
call sanatan dharma by staging demonstrations of the character that
they have been doing. They sent a body of men throughout the tour
in C. P. who wanted to fall prostrate before the car and impede my
progress at every stage. There were often clashes between volunteers
who were looking after me and this body of six or seven young men.
Fortunately, no serious or untoward event happened, though scratches
certainly were inflicted on either side even during the C. P. tour, I
quickly made friends with those people who were staging those
obstructive demonstrations and told them as earnestly as I could that
that was not the way to protect Hinduism.1 Some of them were
youngsters who did not even know what they were doing. With the
exception of one, I doubt if any of them had any idea of the elements
of Hinduism. And I had hoped here also that, if there were such men
1

414

Vide “Discussion with Swami Lalnath”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

who wanted to stage demonstrations, I should come in touch with
them, discuss with them, understand them and know who they were.
But I was sorry that hardly had I put my foot in Malabar when I was
faced with the scene that I witnessed here. It would have been better if
I had been able to make their acquaintance before and ascertained
what they wanted to do. But they chose to take a different course. I
still invite them to meet me and tell me what they would exactly want
me to do; and, short of stopping this tour, I would make every facility
for them, and every convenience for them to express their thoughts or
even to make whatever peaceful demonstrations that they might want
to stage. But what I am most anxious to avoid is goondaism in every
shape and form on the part of either party. I give the same credit to
those who call themselves sanatanists for honesty of purpose that I
would claim for myself, but both must have an equal right to give
expression to their views and mould
public opinion. After all, sanatan dharm is not the prerogative of
one set of people. I claim myself to be a representative of sanatan
dharma in every sense of the term that they claim. I base my
vehement oppo-sition to untouchability upon the same Shastras by
which they swear, and I should stand by my interpretation of the
Shastras even though I were the solitary one amongst the millions of
Hindus; because the same Shastras tell me that I may not resist the
inner call of my fundamental being. Thank God, however, that I do
not stand alone in the interpretation that I have been placing before
you. On the contrary, there are learned shastris who have just as much
right to interpret the Shastras as those who call themselves the
exponents of sanatan dharma. And they give precisely the same
interpretation that I have placed before tens of thousands of men and
women. And it is my settled conviction, based upon an unbroken
experience extending over a period of nearly fifty years, that
untouchability as we practise it today has absolutely no warrant
whatsoever in the Hindu Shastras. I claim that Harijans have precisely
the same common rights of worship, of use of public institutions and
in all other walks of life that the tallest of Hindus enjoy in common
with the rest of Hindu mankind. And, therefore, I have not the shadow
of a doubt that caste Hindu will not have performed their elementary
duties by Harijans until they have thrown open the gates of Guruvayur
and such ancient temples to the Harijans, precisely on the same terms
on which they are open to other Hindus.
But I have infinite patience; and, as you know, although

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

415

Kelappan’s fast had progressed for many days, although many of
these reformers were actually in the temple threatening to declare a
sym-pathetic fast with Kelappan and although the reformers thought
that the prize was almost within their grasp, I sent a peremptory telegram 1 from my own fasting bed, calling upon Kelappan to suspend
the fast and to withdraw the men who were inside the Guruvayur
temple. And I did so because I felt that the fast was premature and I
smelt coercion in it. I mention this in order to show that I will not be
guilty of being party to the opening of a single temple under
coercion. But I do want temples to be opened where public opinion is
absolutely and clearly ripe for the opening of those temples. If there
is any legal obstruction in the process, I want that legal obstruction to
be removed. That is the meaning, and the only meaning, of the
Temple-entry Bill, and no other. This Bill simply removes the powerlessness that many trustees today feel about opening the temples
under their charge because of the legal obstruction. There is not the
slightest trace of compulsion or coercion about this Temple-entry Bill
or the kindred Bill called the Anti-untouchability Bill.
But I heard a whisper this morning that behind this temple-entry
agitation there is a nefarious design, if not on my part, on the part of
my co-workers, that we should take possession of these temples and
own them. I have no hesitation whatsoever in categorically denying
this statement. I have certainly no such design whatsoever, and I do
not know of a single co-worker who has any such design. And if there
is any such co-worker who has such a design, he has no place
whatsoever on this platform. The possession will remain undoubtedly
in the hands of those who are today lawfully in possession.
A kindred question that was asked was whether behind this there
was also a design to undermine Brahminism. I can only tell you that I
cannot be guilty of any such design; for, to me to undermine Brahminism is to undermine Hinduism. This does not mean endorsement of
the claim that the Brahmins, so called, may put forth today. No man
can be accepted as a Brahmin by society merely by reason of his
birth. The Shastras themselves say that a born Brahmin who does not
act according to the requirements of Brahminism will forfeit his right
to be called a Brahmin by the people in general. There are Brahmins
themselves today in this very movement who say that they cannot be
called Brahmins unless they carry out the precepts of the Shastras
1

416

Vide ,”Speech at Public Meeting, Coimbatore” ,16-10-1927
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

referring to them. I believe that the Brahmin is the cornerstone of
Hinduism, as of every other religion. But there you must understand
the meaning of the word Brahmin. The Brahmin is the person who has
realized Brahman. If he has not that realization in every act of his, he
shows that he is ever after it and nothing else. Such a Brahmin
demands my ten thousand prostrations every morning, but not the
Brahmin who is dictated by self, who is multiplying himself1 day after
day and thinks mostly of himself, rarely of others, nor even the
Brahmin who smears himself with ashes from top to toe and can
punctiliously and correctly recite the Vedas. It may be necessary for
him to smear himself with ashes. It is necessary for him to translate the
Vedas in his own life. It is necessary for him to exhibit Brahman in
every act of his life. It is necessary for him to be pure and to impart
that purity to all his surroundings. It is necessary for him to be ever
ready to die so that others may live. Now you understand what regard
I have for the true Brahmin and Brahminism.
Having heard this probably the writer of a printed letter which
was placed in my hands this morning does not want replies to the
several questions which he has put me and to which he has expected
replies this morning. But I can say this much to him that, if he wants a
detailed reply to everyone of the questions that he has raised here, he
can get it by turning to the file of Harijan. He will there find also that,
in putting the interpretations that he has put in his letter on several
things, he has undoubtedly misread the message of the Gita and the
message of Hinduism.
Lastly he has asked for an interview with me. I am sorry that he
cannot have it at Guruvayur, but he can have it at Calicut on the 16th
instant at ten o’clock in the morning. I had an invitation for a
discussion yesterday at Palghat with some learned pundits. I was sorry
to have to disappoint them so far as Palghat was concerned, because,
when I received their invitation, I was making preparations for leaving
Palghat. But I have given them ten o’clock in the morning at Calicut
on the 16th instant, and I would be glad to see this friend and any
other friends who may wish to converse with me on every one of the
points that I have discussed here and any other points that may arise
in the course of that discussion. Though the 16th instant is supposed
to be an off day, it is not a day of recreation for me. Therefore I was
obliged to restrict the interview to half an hour in my letter to the
1

The Hindu report here has; “who has multiplied insults”.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

417

pundits. But I propose now to devote one hour for that discussion, so
that the pundits may have the whole half hour to themselves, if they
chose to take it. 1 I have absolutely nothing to withhold from any
single person, nor have I the slightest desire to hide my ignorance. I
have already set forth my limits. I do not profess to be a learned man
in any sense of the term. I profess to be a humble seeker, ever ready
and ever anxious to follow literally every precept of Hindu religion as
I know it. I, therefore, freely confess that, if the pundits or anybody
else invited me to to a recital of the Vedas or an exposition of the
Vedas and so on, they would floor me entirely. But they will not easily
dislodge me from the position that I occupy. If a knowledge of God
or if a knowledge of the fundamental precepts of Hinduism had
depended upon a meticulous knowledge of all the Vedas and a forest
of books, then hardly any person would be able to say, ‘I know
something of God.’. But these scriptures say that to know God is
possible for every single human being on earth if he purifies his heart.
I must thank you sincerely for the silence with which you have
listened to me. Now I want you to join me in prayer to God Almighty
that He may direct our steps in the right direction and that He may
give us the strength that is necessary to exorcize this devil of
untouchability from our hearts.
Lastly, please remember that those who believe that
untouchability is an evil and who believe also that it can be exorcized
only by self-purification should never hurt a single hair of those who
are opposing this movement. On the contrary, you and I have to see to
it that we win them over by our own correct conduct and by gentle
persuasion. I, therefore, ask you to treat those two friends, who are
now in the dispensary, and those who might be representing the
Varnashrama Swarajya Sangh, with respect and affection and as your
guests. Irrespective of what they may do, let them experience the
warmth of your hospitality and affection and not your bitter reproach.
Harijan, 26-1-1934, and The Hindu, 12-1-1934

1
The pundits did not accept the invitation. Instead they wrote to Gandhiji that
they would see him if he was prepared to discuss the Shastras with them not for an
hour but for days together and that too in Sanskrit.

418

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

449. SPEECH AT PATTAMBI1
January 11, 1934
It has given me some surprise that in Malabar, the land of
eternal green, you have to use artificial paper flowers. I thought that in
Malabar, where Nature has been so beneficent to you, you could avoid
all artificiality. But I suppose that in order to appreciate the beauty of
this land you require the help of a person who comes from a treeless
desert as I do. Just as you have gone in for artificiality in the matter of
flowers, you go in for artificiality in the matter of untouchability, and
then you think that that artificial product comes from Divinity itself. I
have come to warn you against the belief that untouchability,
unapproachability or invisibility can have any divine sanction. In my
opinion it is one of the greatest sins that we, Hindus, have been
committing against man and God. You degrade human beings, as we
have been doing in this part of the world, and then to say that they are
what they are because of their past deeds is a complete caricature of
the law of karma. I claim to know somewhat, from first-hand evidence,
of the working of the law of karma, because practically a period of
fifty years I have devoted to find out what this law of karma could be.
And this much I do know that to apply it to everybody else but
ourselves is to distort it altogether; and if I had more time than I have
at my disposal, I could show to the satisfaction of every one of you
that you can never apply the law of karma as you apply it to the
Nayadis and others. If we were to apply the law of karma as I have
suggested, that is to say, towards ourselves, you would find the land
here and elsewhere transformed. I have, therefore, come to beseech
every one of you to exorcize this ghost of untouchability. If you do
not, you may be sure that that ghost will eat us up.
Harijan, 19-1-1934

FRIENDLY

450. NOTES
DISCUSSION ALWAYS W ELCOME

During my brief stay in Madras I saw in the papers that a public
appeal signed by certain gentlemen was made to me. In it, I was asked
to hold a public discussion about untouchability. Later on I received a
printed copy of that appeal, with the following opening words typed at
the top :
1

Extracted from Chandrashankar Shukla’s “Weekly Letter”

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

419

As a man posing to know more, please come out and discuss. Don’t
say, “No time, no time”. It is a shame to say so when your very existence is
questioned. World will laugh at you and will mock at you.
Then follows this astonishing paragraph :
Abandoning all his political activities which had really brought him
into the limelight of Indian politics, destroying—for all practical purposes—
the great Indian National Congress which had made him its virtual dictator and
blindly entrusted its destiny into his hands and agonizing not merely the
orthodox sanatanadharmis but also all lovers of Indian nationalism in the
land, Mr. Gandhi has, of late, begun a whirlwind propaganda against
untouchability and in favour of temple-entry legislation, whereon he has been
putting forth his ipse dixits and obiter dicta before the public, not as his own
individual views or in the name of Rousseau, Tolstoy, Lenin, etc., but under
the banner of sanatan dharma, sociology, abstract justice and so on!
I had some such appeal again whilst I was travelling in Nellore District. The
telegram inviting me to a discussion says :
It appears to us that you have not understood the Hindu dharma and have
been leading the Hindus astray from the path of true moral and religious life.

I was not able to reply to these invitations there and then : the
last invitation was received at Venkatagiri1 at 10 o’clock at night. The
next day I was to reach Tirupati, near which I was to go to the
proposed discussion. I had to be content with sending a verbal
message to my host at Tirupati. As to the first invitation, I had sent the
message that I was ready to hold a friendly discussion with anybody
and to be convinced of my error, if it could be brought home to me. I
had to say that my time was limited and that the discussion would only
take place, at my decision, wherever it might be for the time being.
My limitations I had set forth in these columns times without number :
I am no Sanskrit scholar, but I know sufficient to detect errors in
translations that may be given to me. I claim to have read the Shastras
to my satisfaction, and I claim to have endeavoured from my youth
upwards to put into practice the fundamental precepts of the Shastras.
Thus I have no hesitation in putting before the public, with the utmost
confidence, the conclusions I have reached regarding certain
fundamentals of Hinduism. One of the conclusions I have reached is
1

420

On December 30, 1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

that there is no warrant in the Shastras for untouchability as it is
practised today. My conclusion is supported by shastris no less
learned than those who challenge my conclusion, and the former
claim to be just as good sanatanists as those who hold the opposite
view, but I always believe in regarding opponents with respect and,
therefore, listening to what they might have to say. I have held
discussions with them more than once, and these have resulted in
strengthening my convictions. Therefore, whilst I feel that myopinion
will not be shaken by any such discussions, I am quite willing to find
time for those who could be good enough to suit themselves to my
daily engagements. I dare not disturb the programme that has been
settled in advance for several months to come. I have already had
discussions with sanatanists during the tour at several places. If those
who write to me directly or indirectly through the Press will observe
the laws of common courtesy and if they have the desire to find a
basis for common work, I have no doubt that there are many points of
agreement, even on the question of temple-entry and the proposed
legislation. Much mis-understanding can be removed by mutual and
friendly discussion. I may mention for the information of the general
reader that, as against sanatanists who are enraged against me and
fling all sorts of abuses at me, I frequently meet those who, having
understood the central point of my message, have become supporters.
I have no weapon with me except the one of an appeal to the reason
and heart of the people. The reform that I am advocating can only
come through a change of heart on the part of millions of Hindus.
Therefore, it is in the interest of my mission that I lose not a single
opportunity of meeting my opponent, whenever it is possible for me
to do so.
Harijan, 12-1-1934

451. LETTER TO GOVINDBHAI R. PATEL
January 12, 1934
BHAI GOVINDBHAI,

I have written to you saying that I had written a long letter to
Shri Aurobindo. I have received no reply till today.
I have written to you in reply to your English letter, too, and

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

421

said that you may ask me any questions you wish to when we meet.1
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original : C. W. 10744. Courtesy : Govindbhai R. Patel

452. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
January 13, 1934
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,

I got the letters from both of you. I hope you get my letters
regularly. Of late I have not missed a single mail. With my last letter I
had enclosed a copy of Ba’s letter.
Sushila has given sufficiently detailed news about Shanti. If he
does not waste money in fanciful ventures, I am satisfied.
Sushila wishes to know who are in my party. I think I have
already written about that. Chandrashankar, Mirabehn, Om, Kisanbehn
(Premabehn’s friend), Professor Malkani (Thakkar Bapa’s representative), two accountants—Vishwanath and Damodar—one store-keeper
Sharma and one typist—these form the party.
Personally I like Sita being talkative and mischievous. It is for
the parents to put these qualities to good use. They can in this way
impart a good deal of education. Naughtiness and talkativeness are a
kind of energy, like steam. The energy of steam is conserved and used
to drive big trains and steamboats. A child’s energy can be used in a
similar manner. If we understand it and use it wisely, it can produce
excellent results. Instead of making Sita write the letters of the
alphabet, you should teach her just now to draw geometrical figures.
After that you may teach her to draw pictures of objects and last of all
to write the letters. But before doing that you should teach her to
recognize the letters, and to understand the meaning of words. You
can give her some knowledge daily through stories. You can easily
teach her some-thing about history, geography, science and tell her
1

According to the addressee, he communicated the contents of this letter to
Mother and inquired if it was true that Gandhiji had “asked for at least a line in Shri
Aurobindo’s hand; and Shri Aurobindo has written a full letter in his own hand—
which he does not usually do”. In reply, Shri Aurobindo wrote in pencil on the note :
“Yes, I wrote to him a short letter explaining the nature of my retirement and
regretting that I could not break my rule as long as the reason for it existed. It was
addressed to Bangalore, I believe, and ought to have reached him, unless it has been
pocketed by the C.I.D. I suppose even if he had left Banaglore it would have been
forwarded to him. You can write and inform him of the fact.”

422

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

stories from the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. She can learn all
these things in play. This will not tire you; on the contrary you will
enjoy teaching her in this manner. Through this you yourself will
learn something daily and Sita will get the best possible education.
She can learn English, Gujarati and also Hindi at the same time. What
help do you give to Manilal ?
Did either of you see West ? Please meet him and give me some
news of him. I shall be satisfied if he is not unhappy. You should
show yourself always ready to help.
Ba seems to be all right. This time she does not appear to enjoy
as much freedom as before.
I did not understand Pragji’s letter to you. I do not remember in
what context we had the talk and what I had said. In any case, what I
may have said does not apply to you two. The facts are not the same
in all cases. We may have dicussed what his duty was in India. It is of
course true in a sense that, if the struggle here succeeds, the solution
of the problem in that country will soon follow. But that certainly
does not mean that anybody should leave that country and come away
to India. The rule that ‘better is death in the discharge of one’s duty’1
is perfectly true in this case. You two, therefore, should go on doing
the work which is your dharma at present. It will be enough if you do
not depart from the path of dharma in doing that work.
Devdas has been released. He will spend his time in Delhi and
other places for the present. He will come and see me. He has kept
good health. He paid a visit to Kanti. The latter has displayed boundless courage. He doesn’t leave jail at all. Let us see how long he keeps
it up.
Kishorelal can be said to be a little better. The fever has not yet
wholly left him.
Write to Devdas and Lakshmi. And continue to write to Ramdas
and Nimu regularly. I hope you are getting Harijan.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I wrote this letter a little after 3 a. m. before prayer time in a
town called Tellicherry.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 4814
1

Bhagavad Gita, III. 35

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

423

453. LETTER TO DAHYABHAI PATEL
January 13, 1934
CHI. DAHYABHAI,

I have your letter. I got three letters almost simultaneously
which may be regarded as an instance of telepathy.
Mahadev is being tested severely. Possibly he might suffer a
little loss of health, though no other hardship. I have sent a detailed
message in reply to the letter to Jivanji. However, the next time you
have a chance write as follows :1
“Whilst I need not receive Mahadev’s letters, he must not think
that I cannot have time to read them. The Gita portion was technical
and I felt that there was no immediate need for me to give my
opinion. And the fact is that I have so little regard for my own
technical meaning of the verses. Where the meaning does not fit in
with my interpretation as a whole, I should naturally have to examine
it but speaking in general terms one meaning would be to me as good
as any other and therefore I should readily accept Mahadev’s
considered interpretation in preference to my own which after all must
have been an adoption of some single author’s version. He should
therefore prosecute his researches and his work of translation without
waiting for my opinion. When it is all completed of course I shall have
ample time, God willing, to go through it.
I take it that Mahadev has read B. Shaw’s Adventures of the
Black Girl in Her Search for God. I am sending him today,
Adventures of the White Girl in Her Search for God by Cff. Maxwell.
If he gets it safely, he will acknowledge it in his next letter.
When I reach Belgaum I shall try to see Mani and Mahadev.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4 : Manibehn Patelne, pp. 158-9

1

424

The two paragraphs that follow are in English.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

454. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, TELLICHERRY1
January 13, 1934
FRIENDS,

I am very much obliged to you for the addresses and the purse
you have presented to me. You know the nature of the mission at the
present moment taking me from one end of India to the other. In
pursuance of that mission early this morning I have come here to ask
you to rid yourselves of the devil of untouchability from your hearts.
I see in all your addresses there is one note running, namely, that this
monster of untouchability might be laid low. Let us not make the
mistake of supposing that this is a work that has got to be done by
somebody else. It is essentially a work that has got to be done by
everybody—by himself or herself—for it is a matter essentially of a
change of heart on the part of the caste Hindus or savarna Hindus as
they are called. They have to cease to think that they are caste Hindus
or that some of them are savarnas and others avarnas. This
distinction of high and low has destroyed society altogether and as we
want to save ourselves from impending destruction, we must cease to
think that anybody on earth is lower than ourselves. The poison of
untouchability has spread so far and so wide that even amongst caste
and caste there is a grave degree of untouchabilty. In this distinction
of high and low, we have gone further, and the poison has enveloped
all the communities. There is untouc-hability not merely amongst
Hindus and Hindus, savarnas and avarnas, savarnas and savarnas,
but there is untouchability also between Hindus, Muslims, Parsis, and
Christians. I am convinced that, whilst there may be other reasons for
inter-communal quarrels, I have no doubt whatsoever that untouchability is the main and deciding reason for the majority of these
quarrels. Therefore, if we will exorcize this principal manifestation of
the devil of untouchability, I have not even a shadow of doubt that we
will be able to right the wrong all along the line. One of your
addresses mentions that most of the temples are not open to Harijans
and that only one temple, opened by the followers of Shri Narayana
Guru, is open to Harijans. I congratula te the trustees of the temple
on their liberality and I hope that their example will be followed by
other trustees; but it will largely depend upon the temple-going public
to bring about that change. If the temple goers are sincerely penitent
1

The meeting, which was attended by more than 6,000 people, was held at the
Tellicherry maidan at 7.30 a. m.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

425

and feel that hitherto they have done serious wrongs to Harijans by
prohibiting them from entering the temples, I have no doubt that their
expression of opinion cannot be challenged and the temples will be
soon opened. I am therefore hoping that you will organize public
opinion so that the temples may soon be opened to Harijans precisely
on the same terms as they are open to other Hindus. I am surprised to
discover that there was in some place near here bad blood between
untouchables and untouchables, that is between Pulayas and Thiyyas.
I do hope that the Harijans all over will set their house in order and rid
themselves of untouchability within untouchability. Now you have
given me this purse which I only consider as a token of your
determination to deal with this evil in a final manner.
The Hindu, 15-1-1934

455. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, MAHE1
January 13, 1934
FRIENDS,

I have a peculiar pleasure in being in your midst since you are
in a part of French India. I had the pleasure of visiting Chandanagore
in Bengal more than once. But this is my first visit to French India in
this part of the country. For me whether it is French India or British
India it is one and the same country. The same blood flows
through my veins that goes through yours, the same soil, the same
atmosphere, the same manners and customs and many things too
numerous to mention are common to all of us. But for the
difference in the uniform of your police and the French language I
read here and there I would notice no difference whatsoever.
Therefore it is a matter of no surprise to me that you have, whilst I am
passing through Malabar, invited me and presented me with a purse
for the Harijan cause. Indeed I would have been surprised, and
painfully surprised, if I had found that, whilst I was actually passing
through this road, you took no notice whatsoever of the self-styled
representative of the Harijans. Therefore I am glad to be able to be
present in your midst even though it is only for a few minutes. I was
glad to discover that an important temple in this place was thrown
open to Harijans precisely on the same terms as to other Hindus. I
1

At the meeting Gandhiji was presented with addresses on behalf of the public
and students of Hindi.

426

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

congratulate the trustees on having performed this very simple
religious duty. Now, I hope you know what I am after in pursuing this
mission. I would like you to understand that mere opening of temples,
mere opening of schools for Harijans does not constitute the whole of
my mission. It means that savarna Hindus have got to purify their
hearts and, make due reparations to the Harijans whom they have
hitherto suppressed. It means that we should abolish all distinctions of
high and low and realize that we are children of one country and as
such, should realize that, being children of one country, there can be
no distinction of high and low. May God help us to realize this very
simple idea. I am glad of this Hindi address and I would like every
one of you here to appreciate this message of Hindi.
The Hindu, 16-1-1934

456. SPEECH AT OPENING OF DISPENSARY,
PAKKANARPURAM
January 13, 1934
I have been invited to open the dispensary that you see in front
of you in the name of a young brave worker who sacrificed himself
for the sake of his country and died some years ago in about 1921.
His name is Balakrishna Menon. And this dispensary will be called
after his name. In those days of non-co-operation at its height, he, in
common with others, was confined in jail and it is in his memory that
this dispensary is to be named. Medical relief has been given to
hundreds of Harijans. Within the last four or five months over two
thousand patients have been treated free of charge. Let us hope that
this dispensary will grow day after day, that is to say, it would be an
instrument of ever-increasing service to ailing humanity. I understand
that a young medical practioner has offered to give his services free of
charge. Let us hope that such self-sacrificing young men will multiply
in this land. We do need young medical men who have the requisite
spirit of self-sacrifice and who will consent to live in villages. It is
absolutely necessary that Harijans should receive medical aid. I
know and I am grieved that there are medical practitioners in
India who disgrace their profession by refusing to touch Harijans lest
the touch might pollute them. Therefore, it fills me with joy whenever
I find a medical practitioner who is entirely free from those
superstitions and at the same time has the spirit of sacrifice to enable
him to give his services free of charge. Whilst giving medical relief,
providing for education and arranging for free water supply are

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

427

necessary in the interests of Harijans, there is something still more
necessary to be done by the savarna Hindus. We have to cease to be
patrons. We have been oppressing the Harijans for centuries. We have
to purify ourselves from this taint of untouchability immediately and
take the Harijans to our bosom. We have to consider them as our
blood-brothers and sisters. It is a sin to consider any single human
being to be lower than ourselves. It is blasphemy to consider that God
can have any partiality with regard to His children. I would consider
this dispensary a success if it lends itself to eradicate the distinction of
high and low to some extent.
The Hindu, 16-1-1934

457. SPEECH AT WOMEN’S MEETING, CALICUT
January 13, 1934
DEAR SISTERS,

I see that all of you are seized with a peculiar fear lest I might
induce you and you might feel irresistibly tempted to part with all
your ornaments. Some of you have already begun to give your
trinkets. I propose to give you tonight a beautiful story of a girl called
Kaumudi. I saw her for the first time this morning at Badagara and in
response to an appeal I made to the ladies to give their jewellery, and,
if they had the desire, all their jewellery, this little girl Kaumudi—I call
her “little” comparatively—I suppose she was about 20 years,
probably 21 1 —and she came forward and began with her two beautiful bangles, the only bangles she had on her wrists.
I was more than satisfied but not she. Out she came with her
very beautiful necklace. I thought she would stop at that. But she
would not. Her hands involuntarily went to her ears and she suddenly
thought there was something in her ears also, and was delighted to
give her ear-rings. I was very deeply touched,but I suprressed my
emotion at that time. Istraightaway enquired whether she was an
independent girl or whether she had obtained the consent of her
father. And I immediately learnt that she had done this in the presence
of her father because he was on the platform helping me to get my
addresses and other trinkets. I then learnt that the father was also
entirely with his girl in her giving everything that was on her person to
1

In fact she was 16 years old; vide Vol. LVII, “Kaumudi’s Renunciation”,
19-1-1934.

428

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the Harijan cause. All she wanted was an autograph for her two
bangles. Of course I gave her more than my autograph. I wrote there
in Hindi that her great sacrifice would be a truer ornament than her
gold and jewel things. She went very delighted. And I had her definite
promise that she was not going to ask her father to replace those
articles of jewellery. She has enough and more articles to wear and
jewellery also. Of course for a Malabar girl this is not an amazing
performance. Because so far as my knowledge goes, Malabar girls are
the simplest of all the girls in the world. Somehow or other they have
left on my mind the impression that they have the least desire for
jewellery. I may be wholly mistaken. Anyway that is the impression
that they have left on my mind.
I must conclude this soul-stirring story by adding another story.
Now nearly ten years ago 1 or more there was a girl in Andhradesha
who was married and when I made an appeal to the sisters there—it
was an imposing meeting of women in a theatre—she was the first to
give me her ornaments. Although Sri Annapurnamma’s jewels wer
comparatively simple, still her necklace or her chain as I might call it
was a long heavy chain of pure gold. I must not describe other articles
of her jewellery. Alas, she is no more. But let me inform you that she
was true to her promise cent percent that she would not replace those
rich articles of jewellery. She had very rich parents, who would gladly
have given her all their jewellery to replace hers. But from that time
up to the time of her death which took place now three years ago2 she
never wore an article of jewellery. It is my certain conviction that
Annapurnamma gained by giving and so has Kaumudi. I have
lingered on those two very sacred illustrations and I want to tell you
that in discarding your jewellery for a cause so sacred as the Harijan
cause you will be doing nothing wonderful. [Women have done such
things] when they have taken up the defence of a sacred cause
like this. I have to ask you, to beseech you, to purify your hearts of
the sin of untouchability, to treat Harijan boys and girls as if they are
your own children, brothers and sisters. We have for long ages
supressed Harijans and today if we sacrifice our all for their sake we
shall be only making some slight and tardy reparation for all the
wrongs inflicted upon them in the name of religion. Therefore,
whatever you give, whether it is a trinket or heavy piece of jewellery or
1
2

In April 1921; vide , “Orissa and Andhra”
She died in 1927; vide ,”A Good Servant Gone”

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

429

silver, I want you to give as merely a token of your determination to
rid yourselves of this taint of untouchability, the idea that you are
high and somebody else is low. May God give you wisdom to see this
very simple truth and enforce it in your life. Now you can give the
things, whether jewellery, or silver or paper, whatever you want to give.
The Hindu, 15-1-1934

458 SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, CALICUT1
January 13, 1934
I am much obliged to you for these addresses that have been
presented to me this evening and I thank you for the self-restraint you
have imposed upon yourselves by not desiring to read these addresses
to me. Only you have thereby appreciated the fact that I have been
going from one place to another from day to day, now for over two
months, and at the end of the day I am therefore fatigued. You, wise
men that you are, have appreciated this act and absolved me from the
duty of having to listen to these addresses. You having exercised this
self-restraint, naturally it was up to me to read those addresses and be
prepared. But I must say to you that I had no notion whatsoever that I
was to have all these addresses nor have I been given copies of these
addresses. Had I been given copies I would certainly have read them.
However I have no doubt whatsoever that these addresses contain
nothing more than what I have noticed in the numerous addresses that
I have been receiving throughout these two months or more. Almost
without exception they have expressed to me great joy, not only their
sympathy with the cause that I am espousing for the time being but
they have in these addresses signified their intention, nay their determination, of doing everythingthat these various bodies of gentlemen
or ladies could possibly do in their own sphere to advance the
Harijan’s cause.
It has given me a great deal of satisfaction and joy to discover
that there is consensus of opinion on the part of the intelligentsia. I
would have been painfully surprised if it had been otherwise. Not only
has it been so with reference to the intelligentsia but as far as mere
assent goes, I have found to my great delight the masses also are
1
The meeting was held at the Town Hall. Addresses were presented to Gandhiji
on behalf of the Municipal Council, Malabar Chamber of Commerce, Taluk Board,
Harijan Yuvak Sangh and other bodies.

430

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

equally with this movement. I am not easily self-deluded. I have no
doubt that I have, must have, my due share of self-delusion or else life
perhaps would be a positive burden to most of us if not to all of us.
But due allowance having been made for self-delusion I can say that
all these scenes that I witness every day cannot possibly be a matter of
masses or classes coming to me to signify their praise or their
satisfaction for services that I might have performed in a previous life
or in days gone by. This life has rushed and with me it has rushed
with such rapidity that it is impossible for me to have a clear
photography of the events that have happened and, that being the
case, I should be intensely surprised and also disappointed that these
classes and masses had signified not only their satisfaction and their
sympathy by their presence at these meetings but also given me
donations more or less and had done certain acts also as a
consideration for those services. I would let that pass by. I am
assuming that all your addresses contain a serious and solemn pledge
that you are determined to do everything that is humanly possible for
you to do to render the reparation that is overdue to the Harijans.
Malabar, if one were to draw the untouchability map of the whole of
India, I suppose will easily wear the black crown and Malabar would
be the blackest spot so far as untouchability is concerned. It is a
matter of regret but it is no use ignoring the fact. I would turn this
blackness to good account and I would invite you to gird up your
loins and make such Heruclean effort that at the end of the struggle it
may be possible to say of Malabar that Malabar had been in the
vanguard of progress in this battle against the monster of untouchability. Let it be said of Malabar that Malabar counted no sacrifices
too great for removing this evil of untouchability. And what could be
a better and more sacred reminder for this meeting than the portrait of
Mr. K. Madhavan Nair ?
I had the pleasure of knowing him long ago. When I first visited
Calicut I had the honour of being introduced to him but I must
confess that I did not know him so intimately as I came to know him
when he paid me a visit at Yeravda. I then came into very intimate
touch with him, and when Mr. C. Rajagopalachariar was here and the
Guruvayur referendum was going on, naturally I was corresponding
with him as with other friends almost from day to day. Then Smt.
Urmila Devi and my wife came into close contact with Mr. K.
Madhavan Nair. My wife is a simple woman. She knows nothing, she
does not know the English language, certainly she does not know
Malayalam, but she was able to tell me in her very simple language

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

431

that she was very much struck by the simplicity of his character. She
merely strengthened the impression that Mr. Madhavan had left on
my mind and that impression is still indelible. I have the most vivid recollection of my contact with him and what struck me most was his
transparent humility. This is his faithful picture and I congratulate the
artist on presenting the citizens of Calicut with this picture. I think
there you can easily see humility written in his features. I don’t think
that the artist has enhanced the transparence of his humility. I think
the artist is incapable of doing that. To look at Mr. Madhavan Nair
and look at the living eye would give you a better illustration of that
humility. The whole of his behaviour is on the picture. Mr. Madhavan
Nair is in front of me today as I saw him in Yeravda. He stands vividly
before me and this is the one peculiar impression that he left on me.
I discovered also that he was a man of very few words. You do
not find many people who are economical in the use of language or
their words. In his contact with me Mr. Madhavan Nair showed this
quality in a supreme degree. His letters were compact, nice, neat and
the briefest possible. Whatever he had to say he expressed in a few
words and he had finished. That was the man. If you were to recall the
men who had died in body but are even now still living, you will
discover that they are living not because of their intellectual gifts but
because of virtues which you and I and every one of us can cultivate if
we have the will and if we will make the necessary effort in order to
cultivate them. Therefore I would say you will be doing wrong to the
memory of the man whom I have described as I have known him, if
you think that you have performed your duty by calling upon me to
unveil his portrait and for having witnessed this ceremony and having
heard a few words in praise of his memory; nay, you will be doing
wrong. But you will be doing the right thing if you will treasure as a
perpetual reminder to you that you also would like to be if not wholly
at last some what like Mr. Madhavan Nair. At the end, to put a
finishing touch, Mr. Madhavan Nair died in harness so far as the
Harijan cause is concerned. He was a true co-worker in the Harijan
cause which is a matter of self-purification, repentance and reparation.
I give you my evidence that Mr. Madhavan Nair, when he took up this
cause, had the spirit in him, for every act that he did in connection
with the Harijan cause was an act of sacrifice, repentance and
reparation. There was no meanness about anything that he did. May
his memory ever remain in my heart and in your own hearts.
I thank you once more for having presented me with addresses.
Since I think that this is not proper time for auctioning these
432

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

addresses, I hope that tomorrow you will help me to realize some
money from these addresses because I know that Calicut will not send
me away with disappointment.1
The Hindu, 15-1-1934

459. SPEECH AT MALABAR CHRISTIAN COLLEGE,
CALICUT
January, 13, 1934
It was a great joy to me when I received the invitation to come to
you to receive a purse for the Harijan cause and to speak a few words
to you. You have naturally expressed your sympathy with the cause.
But you boys ought not to be satisfied with the certificate that your
Principal has given to the institution and therefore by implication to
you also. 2 You are called upon to do something much more vital, to
regard untouchability not as an institution descended to us from
Divinity but as an institution which has been devised by the devil
himself for encompassing our undoing. We, all of us, no matter to
what faith we may belong, are children of the same Creator. There is
but one Creator. We do say that with our lips, but we deny that
profession in every walk of life and in so many of our activities. That
lie we ought to get rid of from our lives. And who can do this better
than the students? You must therefore make the announcement
fearlessly that if we are children of the same God, then we are all
equal. Do not in your mind cross-examine and say, ‘How can we be
equal ?’ Some of you are very bright boys, and have received prizes
and occupy front ranks in the classes, and how can those who are at
the top of the class be on a par with those who are at the bottom of the
class ? This is a fine conundrum for you and me and you ought to
solve it wisely and not unwisely. Very often we solve these puzzles as
we solve puzzles in arithmetic and geometry. If you are able to solve
1

Gandhiji then unveiled the portrait of K. Madhavan Nair. Later during the day
Gandhiji visited the office of the Mathrubhumi, a Malayalam daily, and addressing its
staff described Mr. Madhavan Nair as the soul of the Trust due to whose ceaseless
effort the paper occupied its unique place. It was not too much to say that it had
occupied a unique place in Malabar. He appealed to the staff to follow in the steps of
the late Mr. Madhavan Nair, who was whole-heartedly in favour of the Harijan
movement, without mental reservations or anything of the kind. Pure and simple, it
was a religious movement.
2
The principal of the college had observed that Harijan boys in the institution
were treated on a par with others.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

433

these wisely, then I will give you illustrations of earthly parents. Those
of you who have brothers will realize that all have not the same degree
of intelligence and of virtues. You are not certainly of the same age.
You do not enjoy the same vigorous constitution. And yet do you
find your parents distinguishing between you and those who are
brighter and more diligent ? On the contrary perhaps your parents
will give more to those who are helpless and are in need of help than
to those who are brighter and well able to take care of themselves. Do
you suppose then that the Divine Father, the Father of all fathers that
the world has ever seen, will treat some from their very birth to be
untouchables and therefore the lowest and others to be the highest at
the top of ladder ? I suppose this is a self-proved proposition of
untouchability as you are practising it today. The purse will be turned
to good account if it is given as an earnest of your determination to
change your hearts and to regard no person as untouchable on the
face of the earth. Religion teaches us to consider ourselves as the
lowest and everybody else as the highest. Do all of you behave like
that ? Untouchability has undoubtedly to go. It is eating into the very
vitals of our being and it crushes the very soul. If you are able to
understand my words then you will so change your hearts and
transform them that you will not allow untouchability in any shape or
form to find a residence in your hearts. You will not allow
untouchability towards boys belonging to other religions. You will go
to Harijan quarters, instead of wasting your time, you will go there,
serve the Harijan boys, and find out what their wants are. If your
parents give you five pies or whatever it is, you must at least spare a
portion of that money for the Harijan boys who are in greater need
than yourselves. You will give your leisure minutes for the service of
Harijan boys and girls. You will go to their quarters and sweep them.
You must teach them how to lead a clean life. It is not enough that
you clean your body but you must clean your heart and soul. The
first thing to do, when you get up from bed, is to ask God to keep you
clean in heart and body. If you will do these things, the purse that you
have given is a token of your determination to get rid of untouchability.
The Hindu, 15-1-1934

434

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

460. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
January 14, 1934
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

Malkani has shown me your letter. I have written frankly to
Biharilal. I send you a copy of my letter. We have to be outspoken
and firm in our dealings with him. It does not seem possible in this
tour to achieve all that can be accomplished in a walking tour. But
whatever has been achieved appears to be good enough. Public
opinion has undergone a great change but not much change is evident
in the conduct. Let us see what happens. I can see only God’s hand in
this work. This is not a trite observation. This task is beyond the power
of one lone person or even of thousands. Nothing more can be written
or said on this subject. It simply means that my faith in God is growing stronger than ever. I am having a direct experience of the feebleness of my own powers.
I hope you are maintaining good health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi : C. W. 7943. Courtesy : G. D. Birla

461. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, KALPETTA1
January 14, 1934
FRIENDS,

It was not a task to me but a real pleasure to be able to drive
through this very beautiful tract of the country. I have learnt
a great deal of what lies at the back of the addresses to which
you have just now listened. The deceased Subbiah Goundan, it seems,
has left by his will all the landed property 2 he ever possessed for the
Harijan cause. It is a rare gift and a rather rich gift. A great burden
rests upon the executors of the will and the Trustees in connection
with this Trust. They cannot make of this colony the success that the
testator must have desired it to become, unless they devote themselves
heart and soul to the scheme which has to be worked under this
bequest. Let me hope that the Trustees or the executors are worthy of
the trust that has been reposed in them and that they will discharge the
1
The meeting was held to mark the opening of Muthal Thirunelli Harijan
Colony under the auspices of the Sahodara Sangham.
2
Amounting to 165 acres of land

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

435

trust to the entire satisfaction of the public. I deliberately say “the
public” because the Trust becomes public property immediately it is
devoted to public use. It is under this hope and with this assurance that
I gladly declare this colony open and wish it every success. The
materials for the experiment or realization of the scheme are in front
of us all. We have in front of us not one or two but many Harijan
brothers. All of us witnessed the music and the dance that they gave
us. It was not a matter of enjoyment or amusement for us but it ought
to carry a deep lesson to us. I suppose all of you realized as I did at
once that there was no music about their instrument nor was there any
charm about the dance. But that was the only thing that they do in
order to pass their idle hours. The responsibility for the want of music
about their instrument and about their dance lies not upon their
shoulders but upon your shoulders and my shoulders. We need not
have gone into their dance or their music in order to understand their
primitive nature. Their appearance, their dishevelled hair and
everything about their person is sufficient to tell us how criminally
neglectful we have been to our kith and kin. They wear the same loin
cloth or the scarf from year’s end to year’s end, till it turns into rags.
They rarely bathe and when they do bathe, you may take it from me
that it will not be in specially clean water. Again the responsibility for
this disgraceful state of affairs is yours and mine. And if I had the
management of this colony I tell you I would straightaway invite these
people to live in the colony, give them decent pay and insist upon
their taking regular baths and transform them into presentable human
beings. I suppose that is precisely what we would do, each one of us, if
we discovered suddenly that nearby was our own blood-brother
residing in precisely the same savage condition that these
brothers of ours are living in. And if that happy state of things
is brought about without any loss of time, you and Iwill have more
than well spent our time here. This addresss almost concludes with
these words “May your efforts be crowned with success.” Well, I can
only say that my efforts can never be crowned with success unless
your efforts are also crowned with success. For, my efforts merely
consist in inviting all the savarna Hindus to change of heart by
serving Harijans in every way possible. Lastly I ask these Harijan
brothers to respond to the call of self-purification.
The Hindu, 16-1-1934

436

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

462. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, CALICUT1
January 14, 1934
FRIENDS,

I have just got several purses on behalf of the citizens of Calicut
which amount to Rs. 4,388-5-9. On the principle that you may not
look a gift horse in the mouth I must in all courtesy thank you for the
gifts that you have given on behalf of the Harijan cause. But as a selfchosen or self-appointed Harijan servant I must lodge my respectful
protest against the leanness of the purses from the capital of Malabar.
You will be surprised to learn that Bangalore, not the capital of
Mysore, but the second city in Mysore, not as big as Malabar,
produced much more than you have given this evening. And I am
fully aware of the capacity of Calicut to give for the Harijan cause.
But nothing is lost yet. You have got here many tempting things, and
at the end of a few remarks that I want to make, it is open to you and
perfectly possible for you to make up for the deficiency and what is
today undoubtedly a lean purse can be turned by you into a fat
purse.2
As I have said from many a platform after entering Malabar, if
there was a map of untouchability made for the whole of India,
Malabar would be marked as the blackest spot in all the land; and as
matters stand today, I suppose you will admit that you will have to
plead guilty to the charge. Then if you are convinced of the sin of
Malabar, as confessedly you are convinced by the very fact of your
giving me this purse, you will admit that Malabar has to make the
greatest reparation in order to rid itself of the greatest sin. It does not
matter, and it ought not to matter, the least little bit that some of you
who are monied men do not originally come from Malabar. Those
who make their livelihood or their fortunes in Malabar should realize
that every pie they get is tainted with this sin. Therefore, in the matter
reparation and repentance, they stand exactly on the same footing as
the original Malayalis.
This morning they took me to a most beautiful bit of Malabar;
they took me up the hills with the most romantic scenery. There I was
taken to a village called Kalpetta, and I recalled a hymn—I think it
was composed by Bishop Heber. But whether it was composed by him
1

The meeting was held at the beach at 6 p. m. and was attended by 15,000

people.
2

This paragraph has been taken from The Hindu.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

437

or some other bishop, this is the line that I single out from that hymn
for your edification. It is said that, as he was approaching this Western
coast of India, involuntarily this line came to his lips, or to his pen :
“Every prospect pleases, man alone is vile.”1 I have no doubt that he
had not this black spot of untouchability in his mind when he wrote
this line. The orthodox interpretation of this line is wholly different
from the one that I put upon it. But poets can never be confined even
in cages of their own construction. Poets write for eternity. Their
words are charged with a meaning of which they have no conception
when they utter or write them. Scented breezes come from plantations
that Nature has designed for man in Malabar. But through
untouchability he has violated Nature and thus become vile. We have
endeavoured to disfigure God’s mightiest creation, namely, man. The
soul of man presents a beauty never to be surpassed by any ravishing
beauty of vegetation. But the so-called savarna Hindus or the socalled high class Hindus arrogated to themselves the right of suppressing a portion of Hindu humanity. They endeavoured, however,
vainly, as we shall presently see in a few years, perhaps. But man has
left no stone unturned to suppress, in the name of Divinity itself, the
soul of man by putting thousands outside the pale of society.
I will tell you what I saw today in Kalpetta in the midst of the
ravishing beauty of vegetation. I saw wild specimens of humanity, with
a stinking odour. Please do not say hastily that that is why they are
untouchables. I want you to think with me a little more deeply than
possibly you are prepared to do and realize with me that for this
indescribably painful scene you and I are responsible. These very
men, in an hour’s time, if you desire, can be transformed into beings
cleanly and outwardly as respectable as you and I may be. A little hot
water, or soap, a little white khaddar, and you will immediately find
that they are just as presentable as you and I are. Internally, God alone
can be the judge between them and us. It is quite possible, in fact, in
my opinion it is quite certain, that we are much more sinful or much
viler than they can be. Our slates are sullied with writings not
particularly creditable to us. Their slates have still to be written upon.
Are you now surprised that, when I saw these countrymen of ours, I
involuntarily said in my mind to the poet, ‘you were right in saying,
1

438

The lines are :
What though the spicy breezes
Blow soft o’er Ceylon’s isle,
Though every prospect pleases,
And only man is vile.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

“Every prospect pleases, man alone is vile”.’ Now, put your hand
upon your heart and tell me whether, if you gave up all your wealth
and all sisters discarded every article of jewellery of which they are
possessed, would it be a sufficient reparation for the injuries that you
have been partners in inflicting on these countrymen of ours ? I wish
to suggest to you that you will be fit servants of Harijans when you
have begun the act of reparation by discarding all your possessions
for their sake. But I know that is an ideal state of things, and I know
also that, if I could possibly carry you along those ideal lines, then
India would again be really a land of thirty crores of gods.
But I am labouring under no such delusion. I consider myself a
practical idealist. I take from human nature what it yields and go my
way. My business is to present to you the realities of the situation, to
stimulate your intelligence and your imagination, to touch your hearts
and then leave you to do the very best that you can possibly do for a
cause so noble and so sacred as that of the Harijans.
I would like you, lastly, to realize that if we, that so-called
savarna Hindus, failed in this elementary duty by the Harijans during
this brief period of probation, Hinduism will be a thing of the past.
History teaches us that many a civilization, many a culture perished
beyond redemption because of the inherent weakness of the representatives of those bygone civilizations. Do not, therefore, run away with
the belief that Hinduism will be an exception and escape the impending doom, if we, Hindus, prove unworthy representatives of the priceless treasures that the rishis have left for us.
Harijan 2-2-1934, and The Hindu, 16-1-1934

463. LETTER TO NAN AND TANGAI MENON
January 15, 1934
1

2

DEAR NAN AND TANGAI ,

Love and kisses to you. I hope the climate 3 is suiting you and
that you are both happy. Are you picking up Malayali tongue ? You
would write to me frequently.
Love.
BAPU
My Dear Child, p. 120
1

Daughters of Esther Menon
ibid
3
Of Kodaikanal in the Palani Hills, South India
2

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

439

464. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
January 15, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

It is four in the afternoon just now. Today is my weekly silence
day. I am writing this in Nagji Purushottam’s bungalow in Calicut.
Devdas and Lakshmi arrived today. Thakkar Bapa and Shankerlal will
arrive tomorrow. I will see the Zamorin1 tomorrow at 2.30 in the
afternoon and then will leave for Trichur at five.
The question is whether Lakshmi should go to Delhi for her
delivery or remain in Madras. She and Devdas will see Raja in about
two days. They will come to a final decision after that. Devdas has got
the permission to go to Delhi, but I think he should spend about six
months in Madras to gain experience. Lakshmi would not like her
delivery to take place in his absence and Raja would not like it in his.
Thus there is a problem within a problem. Doesn’t the meaning of life
consist in solving even such seemingly trivial problems in the right
manner ?
I have specially called Shankerlal here for a brief discussion
regarding khadi. I observe that perhaps needless expenditure is being
incurred in our department. I wish to place before him what I have
observed. I think we should stop the needless expenditure on sending
khadi from one province to another. I incline finally towards the
practice followed in Anantpur. The practice followed at Saoli seems
good. Krishnadas [Gandhi] and Jajuji are experts and they complement each other perfectly. Krishnadas is acquitting himself very well.
Keshu is quiet. Ramdas is discontented. He also will become calm by
and by.
Devdas visited Ba. He is full of praise for her courage. She is of
course harassad a little. But without harassment there would be no
pleasure in being in jail.
I paid a visit to Guruvayur. There is no resentment there at all. It
is true, though, that the Varanashrama Sangh had sent pahelwans2
from North India to demonstrate with black flags and get beaten up a
little. Two of them had taken control of the dais. They got hold of a
man by his feet, whereupon the young men there asked them to get
down. An altercation and fighting followed. The pahelwans got
beaten up a little. They are quite all right, but they did their play1
2

440

Of Calicut, now Kozhikode
Professional wrestlers
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

acting cleverly. I sent the two to a dispensary and started the meeting
and went on with it as if nothing had happened.1 The crowds continue
to be as big as ever. Small and big contributions continue to come in.
Another Annapurna, named Kaumudi, came into the limelight. She
gave all her ornaments.2 “Who can harm him whom Rama protects ?”
So we will live as He ordains, do His bidding and dance as He wills.
Two Hungarian women, mother and daughter, met me in
Bangalore. Both are expert painters. They lead a simple life. Just now
they have dedicated themselves to the service of India. Bhajan music
fills them with ecstasy.
N. seems likely to go to America. S. too may go. I have not
written much to you about their doings. What could I write ? Besides, I
don’t have the time either.
Amala is getting on fairly well.
A letter from Mani is enclosed. I have written to Swami for
slivers and the books. Since the books will not be of the same size, I
don’t know whether he will be able to pack them together. But Swami
is resourceful and, if it is possible, he will manage to do that.
Dahyabhai had sent to me Mani’s letter to you.
If I go to Belgaum, I will surely try to meet both. But my going
there is not certain.
Write to Mani that one need not be with one’s elders in order to
serve them. If one does their work, one serves them. It is not wrong to
wish to be near them. On the contrary, it is natural to do so. But there
is no necessary connection between serving them and being near
them. Poor girl, she would be thinking that her letter must have been
forwarded directly to you. But you must have noticed that it had made
a trip to Sabarmati for a dip in the river.3 It thus got moistened at for
or five places. This is of course no new experience to us. But it is our
resolve—is it not ?—to remain contented with whatever happens.
I have not been able to satisfy Gordhanbhai. But he doesn’t
write to me now. Towards him, too, I have done my duty as I saw it. I
have asked him to let me know the total sum received from Vithalbhai
and also to send me the correspondence between them. If I get it, I
think I shall have to publish it.
1

Vide “Speech at Public Meeting, Guruvayur”
Vide “Speech at Women’s Meeting, Calicut”, also Vol. LVII “Kaumudi’s
Renunciation”
3
There being nobody knowing Gujarati on the staff of the Belgaum jail,
Gujarati letters written by prisoners were first sent to Sabarmati jail for censoring.
2

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

441

Let him always write to me at Wardha. Even if, however, he
writes everything only to you and if I get every such letter, I shall be
fully satisfied. I want you yourself to guide him in this matter. I take it
that you will write about Ba. I have already written to you about
Lakshmi. I am writing to Mridula and Nandubehn.1 Devdas went and
looked up Brijkrishna. He is quite well. He has survived. He needs rest,
which he is taking.
It is certain that Raja will be released on 6th February.
You should learn not to go on thinking about things, whatever
the cause. For that, you should either memorize the Gita or learn
Sanskrit or go on reciting the Ramadhun both in the straight and the
reverse order.
I get no time at all for worrying, so you needn’t advise me not
to worry.
Blessings to both from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2 : Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 62-5

465. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
January 15, 1934
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I did get news of you from time to time. I deliberately refrained
from writing to you. As you were permitted to receive only one letter
I thought you should be able to get other more important letters.
But, whether I write or not, I always remember all the women
workers.
My message to all the women is this : Irrespective of the
resolution or promise made or given at the time of the march2 to Ras,
let all the women think again independently and take a fresh decision.
I will accept it. I adhere to my previous view. Nobody should
persuade anybody else to adopt a particular course. Everyone should
decide for herself. It is their religious duty to do so. Each should act
according to her capacity and her inclination. It is an accident that I
am out of prison. No one should stay in the Red Bungalow. Nobody
should stay at any place where he or she is permitted to stay as a
matter of favour. A time may come when one may not get a place to
1
2

442

Vijayagauri, wife of Dr. Kanuga
On August 1, 1933; vide “ Appeal to People of Gujarat” , 30-7-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

live in or anything to eat. We have learnt that it is our dharma to bear
such hardships without grumbling and without feeling unhappy about
it. This is the essence of the Gita. If other people do not now welcome
us, it means that they are not in a position to do so. Why should you
be unhappy about it ? However, things have not yet reached that stage.
It will indeed be good if they do. It will be a real test for us.
Every one of the women should not expect a separate letter
from me for the present, but I expect them all to write to me.
You should, of course, write for all. And you should pour out
whatever is in your heart. If you need anybody’s help for writing the
letter, you may take it. Everyone should tell me in her letter what work
she has been doing.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
All letters should be sent to the Wardha address.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-6 : G. S. Gangabehnne, pp. 81-2. Also C. W. 8814. Courtesy :
Gangabehn Vaidya

466. LETTER TO SULOCHANA A. SHAH
January 15, 1934
CHI. SULOCHANA,

Did you enjoy yourself ? Give me an account of how you spent
the six months and let me know what you intend to do now. Be quite
frank.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 1750

467. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
January 15, 1934
CHI. PREMA,

I am writing this only to tell you that I will await the long letter
which you propose to write.
Kisan is quite well. I cannot give her as much attention as I
would like to.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

443

Go through all the issues of Harijan, both Gujarati and English.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 10353. Also C. W. 6792. Courtesy :
Premabehn Kantak

468. LETTER TO AMINA G. QURESHI
January 15, 1934
CHI. AMINA,

Write to me a detailed letter. Let me know your reaction after
you have seen the children. Do what you think right for the future.
Tell me what you did in the jail, what you read and all other things.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C. W. 10622. Courtesy : Amina G. Qureshi

469. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
January 15, 1934
CHI. MRIDU,

It is of course too much to expect a letter from you. When all
of you consider me someone to be pitied, how can I expect any letter?
I think it is only due to his attitude that there is no
acknowledgement of the letter I had written to Saralabehn. I keep
getting some new at least about all of you.
I am writing this letter to pass on Mani’s message. She has
received Rs. 30 from you. She has received Rs. 25 from Nandubehn1 .
Hence she does not at all need any more money. She has written
many other things. But it only implies that she is at peace and her
health is good. There are fewer facilities this time. There is no
company at all. She is occupying herself in reading and spinning. She
has also received the books you had sent for her.
You must be keeping yourself informed about me through the
Harijan.

1

444

Vijayagowri Kanunga
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Write to me. Give me news about everyone’s health. Write only
at the Wardha address.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11186. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

470. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
January 15, 1934
MY DEAR DAUGHTER AMTUSSALAAM,

1

I must not attempt to write more Urdu. I am really too tired now
to write any more. The hand aches and it is past 8.30 p. m., silence
day. But I must write some letters. I hope you got my letter in the jail.
I have told you that you should not come to me.2 I am far away from
you. But if you cannot resist the wish, you must come. You should of
course see your mother and Narandas. In any case write to me fully. I
hope you are well in body and mind.
Love.
BAPU3
From a photostat : G. N. 290

1

The superscription is in Urdu.
Vide “Ashram Bhajanavali”
3
The signature is in Urdu.
2

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

445

471. MESSAGE TO THE PEOPLE OF MALABAR1
[January 16, 1934] 2
Having travelled throughout Malabar I have no doubt that the
removal of untouchability entirely rests with workers. If they will
prove their faith through character that is above reproach and through
devotion that counts no sacrifice too great, the hearts of opponents
will be melted.
The Bombay Chronicle, 20-1-1934

472. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
January 16, 1934
BA,

There is no letter from you probably because Devdas visited
you. But I hope you received my letter. I have been writing every
week regularly and also sending the discourses.3 Devdas came and saw
me. He arrived yesterday. Lakshmi also has come. Both are well. We
shall part today. I think they will both go to Delhi after meeting
Rajaji. But it is not finally decided. Devdas told me everything about
you. It is rather strange that they did not permit you to get oil for
massage from outside. But I was glad to learn from Devdas that you
remain cheerful whether or not you get the oil or whether the food is
good or bad. If the reading of the Gita and other sacred books did
not bear even this fruit, it is the same whether one had read them or
not. My discourse this time will therefore be about reading books. We
read in many works that reading of holy books by itself earns merit
for one. Such statements are intended to encourage us. If we take
them literally, we shall benefit nothing by reading them. One should
ponder deeply over what one reads. Pondering deeply means thinking
how we can apply their teaching in our life. But today I have been
having a large number of visitors and so I don’t write more. We are in
Calicut today. I am sure you remember Shyamjibhai. Vali is doing
1
2

This was given to Mathrubhumi for publication.
Gandhiji gave this message before he left Calicut for Cochin on January 16,

1934.
3

446

The first discourse appeared in the letter dated December 25, 1933;

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

some public work. Narmada, too, is engaged in the same work. We
shall be leaving Calicut this evening. Urmila Devi is here. They all
inquire after you.
Blessings to all from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, p. 9

473. LETTER TO MANIBEHN N. PARIKH
January 16, 1934
1

CHI. MANI ,

Give me detailed news about yourself. How did you spend your
time, what did you read and what did you think about? Write about
the children, too, and tell me whatever you wish to.
Everybody may do as he or she wishes. There is no time to write
more.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5975. Also C.W. 3292. Courtesy:
Vanamala M. Desai

474. LETTER TO GOVINDDAS
January 17, 1934
BHAI GOVINDDAS,

I have your letter. I was delighted. I too wish to meet you. The
itinerary is enclosed. The dates for U.P. are not fixed. Utkal is
followed by Bengal, Assam and Bihar.
God sustains me.
I trust you are keeping well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: C.W. 9709. Courtesy: Bharat Kala Bhavan, Varanasi

1

Wife of Narahari Parikh

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

447

475. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, TRICHUR
January 17, 1934
FRIENDS,

It gives me very great pleasure to renew my acquaintance with
you after so many years. But that pleasure is not unmixed with pain
because of the fact that in an enlightened State like Cochin
untouchability is still flourishing. It was perhaps whilst I was driving
through the streets of Trichur this morning, to speak a few words to
you, that I saw a Nayadi in flesh and blood. He was shivering with
fear. It was a sign of humiliation for you, for me and for all Hindus. It
is high time that you wipe out that shame. It is also a shame for us that
there should be even at this stage men—I don’t know anything about
women—defending untouchability, unapproachability and invisibility
in the name of religion. I venture to suggest to you that throughout
the civilized world such a sin cannot possibly be hinted at in the name
of religion.
His Highness the Maharaja by himself cannot possibly change
your hearts, and I would be wholly wrong were I to go away with the
belief that untouchability could be removed by a stroke of the pen.
Nor can this change be brought about by any sort of compulsion.
Therefore I would say to our sanatanists, or rather those who call
themselves ‘sanatanists’, that they need not fear the propaganda that I
am carrying on. I have to appeal to your reason and to your hearts
and urge you to do your best. The Hindus claim to be essentially a
nation of toleration. And if there is such a thing as untouchability in
Hinduism, it will become a religion of intolerance.
I therefore respectfully put to those who are today intending to
do this propaganda against untouchability to wipe out this blot on
Hinduism. I have received several letters on this matter and most of
the pricking letters that I have received on this problem are from
Travancore and Cochin.
One word to reformers. If we have sense of our own conviction,
if we only understand the sanatanists, we should tolerate what our
brethren may say of us. After all it will depend upon the character of
the reformers as to what is to be the nature of the reform that they are
making. The goal of this campaign against untouchability depends on
the purity of the reformers in this campaign. If they stick to their
present character and ceaselessly endeavour in their task, then this
monster of untouchability will be wiped out. But patience is required

448

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

on the part of the reformers. Surely, they must not lose faith though
there is no support from the surroundings.
One word to Hindi friends. I really expected that there would be
so much atmosphere in Malabar about Hindi and so many Hindi
scholars, that it would be easy for me to speak in Hindi altogether. I
was astonished, however, to find that there was no translator who
would translate my Hindi speech, and there was so much disinclination
on the part of the audience to allow a Hindi speech. May I suggest to
you that this disinclination also bars our way to progress in the
campaign against untouchability? I shall simply put it in one sentence.
There must be exchange of workers between North and South.
Though we have an inexhaustible supply of workers amongst the
Hindi speaking people, if workers from the North cannot possibly
come here and explain, it becomes an impossible barrier. You may
retort, ‘what about you when you go to the North? Why should not
they understand our speech?’ If you will think a little deeper, you will
realize that it is an impossible demand. Among Malayalam, Telugu,
Canarese, Tamil, what speech should the Northerner adopt? I am
myself a lover of all Indian languages. And I have attempted at the
age of sixty-five to learn all these languages. I have become a special
lover of Southern languages. But my intimate knowledge of this state
of affairs demands that, if we are to work for such reform as
[eradication of] untouchability, a common knowledge of Hindi is
absolutely indispensable, because it is a language spoken by twenty
crores out of thirty crores of people, and since we call ourselves
Indians we can expect the thirty crores to try to understand the speech
of twenty crores of people.
The Hindu, 19-1-1934

476. SPEECH AT KURUKKANCHERI1
January 17, 1934
It is a matter of exceedingly great pleasure for me to renew your
acquaintance. The names Ezhavas and Thiyyas are not new to me at
all, nor is the name of Shri Narayana Guru new to me. I had the
honour of meeting him and having long discussions with him while he
was on this earth. It was at that time I came in close contact with many
Ezhavas and Thiyyas. I met the leaders and had many friendly
discussions with them. 1 have very pleasant recollections of the
1

This was in reply to the address of welcome by Thiyya Harijans. A report of
the speech was also published in The Hindu, 19-1-1934.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

449

affection I received from them without exception. Since then constant
correspondence has been kept up between them and myself. Whilst
some have differed from the view I have expressed, their affection has
not suffered in any way. I treasure that affection. Therefore I am glad
that I am once more in your midst.
I have carefully read the whole of your address. All the remarks
that you have made about the institution of caste, as you have
interpreted it, have my fullest sympathy. But you know from your
experience that the vast majority of questions in this world have at
least two sides. They appear differently and bear different meanings
also. Caste, in so far as it is based on untouchability, is an institution of
the devil, and we must get rid of it at any cost. But I have explained
repeatedly that caste expressed as varnadharma is an eternal law which
we may not break except at our own risk. There are many laws of
Nature, which are still hidden from us. That does not mean that they
are not in existence or that they do not operate in our lives. The law of
varna was discovered by our ancestors ages ago; and, as I have
understood and interpreted it, it has appeared to me a wholly
beneficent law. But like many laws and institutions of Nature this law
of varna has been distorted, and we see it today in its hideous form.
Man—Hindu man—has disfigured it and made it doubly hideous by
tainting it with untouchability. Varnadharma is an economic law. It is
my certain conviction that, if the whole world followed that law, the
strife that we see around us would cease at once. It is pre-eminently a
law of concord, never of discord.
But I have not come here to give you a dissertation on the law of
the varna. I simply want to say that I am in full agreement with you in
your fight against untouchability. I entirely endorse your remarks that
it has corrupted not Hindu society alone, but has affected other
societies also. The assumption of superiority of one class over another
is a poison slowly killing us. When Narayana Guru Swami enunciated
his formula of one caste, one religion and one God, he had, in my
opinion, no other meaning in his mind. He said, ‘I will not tolerate
this assumption of superiority on the part of anybody.’ I do not recall
in my many discussions with him that he had anything to say against
the beneficent interpretation of varnadharma that I have given.
Let us not, therefore, destroy the tree for its bad or poisonous
branches. If you know anything whatsoever of gardening, you know
that a gardener who finds diseased branches prunes them. He deals
with the whole tree if he finds the tree rotten at the root. He will be
considered a foolish gardener deserving summary dismissal who,

450

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

because he sees some diseased branches, lays the axe at the root. In
our society let us act as wise gardeners. Let us understand the disease
that is corroding Hinduism. Let us get rid of untouchability or, in
other words, of the evil of superiority and inferiority. Let us first get
rid of this evil and purify our hearts. And when we shall have
successfully done so, we shall be able to pronounce opinion on the
working of the law of varna as I have explained it. Today we know it
chiefly as a species of untouchability. Lastly, it is my conviction, and I
want you to be infected with that conviction, that untouchability as I
have described it to you is fast going. And if you are fired by that
conviction, I want you to put forth your best effort to exorcize that
devil.
Harijan, 9-2-1934

477. SPEECH AT UNION CHRISTIAN COLLEGE, ALWAYE
January 17, 1934
It is a matter of great pleasure to me to renew acquaintance with
the students and professors of this college. I have very pleasant
recollections of my meeting with the students that were in the college
at the time of my first visit. It was good of you to think of me while I
was passing through this part of the country.
My message is exceedingly simple. It is no new truth that has
dawned upon me today. I have to the best of my ability striven to live
up to it for the past fifty years. And the more I have succeeded in
living up to it, the greater has been my inward joy. Nor is it for the
first time that I am delivering this message to India. But because of
some incidents in the recent past, it comes to the people as a new
thing. My message is simply this that savarna Hindus, who have been
considering themselves superior to those whom they have called
untouchables, unapproachables, invisibles or avarna Hindus, should
realize that this arrogation of superiority has no sanction whatsoever
in the Shastras. If I discovered that those scriptures, which are known
as Vedas, Upanishads, Bhagavad Gita, Smritis, etc., clearly showed
that they claimed divine authority for untouchability as I have
described it to you, then nothing on this earth would hold me to
Hinduism. I should throw it overboard as I should throw overboard a
rotten apple. My reason is offended and my heart is wounded at the

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

451

very thought that God Himself, who has created both savarna Hindus
and avarna Hindus, should impose this bar sinister between His
children. The very thought that the rishis, who gave the Vedas and the
Upanishads and who in every mantra that they pronounced taught the
unity of God, could ever conceive of any such thing as untouchability
as it is practised today in Hinduism must be repugnant to every
intelligent person. But prejudices and superstitions die hard. They
cloud the reason, befog the intellect and harden the heart. And so you
find learned men defending this untouchability.
But you, students, should know that behind this message there
lurks also a much greater message. This monster of untouchability has
invaded every form of society in India; and the idea behind this
message is that there should be not only no untouchability as between
Hindus and Hindus, but that there should be no untouchability
whatsoever between Hindus, Christians, Mussalmans, Parsis and the
rest. I am convinced that, if this great change of heart can be brought
about among millions of savarna Hindus and their hearts can be
purified—as certainly they will be purified—we should live in India as
people trusting each other and without any mutual distrust or
suspicion. It is untouchability with all its subtle forms that separates us
from one another and makes life itself unlovely and difficult to live.
You can now, therefore, understand why I am drawing upon the
sympathy of all Indians, to whatever faith they may belong. Indeed I
have not hesitated to ask the support of the whole world, not by way
of pecuniary offering but by their sympathy, their prayers and their
study of the question with all its implications. I want their heart sympathy, which is infinitely greater than any pecuniary offering. I do not
stretch out my hand before them for money because they are not
debtors to Harijans. It is for savarna Hindus to discharge this debt.
To conclude, this prayerful support and sympathy can only be
given by non-Hindus, if they have no distrust of this movement and if
they are satisfied that this is a movement of inward purification and
deeply religious. Remember that I have not idly given this message
which has come straight from the heart. I have gladly taken your
purse which is a spontaneous offering from you. But I have accepted
it as a bond between you and myself and as a token of your

452

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

determination to give me the fullest support you are capable of
giving. And since I am a good accountant, I shall ask an account from
you and shall want to know from time to time what part you have
played in this movement.
Harijan, 26-1-1934

478. LETTER TO HARIJAN WORKERS OF KUPPAM1
[Before January 18, 1934] 2
DEAR FRIENDS,

It is altogether wrong and reprehensible for people to threaten
to fast if I do not go to a particular place. You can easily see that if
many people issued such threats they can make it impossible for me
to go anywhere. I hope, therefore, that you will apologize and withdraw your threat.
The Hindu, 18-1-1934

1

Sundarraya Iyengar and other Harijan workers in a letter had informed
Gandhiji of Iyengar’s intention to go on a fast from February 8, in case Gandhiji did
not visit Kuppam during his forthcoming visit to Tiruppattur.
2
The newspaper report is dated January 18.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1933 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

453

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I
(A) TOUR PROGRAMME1
FROM 7 TH NOVEMBER 1933 TO 15TH NOVEMBER 1933
7th November
Selu :
a.m.)
8th November
6-0 a.m.
7-0 a.m.
7-40 a.m.
7-40 to 8
8-0 to 8-30
8-30 to 8-45
8-45 to 9-0
9-0 to 9-15
9-15 to 9-30
9–30 to 10-0
10-0 to 1 p.m.
1 to 5-0
5-0 to 6-0
6-0 to 7-0 p.m.
9th November

Open [ing] of a temple and a public meeting, etc., (morning 9

Departure from Wardha
Halt at Bori
Arrival at Nagpur
Reception at Dhantoli
Visit to sweepers’ quarters, opening of a well recently
constructed by the M.C.
Khalasi Line Untouchable Girls’ School
Sadar Bazar D.C.A. Girls’ School
Chokhamela Hostel
Pachpaoli D. C. M. School and Mang Boarding
Mahar Students’ Boarding, Untkhana
Rest
Katol public meeting, etc.
Rest
Public meeting

6-0 a.m. to 6-30
Visit to Anath Vidyarthi Graha
6-30 to 10 a.m.
Ramtek
10-0 a.m. to 2-0 p.m. Rest
2-0 p.m.
Departure for Saoner
3-0 to 4-0

Public meeting, etc.

4-0 to 5

Back to Nagpur

5-0 to 6-0 p.m.

Rest

6-0 to 7-0 p.m.

Meeting with workers

7-0 to 8-0 p.m.
10th November
6-0 a.m.

Departure for Tumser

8-0

Public meeting, etc., at Tumser

1

454

Students’ meeting

Vide “ Leaves From a Diary”, 25-2-1934

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

9-0 a.m.
10-0 to 11-0
11-0 to 2-0 p.m.
2-0 p.m.
5-0 to 6-0 p.m.
6-0 to 8-0 p.m.
11th November

Departure for Bhandara
Opening of a temple, presentation of addresses
Rest
Departure for Gondia
Rest
Public meeting, etc.

1-20 a.m.
Departure by train, change at Nagpur at 5-0
8-0 a.m. to 9-0 a.m.Deoli, in Wardha District
12th to 13th November
Rest at Wardha
13th November
4-0 p.m.
8-30 p.m.
14th November

Hinganghat
Chanda

6-0 a.m. to 3-0 p.m.Halt at Saoli
6-0 p.m.
Public meeting at Chanda
15th November
5-20 a.m.
6-30 a.m.

Departure from Chanda
Arrival at Warora. Departure for Wani

(The above programme is subject to alteration by Dr. Khare if Mahatmaji’s health
is unable to stand the strain of the tour.)

(B) CIRCULAR RE : CHANGE IN TOUR PROGRAMME

CAMP WARDHA,
November 7, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

RE: CHANGE IN GANDHIJI’S PROGRAMME
It has been found necessary, quite unavoidable, to make a substantial alteration in
the order of the programme of Mahatmaji’s proposed tour, extending over 9 months—
November 1933 to July 1934. After touring in the Central Provinces, where the tour has
commenced from today, and after attending the Central Board meeting at Delhi—
December 10 to 14—he will go directly to Andhra, and the rest of the Madras
Presidency, instead of going up to the Punjab, Sind, etc., and will thereafter work his way
to Bengal and Assam and then westward. The new order will, therefore, be as follows :
C. P., Delhi, Andhra, Madras City, Mysore States and Malabar District, Cochin
and Travancore, Tamil Nadu, Orissa, Calcutta, Bengal, Assam, Bihar, U.P., Punjab, Sind
and Rajputana, Gujarat and Kathiawar, Bombay City, Maharashtra and Hyderabad Dn.,
and Karanataka at the end of July 1934.

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1934 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

455

The dates of the tour in the various provinces and other details are given in the
sub–joined table. The details of the tour in each province will be settled and filled up by
the Provincial Secretaries in consultation with their Presidents in accordance with
detailed instructions already issued. But the four elementary rules to be observed are
mentioned below :
(1)There should be full four hours cessation of public work for meals and
correspondence in the middle of the day, preferably from 10.0 a.m. to 2.0 p.m.
(2)The day’s work should not begin earlier than 6.30 a.m. and not [continue] later
than 8.0 p.m.
(3)Railway journey is any day preferable to motor journey, but where the latter is
unavoidable, it should not exceed 75 miles in one day.
(4)Mondays and Tuesdays in every week are non–working days and should be
kept free of any travelling or public engagement. To be accurate, the period from 8 p.m.
on Sunday to 8 p.m. on Tuesday is reserved, 24 hours for silence and 24 hours for
correspondence and other work.
A. V. THAKKAR,
GENERAL SECRETARY,
SERVANTS OF THE UNTOUCHABLES S OCIETY

(C) TOUR PROGRAMME PROVINCEWISE
THE PROGRAMME OF GANDHIJI’S HARIJAN TOUR
Two days per week, preferably Monday and Tuesday, will be free from travelling
and appointments to give Gandhiji time for correspondence and writing for the Harijan.
Thus there will be five working days per week so far as the tour programme is concerned.
PROVINCE
TOTAL DAYS
DATES
WORKING
(BOTH DAYS INCLUSIVE)
318th Nov. to 8 Dec.
23
9TH DECEMBER IN TRAIN AND AT JHANSI
Delhi 510th Dec. to 14th Dec.
3
15TH DECEMBER IN TRAIN DELHI TO BEZWADA
Andhra1416th Dec. to 29th Dec.
10
Madras City
5
30th Dec. to 3rd Jan. 1934
Mysore–Malabar
10
4th Jan. to 13th Jan.
Cochin–Travancore
7
14th Jan. to 20th Jan.
Tamil Nadu
20
21st Jan. to 9th Feb.
(INCLUDING 6 DAYS’ FULLL REST)
10TH FEBRUARY IN TRAIN—MADRAS TO ORISSA

DAYS

C.P.

Orissa 711th Feb. to 17th Feb.
Bengal2818th Feb. to 17th March

456

3
8
5
10

5
20

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Assam 718th March to 24th March

5

Bihar 1425th March to 7th April

10

U.P.

20

358th April to 12th May

(INCLUDING 7 DAYS’ FULL REST)
Punjab 1413th May to 26th May

10

Sind

5

727th May to 2nd June

Rajputana

7

3rd June to 9th June

5

Rest at Ahmedabad

7

10th June to 16th June

0

Gujarat–Kathiawar

14

17th June to 30th June

10

7

1st July to 7th July

5

Maharashtra–Hyderabad Dn 17

8th July to 24th July

11

Karanataka

25th July to 31st July

5

Bombay City

7

This programme must be regarded as tentative and is subject to change, but only
when required for the sake of the cause itself.
A. V. THAKKAR
Gandhi–Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

APPENDIX II
MOHAMMED IQBAL’S STATEMENT1
LAHORE,
December 6, 1933
“The offer made by the Aga Khan to Mr. Gandhi in London in 1931 still holds
good. If under Pandit Jawaharlal’s leadership, the Hindus and the Congress agree to the
safeguards which the Muslims think necessary for their protection as an all–India
minority, the Muslim community will still be ready to serve as camp–followers of the
majority community in India’s political struggle” says Sir Mohammed Iqbal in a
statement issued today referring to Pandit Jawaharlal’s charges against the communalist
Muslim leaders.
Sir Mohammed Iqbal observes that the Aga Khan made a similar offer to Mr.
Gandhi in 1932 but Mr. Gandhi would not guarantee acceptance of his position by the
Congress and also the Hindu and Sikh delegates did not endorse Mr. Gandhi’s position
and further Mr. Gandhi wanted the Muslims not to support the untouchables’ claims.
After explaining the Muslim attitude towards nationalism and democracy, Sir
Mohammed Iqbal puts the straight question to Pandit Jawaharlal, “How is India’s
problem to be solved if the majority community neither concedes the minimum necessary
safeguards to the minority community, nor accepts a third party’s award ? The position
can admit of two alternatives only. Either, India’s majority community must accept for
1

Vide “ Wanted a Manifestation of Christ in Daily Life” , 30-3-1934

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1934 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

457

itself the permanent position of an agent of British imperialism in the East or India should
be redistributed on the basis of religious, historical and cultural affinities so as to do away
with the question of electorates and the communal problems in its present form.”
The Bombay Chronicle, 7–12–1933

APPENDIX III
EXTRACTS FROM JAWAHARLAL NEHRU’S STATEMENT1
. . . I do not think that the Muslim communal organizations, chief of whom are the
Muslim All–Parties Conference and the Muslim League, represent any large group of
Muslims in India except in the sense that they exploit the prevailing communal sentiment.
But the fact remains that they claim to speak for Muslims, and no other organization has
so far risen which can successfully challenge that claim. Their aggressively communal
character gives them a pull over the large number of nationalist Muslims who merge
themselves in the Congress. The leaders of these organizations are patently and intensely
communal. That, from the very nature of things, one can understand.
But it is equally obvious that most of them are definitely anti–national and
political reactionaries of the worst kind. Apparently they do not even look forward to any
common nation developing in India.
At a meeting in the British House of Commons last year the Aga Khan, Sir
Mohammed Iqbal and Dr. Shafaat Ahmad Khan are reported (in The Statesman of
December 31, 1932) to have laid stress on “the inherent impossibility of securing any
merger of Hindu and Moslem, political, or indeed, social, interests”. The speakers further
pointed out “the impracticability of ever governing India through anything but a British
agency”. These statements leave no loophole for nationalism or for Indian freedom, now
or even in the remote future.
I do not think that these statements represent the views of Muslims generally or
even of most of the communally inclined Muslims. But they are undoubtedly the views of
the dominant and politically clamorous group among the Muslims. It is an insult to one’s
intelligence to link these views with those of nationalism and freedom, and of course any
measure of real economic freedom is still further away from them. Essentially, this is an
attitude of pure reaction—political, cultural, national, social. And it is not surprising that
this should be so if one examines the membership of these organizations. Most of the
leading members are Government officials, ex–officials, ministers, would–be ministers,
knights and title–holders, big landlords, etc. Their leader is the Aga Khan, the head of a
wealthy religious group, who combines in himself, most remarkably, the feudal order and
the politics and habits of the British ruling class, with which he has been intimately
associated for many years.
Such being the leadership of the Muslims in India and at the Round Table
1

458

Vide “ Wanted a Manifestation of Christ in Daily Life” , 30-3-1934

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Conference it is no wonder that their attitude should be reactionary. This reactionary
policy went so far as to lead many of the Muslim delegates in London to seek an alliance
with the most reactionary elements in British public life—Lord Lloyd and company. And
the final touch was given to it when Gandhiji offered personally to accept every single
one of their communal demands, however illogical and exaggerated they might be, on
condition that they assured him of their full support in the political struggle for
independence. That condition and offer were not accepted and it became clear that what
stood in the way was not even communalism but political reaction.
Personally I think that it is generally possible to co–operate with communalists
provided the political objective is the same. But between progress and reaction, between
those who struggle for freedom and those who are content with servitude, and even wish
to prolong it, there is no meeting ground. And it is this political reaction which has
stalked the land under cover of communalism and taken advantage of the fear of each
community of the other. It is the fear complex that we have to deal with in these
communal problems. Honest communalism is fear; false communalism is political
reaction.
To some extent this fear is justified, or is at least understandable, in a minority
community. We see this fear overshadowing the communal sky in India as a whole so far
as Muslims are concerned; we see it as an equally potent force in the Punjab and Sind so
far as the Hindus are concerned, and in the Punjab the Sikhs.
It was natural for the British Government to support and push on the reactionary
leaders of the Muslims and to try to ignore the nationalist ones. It was also natural for
them to accede to most of their demands in order to strengthen their position in their own
community and weaken the national struggle. A very little knowledge of history will
show that this has always been done by ruling powers. The Muslim demands did not in
any way lessen the control of the British in India. To some extent they helped the British
to add to their proposed special powers and to show to the world how necessary their
continued presence in India was.
I have written all this about the attitude of the Muslim communalist leaders not
only to complete the picture but because it is a necessary preliminary to the
understanding of the Hindu communal attitude. There is no essential difference between
the two. But there was this difference that the Congress drew into its ranks most of the
vital elements of Hindu society and it dominated the situation and thus circumstances did
not permit the Hindu communalists to play an important role in politics. The Hindu
Mahasabha leaders largely confined themselves to criticizing the Congress. When
however there was a lull in Congress activities, automatically the Hindu communalists
came more to the front and their attitude was frankly reactionary.
It must be remembered that the communalism of a majority community must of

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1934 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

459

necessity bear a closer resemblance to nationalism than the communalism of a minority
group. One of the best tests of its true nature is what relation it bears to the national
struggle. If it is politically reactionary or lays stress on communal problems rather than
national ones, then it is obviously anti–national. . ..
I cannot hold the Mahasabha responsible for these statements 1 but as a matter of
fact they fit in with, and are only a slight elaboration of, the Mahasabha attitude. And
they bear out that many Hindu communalists are definitely thinking on the lines of co–
operation with British imperialism in the hope of getting favours. It requires little
argument to show that this attitude is not only narrowly communal but also anti–national
and intensely reactionary. . . .
It is perfectly true that Hindu Mahasabha has stood for joint electorates right
through its career and this is obviously the only national solution of the problem. It is also
true that the Communal Award is an utter negation of nationalism and is meant to
separate India into communal compartments and give strength to disruptive tendencies
and thus to strengthen the hold of British imperialism. But it must be borne in mind that
nationalism cannot be accepted only when it profits the majority community. The test
comes in the provinces where there is a Muslim majority and in that test the Hindu
Mahasabha has failed.
Nor is it enough to blame Muslim communalists. It is easy enough to do so for
Indian Muslims as a whole are unhappily very backward and compare unfavourably with
Muslims in all other countries. The point is that a special responsibility does attach to the
Hindus in India both because they are the majority community and because economically
and educationally they are more advanced. The Mahasabha, instead of discharging that
responsibility, has acted in a manner which has undoubtedly increased the communalism
of the Muslims and made them distrust the Hindus all the more. The only way it has tried
to meet their communalism is by its own variety of communalism. One communalism
does not end the other; each feeds on the other and both fatten. . .
I cannot say what following the Hindu or Muslim communal organizations have.
It is possible that in a moment of communal excitement each side may command the
allegience of considerable numbers. But I do submit that on both sides these
organizations represent the rich upper class groups and the struggle for communal
advantages is really an attempt of these groups to take as big a share of power and
privilege for themselves as possible. At the most, it means jobs for a few of our
unemployed intellectuals. How do these communal demands meet the needs of the
masses ? What is the programme of the Hindu Mahasabha or the Muslim League for the
workers, the peasants and the lower middle classes, which form the great bulk of the
nation ? They have no programme except a negative one, as the Mahasabha hinted at
Ajmer, of not disturbing the present social order. This in itself shows that the controlling
1

460

Made by Bhai Parmanand, Dr. Moonje and others

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

forces of these communal organizations are the upper class possessing social groups
today. The Muslim communalists tell us a great deal about the democracy of Islam but
are afraid of democracy in practice; the Hindu communalists talk of nationalism and
think in terms of a “Hindu Nationalism”.
Personally I an convinced that Nationalism can only come out of the ideological
fusion of Hindu, Muslim, Sikh and other groups in India. That does not and need not
mean the extinction of any real culture of any group, but it does mean a common national
outlook, to which other matters are subordinated. I do not think that Hindu–Muslim or
other unity will come merely by reciting [it] 1 like a mantra. That it will come I have no
doubt, but it will come from below, not above, for many of those above are too much
interested in British domination and hope to preserve their special privileges through it.
Social and economic forces will inevitably bring other problems to the front. They will
create cleavages along different lines, but the communal cleavage will go.
I have been warned by friends, whose opinion I value, that my attitude towards
communal organizations will result in antagonizing many people against me. That is
indeed probable. I have no desire to antagonize any countryman of mine for we are in the
midst of a mighty struggle against a powerful opponent. But that very struggle demands
that we must check harmful tendencies and always keep the goal before us. I would be
false to myself, to my friends and comrades, so many of whom have sacrificed their all at
the altar of freedom and even to those who disapprove of what I say, if I remained a silent
witness to an attempt to weaken and check our great struggle for freedom. Those, who, in
my opinion, are helping in this attempt may be perfectly honest in the beliefs they hold. I
do not challenge their bona fides. But none the less, the beliefs may be wrong, anti–
national and reactionary.
I write as an individual, and, in this matter, I claim to represent no one but myself.
Many may agree with me; I hope they do. But whether they do so or do not, I must say
frankly what I have in my mind. That is not perhaps the way of politicians, for, in
politics, people are very careful of what they say and do not say lest they offend some
group or individual and lose support. But I am not a politician by choice; forces stronger
than me have driven me to this field and, it may be, that I have yet to learn the ways of
politicians.
The Bombay Chronicle, 2–12–1933

1

Illegible

VOL. 62 : 8 OCTOBER, 1934 - 17 JANUARY, 1934

461

APPENDIX IV
BAPU’S TOUR PROGRAMME1
DATE MORNING

AFTERNOON

NIGHT

Dec. 28

Train

Vizagapatam

*Vizianagaram

Dec. 29

Anakapalli
(till 3 p.m.)

Train

Train

Dec. 30

Buchireddipalem

*Nellore

Venkatagiri

Dec. 31

Renigunta

*Cuddapah

Cuddapah

Jan. 1–2

Rest days at

*Cuddapah

Jan. 3 Vuravakonda
Jan. 4

* Bangalore

Jan. 5

*Mysore

*Anantapur

Train

Letters for the day may be sent to place marked with*.
Gandhi–Nehru Papers 1933. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

1

462

Vide “ Letter to Vallabhbhai Patel” , 18-4-1934

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

