1. LETTER TO ADDITIONAL SECRETARY, HOME
DEPARTMENT, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DETENTION C AMP,

January 27, 1944
ADDITIONAL S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
(HOME DEPARTMENT)
NEW DELHI
SIR,

Some days ago Shri Kasturba Gandhi told the Inspector-General
of prisons and Col. Shah that Dr. Dinshaw Mehta of Poona be invited
to assist in her treatment. Nothing seems to have come out of her
request. She has become insistent now and asked me if I had written to
the Government in the matter. I, therefore, ask for immediate
permission to bring in Dr. Mehta. She has also told me and my son
that she would like to have some Ayurvedic physician to see her. 1 I
suggest that the I.G.P. be authorized to permit such assistance when
requested.
2. I have no reply as yet to my request2 that Shri Kanu Gandhi,
who is being permitted to visit the patient every alternate day, be
allowed to remain in the camp as a whole-time nurse. The patient
shows no signs of recovery and night-nursing is becoming more and
more exacting. Kanu Gandhi is an ideal nurse, having nursed the
patient before. And what is more, he can soothe her by giving her
instrumental music and by singing bhajans. I request early relief to
relieve the existing pressure. The matter may be treated as very
urgent.
3. The Superintendent of the camp informs me that when
visitors come, one nurse only can be present. Hitherto more than one
nurse has attended when necessary. The Superintendent used his
discretion as to the necessity. But when difficulty arose I made a
reference to the I.G.P. The result was that an order was issued that a
doctor in addition may be present. I submit that the order has been
issued in ignorance or disregard of the condition of the patient.She
often requires to be helped by more persons than one. Therefore I ask
1
2

Vide the preceding item.
Vide “Letter to Ardeshir E. Kateli”, 6-1-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

1

that there should be no restriction as to the number of the attendants.
4. It would be wrong on my part, if I suppressed the fact that in
the facilities being allowed to the patient grace has been sadly lacking.
The order about the attendants is the most glaring instance of
pin-pricks, besides being in defeat of the purpose for which
attendance during visits of relatives is allowed. Again, my three sons
are in Poona. The eldest, Harilal, who is almost lost to us, was not
allowed yesterday, the reason being that the I.G.P. had no instructions
to allow him to come again. And yet the patient was naturally anxious
to meet him. To cite one more pin-prick, every time visitors who are
on the permitted list come, they have to apply to Government Office,
Bombay, for permission. The consequence is that there is unnecessary
delay and heart-burning. The difficulty, I imagine, arises because
neither the Superintendent nor the I.G.P. has any function except that
of passing on my requests to Bombay.
5. I am aware that Shri Kasturba is a Government patient, and
that even as her husband I should have no say about her. But, as the
Government have been pleased to say that instead of being discharged
she is being kept with me in her own interest, perhaps, in interpreting
her wishes and feelings, I am doing what the Government would desire
and appreciate. Her recovery or at least mental peace when she is
lingering is common cause between the Government and me. Any jar
tells on her.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3926

2. LETTER TO SECRETARY, HOME DEPARTMENT,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
DETENTION C AMP,

January 27, 1944
THE S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
(HOME DEPARTMENT)
BOMBAY
SIR,

I enclose herewith for dispatch a letter 1 addressed to the
Government of India, but it need not be dispatched if the Government
of Bombay can suo moto deal with the matters referred to therein. As
1

2

Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the object is to obtain relief as promptly as possible, instructions from
the Central Government, if necessary, may be obtained on the phone.
I am, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3927; also Bombay Secret Abstracts: Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 76, p. 179

3. TALK WITH RAMDAS GANDHI 1
January 28, 1944
Mr. Ramdas said that Government was taking unnecessary risk in detaining
Mrs. Gandhi. The old man (Gandhiji) replied that there was a greater risk in releasing
her. In case she was released and if she died, Government would be compelled to
release him, which they did not like to risk.
Mr. Ramdas said that it was his impression that Harilal, being an
irresponsible man, might give in papers anything about the Palace, and hence
Government were reluctant to give Harilal frequent interviews. Mr. Gandhi laughed
and said:

Perhaps I may take advantage of Harilal’s weakness and ask him to do
something for me.
Bombay Secret Abstracts: Home Department, Special Branch (6), File No.
76-1, 1943-44

4. LETTER TO SECRETARY, HOME DEPARTMENT,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
DETENTION C AMP,

January 31, 1944
S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY (H.D.)
BOMBAY
SIR,

I sent on the 27th instant a very urgent letter 2 addressed to the
Government of India. I am still without a reply. The patient is no
better. The attendants are about to break down. Four only can work—
1

This is extracted from a letter dated January 29, 1944, addressed to Secretary,
Home Department, Government of Bombay, by the Officer-in-charge, Aga Khan
Palace.
2
Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 27-1-1944.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

3

two at a time on alternate nights. All the four have to work during the
day. The patient herself is getting restive, and inquires: “When will
Dr. Dinshaw come?” May I know as early as may be—even
tomorrow, if possible:
1. Whether Shri Kanu Gandhi can come as full-time nurse,
2. whether Dr. Dinshaw’s services may be enlisted for the
present, and
3. whether the restriction on the number of attendants during
visits can be removed.
I hope it may not have to be said that the relief came too late.1
I am, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3928; also Bombay Secret Abstracts: Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 76, p. 215

5. SILENCE-DAY NOTE TO SUPERINTENDENT,
DETENTION CAMP 2
[January 31, 1944] 3
She has no particular Ayurvedic physician in mind, but my son
1

According to Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, p. 228, the
addressee’s reply dated February 3, 1944, read: (1) Government have agreed to Kanu
Gandhi staying in for the purpose of helping in nursing Mrs. Gandhi on condition
that he agrees to be bound by the same regulations as other security prisoners in the
detention camp. Government consider that with Kanu Gandhi staying in, the nursing
assistance provided should be adequate and they cannot agree to any requests for
further assistance. (2) Government have decided that no outside doctors should be
allowed unless the Government medical officer considers that it is absolutely
necessary for medical reasons. . . . (3) Interviews with near relatives have been
sanctioned for Mrs. Gandhi. While Government have no objection to your being
present during those interviews, they consider that other inmates should not be
present except to the extent demanded by the condition of Mrs. Gandhi’s health. . .”
For a joint letter from Dr. Sushila Nayyar and Dr. M. D. D. Gilder to Col. Bhandari for
further medical assistance, vide Appendix “Letter form Dr. Nayyar and Dr. Gilder to
Col. Bhandari”, 31--1-1944.
2
Pyarelal explains that the letter was scribbled out by Gandhiji at 4 p.m. on
“Monday, the silence-day”, and “handed immediately to the Superintendent of the
Camp” who had conveyed the following communication from the Government:
“Government wants to know whether Mrs. Gandhi has any particular physician in
mind and whether she would want one in addition to Dr. Dinshaw Mehta.”
3
ibid

4

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Devdas suggested the name of Vaidyaraj Sharma of Lahore. Any
physician who is admitted will be in addition to Dr. Dinshaw, and that
too, if and when the latter has failed to give satisfaction. She has often
expressed a desire to be seen by an Ayurvedic physician. If the
permission is granted, it should be of a general character. She is losing
will-power and I have to judge between a multiplicity of advice so
long as I am permitted to have responsibility for her peace of mind,
which is about all that is possible at this stage.
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, p. 226

6. LETTER TO VIJAYALAKSHMI PANDIT1
AGA KHAN P ALACE ,

February 1, 1944
THROUGH THE BOMBAY GOVERNMENT
DEAR DAUGHTER,

Your letter2 reached me yesterday about 2 p.m. What can I write
to you? The news which I read in the papers was read out by me to
Ba. Thereupon with tears in her eyes Ba said: “Oh God (Rama) I am
at death’s door and I am not taken away while Ranjit is taken away!
What will happen to Sarup?” I did not feel like that. You cannot
become helpless. You are a brave daughter of a brave father,and brave
sister of a similarly brave brother. The disease of Ranjit was such that
he had to go before his time. His body was not meant to suffer jail
life. But all these are my imaginations. The fact is that God gives you
birth and whenever He likes He takes you up. And this is all for the
body. Soul, however, neither takes birth nor dies. You had married a
soul named Ranjit. You can never become a widow. You have rightly
stated that you will represent all the qualities of Ranjit. May God
satisfy this wish of yours. You should look after your body and be
engrossed in your duty.
It is good that Rita 3 is with you. Please send my blessings to
Chand4 and Tara 5 . Also give my blessings to Krishna 6 , Feroze7 and
1

Originally written in Hindi, this is a translation by the jail authorities.
Dated January 15, conveying the news of her husband’s death
3
Rita, addressee’s daughter
4
Chandralekha, addressee’s daughter
5
Nayantara, addressee’s daughter
6
Krishna Hutheesing, addressee’s sister
7
Feroze and Indira Gandhi
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

5

Indu 1 . May God bless you.
Your letter has been delivered to me against the rules2 . And this
will also be delivered against the rules. This is my first letter from jail.
Ba has been counting her days in the hope of death.
Blessings to you from us both,

S HRIMATI VIJAYALAKSHMI P ANDIT
2 M UKHERJI R OAD
ALLAHABAD
Bombay Secret Abstracts: Home Department, Special Branch (6), File No. 13-I
(5), p. 47

7. LETTER TO SECRETARY, HOME DEPARTMENT,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
DETENTION C AMP,

February 3, 1944
S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
BOMBAY
SIR,

Shri Kasturba asked me yesterday when Dr. Dinshaw was
coming, and whether a vaidya (Ayurvedic physician) could see her
and give her some drugs. I told her, I was trying for both but that we
were prisoners and could not have things as we liked. She has since
been repeatedly asking me whether I could not do something to
hasten matters. She had a restless night again. This is, of course,
nothing new for her at present. I request immediate orders about Dr.
Dinshaw and Vaidyaraj Sharma of Lahore. The latter will be some
time coming. But Dr. Dinshaw can come even today if authority is
given for calling him in.
I must confess that I do not understand this delay when a
patient’s life is hanging in the balance and may be saved by timely

1
2

6

Feroze and Indira Gandhi
Allowing security prisoners to correspond only with family members
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

aid. After all, for a patient alleviation of pain is as important as the
highest matters of State.1
I am, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3929, also Bombay Secret Abstracts: Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 76, p. 229

8. LETTER TO SECRETARY, HOME DEPARTMENT,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
DETENTION C AMP,

February 7, 1944
S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY (HOME DEPARTMENT)
BOMBAY
SIR,

On 29th December, 1943, I sent for dispatch to the addressee a
letter 2 addressed to Miss Agatha Harrison of [2] 3 Cranbourne Court,
Albert Bridge Road, London. May I know whether that letter was sent
to Miss Harrison?
I am, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3930; also Bombay Secret Abstracts: Home
Department, Special Branch (6), File No. 13-I, p. 21

1

For the addressee’s reply of even date, vide 2nd footnote of “Letter to
Secretary, Home Department, Government of India”, 31-1-1944.
2
Vide “Letter to Agatha Harrison”, 29-12-1943.
3
Illegible in the source
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

7

9. LETTER TO SECRETARY, HOME DEPARTMENT,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
DETENTION C AMP,

February 7, 1944
SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF

BOMBAY (HOME DEPARTMENT)

BOMBAY
SIR,

In pursuance of the right conferred upon me of making a
representation against my detention, I sent one 1 on 24th January,
1944. May I know when I shall be favoured with a reply thereto?
I am, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3931, also Bombay Secret Abstracts: Home
Department, Special Branch (6), File No. 13-I, p. 23

10. NOTE TO INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF
PRISONS, BOMBAY 2
DETENTION C AMP,

February 11, 1944
The responsibility for bringing in a non-allopath assistant would
be wholly mine, and the Government shall stand absolved from
responsibility for any untoward result following such treatment. I am
not sure that I shall accept the advice that such vaidyas or hakims may
give. But if I do, and if the prescription is ineffective, I would like to
reserve the right to revert to present treatment.
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, p. 229

1
Vide “Letter to Secretary, Home Department, Government of India”,
24-1-1944.
2
In an introductory note to this, in the source, Pyarelal explains: “In
pursuance of the request for an Ayurvedic physician for Shrimati Kasturba Gandhi,
Gandhiji had a talk with the Inspector-General of Prisons on the morning of February
11, 1944. He then wrote out the following confirming what he had already told the
jail authorities.”

8

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

11. LETTER TO INSPECTOR-GENERAL
OF PRISONS, BOMBAY
Immediate DETENTION C AMP,
February 14, 1944
THE INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF P RISONS
P OONA
SIR,

I told you yesterday that Shri Kasturba was so bad during the
night that Dr. Nayyar got frightened and awakened Dr. Gilder. I felt
that she was going. The doctors were naturally helpless. Dr. Nayyar
had, therefore, to wake up the Superintendent who kindly phoned the
Vaidyaraj. It was then about 1 a.m. Had he been on the premises he
would certainly have given relief. I, therefore, asked you to let him
stay at the camp during the night. But you informed me,
theGovernment orders did not cover night stay. The Vaidyaraj,
however, you said, could be called in during the night. I pointed out
the obvious danger of delay but you were sorry, the orders would not
allow you to go further. In vain I argued that the Government having
given the authority to call in Vaidyaraj on condition that I absolved
them from responsibility for any untoward result of the vaidic
treatment, they could not contemplate any restriction on the duration
of the physician’s stay at the camp so long as it was thought necessary
in the interest of the patient. In view of your rejection of my request, I
had to trouble the Vaidyaraj to rest in his car in front of the gate so
that in case of need he might be called in. He very humanly
consented. He had to be called in and he was able to bring the desired
relief. The crisis has not passed as yet. I, therefore, repeat my request
and ask for immediate relief. I would like, if I can, to avoid the last
night’s experience. I do wish that the vexations caused by the delay in
granting my requests about the patient’s treatment came to an end.
Both Dr. Mehta and the Vaidyaraj were permitted to come in after
protracted delay. Precious time was lost making recovery more
uncertain than it was. I hope you will be able to secure the necessary
authority for the vaid’s stay in the camp during night, if the patient’s
condition requires it. The patient needs constant and continuous
attention.
I am,
Yours, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3932; also Bombay Secret Abstracts: Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 76, p. 299
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

9

12. LETTER TO INSPECTOR-GENERAL
OF PRISONS, BOMBAY
Immediate DETENTION C AMP,
February 16, 1944
THE INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF P RISONS
P OONA
SIR,

This is in continuation of my letter1 of the 14th instant. When I
asked 2 for Vaidyaraj and took upon myself the responsibility3 of
changing Shri Kasturba’s treatment, and absolved the Government
physician of all responsibility, I naturally took for granted that the
Vaidyaraj would be allowed such facilities as would in his opinion be
necessary for carrying out his treatment. The patient’s nights are
much worse than her days and it is essentially at night that constant
attendance is necessary. The Vaidyaraj considers himself handicapped
in his treatment of the case under the present arrangement.
In order to be within immediate call, he has been good enough
to sleep in his car outside the gate of this camp for the last three
nights, and every night he has had to be called up at least once. This is
an unnatural state of things and, though he seems to have infinite
capacity for suffering inconvenience for the sake of the patient, I may
not take undue advantage of his generous nature. Besides, it means
disturbing the Superintendent and his staff (in fact the whole camp)
once or more often during the night. For instance, last night she
suddenly developed fever with rigor. The Vaidyaraj, who had left the
premises at 10.30 p.m., had to be called in at 12 midnight. I had to
request him to leave her soon afterwards, although he would have
liked to have stayed with her longer, because so long as he stayed in, it
would have meant keeping the Superintendent and his staff awake
which might have been even for the whole night. I would not do this
even for saving my life-long partner especially when I know that a
1

Vide the preceding item.
Vide “Letter to Secretary, Home Department, Government of India”,
27-1-1944, “Silence-DAy Note to Superintendent Detention Camp”, 31-1-1944 and
“Note to Inspector-General of Prisons, Bombay”, 11-2-1944.
3
ibid
2

10

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

humane way is open.
As I have said already, the Vaidyaraj considers it necessary to be
in constant attendance on the patient. He varies the drugs from
moment to moment as the patient’s condition requires. Drs. Gilder’s
and Nayyar’s assistance is at my disposal all the time—they are more
than friends and would do everything in their power for the patient.
But, as I have said in my last letter, they cannot help while treatment of
a wholly different nature from theirs is going on. Besides, being in its
very nature impracticable, such a course would be unjust to the
patient, to the Vaidyaraj and to themselves.
I, therefore, submit below the following three alternative
proposals:
I. Vaidyaraj should be permitted to remain in the camp day and
night so long as he considers it necessary in the interests of the
patient.
II. If the Government cannot agree to this, they may release the
patient on parole to enable her to receive the full benefit of the
physician’s treatment.
III. If neither of these two proposals are acceptable to the
Government, I request that I be relieved of the responsibility of
looking after the patient. If I as her husband cannot procure for her
the help she wants or that I think necessary, I ask for my removal to
any other place of detention that the Government may choose. I must
not be made a helpless witness of the agonies the patient is passing
through.
The Government have kindly permitted Dr. Mehta to visit the
patient at her repeated requests. His help is valuable, but he does not
prescribe drugs. She needs the physical therapy given by him which
soothes her greatly but she cannot do without drug treatment either.
Drugs can only be prescribed by the doctors or the Vaidyaraj. The
doctors’ treatment has already been suspended. In the absence of a
satisfactory reply to this letter by this evening, I shall be constrained to
suspend Vaidyaraj’s treatment also. If she cannot have the drug
treatment which she should in full, I would rather that she did without
it altogether.
I am writing this by the patient’s bedside at 2 a.m. She is
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

11

oscillating between life and death. Needless to say she knows nothing
of this letter. She is now hardly able to judge for herself.
I am, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3933; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 76, pp. 311-3

13. TELEGRAM TO FINANCE MEMBER,
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Express Telegram

DETENTION C AMP,

February 16, 1944
HONOURABLE F INANCE MEMBER1
NEW DELHI
HAVING
READ
YOUR
STATEMENT 2
ABOUT
SALT
CLAUSE
IN
GANDHI-IRWIN
AGREEMENT
I
BEG
TO
DRAW
YOUR
ATTENTION
TO
NOTICE
THAT
WAS
ISSUED
BY
SIR
GEORGE
SCHUSTER3
EXPLAINING
IMPLICATIONS
OF
THAT
CLAUSE.
ANY
AMENDMENT
SHOULD
BE
IN
TERMS
OF
THAT
NOTICE.4

GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts: Home Department, Special Branch (6), File No.
13-II, p.5
1

Sir Jeremy Raisman
In the Central Legislative Assembly, on February 14, during a debate on
Finance Member’s “Bill to consolidate and amend the law relating to Central Excise
duties, as reported by the Select Committee”, T. T. Krishnamachari (Nationalist),
moved an amendment for according legislative sanction for the practice which had
been in existence ever since Gandhi-Irwin Pact of March 3, 1931, in respect of salt
manufactured for domestic purposes. The Finance Member had stated “that the
Government did not intend to retract from the Irwin-Gandhi Pact, would be quite
willing to meet the desire of the House, if there was no technical difficulty”. He had
also added, “that the Government did not intend to levy any duty on salt collected or
manufactured for domestic purposes by any person” (The Indian Annual Register,
1944, Vol. I, p. 134).
3
The then Finance Member, for Gandhiji’s subsequent correspondence with
him and his successor, Sir James Grigg, in 1934.
4
The addressee’s reply, forwarded through the Government of Bombay by their
letter dated February 25, read: “After discussion in the House it was felt best course to
leave matters to be regulated as hitherto by notification issued in 1931, terms of
which have been scrupulously observed by Government. No amendment was therefore
made.”
2

12

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

14. LETTER TO LORD WAVELL
February 17, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

Although I have not had the pleasure of meeting you, I address
you on purpose as “dear friend”. I am looked upon by the
representatives of the British Government as a great, if not the greatest,
enemy of the British. Since I regard myself as a friend and servant of
humanity including the British, in token of my goodwill I call you, the
foremost representative of the British in India, my “friend”.
2. I have received in common with some others, a notice
informing me, for the first time, why I am detained and conferring on
me the right of representation against my detention. I have duly sent
my reply 1 , but I have as yet heard nothing from the Government. A
reminder2 , too, has gone after a wait of thirteen days.
3. I have said some only have received notices because out of
the six of us in this camp, only three have received them. I presume
that all will receive them in due course. But my mind is filled with the
suspicion that the notices have been sent as a matter of form only, and
not with any intention to do justice. I do not wish to burden this letter
with argument. I repeat what I said3 in the correspondence with your
predecessor, that the Congress and I are wholly innocent of the
charges brought against us. Nothing but an impartial tribunal to
investigate the Government case, and the Congress case against the
Government, will bring out the truth.
4. The speeches recently made on behalf of the Government in the Assembly on the release motion,4 and on the gagging
1

Vide “Letter to Secretary, Home Department, Government of India”, 24-11944 and “Letter to Secretary, Home Department, Government of India”, 7-2-1944.
2
ibid
3
In letters to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of India;
vide “Letter to Secretary, Home Department, Government of India”, 15-7-1943
4
On February 8, the Central Legislative Assembly rejected Lalchand
Navalrai’s resolution for releasing political prisoners. In his speech, Sir Reginald
Maxwell, Home Member, had said that “if Government were asked to release the
Congress leaders, they must be assured that the results would be beneficial to India
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

13

order 1 on Shri Sarojini Devi, I consider to be playing with fire. I
distinguishbetween defeat of Japanese arms and Allied victory. The
latter must carry with it the deliverance of India from the foreign
yoke. The spirit; of India demands complete freedom from all foreign
dominance and would, therefore, resist Japanese yoke equally with
British or any other. The Congress represents that spirit in full
measure. It has grown to be an institution whose roots have gone deep
down into the Indian soil. I was, therefore, staggered to read that
Government were satisfied with things as they were going. Had they
not got from among the Indian people the men and money they
wanted? Was not the Government machinery running smooth? This
self satisfaction bodes ill for Britain, India and the world, if it does not
quickly give place to a searching of hearts in British high places.
5. Promises for the future are valueless in the face of the world
struggle in which the fortune of all nations and therefore of the whole
of humanity is involved. Present performance is the peremptory need
of the moment, if the war is to end in world peace and not be a
preparation for another war bloodier than the present, if indeed there
can be a bloodier. Therefore real war effort must mean satisfaction of
India’s demand. “Quit India” only gives vivid expression to that
demand and has not the sinister and poisonous meaning attributed to
it without warrant by the Government of India. The expression is
charged with the friendliest feeling for Britain in terms of the whole of
humanity.
6. I have done. I thought that, if I claim to be a friend of the
British, as I do, nothing should deter me from sharing my deepest
thoughts with you. It is no pleasure for me to be in this camp, where
all my creature comforts are supplied without any effort on my part,
when I know that millions outside are starving for want of food. But I

and to war effort” (The Indian Annual Register, 1944, Vol. I, p. 131).
1
On February 7, the Assembly rejected A. C. Datta’s adjournment motion to
censure the Government on this order under Defence of India Rules passed on Sarojini
Naidu on January 26. Sir Reginald Maxwell who defended the prohibitory order
had, in his speech, argued that it was unfair to give freedom of speech to Mrs. Naidu
which was denied to her colleagues of the Congress Working Committee.

14

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

should feel utterly helpless, if I went out and missed the food by
which alone living becomes worth while.1
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Correspondence with Mr. Gandhi, p. 118. Also C.W. 10505. Courtesy: India
Office Library

15. LETTER TO INSPECTOR-GENERAL
OF PRISONS, BOMBAY
DETENTION C AMP,

February 18, 1944
THE INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF P RISONS
P OONA
SIR,

Vaidyaraj Shri Shiv Sharma regretfully informs me that having
put forth all the resources at his disposal, he has been unable to
produce a condition in Shri Kasturba so as to give him hope of final
recovery. As his was simply a trial to see whether Ayurvedic treatment
could yield better result, I have now asked Drs. Gilder and Nayyar to
resume the suspended treatment. Dr. Mehta’s assistance was never
suspended and will be continued till recovery or the end.
I want to say that the Vaidyaraj has been most assiduous and
attentive in the handling of this most difficult case, and I would have
willingly allowed him to continue his treatment, if he had wished to do
so. But he would not continue it, when his last prescription failed to
bring about the result he had expected. Drs. Gilder and Nayyar tell
me that they would like to receive the benefit of the Vaidyaraj’s
assistance in the matter of sedatives, purgatives and the like. These
have proved effective both from the doctors’ and the patient’s point
of view. I hope that the Government will have no objection to the
Vaidyaraj continuing to come in for the purpose. Needless to say,
under the altered circumstances, he will not be required for night
1

In his reply dated February 25, Lord Wavell said that the question of issuing
notices “will be looked into at once”. He also forwarded a copy of his speech of
February 17 to the Legislature which, according to him, stated “his point of view”.
For Gandhiji’s comments on the speech, vide “Letter to Lord Wavell”, 9-3-1944.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

15

duty. I cannot refrain from regretfully saying that had there not been
the wholly avoidable delay in granting my request for allowing the
services of the Vaidyaraj and Dr. Mehta, the patient’s condition might
not have been so near the danger point as it is today. I am well aware
that nothing happens outside the Divine Will, but man has noother
means of interpreting that Will apart from the results he can see.
I am, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3934; also Bombay Secret Abstracts: Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 76, p. 335

16. CABLE TO SHIRINBAI JALBHOY RUSTOMJEE1
Immediate

[On or before February 21, 1944]

S HIRINBAI JALBHOY R USTOMJEE
BOX 1610, D URBAN
S OUTH AFRICA
THANKS.
CONTINUE

BA
THEIR

SLOWLY
WORK.

GOING.

MANILAL

SUSHILA

SHOULD

LOVE.

BAPU
Bombay Secret Abstracts: Home Department, Special Branch (6). File No.
76-I, 1943-44

1

This was in reply to the addressee’s cable to Kasturba Gandhi which read:
“Regret your serious illness. If you desire Manilal-Sushila’s presence, can arrange
their passage. We pray for you and Bapu’s blessings.” The Home Department,
Government of India, which communicated the cable to Bombay Government, in a
telegram, said: “Following cable for Mrs. Gandhi received from Durban. . . . Please
convey urgently to Gandhi with intimation that Government are prepared to give him
facilities for reply which you should pass or refer to us, if necessary.”
2
The cable was forwarded by Bombay Government to Home Department,
Government of India, on February 21, 1944.

16

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

17. REQUEST TO GOVERNMENT ON
KASTURBA’S FUNERAL 1
[February 22, 1944] 2
1. Body should be handed over to my sons and relatives which
would mean a public funeral without interference from Government.
2. If that is not possible, funeral should take place as in the case
of Mahadev Desai3 ; and if the Government will allow relatives only to
be present at the funeral, I shall not be able to accept the privilege
unless all friends who are as good as relatives to me are also allowed to
be present.
3. If this also is not acceptable to the Government, then those
who have been allowed to visit her will be sent away by me and only
those who are in the camp (detenus) will attend the funeral. It has
been, as you will be able to bear witness, my great anxiety not to make
any political capital out of this most trying illness of my life
companion. But I have always wanted whatever the Government did,
to be done with good grace which, I am afraid, has been hitherto
lacking. It is not too much to expect that now that the patient is no
more, whatever the Government decide about the funeral will be done
with good grace.
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, p. 233

1

Kasturba Gandhi died at 7.35 p.m. Pyarelal explains that this was “Gandhiji’s
reply taken down by the Inspector-General of Prisons in writing from dictation at
8.07 p.m. on February 22, 1944, in answer to his inquiry on behalf of the
Government as to what Gandhiji’s wishes in the matter were”. Vide also “Letter to
Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of India”, 4-3-1944.
2
ibid.
3
On August 15, 1942, when Gandhiji lit the pyre on the Aga Khan Palace
grounds

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

17

18. LETTER TO ADDITIONAL SECRETARY, HOME
DEPARTMENT, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DETENTION C AMP,

February 26, 1944
THE ADDITIONAL S ECRETARY
HOME DEPARTMENT
SIR,

I have read the speech of the Hon’ble the Home Member in the
Assembly on the debate 1 arising out of the ban on Shrimati Sarojini
Devi. The speech has reference, among other things, to the
correspondence between Shrimati Mirabai and myself and the
Government’s refusal to publish that correspondence. The following
is the relevant portion of the speech:
She (Shrimati Sarojini Devi) refers, and the point has been raised in
this debate, to a letter said to have been written2 by Miss Slade to Mr. Gandhi
and Mr. Gandhi’s reply 3 and I have been asked why no publicity was given to
that letter. That letter was written and answered long before the Congress
leaders were placed in detention. If Mr. Gandhi had wished to give publicity to
that letter, he was perfectly free to do it himself. But it was a confidential
communication addressed to him, and I do not see any reason why Government
should disclose a communication of that nature. I might say that it would not
help the Congress case, if it were disclosed.
Then it has been said that Mrs. Naidu wishes to defend the Congress
from the implication of being pro-Japanese. Government have never at any
time, either here or at home, charged the Congress with being pro-Japanese.
Well, the allusion to that in the booklet called Congress Responsibility refers
to a statement quoted from Pandit Nehru himself. I have not the time to quote it
at length but if Hon’ble Members will refer to the quotation given in the
Congress Responsibility pamphlet, they will easily find the passage in
question.

Assuming that the report is correct, it makes strange reading.
Firstly, as to the non-publication by me of this correspondence
1

Vide 5th footnote of “Letter to Lord Wavell”, 17-2-1944.
Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of India”
sub-title [I} and [J], 5-7-1943.
3
ibid
2

18

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

between Shrimati Mirabai and myself, surely the publication
wasunnecessary until the charge of my being pro-Japanese was spread
abroad. Secondly, why do the Government feel squeamish about
publishing “confidential” correspondence when both the
correspondents have specially invited publication?
Thirdly, I do not understand the reluctance of the Government
to publish the correspondence when, according to the Hon’ble the
Home Member, the correspondence will not serve the Congress case.
Fourthly, the Government seem intentionally or unintentionally to
have suppressed the very relevant fact that Shrimati Mirabai wrote to
Lord Linlithgow drawing attention to the libellous propaganda in the
London Press at the time, containing allegations that I was
pro-Japanese, which allegations she invited him to repudiate. Her
letter 1 to Lord Linlithgow enclosed copies of the correspondence
referred to and asked for its publication. It was written on December
24, long before the Government publication entitled Congress
Responsibility which bears the date February 13, 1943, appeared.
Fifthly, as to Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru’s alleged statement before the
Working Committee, I have already made it clear in my reply2 to the
Government pamphlet that it was wholly wrong on their part to make
use of the unauthorized notes of the discussions at the Allahabad
meeting of the Working Committee, after Pandit Nehru’s emphatic
repudiation3 published in the daily Press.
It is difficult for me to understand the Hon’ble the Home
Member’s speech and the Government’s persistence in making
charges and innuendoes against Congress people whom they have put
in custody and thus effectively prevented from answering those
charges. I hope, therefore, that the Government will at the very least
see their way to publish the correspondence referred to, namely,

1

Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of India”
sub-title [H], 5-7-1943.
2
Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 5-7-1943, point 17 and Appendix “Concluding Chapters of Congress
Responsibility for the disturbances, 1942-43”, after 4-3-1944.
3
ibid.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

19

Shrimati Mirabehn’s letter to Lord Linlithgow of the 24th December,
1942, together with the enclosures.1
I am, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
Correspondence with Mr. Gandhi, pp. 116-7

19. SILENCE-DAY NOTE TO MANU GANDHI
[February 27, 1944] 2
CHI. MANUDI,

Did you sleep well? Yesterday I drafted a long letter about
keeping you and Prabhavati here, but I kept thinking over the matter
the whole of last night and could get no sleep. In the end, I saw light.
We cannot make such a request. Aren’t we prisoners after all? We
must endure our separation. You are a sensible girl. Forget your
sorrow. You want to do great service. Stop crying and live cheerfully.
Learn what you can after leaving the jail. After all this service that you
have given, you are bound to prosper no matter what happens.
More after my silence ends. I am your mother. Am I not? It is
enough, if you understand this much.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Preserve this letter.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIV
1

Sir Richard Tottenham, in his reply dated March 11, said: “. . . I am directed to
say, the Government do not think that any useful purpose would be served by
publishing the correspondence in question. So far as the Government are concerned,
there is the statement in the Home Member’s speech: ‘Government have never at
anytime, either here or at home, charged the Congress with being pro-Japanese.’ They
do not see how this can be regarded as ‘Government persistence in making charges and
innuendoes against Congress people’. So far as Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru is concerned, I
am again to refer you to para 2 of my letter of October 14, 1943, in which it was made
clear that he did not, in his public statement, repudiate the words in the Congress
Responsibility pamphlet to which you take exception in paragraph 18 of your letter
of July 15, 1943. There can, therefore, be no question of Government’s having made
use of that passage after his repudiation of it.
2
According to an entry in the addressee’s diary, the note was received on this
date.

20

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

20. SILENCE-DAY NOTE TO MANU GANDHI
AGA KHAN P ALACE ,

February 27, 1944
I feel much worried about you. You are a class by yourself. You
are good, simple-hearted and ever ready to help others. Service has
become dharma with you. But you are still uneducated and silly also.
If you remain illiterate, you will regret it, and if I live long, I too will
regret it. I will certainly miss you, but I do not like to keep you near
me as that would be weakness and ignorant attachment. I am quite
sure that at present you should go to Rajkot. You will get there the
benefit of the company of Narandas; such good company you will get
nowhere else. You will learn there besides music, the art of working
methodically. You will learn Gujarati, too. There may be other
benefits also. If you spend at least one year there, your slovenliness
will disappear. If you go to Karachi or anywhere else you like after
you have become more mature, you will get all that you want.
Gurudayalji1 will not be in Karachi for long now. Hence you will get
only education there. That also will be useful, of course. Living in the
company of so many girls will also do you good. But what you will
get in Rajkot you will get nowhere else.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIV

21. LETTER TO ADDITIONAL SECRETARY, HOME
DEPARTMENT, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DETENTION C AMP,

March 4, 1944
THE ADDITIONAL S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
(HOME DEPARTMENT), N EW DELHI
SIR,

In reply to a question in the Assembly, the Hon’ble the Home
Member is reported to have said:2
1

Gurudayal Malik
Reginald Maxwell was answering K. C. Neyogi in the Central Legislative
Assembly on March 2.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

21

The provision for the expenses of Mr. Gandhi and those detained with him in
the Aga Khan’s Palace amounted to about Rs. 550 a month.

In my letter1 to you dated 26th October last I remarked as follows:
The huge place in which I am being detained with a big 2 guard around me, I
hold to be waste of public funds. I should be quite content to pass my days in
any prison.

The Hon’ble the Home Member’s reply quoted above is a
sharp reminder to me that I should have followed up the remark just
referred to by me. But it is never too late to mend. I, therefore, take up
the question now.
The expenses on behalf of my companions and me are not
merely Rs. 550 per month. The rent of this huge place (of which only
a portion is open to us) and the expense of maintaining the big outer
guard and an inner staff consisting of Superintendent, jamadar and
sepoys have got to be added. And to this a large squad of convicts
from Yeravda to serve the inmates and to look after the garden.
Virtually the whole of this expense is, from my point of view, wholly
unnecessary; and when people are dying of starvation, it is almost a
crime against Indian humanity. I ask that my companions and I be
removed to any regular prison Government may choose. In
conclusion, I cannot conceal from myself the sad thought that the
whole expense of thiscomes from taxes collected from the dumb
millions of India.
I am, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, pp. 268-9

22. LETTER TO ADDITIONAL SECRETARY, HOME
DEPARTMENT, GOVERNMENT INDIA
DETENTION C AMP,

March 4, 1944
THE ADDITIONAL S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
(HOME DEPARTMENT) , N EW DELHI
SIR,

It is not without regret and hesitation that I write about my dead
wife. But truth demands this letter.
1
Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 26-10-1943.
2
The letter of October 26, however, has “large”.

22

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

According to the newspapers, Mr. Butler 1 is reported to have
said in the House of Commons on 2nd March, 1944:
“...She was receiving all possible medical care and attention, not only from
her regular attendants but from those desired by her family....”

Whilst I gratefully acknowledge that the regular attendants did
all they could, the help that was asked for by the deceased or by me
on her behalf, when at all given, was given after a long wait, and the
Ayurvedic physician, was permitted to attend only after I had to tell 2
the prison authorities that, if I could not procure for the patient the
help that she wanted or I thought necessary, I should be separated
from her, I ought not to be made a helpless witness of the agonies she
was passing through. And even then I could make full use of the
Vaidyaraja’s services only after I wrote a letter 3 to the Inspector
General of Prisons of which a copy is hereto attached. My application4
for Dr. Dinshaw was made in writing on 27th January, 1944. The
deceased herself had repeatedly asked the Inspector-General of
Prisons for Dr. Dinshaw Mehta’s help during practically a month
previous to that. He was allowed to come only from February 5, 1944.
Again, the regular physicians Drs. Nayyar and Gilder made a written
application5 for consultation with Dr. B. C. Roy of Calcutta on31st
January, 1944. The Government simply ignored their written request
and subsequent oral reminders.
Mr. Butler is further reported to have said:
No request for her release was received and the Government of India
believe it would be no act of kindness to her or her family to remove her from
the Aga Khan’s Palace.

Whilst it is true that no request was made by her or by me (as
satyagrahi prisoners it would have been unbecoming), would it not
have been in the fitness of things, if the Government had at least
offered to her, me and her sons to release her? The mere offer of
release would have produced a favourable psychological effect on her
1

R. A. Butler, President of the Board of Education, had expressed British
Government’s regret at the death of Kasturba Gandhi.
2
Vide “Letter to Inspector-General of Prisons, Bombay”, 16-2-1944.
3
Vide “Letter to Inspector-General of Prisons, Bombay”, 18-2-1944.
4
Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 27-1-1944.
5
Vide Appendix “Letter from Dr. Nayyar and Dr. Gilder to Col. Bhandari”,
31-1-1944.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

23

mind. But unfortunately no such offer was ever made.
As to the funeral rites, Mr. Butler is reported to have said:
I have information that the funeral rites took place at the request of Mr.
Gandhi in the grounds of the Aga Khan’s Palace at Poona, and friends and
relatives were present.

The following1 , however, was my actual request which the
Inspector-General of Prisons took down in writing from dictation at
8.07 p.m. On February 22, 1944. . . .
Government will perhaps admit that I have scrupulously avoided
making any political capital out of my wife’s protracted illness and
the difficulties I experienced from the Government. Nor do I want to
make any now. But in justice to her memory, to me and for the sake
of truth, I ask the Government to make such amends as they can. If
the newspaper report is inaccurate in essential particulars or the
Government have a different interpretation of the whole episode, I
should be supplied with the correct version and the Government
interpretation of the whole episode. If my complaint is held to be just,
I trust that the amazing statement said to have been made in America
by the Agent 2 of the Government of India in U.S.A. will be duly
corrected.3
I am, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, pp. 233-5

1

Vide “Request to Government on Kasturba’s Funeral”, 22-2-1944.
Girija Shankar Bajpai who was reported to have told the American public that
“at various times, the Government considered her (Kasturba’s) release for health
reasons but she wished to remain with her husband, and her wishes were respected.
Furthermore, living on the premises, she has the benefit of care from an eminent
doctor living on the premises” (History of the Indian National Congress, Vol. II,
p. 776).
3
For the Government’s reply, vide Appendix “Letter from Additional
Secretary, Home Department, Governmentof India”, 21-3-1944. Vide also “Letter to
Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of India”, 1-4-1944.
2

24

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

23. LETTER TO GEN. CANDY
DETENTION C AMP,

March 7, 1944
1

DEAR GENERAL CANDY ,

Pray accept my deep sympathy in your bereavement. I know
from my own recent experience what the death of a life-long partner
must mean to the survivor.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 2343.

24. LETTER. TO LORD WAVELL
March 9, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I must thank you for your prompt reply 2 to my letter of 17th
February. At the outset, I send you and Lady Wavell my thanks for
your kind condolences on the death of my wife. Though for her sake
I have welcomed her death as bringing freedom from living agony, I
feel the loss more than I had thought I should. We were a couple
outside the ordinary. It was in 1906 that after mutual consent and
after unconscious trials we definitely adopted self-restraint as a rule of
life. To my great joy this knit us together as never before. We ceased
to be two different entities. Without my wishing it, she chose to lose
herself in me. The result was she became truly my better half. She was
a woman always of very strong will which, in our early days, I used to
mistake for obstinacy. But that strong will enabled her to become
quite unwittingly my teacher in the art and practice of non-violent
non-co-operation. The practice began with my own family. When I
introduced it in 1906, in the political field, it came to be known by the
more comprehensive and specially coined name of satyagraha.
Whenthe course of Indian imprisonment commenced in South Africa,
Shri Kasturba was among the civil resisters. She went through greater
physical trials than I. Although she had gone through several
1
2

Surgeon-General, Government of Bombay
Vide footnote 1 of “Letter to Lord Wavell”, 17-2-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

25

imprisonments, she did not take kindly to the present incarceration
during which all creature comforts were at her disposal. My arrest
simultaneously with that of many others, and her own immediately
following, gave her a great shock and embittered her. She was wholly
unprepared for my arrest. I had assured her that the Government
trusted my non-violence, and would not arrest me unless I courted
arrest myself. Indeed the nervous shock was so great that after her
arrest she developed violent diarrhoea and, but for the attention that
Dr. Sushila Nayyar, who was arrested at the same time as the deceased,
was able to give her, she might have died before joining me in this
detention camp. My presence soothed her, and the diarrhoea stopped
without any further medicament. Not so the bitterness. It led to
fretfulness ending in painfully slow dissolution of the body.
2. In the light of the foregoing, you will perhaps understand the
pain I felt when I read in the papers the statement made on behalf of
the Government, which I hold was an unfortunate departure from
truth regarding her who was precious to me beyond measure. I ask
you please to send for and read the complaint 1 in the matter which I
have forwarded to the Additional Secretary to the Government of
India (Home Department). Truth is said to be the first and the heaviest
casualty in war. How I wish in this war it could be otherwise in the case
of the Allied powers!
3. I now come to your address which you delivered before the
Legislature and of which you kindly sent me copy. When the
newspapers containing the address were received, I was by the bedside
of the deceased. Shri Mirabai read to me the Associated Press report.
But my mind was elsewhere. Therefore the receipt of your speech in a
handy form was most welcome. I have now read it with all the
attention it deserves. Having gone through it, I feel drawn to offer a
few remarks, all the more so, as you have observed that the views
expressed by you “need not be regarded as final”. May this letter
lead to a re-shaping of some of them!
4. In the middle of page two, you speak of the welfare of
the“Indian peoples”. I have seen in some Viceregal pronouncements
the inhabitants of India being referred to as the people of India. Are
the two expressions synonymous?

1

Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 4-3-1944

26

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

5. At page thirteen, referring
self-government by India, you say:

to

the

attainment

of

I am absolutely convinced not only that the above represents the
genuine desire of the British people, but that they wish to see an early
realization of it. It is qualified only at present by an absolute determination to
let nothing stand in the way of the earliest possible defeat of Germany and
Japan; and by a resolve to see that in the solution of the constitutional
problem full account is taken of the interests of those who have loyally
supported us in this war and at all other times—the soldiers who have served
the common cause; the people who have worked with us; the Rulers and
populations of the States to whom we are pledged; the minorities who have
trusted us to see that they get a fair deal. . . but until the two main Indian
parties at least can come to terms, I do not see any immediate hope of
progress.

Without reasoning out I venture to give my paraphrase of your
pronouncement. ‘We, the British, shall stand by the Indian soldier
whom we have brought into being and trained for consolidating our
rule and position in India, and who, by experience, we have found can
effectively help us in our wars against other nations. We shall also
stand by the Rulers of the Indian States, many of whom are our
creation, and all of whom owe their present position to us, even when
these Rulers curb or actually crush the spirit of the people whom they
rule. Similarly shall we stand by the minorities whom too we have
encouraged and used against the vast majority when the latter have at
all attempted to resist our rule. It makes no difference that they (the
majority) seek to replace it by a rule of the will of people of India
taken as a whole. And in no case will we transfer power unless Hindus
and Muslims come to us with an agreement among themselves.’ The
position taken up in the paragraph quoted and interpreted by me is no
new thing. I regard the situation thus envisaged as hopeless, and I
claim in this to represent the thought of the man in the street. Out of
the contemplation of this hopelessness was born the anguished cry of
“Quit India”. What I see happening in this country day after day
provides a complete vindication of the “Quit India” formula as
defined by me in my considered writings.
6. I note, as I read your speech, that you do not regard the
sponsors of the formula of “Quit India” as outcastes to be shunned
by society. You believe them to be high-minded persons. Then
treatthem as such and trust their interpretation of their own formula
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

27

and you cannot go wrong.
7. After developing the Cripps offer you have said at page
sixteen in the middle of the paragraph:
. . . the demand for release of those leaders who are in detention is an
utterly barren one until there is some sign on their part of willingness to
co-operate. It needs no consultation with anyone or anything but his own
conscience for anyone of those under detention to decide whether he will
withdraw from the Quit India resolution and the policy which had such tragic
consequences, and will co-operate in the great tasks ahead.

Then again, reverting to the same subject you say on pages
nineteen and twenty:
There is an important element which stands aloof, I recognize how
much ability and high-mindedness it contains; but I deplore its present policy
and methods as barren and unpractical. I should like to have the co-operation
of this element in solving the present and the future problems of India. If its
leaders feel that they cannot consent to take part in the present Government of
India, they may still be able to assist in considering future problems. But I see
no reason to release those responsible for the declaration of August 8, 1942,
until I am convinced that the policy of non-co-operation and even of
obstructions has been withdrawn—not in sack-cloth and ashes that helps no
one, but in the recognition of a mistaken and unprofitable policy.

8. I am surprised that you, an eminent soldier and man of
affairs, should hold such an opinion. How can the withdrawal of a
resolution, arrived at jointly by hundreds of men and women after
much debating and careful consideration, be a matter of individual
conscience? A resolution jointly undertaken can be honourably,
conscientiously and properly withdrawn only after joint discussion
and deliberation. Individual conscience may come into play after this
necessary step, not before. Is a prisoner ever free to exercise his
conscience? Is it just and proper to expect him to do so?
9. Again, you recognize “much ability and high-mindedness”
in those who represent the Congress organization and then deplore
their present policy and methods as “barren and unpractical”. Does
not the second statement cancel the first? Able and high-minded men
may come to erroneous decisions, but I have not before heard such
people’s policy and methods being described as “barren and
unpractical”. Is it not up to you to discuss the pros and cons of their
policy with them before pronouncing judgment, especially when they
are also admittedly representatives of millions of their people? Does it
28

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

become an all-powerful Government to be afraid of the consequences
of releasing unarmed men and women with a backing only of men
and women equally unarmed and even pledged to non-violence?
Moreover why should you hesitate to know their minds and reactions?
10. Then you have talked of the “tragic consequences” of the
“Quit India” resolution. I have said enough in my reply1 to the
Government pamphlet Congress Responsibility, etc., combating the
charge that the Congress was responsible for those consequences. I
commend the pamphlet and my reply to your attention, if you have
not already seen them. Here I would just like to emphasize what I have
already said. Had Government stayed action till they had studied my
speeches and those of the members of the Working Committee,
history would have been written differently.
11. You have made much of the fact that your Executive
Council is predominantly Indian. Surely their being Indians no more
makes them representatives of India than non-Indians. Conversely it is
quite conceivable that a non-Indian may be a true representative of
India, if he is elected by the vote of the Indian people. It would give
no satisfaction even if the head of the Indian Government was a
distinguished Indian not chosen by the free vote of the people.
12. Even you, I am sorry, have fallen into the common error of
describing the Indian forces as having been recruited by “voluntary
enlistment”. A person who takes to soldiering as a profession will
enlist himself wherever he gets his market wage. Voluntary enlistment
has come to bear by association a meaning much higher than that
which attaches to an enlistment like that of the Indian soldier. Were
those who carried out the orders at the Jallianwala massacre
volunteers? The very Indian soldiers who have been taken out of India
and are showing unexampled bravery will be ready to point their rifles
unerringly at their own countrymen at the orders of the British
Government, their employers. Will they deserve the honourable name
of volunteers?
13. You are flying all over India. You have not hesitated to
go among the skeletons 2 of Bengal. May I suggest an interruptionin
your scheduled flights and a descent upon Ahmednagar and the Aga
Khan’s Palace in order to probe the hearts of your captives? We are
1
Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 5-7-1943.
2
The reference is to the Bengal famine.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

29

all friends of the British, however much we may criticize the British
Government and system in India. If you can but trust, you will find us
to be the greatest helpers in the fight against Nazism, Fascism,
Japanism and the like.
14. Now I revert to your letter of the 25th February. Shri
Mirabai and I have received replies to our representations. The
remaining inmates have received their notices. The reply received by
me I regard as a mockery; the one received by Shri Mirabai is an
insult. According to the report of the Home Member’s answer to a
question in the Central Assembly, the replies received by us seem to
be no replies. He is reported to have said that the stage “for the review
of the cases had not yet arrived. Government at present were only
receiving representations from prisoners.” If the representations in
reply to the Government notices are to be considered merely by the
executive that imprisoned them without trial, it will amount to a farce
and an eye-wash, meant perhaps for foreign consumption, but not as
an indication of a desire to do justice. My views are known to the
Government. I may be considered an impossible man—though
altogether wrongly I would protest. But what about Shri Mirabai? As
you know, she is the daughter of an Admiral1 and former
Commander-in-Chief of these waters. But she left the life of ease and
chose instead to throw in her lot with me. Her parents, recognizing her
urge to come to me, gave her their full blessings. She spends her time
in the service of the masses. She went to Orissa at my request to
understand the plight of the people of that benighted land. That
Government was hourly expecting Japanese invasion. Papers were to
be removed or burnt, and withdrawal of the civil authority from the
coast was being contemplated. Shri Mirabai made Chaudwar (Cuttack)
airfield her headquarters, and the local military commander was glad
of the help she could give him. Later she went to New Delhi and saw
General Sir Alan Hartley2 and General Molesworth 3 , who both
appreciated her work and greeted her as one of their own class and
caste. It, therefore, baffles me to understand her incarceration.The
only reason for burying her alive, so far as I can see, is that she has
committed the crime of associating herself with me. I suggest your
1

Sir Edmond Slade
Commander-in-Chief, India, since March, 1942
3
Lt.-Gen. George Noble Molesworth, Deputy Chief of General Staff, India,
1941-42; Secretary, Military Department, India Office, 1943-44
2

30

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

immediately releasing her, or your seeing her and then deciding. I
may add that she is not yet free from the pain for the alleviation of
which the Government sent Captain Simcox1 at my request. It would
be a tragedy if she became permanently disabled in detention. I have
mentioned Shri Mirabai’s case because it is typically unjust.
15. I apologize to you for a letter which has gone beyond the
length I had prescribed for myself. It has also become very personal
and very unconventional. That, however, is the way my loyalty to
friends works. I have written without reservation. Your letter and your
speech have given me the opening. For the sake of India, England and
humanity, I hope, you will treat this as an honest and friendly, if
candid, response to your speech.
16. Years ago, while teaching the boys and girls of Tolstoy Farm
in South Africa, I happened to read to them Wordsworth’s “Character
of the Happy Warrior”. It recurs to me as I am writing to you. It will
delight my heart to realize that warrior in you. There will be little
difference between the manners and methods of the Axis powers and
the Allies, if the war is to resolve itself into a mere trial of brute
strength.2
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, pp. 256-62

25. LETTER TO ARDESHIR E. KATELI
DETENTION C AMP,

March 16, 1944
DEAR KHAN BAHADUR,

You have given me the following memorandum:
Mr. Gandhi may reply to messages from his relatives, and Government
will, if he so wishes, inform other correspondents that their messages have
been delivered to him.

In reply, I beg to say that unless I can write to senders of
condolences irrespective of relatives, I would not care to exercise the
1

Of the Royal Army Medical Corps
For Lord Wavell’s reply, vide Appendix “Letter from Lord Wavell”,
29-3-1944.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

31

facility Government have been pleased to give me. As to the other
messages, I have no wish in the matter beyond what I have said above.
From the newspaper notices of the messages sent to me, I observe that
all the messages sent to me have not yet been handed to me. From the
memorandum I infer that they will be handed to me in due course. I
should perhaps mention that the messages received and given to me
during my son Devadas’s presence were handed by me to him.
Yours, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
KHAN BAHADUR KATELI
S UPERINTENDENT, D ETENTION C AMP
From a photostat: G.N. 3935, also Bombay Secret Abstracts: Home
Department, Special Branch (6), File No. 67, p. 13

26. LETTER TO ADDITIONAL SECRETARY, HOME
DEPARTMENT, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DETENTION C AMP,

March 20, 1944
THE ADDITIONAL S ECRETARY
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA (H.D.)
NEW DELHI
SIR,

I have read with painful interest the answer given on behalf of
the Government in the Central Assembly about the facilities, medical
and otherwise, given to my deceased wife. I had hoped for a better
response to my letter 1 of 4th March, 1944, assuming that it was in
Government’s hands when the answer was given. Beyond the
admission2 that the deceased was never offered release, the statement
makes no amends for the misrepresentations pointed out in that letter.
On the contrary, it adds one more by stating that “trained nurses were
made available. . . .” No trained nurse was asked for or supplied. An
ayah, however, was sent in the place of Shri Prabhavati Deviand Shri
Kanu Gandhi for whom my wife had asked. The ayah left in less than
1

Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 4-3-1944.
2
In the Central Legislative Assembly, on March 13, by Sir Olaf Caroe,
Secretary, External Affairs, in his reply to K. S. Gupta

32

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

a week because she found herself ill-fitted for the work entrusted to
her. Only then, and after some further delay and repeated requests
about Shri Kanu Gandhi, were the two allowed to come. The facilities
have been recited as if they had been granted promptly and willingly.
The fact is that most of them, when not refused, were granted as if
grudgingly and when it was almost too late. My object in writing this
letter is not to make the complaint (though quite legitimate) that the
facilities came too late. My complaint is that in spite of my
representation of 4th instant, the Government instead of giving the
naked truth have seen fit to give a varnished version.1
I am,
Yours, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, pp . 242-3. Also C.W.
10507. Courtesy: India Office Library

27. LETTER TO ADDITIONAL SECRETARY, HOME
DEPARTMENT, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DETENTION C AMP,

April 1, 1944
THE ADDITIONAL S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT
OF INDIA

(HOME DEPARTMENT)

NEW DELHI
SIR,

I beg to acknowledge your letter 2 of 21st March handed to me
on the 27th. As to extra medical aid, I wish to state that the first
request for the services of Dr. Dinshaw Mehta was made by the
deceased verbally to Col. Advani 3 some time in December last.
When repeated verbal requests met with little or no response, I
had to make a written request4 , addressed to the Government of
1
In his reply dated March 30, the addressee stated that the “reply given in the
Legislative Assembly . . . was substantially correct”.
2
Vide Appendix “Letter from Additional Secretary, Home Department,
Government of India”, 21-3-1944.
3
He was the Government doctor officiating for Col. Bhandari.
4.
Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 27-1-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

33

India, dated January 27, 1944. On the 31st of January, I senta
reminder1 to the Government of Bombay (Appendix A), and so did
Drs. Nayyar and Gilder in a letter2 addressed to the Inspector-General
of Prisons (Appendix B). I wrote3 again on the 3rd of February to the
Government of Bombay (Appendix C), who sent a reply 4 (Appendix
D) which resulted in Dr. Dinshaw being brought in on the 5th of
February last, i.e., after an interval of over six weeks from the date of
the first request. And even when permission was granted, restrictions
were placed upon the number of the visits and the time he was to take
in administering treatment. It was not without difficulty that these
restrictions were later relaxed and then removed.
As to the reference in the letter under reply to Dr. Gilder, I
showed it to him. The result was the attached letter5 addressed by him
to the Government which he has asked me to forward (Appendix E).
While it shows that Dr. Gilder never expressed the opinion attributed
to him, it does not alter the tragic fact that Dr. Dinshaw’s services were
held up for over six weeks.
The question of calling in a non-allopath was definitely and
formally raised before the Inspector-General of Prisons by my son
after his visit to this camp early in December last.6 On Col. Bhandari
mentioning to me my son’s request to him, I told him that if my son
thought that non-allopathic treatment should be tried, the Government
should permit it. While the consideration of my son’s request was on
the anvil, the patient’s condition began to worsen and she herself
pressed for the services of an Ayurvedic physician. She spoke to both
the Inspector General of Prisons and Col. Shah several times, again
with no result. In despair I wrote 7 to the Government of India on
1

Vide “Letter to Secretary, Home Department, Government of Bombay”,
31-1-1944.
2
Vide Appendix “Letter from Dr. Nayyar and Dr. Gilder to Col. Bhandari”,
31-1-1944.
3
Vide “Letter to Secretary, Home Department, Government of Bombay”,
3-2-1944.
4
Vide footnote 2 of “Letter to Secretary, Home Department, Government of
Bombay”, 31-1-1944.
5
Vide Appendix “Letter from Dr. Gilder to Additional Secretary, Home
Department, Governmentof India”, 31-3-1944.
6
Vide “Talk wqith Devdas Gandhi”, 26-1-1944.
7
Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 27-1-1944.

34

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

January 27, 1944. On the 31st of January, the Superintendent of this
camp enquired on behalf of the Government, among other things,
whether the deceased had any particular Ayurvedic physician in mind
to which I replied 1 in writing, it being my silence day (Appendix F).
As no relief was forthcoming as a result, and the patient’s condition
admitted of no delay, I sent an urgent letter to the Government of
Bombay on the 3rdof February (Appendix C). It was on the 11th of
February that a local vaidya was sent and on the 12th that Vaidyaraj
Sharma was brought in. Thus there was an interval of more than eight
weeks between the first request for non-allopathic aid and of actual
bringing in of that aid.Before Vaidyaraj Sharma came, I had been
asked to give a written undertaking2 (which I gladly did) that I
absolved the Government of all responsibility about the result of his
treatment (Appendix H). The Vaidyaraj was thus in sole charge of the
case for the time being. One would have thought that a physician in
sole charge of a patient would have all such facilities of visiting and
watching the patient as he considered necessary. And yet there was no
end to the difficulties in getting these facilities for him. These have
been alluded to in the enclosure3 to my letter 4 of March 4, 1944, and
in Appendix G5 . . .
All this time the patient was passing through great sufferings
and her condition was deteriorating so rapidly that every delay
weighed against chances of her recovery. Whether the delays and
difficulties experienced by the patient and me were caused by one
department of the Government or another, or even by the Government
doctors, the responsibility surely rests with the Central Government.
I note that the Government have maintained complete silence
over the written request (which was reinforced by subsequent verbal
reminders) of Drs. Nayyar and Gilder to call Dr. B. C. Roy in
consultation, and have not even condescended to give their reasons for
not granting the request.
Similarly the letter under reply is silent about the discrepancy,

1

Vide “Silence-Day Note to Superintendent, Detention Camp”, 31-1-1944.
Vide “Note to Inspector-General of Prisons, Bombay”, 11-2-1944.
3
Vide “Letter to Inspector-General of Prisons, Bomaby”, 18-2-1944.
4
Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 4-3-1944.
5
Vide “Letter to Inspector-General of Prisons, Bombay”, 14-2-1944.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

35

pointed out by me in my letter1 dated March 20, 1944, in the Hon. the
Home Member’s statement in the Assembly that trained nurses were
in attendance. The fact is that they never were. Let me add here that
nurses of the deceased’s choice who were permitted were brought
after considerable delay, especially Shri Kanu Gandhi.
I hope, after a calm perusal of this bare recital of facts and
of the relevant copies of correspondence attached hereto, it will
be conceded that the claim of the Government of India that “they did
everything possible” to ensure that the deceased received all the
treatment that I wished during her illness is not justified.Much less can
Mr. Butler’s claim be justified. For, he went further when he said,
“she was receiving all possible medical care and attention, not only
from her regular attendents, but from those desired by her family.”
Does not the statement of the Government of Bombay (Appendix D),
“Government have decided that no outside doctors should be allowed
unless the Government Medical Officer considers that it is absolutely
necessary for medical reasons” contradict the above claims?
On the question of release, and the report received by the
Government of India of a “private conversation” my son had with his
mother in this connection, a prisoner can have no “private”
conversation with anybody from outside. Therefore, so far as I am
concerned, the Government are free to make use of the conversation
after verification (usual and obligatory in such cases) by my son. In
any case the Government would have been absolved from all blame, if
they had made an offer of release and laid on me the burden of
deciding what was “best and kindest” for her. As to the arrangement
for the funeral, my letter to the Government dated March 4, 1944,
embodying my actual request, which the Inspector-General of Prisons
took down in writing from dictation, speaks for itself. It, therefore,
astonishes me that on “enquiries” made by the Government, they
were “informed” that I had “no special preference between the first
two alternatives” mentioned in my letter. The information given to
the Government is wholly wrong. It is inconceivable that, given the
freedom of choice, I could ever be reconciled to the cremation of a
dear one being performed in a jail compound (which this camp is
today) instead of the consecrated cremation ground.
It is not pleasant or easy for me to write about such personal
matters to the Government. But I do so in this case for the sake of the
memory of one who was my faithful partner for over sixty-two years.
1

36

Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I leave it to the Government to consider what could be the fate
of other prisoners not so circumstanced as Shri Kasturba was.1
I am,
Yours, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI

Enclosures: A to H
From a photostat: G.N. 3936; also Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the
Government, pp. 237-40

28. LETTER TO ADDITIONAL SECRETARY, HOME
DEPARTMENT, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DETENTION C AMP,

April 2, 1944
THE ADDITIONAL S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
NEW DELHI
SIR,

This is in continuation of my letter 2 of yesterday’s date to the
Government of India. For, after handing the letter to the
Superintendent of the camp, on looking at the papers I came upon the
following startling statement in The Hindustan Times, 30-3-1944:
New Delhi, Wednesday [March 29, 1944]—Today in the Council of
State, Lala Ramsarandas asked whether and when Mahatma Gandhi had asked
Government to permit the eminent Ayurvedic physician Pandit Shiv Sharma to
take up the treatment of Mrs. Gandhi.
The Home Secretary, Mr. Conran-Smith, replying said the first definite request
for Pandit Sharma’s services was made to the Government of India on February
9 and was granted on February 10. He understood that Pandit Sharma paid his
first visit a day or two later. —A.P.I.

The fact is that Vaidyaraj Shiv Sharma’s name was first
submitted to the Government on 31st January, 1944, and not on the
9th February. But my letter of yesterday will show further that the first

1
2

Vide also the following item.
Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

37

request for a non-allopathic physician was made early in December
1943. May I look for correction of the statement referred to?1
I am,
Yours, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, p. 242

29. LETTER TO M. G. BHANDARI
DETENTION C AMP,

April 2, 1944
DEAR COL. BHANDARI,

In the Government of India’s letter 2 to me dated March
21 ,1944, there occur these two passages:
3

It was on January 28 that they were first informed that Mrs. Gandhi had
asked for the services of Dr. Dinshaw Mehta. . . . If Dr. Dinshaw Mehta was
not called in earlier, it was due to the view originally expressed by both Col.
Bhandari and Dr. Gilder that his services would not be of any use, but he was
summoned as soon as the Government doctors revised that opinion.
The arrangements for the funeral were understood here to be in
accordance with your wishes. The Government made enquiries on the point and
were informed that you had no special preference between the first two
alternatives mentioned in your letter4 .

Dr. Gilder has no recollection of his having given the opinion
attributed to him.5 I have never expressed indifference as to whether
the deceased was cremated in the consecrated public cremation
ground or in the jail compound which this camp is. Can you please
throw light on the discrepancies?
Yours, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, p. 241
1

For the Government’s reply to this letter and the preceding one, vide 2nd
footnote of “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Governmentof India”,
13-4-1944
2
Vide Appendix “Letter from Additional Secretary, Home Department,
Governmentof India”, 21-3-1944.
3
The source, however, has “31”.
4
Vide “Request to Government on Kasturba’s Funeral”, 22-2-1944.
5
Vide also Appendix “Letter from Dr. Gilder to Additional Secretary, Home
Department, Governmentof India”, 31-3-1944.

38

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

30. LETTER TO LORD WAVELL
April 9, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter 1 of 28th March received by me on the 3rd
instant. Please accept my thanks for it.
I take up the general matter first. You have sent me a frank
reply. I propose to reciprocate your courtesy by being perfectly
frank. Friendship to be true demands frankness even though it may
some time appear unpleasant. If anything I say offends you, please
accept my apology in advance.2
It is a pity that you have refused to deal with important points
raised in my letter.
Your letter is a plea for co-operation by the Congress in the
present administration, and failing that, in planning for the future. In
my opinion, this requires equality between the parties and mutual
trust. But equality is absent and Government distrust of the Congress
can be seen at every turn. The result is that suspicion of Government
is universal. Add to this the fact that Congressmen have no faith in the
competence of the Government to ensure India’s future good. This
want of faith is based upon bitter experience of the past and present
conduct of the British administration of India. Is it not high time that
you co-operate with the people of India through their elected
representatives instead of expecting co-operation from them?
All this was implied in the August resolution. The sanction
behind the demand in the resolution was not violence, but self
suffering. Anyone, be he Congressman or other, who acted against
this rule of conduct had no authority to use the Congress name for his
action. But I see that this resolution repels you as it did Lord
Linlithgow. You know that I have joined issue on the point. I have
seen nothing since to alter my view. You have been good enough to
credit me with “intelligence”, “experience”, and “acumen”. Let me
say that all these three have failed to make me realize that the effect of
1

Vide Appendix “Letter from Lord Wavell”, 28-3-1944.
According to The Transfer of Power, Vol. IV, p. 898, in his report to the
Secretary of State for India, the addressee said: “Gandhi has sent me an ill-tempered
letter in reply to mine. I am sending you a copy and am not continuing the
correspondence.”
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

39

the Congress resolution “must be to hamper the prosecution of the
war”. The responsibility for what followed the hasty arrests of
Congressmen must rest solely on the Government. For, they invited
the crisis, not the authors of the resolution.
You remind me that you were Commander-in-Chief at the time.
How much better it would have been for all concerned if confidence
in the immeasurable strength of arms had ruled your action instead of
fear of a rebellion! Had the Government stayed their hand at thetime,
surely all the bloodshed of those months would have been avoided.
And it is highly likely that the Japanese menace would have become a
thing of the past. Unfortunately it was not to be. And so the menace is
still with us, and what is more, the Government are pursuing a policy
of suppression of liberty and truth. I have studied the latest ordinance
about the detenus, and I recall the Rowlatt Act of 1919. It was
properly called the Black Act. As you know, it gave rise to an
unprecedented agitation. That Act pales into insignificance before the
series of ordinances that are being showered from the Viceregal
throne. Martial Law in effect governs not one Province as in 1919, but
the whole of India. Things are moving from bad to worse.
You say, “it is clear to me that you had lost confidence in our ability
to defend India and were prepared to take advantage of our supposed
military straits to gain political advantage.” I must deny both the
charges. I venture to suggest that you should follow the golden rule,
and withdraw your statement and suspend judgment till you have
submitted the evidence in your possession to an impartial tribunal and
obtained its verdict. I confess that I do not make the request with
much confidence. For, in dealing with Congressmen and others,
Government have combined the prosecutor, judge and jailor in the
same person and thus made proper defence impossible on the part of
the accused. Judgments of courts are being rendered nugatory by
fresh ordinances. No man’s freedom can be said to be safe in this
extraordinary situation. You will probably retort that it is an exigency
of the war. I wonder !
As I visualize India today, it is one vast prison containing four
hundred million souls. You are its sole custodian. The Government
prisons are prisons within this prison. I agree with you that whilst you
hold the views expressed in your letter under reply, the proper place
for one like me is a Government prison. And unless there is a change
of heart, view and policy on the part of the Government, I am quite
40

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

content to remain your prisoner. Only I hope you will listen to the
request made by me through the proper channels to remove me and
my fellow-prisoners to some other prison where the cost of our
detention need not be even one tenth of what it is today.
As to my complaint1 about Mr. Butler’s statement and later the
Home Secretary’s, I have received two letters from the
HomeDepartment in reply. I am sorry to say, they have appeared to
me highly unsatisfactory. They ignore patent facts, and betray an
obstinate refusal to face truth even on a wholly non-political issue. My
correspondence with the Home Department continues. I invite your
attention to it, if you can spare the time and are interested in the
subject.
I am glad and thankful that Shri Mirabai’s (Miss Slade’s) case is
being considered in the light of what I say2 about her in my letter.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
HIS EXCELLENCY THE VICEROY
VICEROY’S C AMP
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, pp. 264-6, and
Correspondence with Mr. Gandhi, pp. 124-5. Also C.W. 10503. Courtesy: India
Office Library

31. NOTE TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
April 10, 1944
You must forget about Paramanand’s daughter. You can have
Ghia’s daughter if she is free. I cannot find a girl right away.
Moreover, my programme is never certain.
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1
Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 4-3-1944and 20-3-1944.
2
Vide “Letter to Lord Wavell”, 9-3-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

41

32. LETTER TO ADDITIONAL SECRETARY, HOME
DEPARTMENT, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DETENTION C AMP,

April 13, 1944
ADDITIONAL

S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

NEW DELHI
SIR,

I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter1 of 30th March,
received by me on the 6th of April. It is good proof to show how
ill-informed the Central Government were about the whole situation.
As to “trained nurses”, I draw attention to the statement made
on behalf of the Government that they “were made available for a
short period”. That my wife preferred an ayah to a trained nurse is
hardly relevant to the consideration whether trained nurses were in
fact supplied. Therefore that statement seems to me clearly to demand
public adjustment.
I hope to have satisfactory reply2 regarding other matters
contained in my letter3 of April 1, 1944.
I am, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, pp. 244-5

1
Vide lst footnote of “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department,
Government of India”, 20-3-1944.
2
The Government’s reply dated April 29, read: “The Government of India have
read with regret your letters of April 2 and 13. They believe that no impartial
judgment would support the complaints you have made against them. At the same
time they feel that it is impossible to expect from you in your bereavement a fair
recognition of their endeavours to do all that was reasonably possible to meet the
requests that reached them and that no useful purpose would be served by continuing
the correspondence.”
3
Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 1-4-1944.

42

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

33. LETTER TO ADDITIONAL SECRETARY, HOME
DEPARTMENT, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DETENTION C AMP,

April 21, 1944
THE ADDITIONAL S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
(HOME DEPARTMENT)
NEW DELHI
SIR,

I wrote to you on the 4th March1 requesting the Government to
transfer the party of detenus in this camp to a prison where the
expense entailed in our detention here may be materially reduced.
I request an early decision in the matter.
I am, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, p. 269

34. LETTER TO SECRETARY, HOME DEPARTMENT,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
DETENTION C AMP,

May 3, 1944
S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
(HOME DEPARTMENT)
BOMBAY
SIR,

Shri Jamnadas Gandhi came in yesterday. When I was asked
whether I would see him, I had consented so as to cause as little
disappointment as possible. For the future, my position is that whilst I
would be glad to see any relatives who might secure Government
permission, I must not break the rule I have made for myself that I
would deny myself the pleasure, so long as the Government restrict
1

Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 4-3-1944.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

43

the permission only to relatives and exclude the members of the
Ashram or those who stand in the same category. I regard them as
equal with my relatives. The Government were good enough to grant
such permission during my fast last year1 without any untoward result
so far as I know. Can they do likewise during my convalescence2
which bids fair to be protracted?
I am, etc .,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3937

35. LETTER TO SECRETARY , HOME DEPARTMENT,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
DETENTION C AMP,

7.45 a.m., May 6, 1944
S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
(HOME DEPARTMENT)
BOMBAY
SIR,

I have been told by the Inspector-General of Prisons that the
party of detenus in this camp is to be discharged at 8 a.m., today. I
wish to put on record the fact that by reason of the cremation of the
corpses of Shri Mahadev Desai and then my wife, the place of
cremation which has been fenced off becomes consecrated ground.
The party has daily visited the ground twice and offered floral tributes
to the departed spirits and said prayers. I trust that the plot will be
1

From February 10 to March 3, 1943
According to The Transfer of Power, Vol. IV, pp. 948-9, in a cable dated May
4, 1944, to the Secretary of State for India, the Viceroy reported: “Latest reports show
progressive deterioration in Gandhi’s anaemia, blood-pressure and kidney functions,
all of which in opinion of Dr. B. C. Roy shared by Surgeon-General Candy, have
tendency to produce coronary or cerebral thrombosis. . . . This is a case in which I
consider we must be guided by medical opinion. Deterioration in Gandhi’s health
appears such that his further participation in active politics is improbable and I have
no doubt that death in custody would intensify feeling against Government. . . . I am
accordingly instructing Bombay Government to release Gandhi unconditionally at 8
a.m. On Saturday, 6th May, with announcement that release is entirely on medical
grounds and am informing all Governors accordingly.” For the British Premier
Winston Churchill’s displeasure at Viceroy’s decision, vide footnote 1 of “Letter
from Lord Wavell”, 15-8-1944.
2

44

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

acquired by the Government with the right of way to it through H. H.
the Aga Khan’s grounds so as to enable those relatives and friends
who wish to visit the cremation ground whenever they like. Subject to
the permission of the Government, I would like to arrange for the
upkeep of the sacred spot and daily prayers. I hope that the necessary
steps will be taken by the Government in terms of my prayer. My
address will be: Sevagram, via Wardha (C.P.)1
I am, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3938

36. TELEGRAM TO M. M. MALAVIYA2
May 6, 1944
AT

A

ADD

STROKE
TWENTY-FIVE

YOU
TO

HAVE

CUT

OFF

TWENTY-FIVE

YEARS.3

YOURS!

From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal. Also Mahatma Gandhi—The
Last Phase, Vol. I, Book One, p. 14

1

According to Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, p. 271, the
Government’s reply dated July 7, 1944, stated: “ . . . it is legally impossible for
Government to acquire the site compulsorily under the Land Acquisition Act.
Government considers that the matter is one for private negotiations between you and
His Highness the Aga Khan. . . . Your request has been communicated to His Highness
the Aga Khan and is now understood to be under his consideration. Government
understands that he has no objection, in the mean while, to the relatives of Mr.
Gandhi and Mr. Mahadev Desai and any other person suggested by you going through
the Palace grounds to the place of cremation. . .”
2
Pyarelal explains that this was in reply to the addressee’s telegram which
read: “Thank God. He has heard prayers of vast millions and set you free to breathe
fresh air. Have every hope. He will let you live a hundred years to serve motherland
and mankind.”
3
Pyarelal says: “The allusion was to Gandhiji’s last speech in the All-India
Congress Committee before his arrest in August 1942, when he had said that he would
like to live and serve the country for 125 years.”
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

45

37. TELEGRAM TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI1
P ARNAKUTI,
YERAVDA HILL , P OONA ,

May 6, 1944
C HI . R AJAGOPALACHARI
BAZULULLAH R OAD
MADRAS
YOUR

WIRE.

PHYSICIAN

HEAL

THYSELF.

LOVE.

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal. Also Mahatma Gandhi—The
Last Phase, Vol. I, Book One, p. 14

38. TELEGRAM TO DR. KHAN SAHEB
P ARNAKUTI, P OONA ,

May 6, 1944
DR. K HAN S AHEB
P ESHAWAR

2

BADSHAH’S 3

WIRE

HEALTH.

LOVE.

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

According to Pyarelal, the addressee “whose health was never too robust” had
inquired about Gandhiji’s health and expressed joy at his release.
2
He led the Congress Ministry in the North-West Frontier Province, which
resigned on November 7, 1939, along with other Congress Ministries.
3
Addressee’s brother, Abdul Ghaffar Khan

46

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

39. FRAGMENT OF A LETTER
[After May 6, 1944] 1
. . . I had condemned it in my letter to Linlithgow without
waiting for evidence. Did you not see it ? In my very first letter 2
written in August the day before Mahadev passed away, I had
condemned all violence, including the violence that had taken place. It
had been the Government’s design to get me to admit responsibility
for the violence which would justify their repression, and show them
to be innocent before the world. I did not oblige. Nothing would
make me do so. Being in jail how could I be expected to know about
it ? So when I heard about Kishorelal, I immediately lodged a protest.
You must try to understand this. Think over it. I have not been guilty
of the slightest error. None but the Government says that I committed
an error. That was a false charge. I had condemned all acts of
violence. They wanted me to accept the Government’s version and
condemn popular violence and condemn it from the jail. I refused to
do that. There is no difference between what I am saying now and
what I said in 1942. On the basis of the evidence available today, I
have condemned certain acts of violence. When that information was
given to me without any evidence, I promptly and unequivocally
protested. Did you not read my reply to the Government ? I have not
gone back upon it. I believe that all type of killing and burning is
bad. So, it taught a lesson at least to those who killed and burnt, did it
not ? The fact is that my correspondence was released only after the
fast. You should read those letters. I have certainly condemned the
violence. But how can I admit without any direct evidence that people
resorted to such and such acts ?
[From Gujarati]
Manavtana Prahari- Pannalal Jhaveri, p. 35

1

The letter appears to have been written following Gandhiji’s release from jail
on May 6, 1944, when certain instances of mass action during the Quit India
Movement were judged in retrospect in terms of violence and non-violence; vide also
“Discussion with a Friend”, after 6-5-1944; “Letter to Annada Babu Chowdhary”,
9-6-1944.
2
Vide “Letter to Lord Linlithgow”, 14-8-1942.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

47

40. DISCUSSION WITH A FRIEND1
[After May 6, 1944] 2
Gandhiji questioned the statement that sabotage could be part of the
non-violent programme or that it was derivable from the principle of ahimsa as he
understood it. The friend, however, persisted that sabotage had come to stay whether
one liked it or not.
GANDHIJI: Irresponsible prophesying leads to nowhere. The real
question is where we stand, what our attitude towards it is going to be.
FRIEND: Was destruction of Government property violence? You say that
nobody has a right to destroy any property not his own. If so, is not Government’s
property mine? I hold it is mine and I may destroy it.

There is a double fallacy involved in your argument. In the first
place, conceding that Government property is national property—
which today it is not—I may not destroy it because I am dissatisfied
with the Government. But even a national government will be unable
to carry on for a day if everybody claimed the right to destroy
bridges, communications, roads, etc., because he disapproved of some
of its activities. Moreover the evil resides not in bridges, roads, etc.,
which are inanimate objects but in men. It is the latter who need to be
tackled. The destruction of bridges, roads, etc., by means of explosives
does not touch this evil but only provokes a worse evil in the place of
the one it seeks to end. 3 To sterilize it needs not destruction but
self-immolation of the purest type, which would demonstrate that the
authorities might break but would not be able to bend a will that has
1

The discussion appeared under the title “A Pointer for the Future” by Pyarelal
who explains that “a friend” had asked Gandhiji “How is the cutting of telegraph wires
contrary to the principle of ahimsa?” And another who met him some time after he
left the Aga Khan Palace had posed the problem thus: “There are two schools of
thought amongst our youth today. One school holds, and openly says, that as a
programme of action ahimsa is played out. It has done its work, which was to awaken
the masses, and has set the stage for the final struggle for independence. In this
struggle, force of arms cannot be excluded. The other school, while professing belief
in ahimsa, says that there is room for modification and further elaboration in its
technique. They aver that the next phase of our struggle would be characterized by
organized sabotage on an extensive scale.”
2
ibid
3
The rest of the paragraph is from Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I,
Book One, p. 38

48

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

resigned itself to the God of truth.
I agree that the evil is within ourselves, not in the bridge which can be used for
a good purpose as well as an evil one. I also agree that its blowing up provokes
counter-violence of a worse type. But it may be necessary from a strategic point of
view for the success of the movement and in order to prevent demoralization.

It is an old argument. One used to hear it in old days in defence
of terrorism. Sabotage is a form of violence. People have realized the
futility of physical violence, but some people apparently think that it
may be successfully practised in its modified form as sabotage. 1 It
lacked the quality of non-violence and could not take the place of
full-fledged armed conflict. . . . We have to deal with a power which
takes pride in not recognizing defeat. In the early part of the British
rule there were powerful risings. In several places the British were
actually beaten. But they won in the end. A British statesman used to
say, “I do not believe in wooden guns.” National struggles could not
be won by “wooden guns”.
It is my conviction that the whole mass of people would not
have risen to the height of courage and fearlessness that they have, but
for the working of full non-violence. How it works we do not yet fully
know. But the fact remains that under non-violence we have
progressed from strength to strength even through our apparent
failures and set-backs. On the other hand, terrorism resulted in
demoralization. Haste leads to waste.
You characterized the “Quit India” movement as a non-violent rebellion. Is not
non-violent rebellion a programme of seizure of power?

No. A non-violent rebellion is not a programme of seizure of
power. It is a programme of transformation of relationship ending in
a peaceful transfer of power. . . . It will never use coercion. Even those
who hold contrary views will receive full protection under it.2
We have found that a person who has had a schooling in violent activity
comes nearer to true non-violence than one who has had no such experience.

That can be true only in the sense that having tried violence
again and again he has realized its futility. That is all. Would you
maintain also that a person who has had a taste of vice is nearer to
virtue than the one who had none? For, that is what your argument
amounts to.3
1

The rest of the paragraph is from Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I,
Book One, p. 38
2
These two paragraphs are reproduced from Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase,
Vol. I, Book One, pp. 38-9.
3
ibid
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

49

It is no secrecy, if the person concerned is boldly prepared to face the
consequences of his action. He resorts to secrecy in order to achieve his object. He
can refuse to take any part in subsequent interrogations during his trial. He need not
make a false statement.

No secret organization, however big, could do any good.
Secrecy aims at building a wall of protection round you. Ahimsa
disdains all such protection. It functions in the open and in the face of
odds, the heaviest conceivable. We have to organize for action a vast
people that have been crushed under the heel of unspeakable tyranny
for centuries. They cannot be organized by any other than open,
truthful means. I have grown up from youth to 76 years in
abhorrence of secrecy. There must be no watering down of the ideal.
Unless we cling to the formula in its fulness, we shall not make any
headway.
I know we have not always lived up to our ideals. There have
been grave lapses. Had our instruments been less imperfect, we would
have been nearer our goal. But in spite of our temporizing with our
ideal, non-violence has worked like a silent leaven among the dumb
millions. That does not mean that we can afford to go on like this for
ever. We cannot remain static. We must move forward or we shall slide
back.
Are you of opinion then, that the August resolution caused a set-back in the
struggle for independence; that all the heroism and courage which our people showed
in the course of it was useless?

No, I do not say that. In the historical process, the country will
be found to have advanced towards freedom through every form of
struggle, even through the August upheaval. All that I have said is that
the progress would have been much greater, if we had shown the
non-violent bravery of my conception. In this sense the sabotage
activity has retarded the country’s freedom. I have the highest
admiration for the courage, patriotism and spirit of self-sacrifice of
people, say, like Jayaprakash Narayan. But Jayaprakash cannot be my
ideal. If I had to give a medal for heroism, it would go not to him but
to his wife who, though simple and unlearned in politics, typifies in
her person the power of satyagraha in its purest form before which
even Jayaprakash has to bow. What I have said about the August
upheaval is not by way of judgment upon the past—I have
consistently refused to condemn it—but as a guidance for the future.
Our people have faith in non-violence but they do not know how to make it

50

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

dynamic. What is the reason for this failure?

By hammering away at it through painful years, people have
begun to see that there is a potency in non-violence, but they have not
seen it in all its fulness and beauty. If they had responded to all the
steps that had to be taken for the effective organization of
non-violence and carried out in their fulness the various items of the
eighteen fold constructive programme, our movement would have
taken us to our goal. But today our minds are confused because our
faith in constructive work is so weak. I know, one must push forth
undaunted by difficulties.1
Harijan, 10-2-1946

41. ANSWER TO VISITORS
P OONA ,

May 7, 1944
Do not worry about my health or my life which is in the hands
of God. He, in His infinite mercy, would do what best pleased Him.2
The Hindu, 8-5-1944

42. TELEGRAM TO T. B. SAPRU
P ARNAKUTI, P OONA ,

May 8, 1944
S IR TEJ BAHADUR S APRU
ALLAHABAD
THANKS.
GOD

TRYING

DISPOSES.

HOPE

UTMOST
YOU

FOR
ARE

SPEEDY

RECOVERY.

BUT

WELL.

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

For a discussion on the same subject with a woman worker and Appa Pant,
vide Appendix “discussion on Underground Activities”, after 31-3-1944.
2
According to the report, “these were the words which Gandhiji told all those
who asked him about his health”. For the Viceroy’s brief report on Gandhiji’s health,
vide “Letter to Secretary, Home Department, Government of Bombay”, 3-5-1944.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

51

43. TELEGRAM TO AMTUSSALAAM
P OONA ,

May 9, 1944
AMTUSSALAAM
C ARE HUMAYUN KABIR
26 AMIR ALI AVENUE
C ALCUTTA
PROGRESSING

SLOWLY.

SEE

DAILY

BULLETINS.

GET

WELL.

LOVE.

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 475

44. TELEGRAM TO FRANK MORAES
P ARNAKUTI, P OONA ,

May 9, 1944
MORAES
C ARE “TIMES OF INDIA”
BOMBAY
THANKS.

PLEASE

WAIT

A

WHILE.

WILL

WRITE

WHEN

READY.

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

45. TELEGRAM TO PRESIDENT, MYSORE STATE
CONGRESS 1
[Before May 13, 1944] 2
THANKS

BUT

INADVISABLE

TO

GO

THERE.

The Bombay Chronicle, 15-5-1944
1

According to the report, the telegram was in reply to the addressee’s
“invitation to Gandhiji to stay at Nandi Hill for recuperation and rest”. It appeared
under the date-line “Bangalore, May 13”.
2
ibid

52

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

46. TELEGRAM TO AMTUSSALAAM
BOMBAY,

May 13, 1944
AMTUSSALAAM
C ARE P IONEER BANK
C OMILLA
SLOWLY

PROGRESSING.

CONTINUE

YOUR

NO

EXCELLENT

CAUSE
WORK

1

ANXIETY.
WITH

EXPECT

REDOUBLED

YOU
ENERGY.

LOVE.

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 476

47. TELEGRAM TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
BOMBAY,

May 13, 1944
ANAND HINGORANI
S ADAR VILLA
F YZABAD R OAD
LUCKNOW
FORLORNNESS2

NO

COMPANION.

YOU

PERMISSIBLE.
CAN

COME

GOD
AFTER

OUR
EAR

ETERNAL
TREATMENT.

BAPU
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India, and Anand
T. Hingorani

1

In Bapuke Patra-8: Bibi Amtussalaamke Nam, the addressee explains that she
started working at Kasturba Seva Mandir, Borkamata, East Bengal, as soon as she got
this wire. Vide also “Letter to Amtussalaam”, 22-5-1944.
2
The addressee had lost his wife. Vide also “Letter to Anand T. Hingorani”,
“Letter to Anand T. Hingorani”, 2-6-1944.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

53

48. LETTER TO POTHAN JOSEPH
PALM BUN, J UHU,

May 13, 1944
DEAR POTHAN JOSEPH,

As you probably know Gandhiji asked the Government to provide him with
Dawn while he was in detention. And whenever it came–which was fairly regularly–he
perused it carefully. Since our coming here, however, he has been missing it. For,
naturally, the Government copy has ceased to come. He has, therefore, asked me to
request you to send him a copy of the Dawn regularly. In case it is not the practice of
your management to send it free to anybody, he says the subscription should be paid
by you out of your capacious pocket. You know well enough that Gandhiji has no
money to buy newspapers with.
Please send the back-numbers too as from the 1st of May, 1944. The address
should be as above until further notice.
With regards.
Yours sincerely,
PYARELAL
POTHAN J OSEPH, ESQ.
NEW DELHI
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

49. LETTER TO TEJ BAHADUR SAPRU
PALM BUN, J UHU,

May 14, 1944
DEAR SIR TEJ ,

I showed your letter to Gandhiji. He was sorry to learn about
your son’s serious illness 1 and he hopes that he will be completely
restored to health in the bracing climate of Kashmere. I shall let you

1
The addressee’s third son, Anand, was suffering from paralysis of the whole
body excepting the head and the neck after taking anti-rabies injections under medical
advice.

54

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

know as soon as he is declared free to undertake public work.
Yours sincerely,
PYARELAL
SIR TEJ BAHADUR SAPRU
19 ALBERT ROAD
ALLAHABAD
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

50. ANSWER TO A FRIEND1
[May 14, 1944] 2
If you had put me this question yesterday, I should have been at
a loss for an answer. But today I can say that it is well with me for,
during the night, I have got back what I had lost for a while—a living
faith in God. He is the Master Physician—the Great Healer.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book One, p. 15

51. NOTE TO ZAVERCHAND MEGHANI 3
[On or after May 14, 1944] 4
I think we have not met after our meeting at Ranpur. I heard
your songs today to my fill and was pleased. My stomach becomes
empty soon. You need not fear, therefore, that it will become overfull.5
[From Gujarati]
Li. Hun Avun Chhun, p. 454

1

Pyarelal explains that Gandhiji gave this answer during his convalescence at
Juhu, where he reached on May 11. Gandhiji was asked “how he was”.
2
From the contents it is presumed that Gandhiji gave the answer before he
commenced his 15-day silence at noon on this date. Vide also “Silence-Day Note to
Doctors”, 15-5-1944.
3
Zaverchand Meghani (1896-1947); Gujarati poet and author known for his
work on the folksongs of Gujarat.
4
According to the source, Gandhiji wrote this note on a silence-day at Juhu
after his release from the Aga Khan Palace at Poona. Gandhiji was released on May 6,
1944; he reached Juhu on May 11 and commenced a fortnight’s silence on May 14.
5
The addressee, at Gandhiji’s request, had sung some of his patriotic songs and
had probably said that he hoped he had not tired him.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

55

52. TELEGRAM TO INAYATULLAH KHAN
MASHRIQUI1
[On or before May 15, 1944] 2
MY

LAST

STILL

YEAR’S

STANDS

THE

QUESTION

SOON

AS

I

GET

AND

REQUEST3

TO

QAID-E-AZAM

JINNAH

I

BE

READY

DISCUSS

WILL

OF

HINDU-MUSLIM

TO

UNDERSTANDING

AS

BETTER. 4

The Hindu, 17-5-1944

53. SILENCE-DAY NOTE TO DOCTORS5
May 15, 1944] 6
The oppression was the fancied or real control of the doctors
rather than the mind. I believe I have freed myself from the doctors’
control. It does not matter if the freedom is imaginary or imagined.
The effect on me is the same. Whatever I may now do will be due
either to my weakness or strength. Next fortnight will show us all what
is in store for me and us. I am approaching the thing with a detached
mind. The difference is this. If I have the strength of mind, what I
announced yesterday will abide. If the mind has become weak I do
not know to what extent I shall go.
If the medicine is the least thing, you are safe and I am safe.
About visitors I shall be stricter than the doctors have [advised].
From a facsimile: Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book One,
between pp. 144 and 145
1

This was in reply to a telegram dated May 9 from the addressee, leader of
Khaksars, a militant Muslim organization. The addressee said: “Your release delightful.
Pray speedy recovery. Requesting Qaid-e-Azam Jinnah to make appointment for
meeting you as soon as possible in response to your last year’s request. Shall
accompany him if necessary. Please wire condition for possible interview.”
2
The telegram was reported under the date-line “Lahore, May 15”.
3
Vide “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 4-5-1943.
4
Vide also “Letter to Inayatullah Khan Mashriqui”, 18-6-1944.
5
Pyarelal, describing Gandhiji in his own words as ‘a very fiend of destruction
so far as papers and documents. . . were concerned’, explains that this and other such
“scribblings” preserved by him “give in part the story of Gandhiji’s tussle with
doctors”.
6
From the reference to the fortnight silence which Gandhiji “announced” on
May 14, 1944

56

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

54. TELEGRAM TO SUPERINTENDENT, CENTRAL
PRISON, AJMER
P ALM BUN , J UHU ,

May 17, 1944
S UPERINTENDENT
C ENTRAL P RISON
AJMER
JUST

HEARD

FROM

ON

HUNGER-STRIKE

MY

BEHALF

HE

WILL

BE

HE

MRS.
IN

SHOULD

PERMITTED

BALKRISHNA
JAIL. 1

YOUR
GIVE
WRITE

UP
TO

KAUL
PLEASE

HER
TELL

HUNGER-STRIKE.
ME

CAUSE

HUSBAND
HIM
I

ON
HOPE

FASTING.

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

55. TELEGRAM TO MRS. BALKRISHNA KAUL
P ALM BUN , J UHU ,

May 17, 1944
MRS. B ALKRISHNA KAUL
S REENAGAR R OAD
AJMER
HAVE

WIRED

SUPERINTENDENT.

WRITE

WHY

FASTING.

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
Balkrishna Kaul, All-India Congress Committee member, who was undergoing imprisonment from August 1942, began his fast on April 25, 1944. He gave it
up in response to Gandhiji’s appeal; vide also “Interview to the Press”, 14-7-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

57

56. CABLE TO “NEWS CHRONICLE1
PALM BUN, J UHU,

May 18, 1944
News Chronicle
LONDON
HAVING

LEARNT

FROM

AUTHORITIES

NO

ASSURANCE

CAN

BE

GIVEN

ABOUT

NON-MUTILATION MESSAGES. REGRET INABILITY COMPLY WITH YOUR REQUEST.

PYARELAL
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

57. LETTER TO ANNADA SHANKAR CHOWDHARI
May 18, 1944
Your letter is very good. You are right and so am I – each in his
own way. Therefore, you should do only what appeals to your heart
and head. I have learnt now not to blame anybody for his action so
long as that action has come from the heart as has yours and many
other co-workers’. You know my view. Weigh it and act according to
your light. This ought to satisfy you. Don’t expect orders from me
especially while I am on a sick-bed.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat : India Office Library and Records. Courtesy : The British
Library, London

1

58

The draft of this is in Gandhiji’s hand.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

58. LETTER TO R. R. DIWAKAR
May 18, 1944
Your letter is very good. You are right and so am I, each in his
own way.1 Therefore you should do only what appeals to your heart
and head. I have learnt now not to blame anybody for his action so
long as that action has come from the heart as has yours and many
other co-workers’.2 You know my view. Weigh it and act according to
your light. This ought to satisfy you. Don’t expect orders from me
especially while I am on a sick-bed.
Love.
BAPU
From a facsimile: Mahatma—Life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, Vol. VI,
between pp. 328 and 329

59. LETTER TO KUMI T. MANIAR
May 19, 1944
This is my second letter from the bed. The first letter was to
Durga3 . I always think about you. I am able to write only today. I wish
you would get well. But if you have got to go on suffering, I also wish
you freedom from that living death. Life and death are not in the
hands of doctors and physicians. God has kept those things only in
His hands. So, either way, we should be calm. God will protect the
boys. And then, God has given you a sister as strong as Bali4 .
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and
Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1
In Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book One, p. 35, Pyarelal
explains that some of the underground workers, of whom the addressee was one, had
been “forced to the same conclusion” as was expressed in Gandhiji’s advice to them;
vide also Appendices “Discussion on Underground Activities”, after 31-3-1944 and
“Discussion with Underground Workers”, after 31-3-1944.
2
According to Pyarelal, R. R. Diwakar had reported to Gandhiji: “Possibly my
trying to remain outside influenced me in not trying to dissuade workers from evading
arrest after they had done some action. It became a part of the technique of dislocation
activities to go on doing things without being arrested.”
3
Durga Desai
4
Balibehn Adalaja

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

59

60. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
JUHU ,

May 20, 1944
MY DEAR BROTHER,

Bapa 1 just informs me of your loss. 2 Why should I be the only
loser through death of a dear one. My sympathy in abundance, if
your philosophy stands in such need.
I feel like being in a wilderness. The so-called freedom jars. But
God is our help. And so I take heart.
With love.
Yours,

LITTLE BROTHER
From a photostat: G.N. 8821; also Letters of the Right Honourable V. S.
Srinivasa Sastri, pp. 358-9

61. LETTER TO M. R. JAYAKAR3
JUHU ,

May 20, 1944
DEAR DR. JAYAKAR,

The country expects much from me. I do not know how you
feel about this release. I am not at all happy. I feel even ashamed. I
should not have fallen ill. I tried hard not to, but failed at length. I feel
that they will imprison me as soon as I am declared free from the
present weakness. And, if they do not arrest me, what can I do? I
cannot withdraw the August resolution. As you have very properly
said, it is innocuous. You may differ about the sanction. It is the
breath of life for me. I am silent till 29th. Meanwhile shall I send

1
2

Amritlal V. Thakkar, Secretary, Harijan Sevak Sangh
The reference is to the death of the addressee’s brother, V. S. Ramaswami

Sastri.
3

This appeared in The Bombay Chronicle, 1-6-1944, with the following note
by Pyarelal: “In view of the garbled and unauthorized version in a newspaper,
Gandhiji has asked me to release for publication the full text of his letter to Dr.
Jayakar. . . . Gandhiji hopes that no deeper meaning would be read into the letter
which was not meant for publication and was necessarily brief.”

60

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Pyarelal to you? That, too, depends upon your health.
I know you are none too well.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhi-Jayakar Papers: File No. 826, p. 1. Courtesy: National Archives of
India

62. LETTER TO VIJAYA M. PANCHOLI
JUHU ,

May 20, 1944
CHI. VIJAYA,

From today I am exercising the liberty of writing a few letters.2 I
am in Juhu till the 29th at any rate. Then, maybe three weeks, in
Poona. The silence will end on the 29th. But do come over here.
Perhaps it may be difficult to accommodate you here. I am staying in
a hut. You may, therefore, stay somewhere else. I am helpless. In
Sevagram all of you could have been accommodated. I am glad that
Nanabhai3 has been released. About me it is as you say.
Blessings to all of you from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7148. Also C.W. 4640. Courtesy:
Vijaya M. Pancholi

1

The addressee’s reply dated May 21 read: “Thank you for your letter. It shows
the anguish you are feeling. If I can be of the slightest use in helping to ease it, I
shall be most happy. Please don’t trouble to send Pyarelal to me. I am now
sufficiently well to come and see you at Juhu, if your doctors will permit such a visit.
Please let me know what your wishes are.”
2
The Government had laid a condition, while Gandhiji was in jail, that he
could not write to anyone besides his family. So he took a vow not to write any letter
for twenty-one months. This was one of the “few letters” that Gandhiji wrote after the
fulfilment of the vow.
3
Nrisimhaprasad Kalidas Bhatt, Principal, Lok Bharati, Sanosara
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

61

63. LETTER TO DURGA M. DESAI
JUHU ,

May 20, 1944
CHI. DURGA 1 ,

I may be regarded as crippled for the present. God does not
allow even a Mahatma’s pride to last. These lines are for all. Once I
start writing letters everyone expects one from me, but before I can
satisfy their wish, maybe I will be there. Write to me in detail. Let all
those who wish to write do so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIII

64. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
JUHU ,

May 20, 1944
CHI. NARANDAS,

I went carefully through your Annual Report. I have not yet
started writing anything. I have written only three letters to invalids.
But Daridranarayana is the greatest invalid in the world. You are one
of His matchless devotees dedicated exclusively to His service. You
celebrate the Rentia Baras2 on the occasion of my birthday and every
year you make your plan of service more rigorous. This year the test
will be the hardest so far. May you succeed in it. This time, while in
jail, I read about Marx and whatever literature I could get about the
great experiment in Russia. What a great difference between that
experiment and our spinning wheel? There also, as in India, the whole
nation is invited to join in the yajna. But the experiments there and
here are as different from each other as East from West or North from
South.
1

Wife of Mahadev Desai
Sacrificial spinning initiated by the addressee in honour of Gandhiji’s
birthday; this was also called Rentia Yajna meaning non-stop spinning beginning on
Bhadarva Vad 12, Gandhiji’s date of birth according to Vikram era, usually falling in
the second half of September, to October 2. Vide also “Notes”, 12-7-1939.
2

62

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

What a difference between our spinning-wheel and their
machines driven by steam or electricity? But all the same I prefer the
snail-like speed of the spinning-wheel. The spinning-wheel is a
symbol of ahimsa, and ultimately it is ahimsa that will triumph. If,
however, we who claim to be its votaries are weak, we shall dishonour
ourselves and discredit ahimsa. Your activity is excellent indeed. But
you should now introduce some new changes in it. There is a science
of the spinning-wheel, as there is one of machines. We have still not
fully evolved the “technique” of the spinning-wheel. It requires deep
study.
Just as knowledge without faith is useless, even so faith without
knowledge is blind.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8607. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

65. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
JUHU ,

May 20, 1944
CHI. NARANDAS,

I drafted an article for you while lying in bed. I was afraid that it
would have too many corrections, but that did not happen. I didn’t
feel like making a fair copy with ink. If you want any changes to be
made in the draft, send it back to me. I will think over your revisions
and will make a fair draft and send it over to you. We have enough
time still.
Secondly, you know Manu (Jaisukhlal’s); she has created a very
good impression on me. I have not seen any other girl in our family
with the same spontaneous spirit of service that she has. The devotion
with which she looked after Ba has captured my heart. She would like
to remain with me, but I do not wish it. I am a broken reed just now
and, therefore, can give her nothing. The others are busy with their
work. And what can they give her now? Her education must go on
regularly. That can be done only if she is with you. She is not the type
of girl whose presence will irritate you. She is simple-hearted. She is
dull in her studies, has a good voice, and her health is fairly good. She

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

63

does not know how to take care of her health. She forgets everything
concerning herself while serving. She is obedient. She will do
whatever work you give her. I do wish that her knowledge of Sanskrit
and Gujarati should improve. I myself taught her the Gita. She can
recite it fairly well. Purushottam1 or you can help her to improve her
pronunciation still further. Jaisukhlal will pay whatever expenses on
her account you think reasonable to ask for. Send me a wire whether
or not you can receive her. I intend to send her with the first available
escort. If you are inclined to refuse, do not hesitate to say so.2
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I have not revised this.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8608. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

66. LETTER TO G. L. MEHTA
May 20, 1944
BHAI SHRI GAGAN,

I read your article on Mahadev. May I entrust you with a job for
Mahadev as long as you are here? Narayan 3 does not like to attend
school or college and whatever he has acquired has been through
Mahadev. I cannot, in my present condition, do anything for him.
After I get well, I do think, I will be free. As long as I am out [of jail]
he wishes to stay with me. It would be nice, if you can spare some time
for him. You can teach him economics, Sanskrit, Bengali, etc. If, on
reflection, you think it would overtax you, then please do not take it
up. I have made this request because I saw in your article your
overflowing love for Mahadev.
Secondly, Smt. Saudamini4 also kindly offered whatever help I
might need. If Chi. Uma5 does not care any more to be nursed as an
invalid, by all means let her give some time to me. I will think over
1

Addressee’s son
Vide also “Silence-Day Note to Manu Gandhi”, 27-2-1944.
3
Also called Bablo, son of Mahadev Desai
4
Addressee’s wife
5
Addressee’s daughter, Uma Randeria
2

64

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

what she can give. How much time and when, that also I will have to
think over. Maybe you two will not be able to spare time. I am only
hungry for the company of the good and, therefore, I accept whatever
is offered or is available from any source.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIII

67. TELEGRAM TO M. M. MALAVIYA
P ALM BUN , J UHU ,

May 21, 1944
BHARATBHUSHAN MALAVIYAJI
BENARES
YOUR

WIRE 1 .

KIND

JOURNEY.
END

SUGGEST

MONTH.

TILL

DOCTORS
TALKING
THEN

WON’T

COUNTENANCE

SUCH

THROUGH

MESSENGER

AFTER

COMPLETE

SILENCE.2

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

68. LETTER TO ASHFAQ HUSSAIN
JUHU ,

May 21, 1944
MY DEAR ASHFAQ,

Your welcome letter. I can write only love letters. Do come
when, if at all, I reach Sevagram.
I have to be under doctors’ care yet for a while.
Love to all friends there.
Yours,

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Dated May 20, 1944, it read: “If doctors permit, suggest your staying
Allahabad two months. Consultation necessary important matter. Wish meet you
when your health permits.”
2
Vide also letter to the addressee, “Letter to M. M. Malviya”, 21-5-1944.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

65

69. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
May 21, 1944
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

I could just read your letter. At present I am not able to write
much. Please, therefore, be content with the little I write. What I write
to one of you should be regarded as addressed to all. I do notknow
anything about the quarrel between Balvantsinha and Amtussalaam. I
think it is good that Munnalal is leaving. It is desirable that he should
settle down somewhere. But he is a restless soul and will not do that.
God protects him because his intentions are good. What is Parnerkar1
doing? How is his health?
Even if I don’t write, those who wish to write to me may do so.
I will not be in a hurry to go there. My heart is there, of course. Now I
will go over only after it cools down. The silence will end on the 29th.
After that I am eager to spend a couple of weeks at Dr. Mehta’s
sanatorium. Blessings to all. Why is Shankaran displeased?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIII

70. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
JUHU ,

May 21, 1944
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

I am now able to write a little. I, therefore, write to persons like
you. I see nothing wrong in the letter you have written. Keep on
writing even though you may make mistakes unintentionally. Many a
time we learn to avoid mistakes only by making them. We can only
try, it is God Who gives the reward. We must be content with whatever
happens. I need not write all this to you. Do not worry about me. Just
now I am observing silence which will end on the 29th.
Blessings to all from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 10212. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Gandhi

1

66

Yashwant Mahadev Parnerkar of Sevagram Ashram dairy
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

71. LETTER TO M. M. MALAVIYA
May 21, 1944
PUJYA BHAI SAHEB,

The doctor has permitted me to write such letters. I don’t
deserve your love. I know that I am unable to fulfil your wishes1 .
The doctors don’t permit my travelling long distances. The fact
is I don’t feel as if I am out of jail. Is being released on grounds of
health any release at all? Let us see what way God shows me after I am
all right.
YOUR YOUNGER BROTHER
From a microfilm of the Hindi: M.M.U./XXIII

72. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
JUHU ,

May 22, 1944
DEAR DAUGHTER,

I got your wire and letter. Pyarelal has replied to them. I have
been given permission to write to a few and am, therefore, writing this
letter. If your health is good enough, give there2 whatever service you
can, otherwise go to Sevagram. I am regaining strength fairly well. My
health is certainly better than yours. But who will let me work, and am
I a person who will work?
Kanti arrived here yesterday. He is all right. He will return to
Mysore in a couple of days.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 477

1

Vide footnote 1 of “Tellegram to M. M. Malviya”, 21-5-1944.
Kasturba Seva Mandir, Borkamata; vide also telegram to the addressee,
“Telgram to Amtussalaam”, 13-5-1944.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

67

73. LETTER TO GOMATI K. MASHRUWALA
JUHU ,

May 22, 1944
CHI. GOMATI,

Today I feel like writing to you. This letter is for all of you.
Vijayabehn and the others came and saw me. Manju too came.
I do not worry about Kishorelal1 . He has come into this world to
endure joy and sorrow silently.
I get news about you, too. I feel satisfied.
Tell Durga that she may accept Shantikumar’s 2 invitation and
come. Lilavati tells me that she is unhappy there. We should not be
unhappy. This is only philosophizing. That she is unhappy is,
however, a fact; so let her come here. She will get some peace of mind
at any rate. Bablo is here, and that is also one reason why she should
come. I am, of course, here too. Let her do what she thinks best. . . .3
Ask her to write to me in detail about her activities.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIII

74. LETTER TO M. R. JAYAKAR
May 23, 1944
DEAR DR. JAYAKAR,

Many thanks for your prompt reply. 4 As soon as the doctors
permit me I shall trouble you to come.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhi-Jayakar Papers: File No. 826, p. 3. Courtesy: National Archives of
India

1

Addressee’s husband
Shantikumar N. Morarjee
3
Omission as in the source
4
Vide 2nd footnote of “Letter to M. R. Jayakar”, 20-5-1944.
2

68

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

75. LETTER TO PRANLAL D. NANJI
By hand with Mathuradas JUHU ,
May 23, 1944
BHAI PRANLAL,

You certainly have the blessings you ask for. If I could not look
at such a matter in a detached spirit, it would be shameful for me to
associate myself with the collection of this Fund 1 . But instead I am
taking as much interest as I can in its success. How can a Fund, the
appeal for which has the signatures of so many wealthy men like you,
be anything but a success?
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI P RANLAL DEVKARAN NANJI
BOMBAY
From a facsimile of the Gujarati: Pranlal Devkaran Nanji Abhinandan Granth,
between pp. 14 and 15

76. LETTER TO PANNALAL JHAVERI
JUHU , B OMBAY,
May 23, 1944
CHI. PANNALAL,

I was glad to have your letter. I am permitted to write only a few
letters and in brief. I am making use of that facility. I am continuing
my unbroken silence. It is good that you restrain yourself from
coming now. I shall be happy if you come to Sevagram when I am
there. I hope you are well, also Gangabehn.
I find that Gangabehn has written a separate letter. I shall not
reply to her separately. This letter is for both.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Manavtana Prahari – Pannalal Jhaveri, p. 34

1

Kasturba Gandhi National Memorial Trust

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

69

77. SILENCE-DAY NOTE TO MATHURADAS
TRIKUMJI
[May 23, 1944] 1
I will ask him [the doctor].You also may ask him. If he permits,
you may come daily. Do keep troubling me often.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 198

78. SILENCE-DAY NOTE TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
May 23, 1944
What you said in your note is perfectly true. In reply I have to
say that I am doing exactly that. I will take no hasty step and am not
going to take a blind plunge. For most of the time I observe silence.
[From Gujarati]
2

Bapuni Prasadi, p. 200

79. LETTER TO DINKAR
JUHU ,

May 23, 1944
CHI. DINKAR,

I have been granted permission to write a few short letters.
Hence this, just for the sake of love. I have persuaded myself to
believe that what has happened is nothing but good. As to the
question of going deep into the matter, we shall see about it when I am
well enough. I am happy to learn that your health is improving. I
know, you are weaker in body than I am. You have acted rightly in
restraining your desire to come over. These days I am observing
unbroken silence.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

In the source, the addressee explain that he visited Gandhiji on the seventh
and thirteenth day after his arrival at Juhu on May 11. This note was written when he
visited Gandhiji the second time.
2
The reference is to the addressee’s letter dated May 20 in which he had said
that it would be proper to take up the question of Hindu-Muslim unity only after
Gandhiji had decided the policy of the Congress as regards the Government.

70

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

80. LETTER TO DADUBHAI DESAI
JUHU ,

May 23, 1944
BHAI DADUBHAI,

I have your loving letter. My entire life has been full of
experiments which have borne fruit. But please don’t worry. I believe
that my experiment has been prompted by God. I am quite sure that
God will sustain my life as long as He wants to take work from me.
You did well in refraining from rushing down here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

81. LETTER TO RAMESHWARI NEHRU
JUHU ,

May 23, 1944
DEAR SISTER,

I was very glad to get your letter. I am not yet permitted to write
much. I am improving slowly. Naturally it will take some time to
regain strength.
Do come over when you are done with things there, and when I
reach Sevagram.
I hope your health is all right.
Blessings to both of you from

BAPU
S HRIMATI R AMESHWARI NEHRU
S RINAGAR
KASHMIR
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 8004. Also C.W. 3104. Courtesy:
Rameshwari Nehru

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

71

82. LETTER TO MOOLCHAND
JUHU ,

May 23, 1944
BHAI MOOLCHADJI,

I got your letter. I find no reason to complain for what has
happened. One can only act according to one’s capacity.
Your work must be going on smoothly.
I am permitted to write just a little.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 843

83. LETTER TO INDRA VIDYAVACHASPATI
JUHU ,

May 23, 1944
CHI. INDRA,

Come over when you wish to. But why should you take the
trouble just to see me, when travelling is so difficult these days? I am
observing silence which will end on the 29th.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 7206. Also C.W. 4864. Courtesy:
Chandragupta Vidyalankar

72

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

84. LETTER TO A. KALESWARA RAO
JUHU ,

May 24, 1944
MY DEAR KALESWARA RAO1 ,

Your letter. Rishis are made of sterner stuff.
Let me remain what I am—a striving servant of India and,
through her, of humanity.2
Hope you are well.
Yours,

BAPU
S HRI A. K ALESWARA R AO
NANDIGAM, K RISHNA DISTRICT
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

85. LETTER TO TARA AND RAMNIKLAL MODI
JUHU ,

May 24, 1944
CHI. TARA AND RAMNIKLAL,

Shouldn’t Tara have precedence as in the compound
‘Sitarama’. I am making progress although very slowly.3 God has
brought down my pride, which is what I deserved. I used to consider
myself healthier than all of you. But I now realize that we are all made
of the same stuff! You can see that I have gained enough strength to
write this.
No one should rush here.
Blessings from

BAPU
17 S HANTINAGAR
ASHRAM R OAD
S ABARMATI
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

Member of A.I.C.C., also of Madras Legislative Assembly
In Reminiscences of Gandhiji, p. 141, Chandrashanker Shukla explains that
the addressee, in his letter, had “described Gandhiji as a great rishi of the present age
and wished him 116 years of life and activity to fulfil his mission on earth”.
3
Literally: “My cart is moving slowly.”
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

73

86. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
May 24, 1944
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

When an inadvertent mistake can wipe out even our own lives, it
is no surprise if some pictures fade out. We should derive not only a
lesson from this but some consolation also. The rest from Pyarelal’s
letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4440

87. MESSAGE TO CHINA1
May 25, 1944
My heartiest good wishes to China from which the world expects
much. I am sorry that I cannot write Chinese.
The Bombay Chronicle, 26-5-1944; also The Hindu, 27-5-1944

88. LETTER TO KRISHNAVARMA
JUHU ,

May 25, 1944
BHAISHRI KRISHNAVARMA 2 ,

I have told you that I used to go through the Divya Jivan with
great care. I have, however, not been able to get anything out of it. A
reader cannot undertake an experiment [on its basis]. The journal
lacks scientific knowledge. Of course, I know Mahadevprasad
verywell. His writings suggested to me that his knowledge was rusting.
Please pass on this to him to read. I write this only to tell you that
either the two of you should fill the pages of your journal with
1

The report in The Hindu said: “Six Chinese saw Gandhiji after evening
prayers. Gandhiji signed an album of photographs containing some photos of
himself which the visitors had brought with them. The Chinese then made a
collection among themselves and handed the sum to Gandhiji as their contribution
towards the Harijan Fund.”
2
Of the Nature-cure clinic at Malad, in suburban Bombay

74

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

knowledge or close down the monthly.
I am a votary of nature cure. But the practitoners neither work
hard nor go deep into the subject. They do not pursue the science
with single-minded devotion. They neither study it [themselves] nor
try to co-ordinate [one another’s efforts].
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

89. LETTER TO S. K. VAIDYA
May 25, 1944
BHAI VAIDYA,

It is my keen desire that you should take up some social work
with this idea in your mind, if for no other reason, that you are thus
identifying yourself with the poor.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5754

90. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
[May 26, 1944] 1
MY DEAR AMRIT,

You won’t expect letters from me but love I can send now.
Hope you are keeping well.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 4202. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7838

1

In the source, the letter appears on top of a letter dated May 26, 1944, from
Dr. Sushila Nayyar to Amrit Kaur.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

75

91. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
JUHU ,

May 26, 1944
MY DEAR C. R.,

I have seen your postcard and letter. It is enough for me to
know that you understand my joke 1 all right. Your letter admits that
you are worse than I am in physical health. Whilst you are free to
come any time you like, I shall not press you to come till I feel I am
ready for sustained discussion. Meanwhile you can send me, in
writing, whatever you have to say. Just now I pass the time reading
some literature I had not read and the correspondence which Pyarelal
chooses to show me.
I hope Papa2 and Narasimhan3 are flourishing.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 2094

92. NOTE TO GULAM ALI KHAN4
May 26, 1944
I like songs in praise of God. I don’t know much of music;
neither have I heard many ustads 5 .
The Bombay Chronicle, 27-5-1944; also The Hindu, 28-5-1944

1

Vide “Telegram to C. Rajagopalachari”, 6-5-1944.
Addressee’s daughter, Namagiri, and son
3
ibid
4
The report in The Hindu said: “Gandhiji wrote this on a slip of paper
appreciating the rendering of classical songs and bhajans by Gulam Ali Khan of
Lahore.”
5
Maestri
2

76

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

93. LETTER TO E. W. ARYANAYAKAM
JUHU ,

May 27, 1944
MY DEAR ARYANAYAKAM,

I thank God and His instrument Asha that you are alive. She has
been your Savitri to deliver you from the jaws of death. God bless you
both. Don’t do it again. Even a Savitri has her limits. I see you are in
harness again. I am wrong. You were in harness even in your
sick-bed.
Don’t waste your time in answering this.
Love to you.
BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

94. LETTER TO MAGANBHAI P. DESAI
JUHU

May 27, 1944
CHI. MAGANBHAI,

I read your letter1 . Let them acquire it if they want to. After all
does it not belong to them? Remember what the poet said in the
bhajan 2 : “ I t is useless to sorrow over what God ordains.” Who could
be the Divine Preceptor of our world? He also has a Lord over him.
But the mantra of worshipping Him is altogether different. “You may
enjoy things only after renouncing them, etc.”3
MAGANBHAI DESAI
VIDYAPITH
AHMEDABAD
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Which reported that the Government intended to requisition the Gujarat
Vidyapith buildings
2
Vide “Ashram Bhajanavali”, 20-12-1930.
3
Ishopanishad, v. 1
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

77

95. LETTER TO SAMYUKTA GANDHI
JUHU

May 27, 1944
CHI. YUKTI1 ,

. . . 2 death and disease stalk us right from our birth. They are
both. . .3 fruits of our own actions. We should suffer them with
patience.
YUKTIBEHN
S EVAGRAM
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

96. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
JUHU ,

May 27, 1944
DAUGHTER,

Your letter is painful reading. I am surprised that you pull on in
spite of your illness. It also pains me, for I don’t understand how a
worker like you can fall ill. But then you are what you are. Ultimately
you are sure to die in harness. You have sent for Munnalal. What for,
may I ask? If you stick to the place in spite of all this illness, how
much work do you expect to do? A better course would be to go to
the Ashram and get well. I write this and yet wonder who am I to
guide you.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I hope you can decipher my handwriting.
AMTULBEHN
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
2

78

Elder sister of Manu Gandhi
Omission as in the source
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

97. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
P ALM BEACH, J UHU ,

May 27, 1944
If I were keeping good health, I would not have let you go
anywhere but would have given you what I myself could. But I am a
broken reed now. After I get well, they will certainly not let me remain
free. Your good, therefore, lies in going down to Rajkot as early as
you can. I will write to Narandas about your education. The things
which Yukti has asked for can be sent to her. You may send for them.
In all this overcrowding [in trains] I would not like to send you there
even in Abha’s1 company. Please guess what I mean from this. God is
sure to look after your well-being. Your services can never go
unrewarded. Preserve this.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIV

98. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
May 27, 1944
CHI. KANTI,

I have done what you wanted. Write a short letter of thanks on
behalf of both. Write, in Hindi, saying that you will both try to be
worthy of his generosity. Write to this effect, if you don’t mind.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI KANTI GANDHI
1882-4 WESLEY R OAD
NEAR BUS S TAND
MYSORE
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7368. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

1

Daughter of Amrita Lal Chatterjee

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

79

99. A LETTER
JUHU ,

May 27, 1944
I myself have not seen the papers, but Sushila told me that you
obtained Nathubhai’s signature on your bulletin. Nathubhai was the
last to come into my life, through Mahadev. But Jivraj and
Purushottam Patel had come into it even before you did. They were
followed by Deshmukh and then Nerulkar. Dalal is dead. I sent a
gentle note of reproach to Nathubhai and asked him why he had not
called. If, now, Nathubhai signs as a doctor, you should rope in
Deshmukh and Nerulkar too. I know that you were prevailed upon by
Dr. Gilder. This protest, therefore, is not addressed to you. It is against
that Mayor. The bulletin, of course, is not to be issued. But this is one
reason for my blood-pressure. There are other reasons, too, but I will
not bother you with them. The pressure, of course, will come down,
and then a day will come when I also will go the way Dalal has gone.
Despite the different therapies, I and all others will have to go one day
under some pretext or other. That is why I tell you that you are
welcome to go on torturing me till you have conquered death.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 2719. Courtesy: Nathubhai Patel

100. LETTER TO GULZARILAL NANDA
[After May 27, 1944] 1
CHI. GULZARILAL,

I read your letter to Pyarelal. Dr. Das visits me from time to
time. Dr. Chugh has not impressed me, Dr. Das has. He does not
propose to administer any medicine to me. By all means bring over
anyone you like from among the names that you suggest. I wish I
could have faith in homoeopathy and biochemic medicines, but I
don’t. Now I am thinking of taking allopathic drugs to get rid of
thehook-worms and the amoebae. Your work seems to be going on
well. Can one say that you have completely recovered?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

In the source, the letter is placed between the letters of May 27 and June 4,

1944.

80

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

101. MESSAGE TO NATIONALIST CHRISTIAN PARTY1
May 28, 1944
I thank you all for having taken the trouble to come to Juhu and
offer prayers for my health. If God has any service still to take from
me, I am sure that your prayers and that of so many others in many
lands will be answered. God bless you all.
The Hindu, 4-6-1944

102. A MESSAGE TO FRANK MORAES2
JUHU ,

May 29, 1944
I have complete and categorical replies to all the charges. As
soon as I get well, and if I am left free, I shall deal with the questions
put.
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

103. LETTER TO LORD SAMUEL
P ALM BUN , J UHU ,
May 31, 1944
DEAR LORD SAMUEL,

My unfortunate illness has prompted the Government to set me
at liberty pending, it seems, restoration to health. I take the
opportunity of sending you a copy of the letter I wrote to you during
detention. The Government would not send you the letter for the
reasons you will glean from copies of the correspondence attached
hereto.

1

The report said that this was given, “in writing, to a gathering of about 400
Christians organized by the Nationalist Christian Party . . . when prayers were held
for the health of Mahatmaji and for the peace of the world”.
2
The message was communicated over the phone at 9.05 p.m.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

81

I take this opportunity of thanking you for your kind message
of sympathy on my wife’s death.1
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
THE R T. H ONOURABLE LORD HERBERT S AMUEL
HOUSE OF LORDS
LONDON
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

104. LETTER TO BALVANTSINHA
JUHU ,

May 31, 1944
CHI. BALVANTSINHA,

I have your letter. Let me write a few words to you too,
since I am writing a little to all those dear to me. You seem tobe well
settled there. Satis Babu gets, I hope, the help which you should give
him. Take care of yourself. Restrain your desire to visit me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1944

105. TELEGRAM TO MANUBHAI PANCHOLI
JUHU ,

June 1, 1944
MANUBHAI
GRAM, D AKSHINAMURTI
AMBLA, S ONGADH
AM

JUHU

TILL

FIFTEENTH

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

82

Kasturba Gandhi had died on February 22, 1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

106. LETTER TO BRIJMOHAN BIRLA
PALM BUN, J UHU,

June 1, 1944
DEAR BRIJMOHANJI ,

I have your letter of 29th ult. Bapuji would like you to wait till you hear from
him. He proposes to write to Shri Khabardar1 himself and will then let you know.
Yours sincerely,
SETH BRIJMOHAN BIRLA
8 ROYAL EXCHANCE PLACE
CALCUTTA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

107. LETTER TO HARIHAR VYAS
PALM BEN, J UHU,

June 1, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I have read out your letter to Gandhiji. He says he is unable to advise on the use
of a purely communal donation. He suggests that the scope may be made general.
Whoever benefits by the donation, the benefit will go to India. If the advice is
accepted, he will make suggestions.
Yours sincerely,
PYARELAL
SHRI HARIHAR VYAS
J AWAHAR GUNJ
J UBBELPORE
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

Ardeshir Framji Khabardar

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

83

108. NOTE TO RADHAKANT MALAVIYA
[After June 1, 1944] 1
Come to Sevagram as soon as you get the permission. Whatever
has to be done will be done after hearing everyone. I am collecting all
the information.
From a Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

109. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
JUHU ,

June 2, 1944
MY DEAR ANAND,

Since you have written in English I answer likewise. You must
cease to grieve. You should summon to your aid all you
have read and digested. Here is a true thought 2 a lady has sentme.
Inwardly digest it. Vidya3 is not dead. She has gone elsewhere leaving
the body which she was inhabiting and taking another suitable to her

1

The note is scribbled on the addressee’s letter of June 1, 1944.
Gandhiji sent with the letter a poem received from Glen E. Snyder of U.S.A.
when Kasturba died. The poem, by James Whitecomb Riley (1849-1916), American
poet, read:
“You cannot say, you must not say
That she is dead.
She is just away!
With a cheery smile
And a wave of the hand
She has wandered into an unknown land
And left us dreaming how very fair
It needs must be, since she lingers there;
So think of her faring on, as dear
In the love of There, as the love of Here;
Think of her still as the same, and say
She is not dead, she is just away!”
3
Addressee’s wife
2

84

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

estate. Of course, you will come when you have finished the course of
treatment. I am making slow progress.
BAPU
S ADAR VILLA
F YZABAD R OAD
LUCKNOW
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India, and Anand
T. Hingorani

110. LETTER TO SAROLA
P ALM BAN , J UHU ,

June 2, 1944
MY DEAR SAROLA,

I did have your wire. Pyarelal acknowledged it, too. You must
have got it by this time. I do not know what is going to happen to me
on recovery. I cannot guide you from a sick-bed. As yet I am allowed
only to tackle light correspondence. All I can say is that you should
do such national service as comes your way. How is Dipak?
Yours,

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

111. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
JUHU ,

June 3, 1944
MY DEAR AMRIT,

Your note in reply to mine1 . Your first letter was never received.
Sushila will write to you fully. I am progressing steadily though
slowly. You must not worry. If God wants more servicefrom me, He
will surely keep me and give me sufficient strength to do His work.
How about you? How about Shummy 2 and Beryl? Give me all the

1
2

Vide “Letter to Amrit Kaur”, 26-5-1944.
Addressee’s brother, Lt.-Col. Kanwar Shumshere Singh

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

85

details you are permitted to give. Are all the old attendants still with
you?
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 4144. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7779

112. LETTER TO SHARDA G. CHOKHAWALA
JUHU ,

June 3, 1944
CHI. BABUDI,

I have your letter. Thanks to your rheumatism, I was able to get
news about you. For some time I had given up hopes about you. If
Gordhandas1 had not been released, you might not have been alive. It
can be said that you owe your life to his labour and care. May you
both live long. I am also eager to see you. But let us both observe
self-control. When I get well and go to Sevagram, do come over and
meanwhile get well completely. You had this serious illness at the
wrong time! I am improving. Keep on writing to me. I think Anand 2
must have grown so much as not to be recognized.
Blessings to all three of you from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 10045. Courtesy: Sharda G. Chokhawala

113. LETTER TO KAUSALYA MALHOTRA
JUHU ,

June 4, 1944
CHI. KAUSALYA,

Do you not know Hindi or any other Indian language? You
need not unlearn English to be able to learn your mother tongue and
write in it.
I have read your letter though my prescription holds. If you will

1
2

86

Addressee’s husband
Addressee’s son
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

be true to yourself, marry without becoming a doll but for the sake of
having a partner to serve the country.
With love.
BAPU
MISS KAUSALYA MALHOTRA
C/ O H. R. M ALHOTRA
C HIEF S ECRETARY TO JAMMU AND KASHMIR GOVERNMENT
S RINAGAR , K ASHMIR
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

114. LETTER TO MANEKLAL GANDHI
JUHU ,

June 4, 1944
CHI. MANEKLAL,

I got your postcard. You are not far ahead of me in age. You
have preserved your health well and it can also be said that you have
given good service. May you excel me.
I am progressing slowly.1 Manu has gone to Sevagram on
account of Yukti. Both the sisters will come from there on the 23rd to
catch the boat. To keep Manu with me now will mean ruining her life.
Ba, of course, valued her service. I too would welcome it, but I don’t
need it. Now she must pay attention exclusively to study.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI MANEKLAL AMRITLAL GANDHI
DEVALI THANA
KATHIAWAR
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 891. Courtesy: Maneklal Amritlal Gandhi

1

Literally: “My cart is jogging along slowly,”

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

87

115. LETTER TO INDU N. PAREKH
JUHU ,

June 4, 1944
CHI. INDU,

I have your letter. You have decided to do the right thing. You
will be steadier when you marry. After all one has to marry,
sooner or later. It is no easy task to observe unbroken brahmacharya.
Practising abstention after marriage is, however, comparatively easier.
Don’t let your health deteriorate.
I still cannot work as much as before.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

116. LETTER TO M. R. JAYAKAR
JUHU ,

June 5, 1944
DEAR DR. JAYAKAR,

I am glad you have returned. I hope to send you in a day or two
the papers I had intended to. I propose that we should meet after you
have studied the papers.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhi-Jayakar Papers. File No. 826, p. 8. Courtesy: National Archives of
India

117. LETTER TO SAILENDRANATH CHATTERJEE
JUHU ,

June 5, 1944
MY DEAR SAILEN 1

I was glad to have your letter. Abha will be with me whilst I am
free. She has become very weak but there is no cause for anxiety.

1

88

Son of Amrita Lal Chatterjee
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

About your difficulty, we shall talk when I am in Sevagram.
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat: C.W. 10494. Courtesy: Amrita Lal Chatterjee

118. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI P. PANDYA
JUHU ,

June 5, 1944
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

I read the ghaza 1 l sent by you. I can understand it. But it does
not have the same effect on my mind as it has on yours. I have read a
good deal of Manibhai’s writings. He was my professor. Your ship
seems to be sailing fairly well. Do not be eager to come here. The
other papers also were shown to me. Send me details of your work.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI BHAGWANJI P URUSHOTTAM
HARIJAN ASHRAM
WADHWAN C ITY
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 398. Courtesy: Navajivan Trust

119. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
JUHU ,

June 5, 1944
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

I read your anguish-filled letter. Constant efforts do result in
purity. Meditate upon chapters VI and XII 2 . More when we meet.
Shankaran is quite distressed and I feel that, if his father is ill, he
should be permitted to go.
What work was Parnerkar doing?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4441
1
2

By Mamilal Nabhubhai Dwivedi, Gujarati poet and thinker
Of Bhagavad Gita

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

89

120. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 6, 1944
MY DEAR MADELEINE,

You will bear with me in addressing you thus. I wonder whether
I did right in giving you another name. The moment I feel that I did
right I shall resume the old style. Enough to know that the same love
that gave you a new name has prompted the withdrawal.
I have your letter. I have read yours to Sushila. I see you are
getting on.
Narandas writes to me that your account having been
discontinued, he will take a little time in tracing the amounts received
from time to time. There will be no avoidable delay. If you want
money badly, I can have a fairly large sum transferred in your name
at once.
I wrote a short note to the Viceroy and he has sent a firm ‘no’
for the same reasons that determined his actions whilst I was in
detention. This is not for publication, only for you, Devdas and
company.
Love.
BAPU
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila
Nayyar

121. LETTER TO PREMI JAIRAMDAS
June 6, 1944
CHI. PREMI,

I was very happy to have your letter. Sushilabehn will write in
greater detail. I am glad that you are keeping good health. I was of
course worried. What do you propose to do now ?
I do often remember Jairamdas. Blessings to Devibehn. Let her
write to me.
Do not come here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original : C. W. 11058. Courtesy : Arjun Jairamdas

90

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

122. TELEGRAM TO AMTUSSALAAM
BOMBAY,

June 7, 1944
AMTUSSALAAM
105 HARRISON R OAD
C ALCUTTA
NEXT

BAPUJI

SEEN

WEEK.

ASKS

YOUR
YOU

POSTCARD.

PROCEED

HE

IS

SEVAGRAM.

LEAVING
SENDS

FOR

POONA

BLESSINGS.

S HANTIKUMAR
From a photostat: G.N. 478

123. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
June 8, 1944
CHI. MANU,

Instead of calling you Manu I should call you Mridulabehn 1 .
Even before leaving Bombay you have disobeyed me. At this rate,
how much of my advice are you going to follow? You have not
earned a single pie yourself. You have a generous father, and so are
wasting his money. Do you wish to spoil the baby2 ? But I will not let
you do so while I am alive. If you think the silver rattle and cups are
all right for you, you may keep them yourself. If you do not want
them, give them to someone like you. I myself want that you should
keep them as a reminder of your foolishness. I am returning the cup
and rattle along with this letter.3
Rama Rama from your unhappy

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIV

1

Addressee’s full name
Nandini, daughter of Pyarelal’s brother, Mohanlal
3
Vide also “Letter to Jaisukhlal Gandhi”, 12-6-1944.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

91

124. LETTER TO VITHALDAS
June 8, 1944
BHAI VITHALDAS,

I read your letter. My mind has become confused. If I hear
both sides, it might throw some light. But is that possible in my
present condition? I would advise you to assume that I have not been
released and do what all of you think best. If that is not possible, then
I may spare some time, listen to both the parties and give my decision.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9805

125. LETTER TO KANAM GANDHI
June 8, 1944
1

CHI. KANAM ,

I received the plans sent by you. I learnt about your
perseverance, as also about the service you are rendering to your
grandmother. We can serve our elders even when they are no more.
There is likely to be greater purity in such service. My purpose in
writing this is, however, different. That you are immersed in study is
good, no doubt, but you must realize its limitation, which is this:
Spiritual progress is as essential as intellectual progress; so also
development of the body. We often tend to forget this. Don’t you
forget this. The rest when we meet, although, I am afraid, it will be
some time before we can meet.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

92

Son of Ramdas Gandhi
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

126. SPEECH AT JUHU
June 8, 1944
I thought you were all good men and that you had faith in
prayer. But if the report that has reached me is correct, I do not think
that you answer to that description. If I am mistaken, you can correct
me. You have gate-crashed and broken in. If that is so, I do not wish
to have your darshan1 , neither do I wish to give you my darshan.
When it rained, I came out and begged to be excused. I thought that
none of you were left out. But you were late, though you had come in
time for the usual prayers.2 So I was helpless. I thought that if Sarojini
Devi had allowed you and if you had come quietly, I would have had
no objection. Instead you howled and broke open the gate. I am
pleased to see you. But the way you have come here has pained me
greatly. I hope you will not repeat this. I do not wish to say any more.
I shall be obliged, if you disperse quietly. Even this much
speaking is beyond my strength and against the orders of my doctors.
But I have spoken because I felt that, unless I gave expression to my
anguish, I would not be able to sleep peacefully. You gate-crashed
and it hurts me. If you disperse peacefully, my anguish will be
lightened. But if you do not remain peaceful and disperse in an
orderly manner, I shall have to come back. Those of you who wish to
contribute to the Harijan Fund may do so. But you will not expect me
to keep standing here. That is beyond my strength.3
The Bombay Chronicle, 9-6-1944

1

Sight of a person, place or thing considered holy
The report said: “Due to the inclement weather Gandhiji went to the usual
prayer ground facing the sea, a little earlier than usual, and begged to be excused. It
was decided to hold the prayers inside the compound. . . .” The report in The Hindu,
10-6-1944, said: “After waiting for more than an hour, they were told that they could
proceed to Mr. Gandhi in batches. But the crowd rushed in. . . .”
3
The report concluded: “After Gandhiji turned back some people made their
contributions to the Fund and all of them walked out of the grounds peacefully.”
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

93

127. LETTER TO T. B. SAPRU
June 9, 1944
DEAR SIR TEJ,

I have your kind letter 1 . I am glad your son is making rapid
progress. May the residence in Kashmir bring about complete
recovery.
The publication of my letter 2 to Dr. Jayakar had become
inevitable. You need fear no hasty statement 3 from me till I am
declared passable by the doctors. I shall look forward to meeting you
in Sevagram. I shall be for a fortnight from 15th instant in Dr.
Dinshaw’s sanatorium and may have to go to Panchgani thereafter.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhi-Sapru Papers. Courtesy: National Library. Also G.N. 7576

128. LETTER TO ARUNA ASAF ALI
June 9, 1944
I have been filled with admiration for your courage and
heroism. I have sent you messages that you must not die
underground. 4 You are reduced to a skeleton. Do come out and
surrender yourself and win the prize offered for your arrest. Reserve
the prize money for the Harijan cause.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book One, p. 36

1

Dated June 4, 1944
Vide “Letter to M. R. Jayakar”, 20-5-1944.
3
The addressee had said in his letter that “any statement at this stage . . .
might make the task of general reconciliation difficult” and reserved his “suggestions
for a personal discussion”.
4
Pyarelal explains: “Aruna Asaf Ali had been suffering from acute dysentery.
It had been accentuated by the vicissitudes of her underground life.”
2

94

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

129. LETTER TO ANNADA BABU CHOWDHARY
June 9, 1944
Secrecy, in my opinion, is a sin and symptom of violence,
therefore, to be definitely avoided, especially if the freedom of the
dumb millions is the goal. Hence all underground activity, in my
opinion, is taboo. What I, however, say is that even the content of
violence and non-violence, whether as policy, or creed, should be
judged by every individual worker according to the dictates of his
head and heart. And when there is a conflict between the head and the
heart, the heart wins.
I am not saying anything as the leader of the movement, I must
be regarded still as a prisoner with freedom to give opinions, not to
issue instructions.
Glimpses of Gandhiji, pp. 74-5

130. LETTER TO MANGALDAS PAKVASA1
June 9, 1944
Don’t you think I have beaten you? You were only able to sign,
but I have been able to write two lines also.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4782. Courtesy: Mangaldas Pakvasa

131. DRAFT LETTER TO THE VICEROY2
JUHU ,

June 10 , 1944
The Committee of the Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry congratulate His Excellency the Viceroy on
the step taken by him in releasing Mahatma Gandhi. Although it is
stated that the action has been taken on medical grounds, the
1

This was written as postscript to Pyarelal’s reply to the addressee who was
not keeping well.
2
The draft carries heavy revisions in Gandhiji’s hand.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

95

Committee feel that to ignore the political potentialities of Gandhiji’s
release would be a great mistake on the part of the Government.
The Committee firmly believe that the situation in 1942 was
thoroughly mishandled by the Government of India leading to the
arrest of Gandhiji and other leaders and other responsible
Congressmen throughout the country. The disturbances were the
natural consequence which the Government should have foreseen.
The Committee is convinced that had the Government waited and
responded to the way of negotiation which was clearly contemplated
as can be proved from Gandhiji’s and Maulana Abul Kalam Azad’s
and Panditji’s speeches and statements made at the time and not
exhibited a panicky mood showed by the arrests, the history of India
would be much different today from what it is. While deploring the
past mistakes, the Committee feel that these could be rectified by
reviewing the position afresh and making a firm attempt to solve the
political deadlock. The Committee is convinced that Mahatmaji is a
man of peace and goodwill and that his method is not one of giving
advantage to the enemy. The Committee, therefore, feel that a solution
is not impossible if the Government were to reciprocate the
friendliness of Gandhiji. The Com[mittee] feel that in order to enable
the Mahatma to render effective help in the war effort, the first natural
action should be the release of the members of the Working
Committee and all others who have been interned. It is clear to the
Committee [that] Gandhiji is powerless without the backing of the
Working Committee.
We believe that even the economic development, for which His
Excellency the Viceroy has expressed such great sympathy, is
impossible unless there is at the centre a Government which can
inspire confidence and enthusiasm among the people. Only a National
Government could fulfil the above condition. The Com[mittee],
therefore, strongly appeal to His Excellency the Viceroy that in the
interest of winning the war, the future Indo-British relations and the
improvement of the economic condition of India, it is imperative that
the Government should take immediate steps to achieve conditions for
the establishment of a truly National Government. The Committee
also appeal to Mahatma Gandhi and Mr. Jinnah to make fresh efforts
to solve the communal deadlock for the purpose of creating an
atmosphere for establishment of a National Government.
From a original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

96

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

132. LETTER TO H. P. MODY1
S UNDER BUN , J UHU ,

June 10, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I send you herewith in two volumes copies of correspondence
between the Government of India or the Bombay Government and
myself during my incarceration in the palace of H. H. the Aga Khan
in Yeravda.
The second volume is a copy of my reply 2 to the Government
of India pamphlet entitled Congress Responsibility for the
Disturbances, 1942-43. The first contains copies of correspondence
arising out of the above mentioned reply and on miscellaneous
matters of public importance.
I had the copies cyclostyled with the help of kind friends. For
fear of censorship difficulties I did not try to have the copies printed
at any printing press. But lest the Government of India may think that
there is anything in the correspondence objectionable from military
standpoint, I am circulating for private use only the copies among
friends who, I think, should know the nature of the correspondence
that took place between the two Governments and me. You are free to
show your copy to any friends you like, subject to the precaution that
applies to you.
You will confer on me a favour, if you will take the trouble of
letting me have your reaction upon the correspondence, especially
upon the points arising from my reply to the Government of India
pamphlet. I have endeavoured to answer every item of importance in
the Government indictment. I should like to know the points, if any,
which require elucidation.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From the original: H. P. Mody Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Also G.N. 1192, and Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, p.
xxvii
1

In Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, this appears as “Gandhiji’s Prefatory Covering Letter”.
2
Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 15-7-1943.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

97

133. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
June 10, 1944
MY DEAR BROTHER,

I have your love letter1 delivered through a precious messenger.
I agree with you in the main. But I understand you will be in Poona at
least up to the 15th. I reach Poona on that date. Could you not
postpone your departure for one day? Then we can meet face to face.
You are to have with this a parcel2 which will tell its own tale.
Love from,
Your little brother,
From a photostat: G.N. 8822. Also Letters of the Right Honourable V. S.,
Srinivasa Sastri, pp. 361-2

134. LETTER TO THORNE 3
GANDHIGRAM, J UHU ,
June 10 , 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I send you herewith in two volumes copies of correspondence
between the Government of India and the Bombay Government and
myself during my incarceration in the palace of H. H. the Aga Khan
in Yeravda.
The second volume is a copy of my reply to the Government of
India pamphlet entitled Congress Responsibility for the Disturbances,
1942-43. The first contains copies of correspondence arising out of
the above-mentioned reply and on miscellaneous matters of public
importance.
I had the copies cyclostyled with the help of kind friends. For
fear of censorship difficulties, I did not try to have the copies printed
at any Printing Press. But lest the Government of India may think that
there is anything in the correspondence objectionable from [a]
1

Vide Appendix “Letter from V. S. Srinivasa Sastri”, 2-6-1944.
The reference is, presumably, to the volumes of copies of correspondence
between Gandhiji and the Government; vide the preceding item.
3
For a copy of this to H. P. Mody, vide “Letter to H. P. Mody”, 10-6-1944.
2

98

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

military standpoint I am circulating for private use only the copies
among friends who, I think should know the nature of the
correspondence that took place between the two Governments and me.
You are free to show your copy to any friends you like, subject to the
precaution that applies to you.
You will confer on me a favour if you will take the trouble of
letting me have your reaction upon the correspondence especially
upon the points arising from my reply to the Government of India
pamphlet. I have endeavoured to answer every item of importance in
the Government indictment. I should like to know the points, if any,
which require elucidation.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat : India Office Library and Records. Courtesy : The British
Library, London

135. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 10, 1944
CHI. NARANDAS,

We have had Abha’s tonsils removed. She is better today. The
wound still bleeds a little. I have been discussing the matter with
Kanaiyo. I have already talked with Abha. I feel inclined to get them
married soon, either in Poona or in Sevagram, wherever I am.
According to me, it is not necessary either for any of you, or for
Amrita Lal and others, to be present. But I should not like to
discourage you or Jamna1 , if either of you desires to attend. The same
view I hold about Amrita Lal. If both of them fully agree, I will fix the
date and the place and inform you. Tell me in time whether or notyou
wish to attend. We shall be leaving for Poona on the 15th. Abha will
be with us. She will stay with me so long as I remain out.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8609. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

1

Addressee’s wife

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

99

136. LETTER TO P. C. JOSHI
JUHU ,

June 11, 1944
MY DEAR JOSHI 1 ,

I had expected a prompt reply to the questions I had raised at
our meeting2 . Meanwhile some additional questions have arisen which
please, answer when you answer my first questions.
1. What is the meaning of “people” in “people’s war”? Does
it mean war on behalf of India’s millions, or the Negroes in East,
South or West Africa, or the Negroes of America, or all of them? Are
the Allies engaged in such a war?
2. Are the finances of the Communist Party, represented by you,
subject to public audit? If they are, may I see them?
3. It is stated that the Communist Party has actively helped the
authorities to arrest leaders and organizers of labour strikes during the
last two years.
4. The Communist Party is said to have adopted the policy of
infiltrating the Congress oranization with a hostile intent.
5. Is not the policy of the Communist Party dictated from
outside?3
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Correspondence between Mahatma Gandhi and P. C. Joshi, p. 2

137. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
S UNDER BUN , J UHU
June 11 , 1944
CHI. MIRA, 4

This is after much debating for 48 hours within myself and
1

Puran Chandra Joshi, General Secretary of the Communist Party of India
According to the addressee, it was early in June.
3
For excerpts from the addressee’s letter in reply to this, vide Appendix
“Letter from P. C. Joshi”, 14-6-1944.
4
In Devanagari
2

100

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

sleepless nights over my duty towards you on our differences and
towards doctors regarding treatment.
It hurt me yesterday when Ammajan told me that you had
doubt about my willingness to part with the money that you gave me
from time to time. The fact is that you having parted with the money
even resented it standing in your name in the Ashram books and
insisted on the money being made part of the Ashram funds and the
expenses on your account being treated as from the Ashram funds. I
felt a delicacy in mentioning that it could be retransferred to you
without any deduction. I, therefore, allowed Ghanshyamdas to tell you
that you could have the money back whether the condition of the
Ashram funds permitted the return or not. So when you told me that
you would be glad to have the money, the measure of esteem in which
I held you went down. It is due to you that I should not withhold this
fact from you. But this is not written to affect your decision. The
return of the money is irrevocable.
The second thing I want to tell you is the things I have been
hearing from reliable sources about Prithvi Singh. They are terribly
disturbing.1 He has been using questionable means to extort money.
He made, without success, indecent approaches to two girls of
Kathiawar.
The girl whom he has married was engaged to a person who was
her benefactor. Nanabhai who was the person to bring him to me and
who testified to his complete change from violence to non-violence
has been sadly disillusioned.
His profession of non-violence when he came to me and in his
letters from the jail appears to have been a deep-laid plot to deceive
me and through me some day or other to secure his release from the
life of hiding which was worrying him. Thus, my prejudice is
deepening. I should love to know from experience that the prejudice
has no basis.
It is generally believed that the Communist Party is exploiting
you through him. I am carrying on correspondence with Joshi. This
you can see from Pyarelal.
In the circumstances my advice to you is that you should hold
your project for a season and judge the situation and watch
1

Vide also “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 15-7-1943.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

101

developments. I do not know how Devdas and those who are
connected with you will be able to guide you or interest themselves in
your activities. Anyway I shall have to let the public know somehow
or other that I am not at the back of any of your activities which are
being undertaken in spite of my disapproval.
This letter is my last warning. I shall trouble you no more. God
be your only guide. 1
[P.S.]
There is nothing withheld from the office staff. I am keeping a
copy of this letter and enclose herewith a typed copy. Please give me a
copy of the letter I wrote to you before this.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

138. TELEGRAM TO P. C. RAY
[On or before June 12, 1944] 2
HOPE
CENTURY.

YOU

WILL

INSIST

ON

FINISHING

AT

LEAST

A

3

The Hindu, 14-6-1944

139. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
S UNDER BUN , J UHU ,
June 12 , 1944
DEAR MISS SLADE,

There is nothing wrong about being formal. “Familiarity
breeds contempt.” The letters will not be destroyed. I have nothing to
be ashamed of. I wrote after intense prayer. My language failed to
transmit the love and the greatest goodwill that prompted it. The only
regret is that I dared to be familiar. My love would have been as true
as now if I had refused to call you by any other name than
1

For the addressee’s answer, vide Appendix “Letter from Lord Linlithgow”,
14-1-1943.
2
According to the report, the telegram was received by the addressee, an
eminent scientist, on June 12.
3
The addressee, who was ailing, died on June 16.

102

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Miss Slade. I like the English coldness and correctness. But my regret
is superficial. The change is good and substantial. I have given the
warning. You have no reason to change your course because of any
opinion I express. What I did was to suggest your waiting. But you
need not since it does not commend itself to you.
Yes, time and action will show what we are and what we meant. I
have patience.
Yours ,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

140. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL GANDHI
June 12, 1944
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,

I wanted to write this letter immediately after Manu’s departure
but I could not. Manu disappointed me very much just before she left.
I thought she had understood everything and would do as she had
promised, but I was wrong. Before leaving, she bought and sent a
silver toy and a silver cup for Pyarelal’s brother’s daughter. I was
very much pained. I poured out all my pain in my letter 1 to her and
returned the things. You must have come to know about all this. Now
you will have to be on your guard. I had suggested that she should
stay for a year at Rajkot in the hope that that would develop all her
fine qualities and cure her weaknesses. But Manu was reluctant. On
receipt of an enthusiastic letter from the teacher at Karachi, she was
beside herself with joy, and I, therefore, sent her there.
I should like to tell you the thoughts which occurred to me
about you. You seem to have such a lot of money that you have
taught Manu to spend money as if she was more than even a
multi-millionaire. I very much appreciate your love for your
daughters. But the question is from where you got all this money. You
could not have saved it from khadi work. Did you, then, save it
from your job there? Is it possible to save so much money
in this way? If you have kept accounts, I should certainly
like to see them. How can I hide from you the suspicion
1

Vide “Letter to Manu Gandhi”, 8-6-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

103

that has arisen in my mind? When I got angry, Shantikumarwas
present. When I asked him, he told me that you could not have saved
so much from the Scindia job. He had no reason to suspect you, as
strict care was taken to see that there was no scope for corruption
among their employees. Now let me have your reply. Sushila must
have written to you about Yukti. Take good care of her. Manu’s eyes
are very weak. They can be saved only with great care. Otherwise in a
few years’ time she might not be able to read and write.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIV

141. MESSAGE TO BOMBAY KERALEEYA SAMAJ1
June 12, 1944
I am glad you took the trouble of coming to me and giving me
a purse for the Harijans. I hope your efforts on behalf of the poor in
the country will prosper. God be with you.
The Hindu, 14-6-1944

1
The report said: “Over a hundred members of the Bombay Keraleeya Samaj
offered prayers . . . for Gandhiji’s speedy recovery . . . and presented him with a purse
of Rs. 501. The party was led by Mr. K. Subramaniam.”

104

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

142. SILENCE-DAY INTERVIEW TO JOURNALISTS1
BOMBAY,

June 12, 1944
Amen. So help us God. The contract is that there should be
silence on both sides. You may read what you can from the silence.
Another spell of a few minutes’ silence followed and Mahatma Gandhi was
asked, how long they could stay there. By a sign of his finger he replied that the
interview would last ten minutes. The journalists replied that they had been waiting at
Juhu practically all the days since his arrival, and therefore the time of the “silent
interview” should be extended. Mahatma Gandhi wrote in reply:

If there is a good singer amongst you, you can take extra time;
otherwise what is the use of your wasting time? There is no such thing
as silence in journalists.
The reporters were taken aback at the request, but one journalist came to the
rescue of the party, and he sang a song, which seemed to have pleased Mahatma
Gandhi. Another gentleman, to everybody’s surprise, volunteered to follow up and
Mahatma Gandhi wrote:

I would gladly listen to more, but ill though I am, the time is all
pledged to the nation2 .
The Hindu, 14-6-1944

1
The report said: “Mahatma Gandhi . . . received some thirty journalists at his
shack at Juhu this evening. Today was his day of weekly silence and since he was
leaving the city for Poona on Thursday, he agreed to ‘see’ Pressmen today. He was
seen in his characteristic pose, squatting crosslegged on a mattress, busy writing
something. The Pressmen crowded around him and someone passed on a chit to him,
stating that the Press was not satisfied with ‘this silent interview’ and that they were
eagerly looking forward to the day when he would be completely restored to health
and would speak to them again as before. Mahatma Gandhi wrote back on the same
chit.
2
The report concluded: “The journalists then pooled some money for Harijan
Fund, gave it to Mahatma Gandhi and left the shack.”

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

105

143. LETTER TO H. P. MODY
S UNDER BUN , J UHU ,

June 12/13, 1944
BHAI HOMY MODY,

1

I promised2 to give you a written reply to your very kind letter
of 9th instant. Here is my reply. The conferences that are meeting to
consider the future, I regard as one of the methods of diverting public
attention from the grim realities of the war.3 The future will be
decided not by conferences but by the way in which the principal
actors behave now. We should, therefore, control the present so that
the future may correspond to the present. We shall reap as we sow.
The realities are that we allow ourselves to be exploited with our eyes
shut and/or open.
I feel that I know the way out but I am helpless not merely
because I am ill, but principally because the censorship tightens round
me like the coil of a snake. I am taxing God to show me how to
disengage myself from the coil.
I shall take no hasty step. Before I take any step, I shall certainly
correspond with H. E. the Viceroy.
As to communal unity, I am wedded to it. All I can say is that I
shall leave no stone unturned to make my contribution towards a just
solution.4
There is a ring of despair running through your letter. I wish I
1

The salutation and subscription are in Gujarati.
The addressee had discussion with Gandhiji on June 9 and 11.
3
The addressee had said in his letter (C.W. 4891): “India is looking on as a
distant spectator; even when her representatives are admitted to a conference table,
they have to play the role of spokesmen of a subordinate member of the British
Commonwealth. . . .”
4
The addressee had stated: “ . . . the issue seems to lie between acceptance of
the Muslim demand, and determination to uphold the political integrity of India even
at the cost of an indefinite postponement of swaraj ... there is a tendency to underrate
the strength of the Muslim insistence on Pakistan, and that there is an increasing
number of people who feel that nothing is to be gained by postponing a
Hindu-Muslim settlement. . . continuance of the present stalemate would have a
certain measure of justification only if there were reasonable grounds for hoping that,
by patiently marking time, it would be possible to achieve political unity as well as
freedom.”
2

106

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

could induce you to share my optimism. Time never runs against a
just cause, especially when it is backed by equally just means.
Anyway you must not despair of me, even though we may not
see eye to eye on things of common interest.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
S IR HOMY MODY
BOMBAY
From a photostat: C.W. 4882. Courtesy: H. P. Mody

144. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
JUHU ,

June 13, 1944
CHI. AMRIT,

This is merely my love letter, not a business letter. For the latter
you will look to Pyarelal and Sushila. I was delighted to receive your
letter through Dr. Sen. I may not meet him, for I go to Poona
tomorrow. I have also your annual gifts. I am already in your
newdhotis. They are too wide for me. But that matters little. They are
well woven. The shawl also I prize. I did not know that you had begun
to spin wool too.
Love to you all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 4145. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7780

145. LETTER TO BHAYANKARANAND
June 13 , 1944
DEAR BHAYANKARANAND,

Your letter. Much as I should like to see you, I have no time
left. You may come and talk to Pyarelalji. Of course, I have read and
heard much about Bengal and other places. The question is how to
deal with the situation. We must not lose patience, faith or nerve.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

107

146. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 14 , 1944
DEAR MISS SLADE,

Of course you are to me what you have been always. I have
been writing to you so that I may be rid of the fear that has possessed
me.
Your decision to go to Panditji soothes me. I was and am
against haste which often proves to be waste. When I am filled with
fear and distrust of wisdom, you should suffer the adopted parent’s
warning. Of course I shall dance with joy when I discover that my
fears were groundless and my suspicion unjustified.
From the foregoing it should be clear to you that I have never
doubted your devotion.
The change of form in addressing you was necessary because I
saw my mistake. My love for you remains wholly unaffected by it.
I have already left the rest to time.
Yours ,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

147. LETTER TO KANAM GANDHI
JUHU ,

June 14, 1944
CHI. KANAM,

I have your letter. Your handwriting, I must say, is very shabby.
You ought to cultivate tidiness in all respects. You should properly
space your words, and use punctuation marks. I hope, you don’t want
to forget the Gujarati script altogether. We will certainly play
odds-and-evens when we meet. But shouldn’t you play games
involving vigorous physical exercise? Your English handwriting also
needs improvement. How can one believe in both violence and
non-violence? Can one ride two horses simultaneously?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

108

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

148. LETTER TO BISHOP OF CALCUTTA
GANDHIGRAM, J UHU,

June 15, 1944
REVEREND LORD BISHOP ,

Gandhiji desires me to thank you for your very kind letter. He was deeply
touched by it. He had expected to be able to reply to it himself. But he is still not
permitted to resume his normal work.
Although he could not be reached through correspondence while he was
undergoing incarceration he knew that the prayers of so many men of God were with
him all the time and that knowledge sustained him.
Yours sincerely,
PYARELAL
THE LORD BISHOP OF CALCUTTA
BISHOP’S HOUSE
CALCUTTA
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

149. LETTER TO JITENDRA BHATIA1
[After June 15, 1944] 2
During my stay in Juhu the volunteers rendered devoted service.
God alone can repay them.
The Bombay Chronicle, 21-6-1944

1

Head of the volunteers who had kept guard at Gandhiji’s shack during his stay

in Juhu
2

According to the report, Gandhiji wrote the letter in Hindustani and sent from
Poona, where he arrived on June 15.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

109

150. LETTER TO R. K. PRABHU
P OONA ,

June 16 , 1944
DEAR PRABHU,

I have read your letter to Pyarelal. I want to see you when I
have finished the medical treatment and am free for work. I wanted to
write to you even before your letter reached me. That was in
connection with the book you have written.1 I am now discussing with
the Navajivan Trust the whole thing. I shall do nothing in haste and
certainly not without meeting you. You are no stranger to me.
Yours ,

BAPU
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

151. LETTER TO MOTICHAND
P OONA ,

June 16, 1944
BHAI MOTICHAND,

I got your gift of grace. I have not brought over all the books in
the packet. I have brought with me only one book. But I now see that
perhaps I shall not be able to touch any literature. I have not been
able to cope with even the material collected by Pyarelal.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 15-7-1943, and also “Letter to R. K. Prabhu”, 19-6-1944 fn.

110

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

152. LETTER TO RAMESHWARI NEHRU
P OONA ,

June 16, 1944
DEAR SISTER,

I have your letter. At present I don’t feel like going to any
other place besides Bombay, Poona, Panchgani and places nearby. Of
course, I do wish to go to Sevagram when the doctors permit. I shall
surely stay with you, if I feel like going to Kashmir. Birlaji told me
about the responsibility you are shouldering. May God give you
success. I am recovering.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 8005. Also C.W. 3105. Courtesy:
Rameshwari Nehru

153. INTERVIEW WITH G. V. MAVALANKAR
P OONA ,

June 16 , 1944
On being requested as to how Mr. Mavalankar should act with reference to the
work of the Fund 1 in Ahmedabad, Gandhiji said :

You can as well represent the capitalists as I do, effectively
influencing their contributions. You will not be able at the same time
to appeal to the masses. The whole conception seems to me to be that
the few rich should ensure the declared amount. Only a popular body
can collect from the masses.
As to the constitution of the Board he advised the inclusion of some more
public workers like Vijayalaxmi Pandit.
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

Kasturba Gandhi National Memorial Fund; vide also “Letter to G. V.
Mavalankar”, 21-6-1944.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

111

154. LETTER TO LORD WAVELL
NATURE -CURE C LINIC ,
6 T ODDIWALA R OAD , P OONA ,

June 17, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

But for the fact that this letter is along the lines of your
pre-occupation, I should not have troubled you with any letter from
me. Though there is little cause for it, the whole country and even
many from outside expect me to make some decisive contribution to
the general good. I am sorry to say, my convalescence threatens to be
fairly long. Even if I was quite well, I could do little or nothing, unless
I knew the mind of the Working Committee of the Congress. I
pleaded1 as a prisoner for permission to see them. I plead now as a
free man for such permission. If you will see me before deciding, I
shall gladly go wherever you want me to, as soon as I am allowed by
my medical advisers to undertake long-distance travelling.
I have circulated among friends for private use, copies of the
correspondence that passed between the authorities and me during
detention. I do feel, however, that in fairness to me Government
should permit its publication in the Press.2
My address will be as above till 30th instant.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Bombay Chronicle, 2-7-1944

1

Vide “Letter to Lord Linlithgow”, 19-1-1943.
In his reply dated June 22, the Viceroy declined both the requests and said:
“If, after your convalescence and after further reflection, you have a definite and
constructive policy to propose for the furtherance of India’s welfare, I shall be glad to
consider it. . . . Since . . . the correspondence . . . has . . . appeared in the Press, I
have given instructions for the publication of the whole of political letters written
during your detention.” Vide also “Telegram to Private Secretary to Viceroy”,
27-6-1944.
2

112

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

155. LETTER TO RANCHHODDAS PATWARI
June 17, 1944
BHAI RANCHHODDAS,

I like your letter, although I don’t like your writing to me in
English. You certainly know Gujarati and so do I. Why should not we
write to each other in our mother tongue?
I understand the change in your thinking. 1 I want you to come
and see me at Sevagram, after I am all right. I can take quite a good
amount of work from you. I had at heart nothing but esteem for you
even when you used to write and speak against me because I always
knew that you had no personal grudge against me. You believed that I
was doing harm to the country, and hence you opposed me thinking it
to be your duty to do so.
Write to me frankly whenever you wish to.
Vandemataram from

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

156. LETTER TO SURENDRA
[After June 17, 1944] 2
CHI. SURENDRA,

I have your letter. Are you troubled by the menace of dogs?
Of jackals? Rabid foxes? Snakes? How is the dwelling? Is
the foundation high enough? Does it have a verandah? How
many rooms does it have? How is the roofing? What are you reading
these days? Do you take any exercise? What work are you doing
among the people? I have nothing to say about your not participating
in any public activities. It is good that you refrain from coming
to me. But don’t hesitate to pay me a visit, if you wish
to, when I reach Sevagram. Nathji 3 had met me. He

1

The addressee had previously opposed Gandhiji’s campaign against
untouchability; vide “Letter to Ranchhoddas Patwari”, 11-1-1933.
2
In the source, the letter is placed between the letters of June 17 and 21, 1944.
3
Kedarnath Kulkarni, Kishorelal Mashruwala’s guru
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

113

will come here. I am here till the 30th. I am keeping fairly well. The
two [kinds of] worms1 won’t leave me yet.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

157. LETTER TO INAYATULLAH KHAN MASHRIQUI2
June 18, 1944
I may say at once that nothing has been issued from this office to say that you
were coming to see Gandhiji. He certainly endorses your view that Qaid-e-Azam is the
man he should try to see. He does not remember the warning you gave him through
the late Dr. Ansari. He has no objection to your publishing your letter under reply.
But he very much doubts the wisdom of carrying on public correspondence of the
nature of your letter. Premature publicity robs such correspondence of its intrinsic
value and use, and lays the publisher open to the charge of self-advertisement.
From File No. 51/4/44. Courtesy: National Archives of India

158. LETTER TO PREMA KANTAK
June 18, 1944
CHI. PREMA,

I got your letter today. You are as impatient as you have always
been. Come over when you wish to. Here I am my own sentry. People
respect my wishes and no visitors come. It is only those whom I send
for or have given an appointment to, that come. Do not believe any
rumour without first referring it to me for verification. Nobody has
been able to come and see me regardless of my wishes. If you have
any information [about such persons], ask me whether it is true.
1

Hook-worms and amoeba; vide “Letter to Gulzarilal Nanda”, after 27-5-1944.
This was written by Pyarelal in reply to the addressee’s letter dated June 12 to
Gandhiji, which, inter alia, read: “You must be remembering in what exact terms I
warned you in 1930 . . . I must avoid coming to see you at Bombay until I have
exhausted all efforts to make your meeting with Qaid-e-Azam possible.... I understand
that a report was recently issued from your office that I was coming over to see you to
discuss the question of Hindu-Muslim understanding.... I still consider Mr. Jinnah the
proper man for this unless he totally refuses to meet you. Vide also telegram to the
addressee, “Telegram to Inayatullah Khan Mashriqui”, on or before 15-5-1944.
2

114

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

About Juhu, too, you may ask me whatever you wish to. 1 Nobody
holds back your letters.
I have come here with the sole intention of meeting Prof.
Limaye2 . He can bring along anybody else whom he wishes. These
days the Professor himself is ill. I wish to do here what I could not in
Juhu. I think it a matter of shame for me that Prof. Limaye should ask
for my permission through you. I have the greatest regard for him.
I hope you will be satisfied with this much today. I need not
write separately about Deshpandeji3 , need I?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10430. Also C.W. 6869. Courtesy:
Prema Kantak

159. LETTER TO BALKRISHNA BHAVE
P OONA ,

June 18, 1944
CHI. BALKRISHNA,

Krishnachandra writes and tells me that just because a man
deceived you, you have given up milk at one meal and that you
castigated yourself too. Both these things can be done on the right
occasion but was it the right occasion in your case? During the last
imprisonment I learnt one thing, namely, that one must never be hasty
in judging the actions of one’s co-workers, one should put before the
person concerned the other side for consideration and then let him
judge himself. Think over your action from this point of view.
Do not hesitate to write anything to me. My going there keeps
on getting postponed. I think I would be lucky, if I could go there by
the end of July. I can say that I do not intend to wait much longer
after the end of August.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 809. Courtesy: Balkrishna Bhave

1

Sarojini Naidu had stopped the addressee from meeting Gandhiji at Juhu
Prof. V. P. Limaye of Vidhayak Samiti
3
G. A. Deshpande, alias Tatyasaheb, Secretary, Maharashtra Provincial
Congress Committee
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

115

160. LETTER TO R. K. PRABHU
P OONA ,

June 19, 1944
MY DEAR PRABHU,

I hope you had my letter. Will 28th instant (Wednesday)
5 p.m. suit you? I can’t give you an earlier time.1 I want to take things
easy.
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 9227

161. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
P OONA ,

June 19, 1944
MY DEAR BROTHER,

I hope you had my note 2 addressed to you at Poona. Your letter
of 17th does not seem to be a reply to it.
Of course, I would love you to come any time you can, i.e., if
your health permits. There will be much noise about our meeting and
more conjecture, but it is inevitable.
I need not think of the past but what of the present? 3 Will not
the present which I can see mould the future? Must I not get rid of the
present hook-worm and amoeba, if I am to ensure the future good of
the body?
Think it over and answer the question when we meet unless

1

Regarding compilation of The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi by R. K. Prabhu and
U. R. Rao, published by the Oxford University Press in March 1945. Vide also “Letter
to G. V. Mavalankar”, 5-7-1944.
2
Vide “Letter to V. S. Srinivasa Sastri”, 10-6-1944.
3
In his letter, the addressee had said: “You have had great wrongs and they cry
aloud for redress. But at this moment the future is more important than the past. While
I don’t venture to say that you shouldn’t seek to re-establish yourself, I would beseech
you earnestly to attend to the demands of the world’s peace. India’s cause and yours
may—who knows—be best served that way.”

116

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you would do otherwise. I am making fair progress in spite of the two
enemies.
Love.
Yours,

LITTLE BROTHER

[PS.]
Will you rather have my letters typed?
From a photostat: G.N. 8823. Also Letters of the Right Honourable V. S.
Srinivasa Sastri, pp. 362-3

162. LETTER TO KAMALA DEVI
P OONA ,

June 19, 1944
1

MY DEAR KAMALA DEVI ,

If I had the mischievous intention of teaching you a lesson, I
would have given you 26th instant. You did not look up your
calendar when you wrote. It is my silence day. But I shall be good.
You can come on 27th instant and see me at 5 p.m.
With love,
BAPU
S HRIMATI KAMALA DEVI
84 NAPEAN S EA R OAD
BOMBAY
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Presumably, Kamaladevi Chattopadhyaya, President, All-India Women’s
Conference
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

117

163. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
P OONA ,

June 19, 1944
BHAI MUNSHI,

We shall meet on the 24th at five o’clock. I am maintaining my
progress, although slowly.1
Blessings to all from

BAPU
S HRI KANU MUNSHI
ADVOCATE
26 R IDGE R OAD
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 7674. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi

164. LETTER TO SHARDA G. CHOKHAWALA
P OONA ,

June 19, 1944
CHI. BABUDI,

I have your letter. I would have allowed you to come for my
sake and it would have been a pleasure to see you; but I stopped you
for your own sake. Never mind even if you are fit enough to travel
from Surat to Bombay. You will improve still further if you observe
self-control. And haven’t you learnt self-control from me? I do not
remember having ever spoilt you, not even at the time of your
wedding.
Chokhawala has broad shoulders and is a soldier. Anand is
really anand 2 .
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 10046. Courtesy: Sharda G. Chokhawala

1
2

118

Literally : “My village cart moves at its own speed.”
Literally, “joy”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

165. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
P OONA ,

June 19, 1944
CHI. MANUDI,

I have your lettter. If you behave as you promise, I shall be very
happy. I am glad that you did not go to the cinema. Even if I do not
write to you, you should write to me regularly. It would be very good
if the climate suits Yukti. The weather there is supposed to be good.
I am improving day by day.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIV

166. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
P OONA ,

June 20, 1944
CHI. ANAND,

1

You must not brood over Vidya’s death nor get disconcerted. If
she was the inspiration of your life whilst she was in the flesh, she must
be more so having gone to her resting place. That to me is the
meaning of the true union of souls. The classic example is that of
Jesus and, in modern times, of Ramakrishna. They became greater
influences after their death. Their spirit did not die, nor is Vidya’s
dead. You must, therefore, leave off sorrowing and think of your duty
in front of you. Do not think of running to me whilst you are having
your treatment and whilst I am having mine. You will come when I go
to Sevagram.2
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Try to write in Hindustani.
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India, and Anand T.
Hingorani

1

This is in Devanagari.
Vide also “Telegram to Anand T. Hingorani”, 13-5-1944 and “Letter to
Anand T. Hingorani”, 2-6-1944.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

119

167. LETTER TO SHIRLEY HUMPHREY
NATURE CURE CLINIC,
TODDYWALA ROAD
POONA, I NDIA,

June 20, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

Gandhiji has your letter of the 4th April. I regret to have to say that his
present state of health does not permit him to comply with your request. But you will
find all the information you want in his My Experiments with Truth published by the
Navajivan Press, P. O. Box No. 105, Ahmedabad.
Yours sincerely,
SHIRLEY HUMPHREY, ESQ.
SOLWAY COLLEGE
MASTERTON
NEW ZEALAND
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

168. LETTER TO VALJI G. DESAI
June 20, 1944
VALJIBHAI,

This certainly reads well.1 But the whole thing deserves to be
reconsidered. The writing can be misinterpreted. For instance, what
can a man do in the present war? As you say, he cannot remain
neutral which means that either he should participate in the war or
commit harakiri by plunging into it. Isn’t it?
Should he go to jail? The answer is not as simple as we might
think. The second part deserves a more serious consideration. Must
only the brave grant forgiveness? One seldom comes across brave
people. Hence the quotations cited by you, although true, are like
1

The reference is to a collection of passages, extracted by the addressee from
his article “The Quintessence of Gandhism” published in Young India, 22-1-1925.
For the passages which the addressee considered as “suitable mottoes to be printed
inside the cover page of History of Satyagraha in South Africa”, vide Appendix
“Passages from The Quintessence of Gandhism”, before February 1944.

120

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

reciting the Bhagavata before a buffalo, or casting pearls before a
swine, or maybe, attaching gold trappings on to an ass!
These are but random thoughts as they come to my mind, and I
am flinging them at you! It is only for your understanding. Under the
circumstances it is best to go on doing our work silently.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

169. LETTER TO BHAGIRATHI DEVI UPADHYAYA
P OONA ,

June 20, 1944
CHI. BHAGIRATHI,

I was happy to get your letter but was equally unhappy to learn
about Haribhau1 . Keep writing to me.
I shall be in Poona till the 30th. It would be at least one and a
half months before I can go to Sevagram. I am getting better
gradually. The doctors say that it will be some time before I regain
my full strength. There is not the slightest cause for worry about me.
Durgabehn, Narayan and Aryanayakam are with me and, of
course, Pyarelal, Sushilabehn and Kanu. Abha was unwell and,
therefore, she also is here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Addressee’s husband

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

121

170. LETTER TO G. V. MAVALANKAR
P OONA ,

June 21, 1944
BHAI MAVALANKAR1 ,

Pyarelal could not deal with the papers you had sent. He was not
attending to our discussion with sufficient care for that. Besides, he
has never concerned himself with that subject. So I myself have done
what I thought proper in this matter. I could have written more, but I
think this much will be sufficient for you. If you think any points
need further clarification, please ask me and I will immediately
explain. Your two questions regarding the Kasturba Fund could have
been drafted differently. But I have not touched them. I wanted to
save time. I have made only a slight change regarding copyright, and
it is self-explanatory.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Maganbhai’s letter is enclosed. According to our understanding,
I assume that you yourself will explain the matter to him, won’t you?2
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1249

171. LETTER TO MAGANBHAI P. DESAI
P OONA ,

June 21, 1944
CHI. MAGANLAL,

I have your letter. The party had gathered at Juhu and it was
decided that whatever problems were brought to me should be
referred by me to anyone I like from among the list of certain names.
The question may, if at all, be referred to me after this.
I have accordingly passed on your letter to Dada Mavalankar. If
he cannot satisfy you, you can have Rs. 8,000 from me. You are not
1
Speaker, Bombay Legislative Assembly, 1937 to 1945; later Speaker,
Central Legislative Assembly and Lok Sabha
2
Vide also the following item.

122

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to waste any time over it. Herewith find a copy of my letter to
Vidyabehn1 regarding the [Gujarat] Vidyapith. It did not occur to me,
although it ought to have occurred, to consult you in the matter. Still,
I hope you will like my reply.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

172. LETTER TO NRISINHAPRASAD K. BHATT
June 21, 1944
BHAI NANABHAI,

I have your letter. I have also heard a lot from Manubhai 2 and
Vijaya 3 . There seems to be some trouble about Prithvi Singh. They
have asked for your experience. Do not for a moment think that it is
your responsibility. You talked open-heartedly and were, in
consequence, deceived. Why then feel hurt about it? How can the
world go on, if we do not have such faith? I could understand your
pain from what Manubhai told me. Hence this letter. Never mind, if
you did not get my earlier letter. Come over to Sevagram, if and when
I go there.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

173. LETTER TO PARACHURE SHASTRI
P OONA ,

June 21, 1944
4

BHAI PARACHURE SHASTRI ,

I have preserved your postcard. I have always been pained that
the country cannot fully utilize your learning. I have looked in vain
for possibilities. You should yourself find a way through persistent
effort. The rest when we meet. It appears almost impossible to reach
1

Vidyagauri Ramanbhai Nilkanth
Manubhai Pancholi
3
Vijaya Pancholi
4
A leprosy patient who came to Sevagram in November 1939, and stayed there
till his death on September 5, 1945
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

123

there by the end of July. Bhai Manohar’s 1 tapascharya is incomparable.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

174. LETTER TO HARIBHAU PHATAK
P OONA ,

June 22, 1944
MY DEAR HARIBHAU,

I could not trace your precious letter when Baburao called. I
admitted him, being sent by you. He had nothing to say. I found your
letter after you had gone.
I did not know that there was no Board here. I am more than
agreeable that you should take charge. As you know, the whole thing
is under the Sangh’s 2 charge. Bapa is arriving here on 1st July.
Probably he is here today. I advise your seeing him and showing this
letter to him. You need have no delicacy about offering your services.
Of course, cases like Baburao’s should be helped, and helped
promptly. The collection made here should principally, if not wholly,
be used in Poona or perhaps Maharashtra proper. This again should
pass through the Sangh who accept my recommendation without
demur. This I shall do. Could you come on Sunday at 4.30 p.m.?
I do not know whether I ever acknowledged your letter
accompanying the sweets you sent. I have not yet tasted them.
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat: C.W. 2803. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Gandhi

1
Manohar Divan who “dedicated himself to the service of lepers”; vide “Civil
Disobedience”, 15-10-1940.
2
Harijan Sevak Sangh

124

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

175. LETTER TO LAKSHMIBAI ABHYANKAR
P OONA ,

June 22, 1944
DEAR SISTER,

Of course, I remember your husband very well. I was struck by
his sincerity, and the accuracy with which he approached the subject
he had made his own.
And only two days ago I had the pleasure of meeting Dr.
Belvalkar and receiving from him his volumes on the Bhagavad Gita.
It gives me, therefore, much joy to be able to send my blessings
to your son and to Usha Belvalkar on their forthcoming marriage.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
SMT. LAXMIBAI ABHYANKAR
S ARDAR GRIHA
BOMBAY
From a copy: pyarelal papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

176. LETTER TO KANCHAN M. SHAH
P OONA ,

June 22, 1944
CHI. KANCHAN,

I waited for you in Bombay. If you had met me there, you
could have travelled with me up to Poona. Now I cannot send for you
here. If I send for you, why not Amtul Salaam? Why not the other
women also who wish to come? Vasumati is pining to come. Even the
present number in Panchagani is too large. When I go there you all
can have the pleasure of my company to your hearts’ content. I am
impatient to go there just for that reason. I hope that you will
understand my position and have patience. There are lots of people
here to attend on me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8268. Also C.W. 7174. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

125

177. LETTER TO GOKHALE
P OONA ,

June 23, 1944
MY DEAR GOKHALE,

I am quite clear that you should try to cure yourself of pleurisy.
It is unnecessary to think ahead of four or five months. You will then
act according to the circumstances then existing. If I am out, you will
write to me.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

178. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI1
P OONA ,

June 23, 1944
CHI. MANUDI,

Your falling ill as soon as you arrived there has shaken me. If
you faithfully carry out all that I have told you, you would never fall
ill. The decision to study is a good one. But you must not study just to
get through the examination. Study whatever you can without
straining your eyes. You are impatient as all young people are. But I
expect patience from you. The virtues that I have seen in you are not
found in all girls. Having regard to them, when I see the smallest
drawback in you it seems to me a mountain and something
unbearable.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U/XXIV

1

The addressee had been upset by Gandhiji’s letter to Jaisukhlal Gandhi, vide
“Letter to Jaisukhlal Gandhi”, 12-6-1944, and had asked Gandhiji to forgive her.

126

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

179. LETTER TO PRITHVI SINGH
P OONA ,

June 23 , 1944
BHAI PRITHVI SINGH,

I should be betraying you if I did not convey to you something
more I have heard about you.1
It appears that you had spread your net beforehand, got
Nanabhai to side with you and through him influenced me. When the
time came you cast me aside. That is to say, you cast aside nonviolence.
You clung to Mirabehn and tried to win me back through her.
You cast lustful eyes on two girls but neither of them fell into
your hands.
The woman whom you have married was to marry her
benefactor. But she abandoned him and linked herself to you.
Apart from these, there are various small things I am
overlooking. I am carrying on correspondence with Nanabhai. I
should be extremely happy if you could satisfy me in the above
matter. I have nothing to say if you think that there is no need to
satisfy me. If you just acknowledge this letter, I shall know that you
have received it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

180. LETTER TO AMRITA LAL CHATTERJEE
P OONA ,

June 24, 1944
MY DEAR AMRITLAL,

Just a line to tell you that I had a long chat with Abha and
Kanu. They are both prepared to be married after we descend from
Panchgani, if your and your wife’s blessings can be had. Narandas
1

Vide also “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 15-7-1943.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

127

and Jamnabehn have given their consent. Narandas won’t be present
at the ceremony.1 Kanu is trying to persuade his mother, too, to
abstain. I hope you two will also be able to exercise restraint. What is
the use of spending money for a sentiment? But if you cannot, you
will, of course, come. Please let me know your wishes per return. Write
to me at Panchgani 2 , Satara District.Abha and Manu will be with me.
Hope you are all well.
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat: C.W. 10495. Courtesy: Amrita Lal Chatterjee

181. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL GANDHI
P OONA ,

June 24, 1944
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,

I have your two letters. You did right in giving all the details. I
will write about that later. There is no need at all to send Manu to
Rajkot. She has come there only with my permission. Let her get well
soon and then study. Let her not be impatient to get through the
examination. She knows household chores; let her, therefore, busy
herself a little in that work. She will have to do it because of the
difficulty regarding servants. If she remains ill there, I will conclude
that her place is at Sevagram. But if she follows my instructions, I am
sure she would never fall ill. If the vaid’s medicine agrees with Yukti,
and if he wishes to give some medicine to Manu also, he may do so.
Her health is good and it must not be impaired. She must study with
due care for her eyes.3
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I intend showing your letter to Shantikumar. He should know
what you have written.4
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIV
1

Vide also “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 10-6-1944.
Where Gandhiji reached on July 4
3
Vide also letter to the addressee, “Letter to Jaisukhlal Gandhi”, 12-6-1944,
and “Letter to Manu Gandhi”, 23-6-1944.
4
ibid.
2

128

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

182. LETTER TO VIJAYA ANAND
P OONA ,

June 25, 1944
MY DEAR VIJAYA ANAND1 ,

I have your dear letter. You did well in writing to me so frankly
as you have done.
I have signed 10 albums for you.
I hope the Maharaniji is well. Love to you all.
BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

183. LETTER TO V. P. LIMAYE
S EVAGRAM , via WARDHA , 2

June 25, 1944
DEAR ACHARYA LIMAYE,

I have seen a copy of the notice. It reads awful. It gives the
occasion3 a public character. Have you seen it? And it advertises the
time as 4 to 6. I see that I shall be unequal to it. Not more than half an
hour should be given in all. If the questions are the fewest possible, I
can wind up the whole thing in a few minutes. Let there be an
exhaustive report of the work done sent to me and the questions well
beforehand. Let me have also a list of those invited with their
addresses and status in the organization. I trust that Prof. Javdekar and
Bhagwat are included in the list.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C:.W. 999. Courtesy: V. P. Limaye

1

The Maharajkumar of Vizianagaram
Permanent address
3
The reference is to Gandhiji’s proposed meeting with the representatives of
the Maharashtra Congress on June 29; vide “Speech to Congressmen, Poona”,
29-6-1944.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

129

184. LETTER TO V. P. LIMAYE
S EVAGRAM , via WARDHA , 1

June 26, 1944
DEAR ACHARYA,

No apology needed. The fault was initially mine. I overrated my
strength. And Sushila was not near me to repress my oversanguine
nature. What followed was excusable. Of course, whatever happened
was unconscious and with the best of intentions. What I am anxious
about is that we should make the most of the forthcoming meeting
and so ensure efficient previous preparation. I shall be very busy
tomorrow. If, therefore, I am unable to see you, you will have full chat
with Pyarelal.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 998. Courtesy: V. P. Limaye

185. LETTER TO DUNICHAND
P OONA ,

June 26, 1944
DEAR LALA DUNICHAND,

I have read your letter. My advice is that you should not submit
to the conditions; it is better to go to prison.
As to the Bengal distress, my illness renders me useless.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal. Also G.N. 5594

1

130

Permanent address
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

186. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR1
[June 26, 1944] 2
Too busy to send you more than my love of which you have as
much as you can carry.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 4200. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7836

187. LETTER TO DINSHAW K. MEHTA
June 26, 1944
BHAI DINSHAW,

I could have only a brief talk with you. But all the time I have
been thinking about the nature cure. The result is:
This institution should remain as it is, with some modifications,
because it is your creation. Do not enlarge its sphere of work.
Buy about a thousand acres of land near a village under your
supervision. There should be enough space for patients and also
provision for the healthy ones to remain so. The rich and the poor
should stay in the same way, and food for them should be produced
there itself. Almost all the things should be grown there. Treatment
through earth, water, light, air and ether should be given. Manage
everything in such a way that the poor can get what they require. Such
new institutions should come up as you get more workers. The
management should be such that the institution is able to meet its
expenses. Do not take Government aid so long as power is not in the
people’s hands.
Convene a meeting of naturopaths and discuss the issue. Take
workers from among them.
There should be a trust for this and the new institution which
will come into being. At least you, Ghanshyamdas and myself should
1

& 2 The letter was written as postscript to one dated Poona, June 26, 1944,
from Dr. Sushila Nayyar to Amrit Kaur, which read: “I went to Bombay yesterday . . .
when I returned at night I found that a reply had been received from my ‘Dear Friend’
[M. A. Jinnah]. He has said a firm ‘No’. I must say that though we did not expect much
from him, we were not quite prepared for that. Now the end is clear. It is only a matter
of weeks. . . .”
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

131

be among the trustees. You can take any fees you think proper. But
take [only] the sum fixed for your personal expense. The rest should
be debited to the institution’s account. Define what items can come
under nature cure, and write books of general knowledge about them.
There is no need to wait for some occasion to arise. So long as I
am out and alive, it will be under my supervision. But it should be so
planned that it will function even during my absence.
I have already started discussing it with Ghanshyamdas. He has
agreed to do as I say.
Think over this and let me know what changes you would like.
You are absolutely free to suggest them. This can be accomplished
only if you have your heart and mind in it. I can think only of you in
this matter. I wish to forget about it, if you are not convinced. I
believe we can get the help we need for the institution.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

188. TELEGRAM TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
VICEROY
P OONA ,

June 27, 1944
P RIVATE S ECRETARY TO VICEROY
VICEROY’S C AMP
IN

VIEW

PERSISTENT

INQUIRY

ABOUT

EXCHANGE

RECENT

1

LETTERS SUGGEST RELEASE THEREOF FOR PUBLICATION.

GANDHI
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, p. 4

1

The correspondence was released to the Press from New Delhi on July 1,

1944.

132

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

189. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
P OONA ,

June 27, 1944
MY DEAR BROTHER,

The enclosed copies1 speak for themselves. The Viceregal reply
does not dishearten me. I had expected nothing else. The reply,
however, makes it clear to me that they cannot keep me free after
discharge by the doctors. For, I see no way of giving co-operation in
the continuing degradation of the people. Even the food relief is only
so-called. But we must discuss the whole thing when we meet. Come to
Panchgani when and if your health permits. I am in no hurry to make
any public declaration. I am simply storing and digesting the
information I gather.
Love from

YOUR LITTLE BROTHER
From a photostat: G.N. 8824

190. LETTER TO GAJANAN N. KANITKAR
P OONA ,

June 28, 1944
DEAR BALUKAKA,

Apart from everything else, I plead for pity on me. I have not a
moment to spare. I tell you, I have been longing to have your son2 by
me to teach me spinning on his improved takli. But I had to give up
the attempt. So you should excuse me for old times’ sake. Write out
all you have to say. The Congress can’t be compromised by you or
me. It will be compromised by the collective activities of its members,
if the sum total is discreditable. Do see the distinguished friends you
mention. Your work need not be affected by the absence of the
contemplated interview with me.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 971. Courtesy: Gajanan N. Kanitkar
1
Of Gandhiji’s letter to Lord Wavell and his reply; vide “Letter to Lord
Wavell”, 17-6-1944.
2
Dhundiraj; vide also “Letter to Dhundiraj G. Kanitkar”, 9-7-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

133

191. SPEECH TO CONGERSSMEN, POONA1
June 29, 1944
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

When some of you came to Juhu, doctors forbade me to speak a
word to you. And I felt very unhappy. When I came over to Poona I
thought I would be able to meet you. Even now I am unwell, but still I
meet many people and am able to talk to them. Why not with you
then? I had hoped to spend some more time with you, but the doctors
have permitted only half an hour. I have promised not to take more
than the allotted thirty minutes. Hence I omit all preliminaries.
At my request 2 , the Secretary kindly sent me a report of the
happenings in Maharashtra since August 9, 1942. Besides the names
of those assembled here, he has sent some questions. I have read all
these papers carefully. I do not propose to reply to all the questions.
This will not be possible within half an hour. You will, therefore,
excuse me for confining my remarks only to the main issues.
Today I do not meet you in any representative capacity. In
terms (the language) of satyagraha, the moment I was imprisoned I
ceased to wield the authority reposed in me by the Congress. And if I
am now out of prison, it is not because of my strength or yours, but
because of my illness. In a satyagrahi, illness is a thing to be ashamed
of. This fortuitous release does not restore to me the authority that
lapsed with my imprisonment.
I discussed my position with some lawyer-friends3 in terms of
the law prevalent in the land, and they are of the opinion that what I
hold to be true in terms of satyagraha happens to be true legally too.
What then is my status today? You who have gathered here occupy
certain positions of authority in the Congress. I do not hold any such
position. I am not even a four-anna member of the Congress.
Iresigned from the Congress some years ago to try out the subtler laws
of satyagraha. Nevertheless, I know that I hold a big place in your
1

About 50 representative Congressmen of Maharashtra met Gandhiji at the
Nature-cure Clinic of Dr. Dinshaw Mehta. Gandhiji spoke in Hindustani. The
translation given here has been collated with that of The Hindu, 1-7-1944.
2
Vide “Letter to V. P. Limaye”, p. 333.
3
Bhulabhai Desai, V. F. Taraporewala and K. M. Munshi. For their opinion,
vide Appendix “Opinion on Gandhiji’s Responsibility”, 6-2-1944.

134

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

hearts, and you would give weight to whatever I might say. What I
may say is to be regarded merely as an individual opinion, to be
accepted or rejected by you at will. It could have been otherwise, if I
were speaking in a representative capacity. Then I would have
expected you as disciplined soldiers to carry out my instructions. I
thought of many things after reading the documents sent by you. But
instead of discussing past happenings, I shall speak only of our
present duties. What work I have done and am still doing in India or
abroad is rooted in truth and non-violence. I have been experimenting
all along with the introduction of truth and non-violence in
day-to-day life. Some people believe that truth and non-violence have
no place in the practice of politics and public affairs. I do not agree. I
have always believed that these weapons are entirely useless, if they are
meant only for personal salvation. I would not like to have even
beatitude for myself alone. I am no slave of any rigid school. I have
no guru. If I discover a guru, I shall bow before him. My religion
teaches me the need for a guru and how to honour one. But today my
heart is my only guru. I do not propose to give you a religious
discourse today. I must say that if you have lost faith in the efficacy
of truth and non-violence, I have no remedy for your despondency.
Inside the prison I used to read the newspapers and now, when I am
out, I hear from people that a sense of frustration has overpowered the
country. But I felt no frustration in my heart in the prison and I feel
none outside. If Congressmen feel frustrated, it is because they lack
faith in truth and non-violence. Examine your hearts. Has your faith
dwindled? You are good for nothing, if you are still in the Congress
but have no faith in truth and nonviolence. Your being in the
Congress would then be a sign of your ignorance.
Who are Congressmen? Only those whose names are in its
register? The Congress should be a poor organization, if it depended
for its strength on the few lakhs of members whose names appeared
on Congress rolls. At the Faizpur Congress1 , Deo and Dastane used to
stress the point that the work done on behalf of the Congress was
beyond description. Huge crowds gathered at Faizpur. But a very
small proportion of them was on the Congress rolls. I noticed
atFaizpur that not even untouchability had disappeared from the
place. A cow could drink water at a well, but not an untouchable. Deo
and Dastane did not notice this, but it did not escape my eyes. It has
1

In December 1936

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

135

been my endeavour from childhood to identify myself with the
masses. I am one of them and not separate or different. That has
enabled me to enter their hearts and to understand them. At the
Round Table Conference I claimed that I represented the whole of
India, those who supported the Congress and also those who had
nothing to do with it. Since the Congress claims to serve all, it
represents them all. Congress represents to a greater extent the poor,
hungry and helpless millions. I shall not discuss today why they lost
the lustre in their eyes. I will merely affirm that you represent
Congress, and you cannot represent it without subscribing to truth and
non-violence.
Experience has led me to the firm conviction that our success
has been mathematically proportionate to the extent to which we have
adhered to truth and non-violence. The phenomenal awakening in the
masses during the last 25 years has been entirely due to the purity of
our means. And to the extent untruth and violence have crept in, they
have hindered our progress. Whatever harm has come our way, it is
due to our lack of faith in truth and non-violence. Today I do not
wish to sit in judgment upon your actions. I only wish to place my
convictions before you. Your faith in me overwhelms me. My
fortuitous release has given rise to great expectations. I am doubtful
whether I deserve all this confidence. But this much I know that
whatever strength I may have is entirely due to my being a votary of
truth and non-violence. If I make any suggestions, they are based on
my faith in these fundamentals. You want to follow a man like me.
You raise minor doubts which trouble me. If you feel frustrated, ask
yourself whether your faith in truth and non-violence has ebbed away.
If so, you should strengthen it. Dark clouds surround us. The
Government is sitting tight. We do not see the way ahead of us. The
communal tangle is, of course, there. Many people are cursing me.
And yet I suffer from no sense of frustration. Frustration can spring
only from one’s own weakness and loss of faith. So long as we do not
lose faith in ourselves, it is well with India. My talking to you would
have served its purpose, if I am able to drive away your frustration.
You will ask me, what about the political deadlock, the
communal tangle, the food-scarcity and the like? I have an answer for
each of these. But I may not attempt it at this meeting. I am convinced
that the sufferings of the people cannot be alleviated until India has
real political power. I cannot alleviate the food situation by feeding a
136

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

few hungry mouths. I have friendly relations with millionaires, not for
personal gain or in order to flatter them, but in order to get a portion
of their wealth for the service of the poor. They too know this. But
their money cannot serve the hungry millions at present.
What is the root cause of this widespread starvation? Under the
cover of war, the Government is extorting huge sums. I am of the
opinion that if India had been free, there would have been no war with
Japan. And if Japan attacked us, we would have defeated it much
earlier. I do not want to bring in Japan. I do not want a change of
masters. I want to he free from all foreign control. For me the four
corners of India are enough for us. If India understands my message
thoroughly, freedom can come to us this moment.
You must have seen my recent correspondence with the
Government. Starvation and destitution are stalking the land. Millions
of rupees are being drained out of India. We may not be deceived by
the wealth to be seen in the cities of India. That wealth does not come
from England or America. It comes from the blood of the poorest. I
claim to be an economist though not of the academic sort. I
understand the roots of misery and [poverty] of India. Are you going
to stamp out India’s starvation by feeding a few hungry mouths?
There are said to be 7,00,000 villages in India. Some of them have
been simply wiped out. Who has kept count of them? I am a villager. I
can recognize at a glance the traces of a ruined village. Where has it
gone? Where are the villagers? If anyone raises a doubt about my
allegations, I can go round with him and show him the devastation.
God will give me the strength for that. The Government reports,
though an underestimate, of the thousands who have died of starvation
and disease in Bengal, Karnataka and elsewhere are shocking. But this
devastation is negligible compared to the wider havoc wrought over
India through the centuries. Why this havoc? It is because the blood
of the poorest is being sucked; whoever eats a morsel more than he
really needs, is sucking the blood of the poor. The money that goes to
England and America is not your money, it is the blood of the
poorest. I tell you that the pressure from the top crushes those at the
bottom. What then is the remedy? All that is necessary is to get off
their backs. This is the meaning of non-co-operation with evil.
Wehave the mighty weapon of ahimsa. In action, it takes the form of
civil disobedience and non-violent non-co-operation. Civil
disobedience is a very potent weapon. But everyone cannot wield it.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

137

For that, one needs training and inner strength. It requires occasions
for its use. But non-violent non-co-operation can be practised by
everybody. I have already indicated the areas where we could
non-co-operate. If we had stuck to non-co-operation, the prevailing
mood of frustration would never have arisen.
I have been receiving most depressing letters and also
stimulating ones. Many Congressmen write to me saying that we must
do something. Should we co-operate with the Government in the
famine-relief work? The present deadlock, they say, must somehow be
ended. Imitating the language of the Government, I would say, where
is the deadlock? If the Government does not seek our co-operation, let
it be so. The country, no doubt, belongs to us. If we do not co-operate
with the Government, it will come to a halt in one day. But we run
after the Government. We do so for a mess of pottage, for a monthly
salary. The whole country has to suffer because a few fall a prey to
the temptation. But we are born to suffer. Our capacity for suffering
should not weaken. Many people believe that they are serving the
poor by drawing a salary of Rs. 300 a month and contributing Rs.
290 for the welfare of the poor. But this is not correct. One who
non-co-operates with the Government, and gives up the remaining ten
rupees and prefers to die starving with the poor, renders the greatest
service to the poor.
I cannot offer you any further guidance today. If you grasp the
significance of all that I have said, your way will be clear. I have no
strength to get into details. The August resolution is still there. I
cannot alter, nor do I wish to alter, a single comma in that resolution.
You too cannot do so without sanction from the Working Committee.
Remember the last few golden lines of the August resolution. On the
arrest of the principal Congressmen on the 9th day of August, 1912,
every Congressman became his own leader competent to act as he
liked, provided that his action fell within the limits prescribed by truth
and non-violence. Today you are in a position to meet and exchange
notes. Even this is, in fact, not necessary. No hair-splitting
discussions are called for. One step is enough. We must learn
resolutely to say ‘No’ when it becomes a duty. Lord Willingdon used
to say, ‘You are all yes-men.’ We must give up that tendency.
If someone forcibly raises my hand to my forehead, it will
not be a salute. And, in fact, despite his raising my
hand, he cannot make me salute, if I have the strength to
138

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

resist. My hand will involuntarily refuse. No one can force us to do
anything against our will. No one can enslave us against our will.
[From Hindi]
Maharashtrake Congress Karyakartaonke sath Mahatma Gandhijiki Baatcheet

192. LETTER TO ARUNA ASAF ALI
P OONA ,

June 30, 1944
CHI. DAUGHTER ARUNA,1

I have just read your letter. My whole heart goes out to you. I
consider myself to be incapable of asking anybody, much less you, of
doing anything that would hurt your pride.2 If you surrender yourself,
you would do so to raise yourself and the country with you. The
surrender won’t be out of your weakness but out of your strength.
This struggle has been full of romance and heroism. You are the
central figure. I would love to see you since you are so near.
Therefore come, if you at all can. Lest you cannot, this is my advice: I
do not want you to surrender unless you feel that it is the better
course. I have brought myself to regard secrecy as a sin in the
application of non-violence. But it cannot be followed mechanically. I
am working for and in the name of the dumb and the downtrodden
millions. They are strangers to the art of secrecy as I am. You must,
therefore, be the best judge of what is proper. And is that not the final
message of the Congress in the closing sentence of the great
resolution of 8th August, 1942? Every Congressman is the bearer, in
his (or her) own person, of the Congressmessage which he (or she) is
1

This is in Devanagari.
In Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book One, pp. 40-1, Pyarelal
explains: “The upshot of Gandhiji’s discussions with underground workers [vide
Appendix “Discussion with Underground Workers”, before 2-6-1944] was that most
of the Congressmen who were engaged in carrying on or directing underground
activities in various parts of the country came out into the open. Some surrendered
themselves to the authorities while others courted imprisonment by offering civil
disobedience openly. Achyut Patwardhan and Aruna Asaf Ali could not reconcile
themselves to the idea of surrendering to the British authorities.... out of deference to
Gandhiji’s judgment, Achyut decided to withdraw from underground activity. But
Aruna preferred to continue her outlaw career till the last.... Both Achyut and Aruna
came out in the open when the warrants against them were cancelled in the beginning
of 1946.”
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

139

to carry out according to his (or her) own will, remaining within truth
and non-violence. My being out does not entitle me to issue any
instructions. Apart from the technicality I really do not know how to
guide you. God be your sole guide and do as He bids you. This I
promise: I will not judge you, no matter what you do.
More if we meet.
Much love from

BAPU
From a facsimile: Link, 6-10-1968

193. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
P OONA ,

June 30 , 1944
CHI. MRIDU,

Why are you waiting for my letter ? Why should I thus be
burdened ? I have already written to you that you may come. But you
must not rush. Come with the readiness to stay as long as I ask. Your
last letter has been received. It will be answered when we meet, don’t
you think ?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C. W. 11229. Courtesy : Sarabhai Foundation

194. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKAR H. PAREKH
[June 1944] 1
BHAI PRABHASHANKAR,

Maganbhai has at last decided to accept whatever judgment I
give. But he has told me that I should give my judgment after
considering his statement and your reply to him. I have agreed. If you
also think it is proper then have a lawyer draft a reply to Maganbhai’s
statement and send it to me. Engage a competent lawyer. It would be
1
From the contents it appears that the letter was written in June 1944; vide
“Letter to Maganbhai P. Desai”, 21-6-1944 and “Letter to Prabhshanker H. Parekh”,
9-7-1944.

140

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

best if you could have Mavalankar. If you have any papers, send them
to me. I hope you have now recovered.
Vandemataram from

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

195. LETTER TO RAMDAS AND NIRMALA GANDHI
[Before July 1, 1944] 1
CHI. RAMDAS AND NIMU,

Since Ba is not here, who is there gently to rebuke you for not
writing at all? Every day I hope that I will see the handwriting of
either of you. Just now, I am in a clinic. I feel better. It will take time.
Perhaps I may go to Panchgani after the 1st. How are you all getting
along?
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI R AMDAS GANDHI
TATA ’S OFFICER
NAGPUR, C.P.
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

196. TELEGRAM TO BRIJLAL NEHRU
July 1, 1944
BRIJLAL NEHRU
S RINAGAR (KASHMIR)
RECEIVED

TELEGRAM.

HAVE

NO

ANXIETY.

WRITING.

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
From the reference to Gandhiji being “in a clinic” at the time and his
proposed visit to Panchgani “after the Ist”; in June, 1944, Gandhiji was convalescing
at Dr. Mehta’s clinic in Poona and thereafter went to Panchgani on Juluy 2.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

141

197. SPEECH AT POONA1
July 1, 1944
Gandhiji said that when he saw in the papers in the detention camp that he was
appointed Chairman of the Trust he was surprised, but he reconciled himself to the
position by the thought that the conception behind the proposal to make him
Chairman was that he should, on his release, guide the trustees in determining the
object of the Fund and regulating its application from time to time. The belief was
reinforced by the fact that the chief originator of the idea was Shri Narandas Gandhi
who had set up the practice of presenting him with a purse collected chiefly in
Kathiawar for the purpose of helping the spread of the hand-spinning movement and
allied activities in Kathiawar. Gandhiji, however, could not shoulder the burden of
attending meetings of the Trust regularly and guiding its day-to-day work. The real
Chairman was Sir Purushottamdas Thakurdas, the Vice-Chairman.
While the Fund was taking shape, the tragic death of Kasturba came. The idea
of a National Memorial possessed the public, and the originator responded by
combining the purse with the Memorial and merging the former in the latter. Thus the
present Trust was formed. Kasturba was a simple woman devoted to village life,
actually living and serving among villages. The object of the Fund was very properly
the welfare of village women and children. It was well that the trustees and the donors
should know the whole of his mind on the question of the welfare of women and
children in the numerous villages of India. The welfare of his conception
encompassed the whole life of the women and children in the villages. It, therefore,
included maternity, hygiene and the treatment of diseases, and education. Education
meant the basic education of the Hindustani Talimi Sangh. The scope of the Fund,
therefore, excludes its use in towns and cities or in education abroad or even in the
Universities of India. He said that it would be readily conceded that while the sum of
rupees 75 lakhs appeared to be big for the purpose of a Memorial, it was ridiculously
small for the scope he had indicated. Gandhiji said that he would be a useless
Chairman and guide, if the trustees did not share his idea as to the scope of the Fund.
Proceeding, Gandhiji said that there was talk that he had said that the
collection should be confined to capitalists and that the general public need take no
part in the collection. It was a travesty of truth. The principal men who could move in
the matter of organizing country-side collection were behind prison bars. He was
himself disabled. He, therefore, expected his rich friends to pull their fullest weight.
He could never be guilty of harbouring even the thought that the Congress and other
1

Gandhiji presided over a meeting of trustees of Kasturba Gandhi National
Memorial Fund. He spoke in Gujarati.

142

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

workers should sit supine. The Memorial was a National Memorial in which
everyone, no matter what his politics, was expected to put in his best effort. It would
be no Memorial, if the collections were confined to capitalists. Indeed Mridulabehn,
who was one of the most active of workers, had come to him for guidance in the
matter of collections in Gujarat.
An unwarranted but pardonable suspicion seems to have been created by the
currency of the conversation he had with Dadasaheb Mavalankar who had come for
discussion. Gandhiji had told him that so far as he was concerned his work should be
confined to the exercise of his unrivalled influence among the moneyed men. “He is,
like me, an ailing man,” said Gandhiji. He would not like him to risk his health in
doing the taxing work of house-to-house collection. That could be easily organized
by the workers that are still available.
It would be a thousand pities, if anyone who had faith in the object of the
Memorial avoided paying his quota, or inducing his friends to pay theirs, under the
false belief that Gandhiji wishes people other than capitalists to refrain from
contributing to the Memorial. Indeed he considered it a good sign that so many
millionaires of India were not deterred by any real or imaginary fear of harm from
identifying themselves with the Memorial of the dead wife of a detenu condemned by
the powers that be. For him, the Chairman, it was a matter of gratification.
Gandhiji said that he did count moneyed men among his friends. He knew that
critics were not wanting who considered his association with moneyed men a sign of
weakness unworthy of a votary of truth and non-violence. The speaker, on the other
hand, considered such association as essentially a sign of his non-violence. His
many friends knew well the motive for his association with them. He received money
from them for many constructive activities, some of which were also supremely
humanitarian. They allowed him to put his hands into their pockets for the All-India
Spinners’ and Village Industries’ Associations, and for basic education as defined by
the Hindustani Talimi Sangh, and other similar causes. So far as he knew, they had
nothing to gain by his association with them. His contact with them took place after
they had proved their success as businessmen. His mission was to convert capitalists
not into mere friends and patrons of the millions of unemployed, but willing sharers
of their goods with them.
Further he had observed that some had doubted whether the Funds collected
would not be used for political ends. He had no hesitation whatsoever in giving the
assurance that he had no such idea in view. The All-India Spinners’ Association and
the other bodies just referred to by him, even though initiated by the Congress, had
no political character about them.
This Memorial movement, Mr. Gandhi added, had been initiated not by the
Congress or Congressmen, but by non-Congressmen and for a purely humanitarian
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

143

purpose. In a higher sense, no great act done by an Indian, whether politician or no,
could be without political significance. He had in mind the activities of Indians in the
field of literature and science and philosophy.1

The Bombay Chronicle, 3-7-1944

198. LETTER TO DINSHAW K. MEHTA
July 3, 1944
BHAI DINSHAW,

I saw the houses. I found them dirty. You must attend to this.
How can one bear to see dirty chairs in a hospital? The patients should
also be taught how to use them. Your assistant should know about it.
The houses of the labourers are not good at all. They should be
simple but at the same time good enough for people like us to live in.
You saw the lavatory and noticed the stink. Improving this does not
involve much expense. Take this up as soon as you come down. There
is room for improvement in the kitchen also. Things will not improve
till you yourself take it up.
I was very much impressed by your management. There is
peace all over in the institution. Nobody talks loudly. You are
yourself soft-spoken, and you seldom talk. Usually we shout while
talking.
I hope to write more about the new scheme immediately.
I often call to mind Gulbai’s2 services.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

The report added that during a discussion which followed “Gandhiji’s
definition of the object of Memorial Fund was unanimously agreed to .... it was
decided . . . to amend the previous resolution on the definition of the aims and objects
of the Fund and to restrict it to the welfare and education of women and children in the
villages.”
2
Addressee’s wife

144

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

199. LETTER TO GOMATI MASHRUWALA
P ANCHGANI,

July 3, 1944
CHI. GOMATI,

Wrote just this much on the 1st and the invasion of visitors
began. Today is the 3rd. I feel quite well here. If the place suits me, I
hope to beagain on my feet. Whether or not I recover, I hope to be
there in August, assuming of course that no unexpected obstacle
prevents me from going there.
I was glad that Kishorelal1 discovered the error. I was sure that
he would do so. Nobody in the world ever had a more sincere
co-worker than him. I at any rate, never had. It was distressing to me
to discourage you in your desire to come here but that was the right
thing to do. It therefore hurts me that my going to Sevagram is being
delayed. I cannot give up the desire to get perfectly well. How can I
give it up? I have nothing which I may call my own. Do not we sing
every day: ten tyakten bhunjithah? I had specially invited Nathji2 to
Poona. We met daily from [June] 20 to July 2. We have never been
together for so many days. Both of us were pleased. He stayed in
separate quarters. I am always surrounded by a crowd. It would have
been difficult for him to observe his rules in the midst of them all.
Vasumati and Amtussalaam have badly disappointed me. I placed
both of them in Dinshaw’s clinic for treatment, but they did not like
it. Now I see the matter with the . . . . 3 eye, and see no reason for
disappointment. One is disappointed only if one hopes. Is it not so?
There was no reason for . . .4 . My suggestion may have been for their
good, but even so, is it not a delusion for me to believe that their good
lies in doing what I wish? So they [may do] 5 as they think fit. Send
this to them, so that I may not have to write separately to them.
I have received Kanchan’s reply. I was glad that she exercised
patience. When I arrive there, she should spend with me as much time
as possible. I feel like writing separately to her but control the desire.
1

Addressee’s husband, Kishorelal Mashruwala
Kedarnath Kulkarni, Kishorelal’s religious guide
3
The source is blank at these places.
4
ibid
5
ibid
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

145

Though I meet fewer visitors, I have a heap of papers to attend to and
the treatment I am taking for my health leaves me so little time that I
cannot attend to them all. Here is my schedule for today.
There is no light here from 11 p.m. to 5.30 a.m. From 7 to 7.30
prayer. At 8, fruit juice and jaggery. Up to 8.30, work. Up to 12.15,
walking, massage and bath. At 1.30 eating, reading or asking someone
to read out to me. Thereafter upto 3.30 in the water-closet, followed
by a siesta and writing of letters (for half an hour). At 4.30, mud-pack
and reading or writing, lying in the bed. I started writing this letter
thus lying in the bed and it is now 4.45. After finishing this, I wish to
attend to nature’s call and so might visit the water-closet. After 5, I
will spin. As far as possible, I spin for an hour. A few days ago, I
started observing silence while spinning. Today, of course, is my
silence day. At 6, I will have some curd and fruit. After that, there will
be prayer. I will attend to it, and then go for a walk and after that,
hope to work for one hour. The fact is that my capacity for work is
still limited. I am using up what little strengthI have gained. It does
not seem proper not to use it up in that way. Thus, I act as God
prompts me to. If professing to act in the name of God, I am in fact
acting through ignorant attachment, it cannot but . . .1 Show this letter
to all.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of Gujarati : S.N. 33128

200. INTERVIEW TO STUART GELDER2
July 4, 1944
I saw Gandhi at Panchgani on the 4th July. I told him: “My Editor is anxious
to help in solving the political deadlock in India. I went to Delhi and I was
disappointed. I hope you will not disappoint me.” I asked: “Supposing you saw the
Viceroy, what would you say to him?” He immediately replied:

I would tell him that I sought the interview with a view to help
and not to hinder the Allied war-effort. But I can do nothing without
1

Some words here are illegible in the source.
This appeared under the date-line “Panchgani, July 12” as “notes” prepared
by Gandhiji for publication in News Chronicle which Gelder represented. The
interview was “distributed over three days”; vide “Telegram to S. Sadanand”, 12-71944, and “Statement to the Press”, 12-7-1944.
2

146

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

seeing the members of the Working Committee for I believethat my
authority under the August resolution ended with my imprisonment.
It was not revived by my release. You are not interested in my
personal views, but you should be, if I spoke as a representative.
I interrupted and said: “The Viceroy and everybody else is interested to know
your mind because of your hold on the masses of India.” He replied:

I am a democrat and I cannot exploit that hold except through
the organization in the building of which I had a hand.
But again I interrupted and said: “Before the Viceroy permits you to see the
Committee, he would want to know how you would influence the members.” He said:

History does not repeat itself. The conditions of 1942 do not
exist today. The world has moved on during the last two years. The
whole situation has to be reviewed de novo. The point, therefore, for
me to discuss with the Working Committee is to know how they react
to the knowledge that I gained since my release.
I have to take up the thread that was broken by the Government
in 1942. I was first to negotiate and, on failure, to offer civil resistance,
if I thought it necessary. I want to plead with the Viceroy. I can do so
only when I know the Working Committee’s mind.
But I tell you that the common talk among us is that whatever
the Viceroy may wish personally, he has no authority in the political
sphere. Mr. Churchill does not want any settlement. He wants to crush
me, if he has been correctly reported.1 He has never denied the report.
The beauty of it, for me, and the pity of it, for him, is that no one can
crush a satyagrahi; for, he offers his body as a willing sacrifice and
this makes the spirit free.2
The Bombay Chronicle, 13-7-1944

1

In This Was Bapu, p . 139, R. K. Prabhu explains that while referring to
Gandhi-Irwin talks in his address to the Council of the West Essex Unionist
Association on February 23, 1931, Churchill was reported to have said: “It is
alarming and also nauseating to see Mr. Gandhi, an Inner Temple lawyer now become
a seditious fakir of a type well-known in the East, striding half-naked up the steps of
the Viceregal palace while he is still organizing and conducting a defiant campaign of
civil disobedience, to parley on equal terms with the representative of the King
Emperor. I am against these conversations. . . . The truth is that Gandhism and all it
stands for will have to be grappled with and finally crushed.”
2
Vide also “Letter to Winston Churchill”, 17-7-1944.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

147

201. INTERVIEW TO STUART GELDER1
July 4[to6] 2 1944
I saw Mahatma Gandhi on July 4th at Panchgani. I told him: “My Editor is
anxious to help in solving the political deadlock in India. I went to Delhi and I was
disappointed. I hope you will not disappoint me.” I asked him: “Supposing you saw
Lord Wavell how would you begin to talk? What would you say to him?”
He promptly replied that he would tell the Viceroy that he had sought the
interview with a view to help and not to hinder the Allies, and it was to this end he
had asked for permission to see the members of the Congress Working Committee.
He said, he had no authority to act in the name of the Congress. According to the
canons of satyagraha, when a civil resister was imprisoned, the authority vested in
him automatically came to an end. Hence the need for him to see the members of the
Working Committee.
I said: “The Viceroy might feel, as you swear by the August resolution and by
the weapon of civil disobedience, your meeting the Working Committee members
may only result in their re-investing you with authority to carry on civil disobedience
in the name of the Congress, and the result will be that when you come out of the
interview you will hold the pistol on the Viceroy’s head and say: ‘Do this or I start
civil disobedience.’ That would make things worse than they are today.” Gandhi
replied:

At the back of that is total distrust of my profession that I am,
and have always been, a friend of the British. Therefore I can never
use the weapon of civil disobedience during the war, unless there was a
very grave reason as, for instance, the thwarting of India’s natural
rights to freedom.
My next question was: “Supposing the Working Committee was let out of jail
tomorrow and the Government refuses to give India what they want, would you start
civil disobedience?” Gandhi replied:

If the Working Committee came out, they would take stock of
the situation and discuss things among themselves and with me. I can
tell you this, that I have no intention of offering civil disobedience
today. I cannot take the country back to 1942. History can never
berepeated. Even without the authority of the Congress, if I wanted to
1
In the source, the interview appeared as “Second Statement” and followed
Gandhiji’s version, vide the preceding item.
2
ibid

148

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

do it, I could start civil disobedience today on the strength of my
supposed influence with the masses. But I would be doing so merely
to embarrass the British Government. This cannot be my object.
But the Working Committee would not sit still while people are
suffering. It is my conviction that we cannot meet fully the situation
and alleviate the sufferings of the people, unless power and
responsibility are transferred from British into Indian hands. Without
such transfer, the attempts of Congressmen and others to alleviate the
people’s sufferings are most likely to lead to conflict with the
Government.
I interrupted and said: “When things are as they are, I cannot believe that they
will transfer authority now; that is, Government will not concede the demand for
independence while the war is on.”
Gandhi replied that there was a difference between what he would ask today and
what was asked in 1942. Today he would be satisfied with a national government in
full control of civil administration. It was not so in 1942. Such a government would
be composed of persons chosen by the elected members of the Central Assembly.
“This would mean declaration of independence of India, qualified as above, during the
war.”
I thought it was a great improvement on the 1942 position. I asked him if the
military would control railways and the ports, etc.
Gandhi replied that the national government would let the military have all the
facilities that it might require. But the control would be that of the national
government. Ordinance rule would give place to normal administration by the
national government.
“Will the Viceroy be there?”, I asked. [Gandhiji replied:]

Yes, but he will be like the King of England guided by
responsible Ministers. Popular government will be automatically
restored in all the provinces so that both the provincial and the central
government will be responsible to the people of India. So far as
military operations are concerned, the Viceroy and the
Commander-in-Chief will have complete control. But it must be
possible for the national government to offer advice and criticisms
even in military matters.
Thus the portfolio of Defence would be in the hands of the
national government which would be genuinely interested in the
defence of the country and may render great assistance in the shaping
of policies.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

149

The Allied forces would be allowed to carry on their operations
on Indian soil; I realize that they cannot defeat Japan without that.
Gandhi made it clear that the expenses of the Allied operations on the Indian
soil should not be borne by India. I asked: “If a national government is formed, would
you advise the Congress to participate in it?”
Gandhi replied in the affirmative. I asked: “So it means that if a national
government is formed, the Congress will join and help the war effort. What would be
your position?” [Gandhiji replied:]

I am a lover of peace through and through. After independence
was assured I would probably cease to funtion as adviser to the
Congress and, as an all-war resister, I would have to stand aside; but I
shall not offer any resistance against the national government or the
Congress. My co-operation will be abstention from interfering with
the even tenor of life in India. I shall work with the hope that my
influence will always be felt to keep India peace-minded and
brotherhood among all without the distinction of race and colour.
I next asked: “Supposing there is a conflict between the civil and military
authorities, how would the dispute be settled? If, for example, civil authorities want
to use the railway to carry two thousand tons of food, and the military authorities
wanted it for carrying munitions, what would you advise?” Gandhi replied:

As I said before, I would not have to advise on such matters. But
supposing I had, I can conceive of the necessity of allowing
precedence to the military. But supposing the military wanted to blow
off places or practice manoeuvres in disregard of the life of the
people, I would say: ‘Hands off.’
The thing is that with mutual trust such difficulties would not
arise and if they did, they would be easily adjusted. If there is no trust,
I cannot work. I cannot work for Allied victory without trust. If they
trusted, a settlement would be easy to achieve. Freedom for India will
bring hope to Asiatics and other exploited nations. Today there is no
hope for the Negroes, but Indian freedom will fill them with hope.
Finally I asked: “What about the Hindu-Muslim differences?” Gandhi replied:

If the British meant well, there would be no difficulties.
Gandhi said in conclusion:

Most of us believe that whatever the Viceroy may wish
personally, he has not the authority in the political sphere. Mr.
Churchill does not want a settlement. He wants to crush me, if he has
150

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

been correctly reported1 . He has never denied the report. The beauty
of it, for me, and the pity of it, for him, is that no one can crush a
satyagrahi; for, he offers his body as a willing sacrifice and thus
makes the spirit free.
In the course of his explanatory statement, Mahatma Gandhi said that
throughout his talks with the British journalist he had emphasized the fact that he was
speaking for himself and in no sense involving the Congress in what he said. He
added:

I do not know how far today I represent the views of the
members of the Working Committee. And about Hindu-Muslim
formula which has nothing to do with these two statements, I have not
spoken as a Hindu. I have spoken as an Indian first and an Indian last.
My Hinduism is my own—I personally think it embraces all faiths.
Therefore I have no authority to speak as a representative of the
Hindus. That I respond to mass mind and the masses know me
instinctively is a fact which cannot be gainsaid but I have not built my
case upon it.2
The Bombay Chronicle, 13-7-1944

202. A NOTE
July 5, 1944
This is not Ramachandran’s letter. The signature is altogether
different. Let the money be sent here. There are no indications that
Harijan will be published.3 But if it is published, you may certainly
bring out its Tamil and Telugu editions.
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

203. LETTER TO RAMANATHAN
P ANCHGANI,

July 5, 1944
MY DEAR RAMANATHAN,

I was delighted to have your letter. If any member as such of
1

Vide 2nd footnote of “Interview to Stuart Gelder”, 4-7-1944.
Vide also “Statement to the Press”, 12-7-1944.
3
Publication of the journal was suspended on October 24, 1940. It was
subsequently revived on February 10, 1946.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

151

the A.I.S.A. took part in the movement, it was contrary to the
constitution and my direction. The latter was that those who
contemplated taking part were to resign.
As to sabotage and the like, I have expressed my opinion against
them as also against secrecy1
As to the particulars you mention, I would like you to see me at
Sevagram, if I reach there and am declared free from the present
illness.
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 9258. Also C.W. 3075

204. DRAFT LETTER TO THACKER & CO. AND
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS2
July 5, 1944
It was after much thought that I declared a trust in connection
with my writings. I had observed misuse of Tolstoy’s writings for want
of a trust. By curing the defect, I preserved fully the idea lying behind
dislike for copyright, i.e., for personal gain for one’s writings. The
idea also was to prevent profiteering by publishers or distortion or
misrepresentation, wilful or unintentional. I have requested the
Navajivan Trust to permit you to publish Shri Prabhu’s compilation
with the right for you to multiply editions as long as there is demand
for it, provided that the price will be reduced to the minimum, leaving
to you a profit of not more than five per cent—one half of which shall
be paid to Shri Prabhu as honorarium for his labours. One hundred
copies of each edition should be given free of cost to the Navajivan
Trust. The Navajivan Trust should have the right to publish a cheaper
edition (in English or in any Indian languages) for sale in India
including Burma and Ceylon. If, per chance, any profit accrues, it will
be equally divided among your firm, Shri Prabhu and the Navajivan
Trust.
Samsmarano, pp. 164-5
1

Vide “Letter to Annada Babu Chowdhary”, 9-6-1944; also Appendices
“Discussion on Underground Activities”, after 31-3-1944 and “Discussion with
Underground Workers”, before 2-6-1944.
2
This was an enclosure to the following item.

152

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

205. LETTER TO G. V. MAVALANKAR
P ANCHGANI,

July 5, 1944
BHAI MAVALANKAR,

I had a talk 1 with Bhai Prabhu. I didn’t get the impression that
he had done anything through a selfish motive. I went through the
papers submitted by him. I don’t find copies of our communications
to him. I will go through them when they arrive. I don’t need them,
however, for future use. I am, therefore, sending herewith a draft2 of
the letter to be addressed to both the publishing firms. If you approve
of it, I will write accordingly. If you wish to suggest changes, you may
do so.
I have been discussing what to say on the blurbs. If you have
any suggestions to make in regard to it, please do so. I have also been
thinking about the title of the book on brahmacharya. You would not
probably like to waste time in thinking over a matter like this.
If you have any suggestions or comments to make regarding
the arrangements for the Kasturba Memorial Fund, you may do so.
Would you like to make any suggestions regarding the names of the
ten trustees?
The air here is quite humid. Its magic will be known by and by.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1719

206. LETTER TO JOHN HAYNES HOLMES
AS AT S EVAGRAM , via WARDHA , 3

July 6, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I was much touched by your letter of 10th May last.
Dissolution of my wife’s body has enriched my life. For, I
remember only her great merits. Her limitations were reduced to ashes
1

On June 28; vide “Letter to R. K. Prabhu”, 19-6-1944.
Vide the preceding item.
3
Permanent address
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

153

with the body.
As for me, I am making slow but steady progress. We are all
passing through anxious times. Sympathy of friends like you sustains
me in my struggle against forces of evil.
Mirabehn has gone to the Himalayas for health’s sake.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
1

DR. J OHN HAYNES HOLMES
10 P ARK AVENUE
NEW YORK 16 N. Y.

From a photostat: C.W. 10965. Courtesy: S.P.K. Gupta. Also from a copy:
Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

207. LETTER TO DR. JOSIAH OLDFIELD
AS AT SEVAGRAM,

via

WARDHA, 2

July 6, 1944
MY DEAR OLDFIELD,

Your letter revives very old and sweet memories. Of course, you
could point out many omissions in my writings. I was not writing an
autobiography. I wrote about my experiments with truth. WhateverI
deemed necessary for the purpose and recollected, I reduced to
writing.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 4518. Courtesy: Dr. Josiah Oldfield

1

1879-1964; American clergyman; founder-member of American Civil
Liberties Union, and the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured
People; Editor of Unity; Rabindranath Tagore Memorial Visiting Professor (under the
auspices of the Watumull Foundation) at Banaras Hindu University from October 1947
to January 1948; author of My Gandhi, and books on religion and social subjects
2
Permanent address

154

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

208. LETTER TO SAROJINI NAIDU
PANCHGANI, S ATARA DIST.,

July 6, 1944
DEAR MRS. NAIDU,

Bapu was very glad to have your note of the 28th ult. His acquaintance with
the late Nawab Yarjung was so slight that he does not feel any enthusiasm about
sending the message you have suggested.
Bapu has a grouse against you. Sir Radhakrishnan was here yesterday. He said
that you were as incorrigible about taking care of your health as ever. When are you
going to turn a new leaf in this respect ? How is Padmaja ?
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
PYARELAL

[PS.]
Dear Ammajan, Bapu’s anaemia is better. Bhai forgot to mention it.
How are you ?
Love.
SUSHILA
MRS . S AROJINI NAIDU
“SUKH NIWAS”
RAMKOTE
HYDERABAD
DECCAN
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar:

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

155

209. LETTER TO MANU S. MASHRUWALA
P ANCHGANI,

[July 6, 1944] 1
CHI. MANUDI,

Are you offended with me? How long will you remain so? And
is it right for children to feel offended with their parents?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 5062. Courtesy: Surendra Mashruwala

210. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
P ANCHGANI,

July 6, 1944
CHI. MANUDI,

Your letter is good. The work that you have undertaken is fine
but it will come in the way of your study. But never mind that. It will
save your eyes from harm. Study as much as you can with due care
for your eyesight. God has endowed you with capacity for service
and, therefore, you get such work unasked. Overcome your habit of
thoughtless spending. Take care of everything and use it as a poor
person would.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
To Jaisukhlal later.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIV

1

In the source, the letter appears below the one dated July 6, 1944, from
Kishorelal Mashruwala to the addressee.

156

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

211. LETTER TO GIRIRAJ KISHORE1
P ANCHGANI,

July 6, 1944
Just now be content with only my blessings.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 8772

212. LETTER TO R. R. KEITHAHN
P ANCHGANI,

July 7, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I hope you will have a successful gathering. Twenty real votaries
of Truth and Love are equal to or rather more than a match for a
number of indifferent persons raised to Nth power.
Love.
BAPU
R EV . R. R. K EITHAHN2
156 BANVARGHATTI R OAD
BANGALORE C ITY
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

213. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM K. JERAJANI
P ANCHGANI,

July 7, 1944
BHAI KAKUBHAI,

Indeed we have suffered a great loss in the passing away of your
father3 . He is relieved of the burden. Although I knew very little about
him, I had heard a lot about his love of khadi. The straight and noble
1

The letter appears below the one from Pyarelal to the addressee.
American missionary and social worker in India; the Mysore Government
served an externment order on him on August 8, 1944.
3
Kanjibhai Jerajani
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

157

way to fill the void created by his passing away is to emulate that love
of his.
Blessings from

BAPU
KHADI BHANDAR
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

214. LETTER TO CHHOTUBHAI
P ANCHGANI,

July 7, 1944
BHAI CHHOTUBHAI,

I like your letter very much because it is so candid. But you
have raised questions one would not expect from a man of your
intelligence. There are other co-workers like you and I sometimes
wonder if my company is stifling their intelligence. All the same, I
answer the questions.
1. I have not the least doubt of Russia’s bravery. But I would
not weigh it on the scales of non-violence.
2. It does not appear to me that anything that is happening
today can be likened to the Dharasana episode. I can understand the
hardship resulting from the refusal of the farmers to sell the stocks of
grains lying with them to the Government at rates lower than they can
afford. But the looting of Government grain stocks cannot be called
non-violent whether it is done after serving prior notice or not. I have
always considered and still consider salt public property like water and
air. I cannot include acts like sabotage of railways, etc., in nonviolence.
3. It is of course not easy to decide on a programme for
someone who is bent upon facing bullets in a non-violent way, but it is
not impossible. One is not duty-bound to give one’s name. Informing
about the action contemplated would suffice. If at the time fixed one
finds that no one has come to the spot because the notice, being
anonymous, had been thrown away, another notice can be sent. If this
is done again and again, one day the tiger is sure to come. However,
do not conclude from this that I consider the programme mentioned
in the second question non-violent even if carried out after giving
158

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

prior information. My answer is intended only to clear the difficulty
about the third question.
4. The information contained in the cutting is more or less
correct. My advice to Raojibhai was not in exercise of a right. One
does not advise as a matter of right. One commands. Is that not so ? I
lost the right to command from the moment of my incarceration.
5. Post Offices, courts, and so on, today do not belong to the
people. Even when they come to belong to the people, they will not be
personal property. Even personal property will be property belonging
to the people. Out of that, only what the nation has given unto itself or
kept for itself would belong to it. I hope this provides you all the
explanations you seek.
I have not revised the above.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

215. LETTER TO B. S. MOONJE
July 8, 1944
DEAR DR. MOONJE ,

In reply to your letter of the 2nd inst. to Gandhiji, I am to say
that you are at liberty to publish your letter of the 27th June to him.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

216. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
P ANCHGANI,

July 8, 1944
BHAI MUNSHI,

I got your opinion. 1 In the circumstances stated by you, it is not
desirable to publish it. I will preserve it with me. Your labour will

1

Vide Appendix “Opinion on Gandhiji’s Responsibility”, 6-2-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

159

not go in vain; I am already using it for my own purpose. I am
enclosing a note for Sarla1 .
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C. W. 7676. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi

217. LETTER TO GUNOTTAM HUTHEESING
July 8, 1944
CHI. RAJA,

I am simply waiting for the 20th. One need not fear the climate
of this place because one can always return to one’s own place, if the
climate does not suit one. Death strikes a man but once; cowardice
hundreds of times. Moreover you had better pay a visit, if only to
fulfil a promise. If you are still hesitant in spite of all this persuasion,
you should stay put. It is surprising that Krishna 2 cannottake care of
herself. She must stay on for the sake of Indira 3 , else I would have
dragged along both of you. Let me have your final decision.
Blessings from

BAPU
HUTHEESING
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

218. LETTER TO BHARATI SARABHAI
[After July 8, 1944] 4
CHI . BHARATI,

I have forgotten the talk I had with Pyarelal. But I like your
book 5 . It certainly has a beautiful theme. I like best the portrayal of
your heart, as presented in the book. I cannot be a judge of the
language. I have hardly read a few poems and can appreciate little. I
found the language affected. Moreover I certainly wish that your
poetic faculty blossoms through the medium of Gujarati. Is there any
1

Addressee’s daughter, Sarla Seth
Addressee’s wife
3
Indira Gandhi
4
In the source, the letter is placed after the letters of July 8, 1944.
5
The Well of the People, published in 1943
2

160

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

dearth of lovers of English? How many lovers can Gujarati boast of?
Blessings from

BAPU
B. S ARABHAI
AHMEDABAD
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

219. LETTER TO JATINDERNATH
P ANCHGANI,

July 9, 1944
DEAR JATINDERNATH,

I have gone through your letter. It makes me sad. Ill as I am, I
am powerless to help much. But taking the recital as true, the question
is why did not the two men who were so brutally assaulted resist unto
death. Non-violent resistance is possible without inflicting injury
onthe injurer. I know this is more easily said than done. But if we are
to learn the art of non-violence, we must refuse to be living witnesses
of our own degradation. You are at liberty to show this to any friend
you like. Mind, I cast no reflection on the living ones. My object is to
point the moral.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

220. LETTER TO SECRETARY, HOME DEPARTMENT,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
‘DILKHUSHA, P ANCHGANI,

July 9, 1944
S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY (H.D.)
P OONA
SIR,

I have received your letter1 of 7th instant in connection with the
ground in H.H. the Aga Khan’s Palace where Shri Mahadev Desai’s
and Smt. Kasturba Gandhi’s bodies were cremated. My purpose is
served by the present arrangement for which I thank the Government.
Yours, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3939

1

In reply to Gandhiji’s letter dated May 6, 1944, vide “Letter to Secretary,
Home Department, Government of India”, 6-5-1944.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

161

221. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKAR H. PAREKH
P ANCHGANI,

July 9, 1944
BHAI PRABHASHANKAR,

I have your letter. You are in great distress but you are enduring
it with courage. From Champa’s 1 letters, I learn that you have been
freed [from attending to Dr. Mehta’s finances.] For what work am I
appointed an arbitrator? I am not even aware of it. My appointment
and continuance as an arbitrator depend only upon the goodwill of
friends. May I know what kind of guidance you expect from me? I
have no idea what I should do. Without going deep into the matter I
should only advise you to give Champa whatever she wants. What is
there left for you now? Repeat the Lord’s name in solitude and render
as much service as you can.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
S HRI P RABHASHANKAR HARCHANDBHAI P AREKH
DERA S HERI
R AJKOT C ITY
KATHIAWAR
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XX

1

162

Addressee’s daughter, wife of Ratilal, Dr. Pranjivan Mehta’s son
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

222. LETTER TO DHUNDIRAJ G. KANITKAR
P ANCHGANI,

July 9, 1944
CHI. DHUNDIRAJ,

I have your letter. My recovery is slower than I had expected; so
now I would reluctantly ask you not to come over. It keeps raining all
day. Besides, I do not have sufficient accommodation for you. Please
ask your father to forgive me.1
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI DHUNDIRAJ GAJANAN KANITKAR
HINDMATA MANDIR
341 S ADASHIVPETH
P OONA
From a photostat of the Hindi: C.W. 972. Courtesy: Gajanan N. Kanitkar

223. A LETTER
P ANCHGANI,

July 10, 1944
2
As for Bapa’s reference of July 6, I see no discrepancy in my
opinion regarding Nanjibhai’s 3 proposed donation and the previous
opinion quoted by Bapa. My point is that no donor should arbitrarily
keep part or whole of the donation with himself. He may send
recommendation about ear-marking. If it satisfies our conditions, the
ear-marking may be allowed. If my opinion is held good, the fourth
condition is superfluous.
Thus while I see no discrepancy in my present opinion and the
past, my emphasis has changed. In my weakness, I was anxious to
make up the total of 75 lacs somehow. Now I am strong enough to
resist that temptation. We shall better serve the object of the Memorial
by securing what we can by October 2 next, than by letting donors to
1

Vide also “Letter to Gajanan N. Kanitkar”, 28-61944.
As Secretary, Kasturba Gandhi National Memorial Fund Trust
3
Nanji Kalidas; vide also “Letter to Nanji Kalidas”, 20-9-1944.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

163

fritter away the sum by local earmarkings and keeping the bulk with
themselves. In the States, generally, we are likely to experience
difficulty in spending money in the villages. I prefer the use of the
word ‘villages’ to that of the expression ‘rural areas’. There may be
rural area of Calcutta but it may not be composed of villages properly
so-called. Santa Cruz is a suburban area but not a village. I hope the
distinction I have made is capable of being easily understood.
Again our large donors will be townsmen. Their natural-wish
will be to spend their donation in their own way and in their own
place. This may defeat the purpose of this Memorial.
I see the prospect of such questions arising frequently. They
will be largely of interpretation. I am most anxious to spare Bapa’s
time and trouble. Let him unhesitatingly interpret rulings to the best
of his ability and risk difference of opinion with the chairman. In
matters of interpretation, Bapa’s shall be final except where he has
previously referred any such question to me.
I would like Bapa, if he can, to be satisfied with my Gujarati. I
know it is difficult in old age to change confirmed habits. I have
strong objection to the use of English when the use of the mother
tongue or the national language is possible. But here again let Bapa’s
wish prevail. He is on the active list. I am on the sick list and have
therefore time for indulging in preferences.
This letter should be sent to Bapa wherever he may be. It should
also be shown to Sir Purushottamdas. If he differs on the question
referred to me by Bapa, I should know.1
This opinion was drafted yesterday. It was typed today. Bapa’s
bombshell came later. I hope it will not explode.
BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

164

What follows is in Gujarati.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

224. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
[July 10, 1944] 1
CHI. AMRIT 2

I better conserve my time and energy for the business before
me. I have no news to give you. Play I dare not when there is work
which calls me. And I have hardly enough energy to cope with the
daily post.
Love to all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 4201. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7837

225. LETTER TO VANAMALA N. PARIKH
P ANCHGANI,

July 10, 1944
CHI. VANAMALA,

So the fat on your body has proved completely deceptive,
hasn’t it? More deceptive even than mine? You have got what you
deserved. If you had given up salt, etc., from the beginning, don’t you
think you wouldn’t have been obliged to give them up now? But
never mind. Rest for four months now and make your body quite
strong. Maybe, this ordeal will improve your hearing too. Show this to
the doctor. He is no doctor who treats a patient only for one
symptom. The root cause of all diseases is generally one. But all this is
idle philosophizing intended for your amusement while lying in bed.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5792. Also C.W. 3015. Courtesy:
Vanamala M. Desai

1

In the source, the letter appears below the one dated July 10, 1944, from
Pyarelal to the addressee. Pyarelal said: “By the time this reaches you, you will have
seen in the papers the latest bombshell, i.e., Rajaji-Jinnah correspondence which
was released yesterday. That ought not to surprise you. Bapu had shown his
preparedness for exploring some such formula even as far back as August 4, 1942,
when he wrote to C. R. about it. . . .” For the text of C. Rajagopalachari’s Formula,
drafted in 1943, side Appendix “C. Rajagopalachari’s Formula”, before 5-8-1942.
2
This is in Devanagari.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

165

226. LETTER TO ISHVARLAL G. VYAS
P ANCHGANI,

July 10, 1944
BHAI ISHWARLAL,

I have read your letter carefully. Most of the women have been
provided for by you and Purbai. That is as it ought to be. If I go to
Sevagram, and if you find it convenient and think it necessary, both of
you may come and see me there. Workers have no time or money to
waste. I, therefore, try to stop most of them. But there are some who
need reassurance. And these do come. Orissa has been in my thoughts
all the time, but I have deliberately refrained from speaking about it.
You have an eternal famine there. Its protector is God. Appealing in
my name is not going to be of any particular help.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI ISHWARLAL G. V YAS
P URBAI ASHRAM, S ORO P.O .
BALASORE DISTRICT
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5061

227. TELEGRAM TO ZIAUDDIN CHAUDHARI
P ANCHGANI,

[On or after July 10, 1944] 1
ZIAUDDIN C HAUDHARI2
C ARE EMDESSONS
KARACHI
RAJAJI’S OFFER SUPERCEDES PREVIOUS WRITING IF CONTRARY.

From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

In the source, the telegram is placed among the items of 1944; the date is
inferred from the reference to “Rajaji’s offer” which was published on July 10. Vide
1st footnote of “Letter to Amrit Kaur”, 10-7-1944.
2
Sir Ziauddin Ahmed, Member, Central Legislative Assembly, Vice
Chancellor, Aligarh Muslim University

166

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

228. LETTER TO MIR MUSHTAQ AHMED
July 11, 1944
DEAR MIR SAHIB,

I am clear that the conditions are derogatory and unacceptable.
Detenus who decline to avail of facilities with humiliating restrictions
do well.
But my opinion carries no authority.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
MIR MUSHTAQ AHMED S AHEB
34 P REM HOUSE
C ONNAUGHT P LACE
NEW DELHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

229. LETTER TO S. ZAHEERUL MUJAHID
P ANCHGANI,

July 11, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I feel wholly unable to undertake the task1 you have entrusted
me with.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

230. LETTER TO P. G. MATHEW
P ANCHGANI,

July 11, 1944
MY DEAR MATHEW,

I am glad you are fixed up at last. Of course, I have not
1

The addressee had asked for an article on Jinnah from Gandhiji, as he
proposed to publish a series of biographies of all prominent Muslim leaders of India.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

167

forgotten you but I have not written to the people I have not
forgotten. I write only when I must.
Love.
BAPU
P ROF. P. G. M ATHEW
S. H. C OLLEGE
THEVARA , via ERNAKULAM
From a photostat: G.N. 1544

231. LETTER TO LILAVATI K. MUNSHI
July 11, 1944
CHI. LILAVATI,

I have your letter. I do not know what has appeared in the
newspapers. I merely repeated in Ahmedabad what I had said in
Bombay. I did not describe my note as a definition in Ahmedabad.
There also I described it as a working guide.
I cannot yet do my own writing.
Your discovery about Kumarappa is excellent. I will keep it in
mind.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C. W. 7677. Courtesy : K. M. Munshi

168

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

232. TELEGRAM TO S. SADANAND1
July 12, 1944
2

YOUR

WIRE .

APPEARANCE
PRESS3 .

THIS

“NEWS

THANKS.

APOLOGIZE

ACCOUNT

INTERVIEW

WAS

CHRONICLE”

LISHED.

MEANT

FAIRLY

THROUGH

EARLY

MY

MERE

GOOD

OR

WITH

NOT

NATIONAL

CONGRESS
CANNOT
INTERPRET
SOLE

BE

FOR

WHETHER

OF

INTEGRITY

FORCIBLY
OF

UNDER
BUT

TOGETHER.
I

SHOULD

SATYAGRAHA

OF

THOUGH

PROMOTE

OPINION
ALL
BE
MY

HOPE

COUNTRY’S
PUBLICATION

FORMULA

NON-VIOLENCE

HELD

PUBTHREE

INACCURACY.

SIMULTANEOUS
MY

IS

DURING

CORRECT

REGARD

AND

PUBLICATION

WHEREOF

CORRECTION.

THEY

OPINION.

FOR

ANGLO-INDIAN

INSTRUCTION.

REQUIRES

ACCIDENTAL.

SATYAGRAHA.

INTERPRETER

GELDER’S

PRESS

FOR

HOURS

INTERVIEW6

PRESS

RESOLUTION.

PART

THREE

ACCURATE

MATTER

GIVE 4

DID

INTERVIEW

PERSONAL.

FORMULA7

RAJAJI’S

NATIONALIST

EXCLUSIVELY

I

COVERING

CHIEFLY

REPORT
VIEWS

SHORT

TALK 5

MY

DAYS
HIS

UNAUTHORIZED.

TO

CONSISTENT
WITH

SPIRIT

NATIONAL

UNITS

ARE

FREE

TO

TO

BE

ALLOWED
CONCEPTION

WHICH

HAS HELD FIELD SINCE 1908.

The Bombay Chronicle, 13-7-1944

1

Managing Editor, Free Press Journal, Bombay
According to The Transfer of Power, Vol. IV, p. 1086, the Viceroy’s Private
Secretary, E. M. Jenkins, in his letter dated July 13, 1944, to F.F. Turnbull, the
Private Secretary to the Secretary of State for India, reported that Sadanand had
telegraphed Gandhiji “protesting against communication of his views on important
matters to Gelder, a representative of British and Anglo-Indian Press, rather than to
Nationalist Press, and adding that Gandhi’s [? Proposal] to Jinnah, if correctly
reported, ‘betrayed trust Congress and nation had placed in him’ ” .
3
The reference is to The Times of India, 11-7-1944, in which Stuart Gelder’s
cable to News Chronicle had appeared; vide Appendix “Staurt Gelder’s Cable toNews
Chronicle”, 12-7-1944.
4
Vide “Interview to Stuart Gelder”, 4-7-1944.
5
Vide “Interview to Stuart Gelder”, 4-7-1944.
6
Vide the following item and “Interview to the Press”, 13-7-1944.
7
Vide Appendix “C. Rajagopalachari’s Formula”, before 5-8-1942.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

169

233. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
[July 12, 1944] 1
I had not authorized publication of the interview or even the
substance. I had said that it should not be published, unless I
authorized its publication, and in no case had I ever dremt that the
interview would be published, with exclusive rights to any one paper.
If it was to be published, it should have been broadcast throughout
India.
Therefore I had to offer that apology 2 publicly in order to
soothe myself and also to show to the Press my appreciation that they
have respected my desire to be left alone, and also not to report
anything which I had not authorized.
I know that some things have appeared in the Press without
authority but, generally speaking, I must confess the Press has obliged
me by refraining from reporting things that are not authorized. My
object in seeing the Press people is purely to advance the cause for
which I am living, namely, the freedom of India through truth and
non-violence.
I do not seek publicity for the sake of it and just now I feel I
would serve the cause better by remaining in obscurity, if such things
were possible. Therefore I had warned Gelder that he was not to
publish anything from me unless I authorized it. He has published 3
what he has, I have no doubt, with the best of intentions, but somehow
or other I feel he has not served the cause as well as he might have.
I passed nearly three hours with him distributed over three days
in order that he might know the whole of my mind. I believed him,
and still believe him, to be a well-wisher of India as he is a lover of his
own country, and I accepted his word entirely when he told me that he
approached me not as a journalist principally but as one desiring to
see that the political deadlock was resolved.
Whilst I declared my views with absolute freedom, I told him
that his first business should be to go to Delhi and, if I could reach the
1

The statement, though released by Gandhiji, on this date, along with the
notes on his interview to Stuart Gelder, vide pp. 347-8 and 349-52 appeared under the
date-line “Panchgani, July 13”.
2
In telegram to S. Sadanand, vide the preceding item.
3
Vide Appendix “Stuart Gelder’s Cable to News Chronicle”, 12-7-1944.

170

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Viceregal throne, he should see the Viceroy1 and give him what
impressions he had gathered. Having myself failed to get an interview
with the Viceroy, I felt that Gelder being reporter of a prominent
English daily might be able to serve the cause. Even in South Africa,
where I was working in a hostile atmosphere, I was fortunate enough
to get journalists and editors to help me when they became impressed
by my earnestness and the justice of my cause. I was handling the
disabilities of Indians in South Africa.
The publication, therefore, at this stage, of an abstract [by
Gelder] of two interviews seems to me to be misfired. I, therefore,
propose to give you two notes prepared after discussion with Gelder
one of which, namely, the shorter one, after his pilgrimage to Delhi he
was free to send to his paper, and the other he could discuss privately
with anybody who cared to understand me or who Gelder thought,
should know how my mind was working
You will see after you have read the two notes that he has
compressed the two in the report published by him. You will notice
also that there are some glaring inaccuracies in the report as
published. I want to guard myself against being undrestood as
accusing Gelder of wilful distortion.
But I have found it times without number during my public life,
covering a period of over 50 years, that my statements do not admit of
being easily abridged or paraphrased. In 1897, I very nearly lost my
life when Reuter sent an abridged summary of a pamphlet2 I had
written and distributed in India in 1896. The summary was, I have no
doubt, an unconscious distortion of what I had written. Fortunately
my life was spared when I was lynched, and I was able to show that the
case based against me on the strength of the summary was utterly
wrong.
Here the abridgement has no such mischievous consequences. I
recall the South African incident in order to emphasize my point. All
my life I have handled what seemed to be forlorn causes. I have been
also a fairly successful journalist, but I did not embark upon that
calling for a living. It was a venture in order to advertise the cause I
was handling, and I gave this long preface before handing the two
statements to fellow-journalists in the hope that they would respondto
1
2

Who, however, declined to see him
The “Green Pamphlet”.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

171

my earnest wish that they would co-operate with me in dealing with
the situation which, if properly handled, may yield promising results
for mankind.
I was ill-prepared for this ordeal that is in front of me. I am in
Panchgani trying to rebuild my broken body. The desire not to see
statements published at this stage was also prompted by regard for my
health. I want to get well quickly and to be in full working order.
Since things are so shaping themselves that I might not be able to
carry out that wish; the statement being before the public, I have to
watch the reaction and deal with misunderstandings.
I have kept you, gentlemen, away from me and you have been
very kind to me. You have waited in the hope that some day I would
satisfy your natural inquisitiveness. I am afraid that you will be
perhaps oversatisfied because, if your chiefs still keep you here, you
will give me daily summary of reactions in the Press. I do not expect
that I shall want to deal with them all, but in so far as there are
misunderstandings I will have to remove them, if I possibly can.
Throughout this I have emphasized the fact that I was speaking for
myself and in no sense involving the Congress in what I said. I do not
know how far today I represent the views of the members of the
Working Committee.
As regards the Hindu-Muslim Formula 1 , which has nothing to
do with these two statements, I have not spoken as a Hindu. I have
spoken as an Indian first and an Indian last. My Hinduism is my
own—I personally think it embraces all faiths. Therefore I have no
authority to speak as a representative of the Hindus.
That I respond to mass mind and the masses know me
instinctively is a fact which cannot be gainsaid, but I have not built my
case upon it. As a representative of satyagraha, as I know it, I feel it
my duty to pour out my heart to an Englishman who I thought, and
still think, is a sympathetic listener. I claim no further authority for
my views. I stand by every word that appeared in the two statements I
have given to you, but I speak on behalf of no one else than myself.
The Bombay Chronicle, 14-7-1944

1

The reference is to Rajaji Formula; vide Appendix “C. Rajagopalachari’s
Formula”, before 5-8-1942.

172

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

234. LETTER TO HORACE G. ALEXANDER
[July] 1 12, 1944
MY DEAR HORACE,

I have your long letter—long for the time and the way in which
it had to be sent, not for the subject matter. Some of what you tell me
I had known already after coming out, and some of it is startling. All
of it is good as coming from you, even the part that I know to be
wrong. But that which is wrong does not diminish the importance of
what you have said. The defects of your narrative arise from your
good nature. I would rather have the latter than have the defects
removed at the sacrifice of it. I need not thus have qualified my
appreciation of your letter but for the fear of misleading you into the
belief that I accept the whole of your version without any deduction.
To discuss the deduction is not germane to what I want to say. You
know the other side of the picture. The popular fury was pardonable;
the vindictive and inhuman retribution wholly indefensible. But I will
not take your time over this.
Your anxiety that I should offer co-operation at least for the
alleviation of hunger, I fully understand. My difficulty is that I
cannot, for the very valid reason that the alleviation is only apparent.
The Viceroy’s good intentions in the matter are not to be doubted.
His promptness in rushing to Bengal on arrival was worthy of the
soldier that he is. The agency through which he had and has to work
is not designed to carry out the work of alleviation. You are entitled to
put your noble work and experience against what I am saying. That
only shows that evil by itself and in itself has no life. It requires the
prop of good for its sustenance. Hospitals, roads, railways are
probably good in themselves but when they are instruments of evil
they are to be shunned. They become snares. You will now realize
somewhat my meaning. Sufficient to say that at no time has India
been so bound down as now. The remedy is liberty consistent
with the movements of Allied troops. But there is deep mutual
1

The source, however, has “June”. The inference here is from the reference to
Gandhiji’s attempts “in vain to see the Viceroy or be permitted to see the Working
Committee members”; vide “Letter to Lord Wavell”, 17-6-1944. Also Dr. James Vail,
Secretary, Foreign Service Section, American Friends’ Service Council, had met
Gandhiji in the last week of June.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

173

distrust.Authority distrusts the Congress and every public body
including the Muslim League. Public opinion is flouted at almost
every turn. In this state of things voluntary co-operation becomes
impossible. I have tried in vain to see the Viceroy or be permitted to
see the Working Committee members. Now tell me what to do. I know
what not to do. I am praying to God to tell me what to do. You can
assist.
I had a pleasant union with James Vail. Love to all who think of
me.
Love.
From a photostat: G.N. 1440

235. LETTER TO MURIEL LESTER
AS AT S EVAGRAM , “ VIA ” WARDHA (C.P.),
C AMP P ANCHGANI,
[July] 1 12 , 1944
MY DEAR MURIEL,

I have your two dear letters. You are going through wonderful
if also frightful experiences. Let us hope it is the darkness before
dawn. But we must so work that the hope may be realized. We too are
having our own experiences though of a different type from yours. I
am working with might and maintain the direction through prayer and
fasting. My energy is still very limited. Ba and Mahadev live as
inspirations. More from Agatha and Horace to whom I have written at
length.2
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1
2

174

The source has “June”, evidently a slip.
Vide “Letter to Horace G. Alexander”, 12-7-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

236. LETTER TO SHAMALDAS GANDHI
[After July 12, 1944] 1
CHI. SHAMALDAS,

I do not remember whether I have said anything to you about
Bhai Munshi. I had a long talk with him. I have not found anything to
justify the attack you made on him in Vandemataram 2 . If there is any
truth in the charge, please let me know. He is quite frank with me.
I have not been able to read the comments on my talks with
Gelder in full, either in English or Gujarati. Do not defend me out of
modesty if my views differ from yours. You have full right to guide
people according to your understanding.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy : Beldevi Nayyar and
Dr. Sushila Nayyar

237. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
“DILKHUSHA”, P ANCHGANI,

July 13, 1944
MY DEAR AGATHA,

I have your letter of 14th June. Everything I do turns to dust. It
must be so, so long as I am ‘untrustworthy’. If I could plead guilty, I
would at once mend my way. On the contrary, I know, I have done
nothing to forfeit the confidence I used at one time to enjoy among
the official circles.
You know the attempt I made to see the members of the
Working Committee and, failing that permission, to see the Viceroy.
Perhaps the chief difficulty is the opinion3 , reported to have been held
by Mr. Churchill about me. You know the oft-quoted passages
attributed to him. He is said to want to “crush” me “the naked
fakir”. The body can be crushed, never spirit. But if the report is true
1

From the contents, it appears that the letter was written after “The Statement
to the Press”, 12-7-1944; vide “Statement to the Press”, 12-7-1944.
2
A Gujarati daily
3
Vide 2nd footnote of “Interview to Stuart Gelder”, 4-7-1944.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

175

and it has never been denied—it gives the clue to all my so-called
failures.
I can give you this assurance that nothing dismays or
disappoints me. If I represent the truth and if I do as God bids me, I
know that the wall of distortion and suspicion will topple. Only be
patient with me. I feel for you and friends like you.1
Recently I had sent to me a letter written by Henry2 to the Press
whilst he was in America. Tell him, if you see him, that it distressed me
deeply. I never could have thought that he could believe lies about me
without verification from me.
Ere this reaches you, you will have known from the Press about
the attempt I made to solve the communal tangle in collaboration with
Rajaji who has been with me these few days3 .
My love to all the friends. I sent a letter to Muriel.
Yours,

BAPU
MISS AGATHA HARRISON
2 C RANBOURNE C OURT
ALBERT BRIDGE R OAD , L ONDON S.W. 11
From a photostat: G.N 1525

1

In her letter, the addressee had quoted the substance of a cable sent by C. F.
Andrews to Gandhiji some ten years earlier. It read: “When two men meet without
conditions, a way of peace may be found.” She had also said: “Uppermost in my mind is
another meeting between the Viceroy and you, the result of which might well be ‘a way
of peace’. . . . So often during these days my thoughts have turned to you who for fifty
years have pioneered in finding a way of settling disputes other than by force.
Persistently there comes to my mind a supreme contribution that could be made by you
to this sorely tried world. It is this: that in the midst of total war, without bloodshed
an honourable way of peace could be found between our two countries. What a
disarming thing it would be, a tangible, living proof of the power of non-violence.”
2
H. S. L. Polak (1882-1959); joined Gandhiji at Phoenix Settlement; edited
Indian Opinion; founded Indian Overseas Association in London in 1919. In
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, p. 34, Pyarelal explains: “In the
letter in question, Henry Polak had made certain remarks about Gandhiji’s attitude in
regard to the war and his role in ‘Quit India’ struggle at a time when Britain was in
distress. . . .” of the two missions which spoke against the Congress and its political
demands in America, H. S. L. Polak, along with S. K. Ratcliffe and T. A. Raman,
formed one in late 1943; the second being that of Sir S. Ranganathan, High
Commissioner for India in England.
3
The reference is to Rajaji Formula, vide Appendix “C. Rajagopalachari’s
Formula”, before 5-8-1942.

176

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

238. LETTER TO G. E. B. ABELL
‘DILKHUSHA’, PANCHGANI,

July 13, 1944
1

DEAR MR. ABELL ,

I had your undated letter enclosing Miss Agatha Harrison’s
letter to me for which I thank you.
Could I have the courtesy extended to me of sending the
enclosed reply2 through the Viceroy’s air-mail bag?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
G. E. B. ABELL, E SQ.
THE VICEROY’S C AMP
INDIA
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, p. 33

239. LETTER TO S. SADANAND
‘DILKHUSHA’, PANCHGANI,

July 13, 1944
MY DEAR SADANAND,

Your wire. Though this reply is to you as a journalist, and for
publication, the manner of my reply will be on the basis of your claim
to be my son, a claim which you have often repeated. You have
verbally accepted my amends3 but in action rejected them. Re-read the
opening parts of your telegram and you will understand my meaning.
If you do, you will make a public acknowledgement of the offence
you have given me even in the act of accepting amends.
As a pleasing contrast to this, I may tell you that the four
reporters whom I had the pleasure of meeting4 yesterday were
1

Deputy Private Secretary to the Viceroy
Vide the preceding item.
3
R. K. Prabhu explains that The Free Press Journal, 12-7-1944, in its
reference to the Rajaji Formula, had reported that Gandhiji had been “misled”. When
“Gandhiji privately remonstrated against this” with the addressee he “offered some
sort of apology”.
4
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 12-7-1944.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

177

graceful enough to accept my amends and to understand fully its
implication.
I have a categorical reply for every one of the questions you
have asked me. But I very much fear that they are not sincere but
meant to advertise your bravery, and newspaper propaganda of an
unworthy type.
I have read with much pain your writings in your issue of July
12, 1944. They caption a wicked attack upon Rajaji and milder one
on esteemed public men. You are doing a great injustice to yourself
and shaming your nationalism by attacking Rajaji who, to my
knowledge, has no axe to grind, has forsaken everything for love of
his country and
has risked popularity in pursuing the dictates of his conscience.
Let me tell you that Rajaji has not discussed his politics with me. My
dissent from his politics, as I understood him in jail, continues. Now
that I have been involuntarily and prematurely drawn into political
controversy, I shall certainly discuss them with him as I am doing with
respect in spite of wide political divergence. Courtesy towards
opponents and eagerness to understand their view-points is the ABC
of non-violence. But you of all persons should know that they are not
likely to deflect me from the straight and narrow path I have chosen
to tread. They can but strengthen me in my resolve to follow it, never
weaken me.
And I should be all utterly unworthy leader or exponent of
non-violence, if I could be led astray by eminent leaders or constant
companions like Rajaji.
In a way the honest mistake made by Mr. Gelder, as his
premature publication1 of an abridgement of the notes of interviews
with him appears to have been, is a blessing in that the country once
again has an opportunity of knowing the measure of my
compromising nature. I have no reason to be ashamed of it and I have
never considered it a sign of weakness in me but strength.
If you will prove a worthy son of mine, you will revise the whole
of your policy and use your journalistic gifts so as to serve the
country by the way of truth and non-violence.
You have had a fair portion of material goods out of your
journalistic venture. Now dare to be poor, if need be, and instead of
1

178

Vide Appendix “Stuart Gelder’s Cable to News Chronicle”, 12-7-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

feeding the public on sensationalism, give them nothing but solid
gold. And, if you do not know how to do so, accept a humbler
vocation. You will then at least have the credit of ceasing to do
mischief.
I hope that you will publish this without alteration.1
Yours sincerely,
This Was Bapu, pp. 152-4

240. LETTER TO SHUAIB QURESHI
July 13, 1944
MY DEAR SHUAIB,

Your note and message. I have told you my head is on your
lap. I do not remember the talks I had with you. Remember I am not
like you. I am in the evening of life. If you see [any] conflict between
the Rajaji formula2 and our talk tell me and I shall know. I have gone
on [the] feeling that there was no conflict. Anyway the Rajaji formula
is my last word unless you differ and convince me to the contrary.
Am I clear ? Let not your effort be interrupted.
Love to you and the whole family.
BAPU
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

R. K. Prabhu explains: “Gandhiji’s letter . . . was . . .published in . . . The
Free Press Journal, 19-7-1944, with the following ‘in explanation’ from. . .
Sadanand: ‘Gandhiji’s letter to me dated July 13, the telegram to Gandhiji dated July
14 and Gandhiji’s reply dated July 15 are published in these columns. There could not
be an earlier publication, as I returned from Delhi only this (18th) afternoon.
Gandhiji has honoured me by recalling my allegiance to him, as a son. I claim to be
true to that allegiance even today. It is within Gandhiji’s knowledge that, according
to my concept, a son may not defend himself against parental chastisement. I see no
reason to break the golden rule on this occasion.’ ”
2
Vide Appendix “C. Rajagopalachari’s Formula”, before 5-8-1942.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

179

241. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
P ANCHGANI,

July 13, 1944
Some have said that I have admitted that the August resolution
has lapsed. Not only have I never said it, on the contrary, at the
Maharashtra Workers’ meeting1 , I made it clear to the friends who had
gathered around me at Poona that no comma of that resolution could
be altered by anybody except those who passed it, namely, the
Working Committee and finally the A.I.C.C. What I have said and
what I reaffirm is that my authority under the resolution had
undoubtedly lapsed according to my view of the working of
satyagraha.
The premature publication2 of the interview to Mr. Gelder has
led to some confusion in the minds of Congressmen. Let me make it
clear that the lapsing of my authority has nothing to do with the
normal activities of the Congress. What no one can do in the name of
the Congress is mass civil disobedience which was never started and
which, as I have said, I cannot at the present moment, even in my
personal capacity, start.
The “Quit India” resolution I hold to be absolutely innocuous.
The Gelder interview notes3 now published are in no way in conflict
with the “Quit India” resolution as I have interpreted it and, as the
joint author of it, I have every right to interpret it.
The question before me and before the All-India [Congress
Committee] is how to implement the resolution at the present time, i.e.,
nearly two years after the passing of the resolution. The Gelder
interview notes show the way how it can be done in a perfectly
honourable manner. Those who approve of the stand I have taken up
will naturally support it. People having difficulty are free to refer to
me but their approval of the stand taken by me must not be
interpreted to mean suspension of the normal activities of the
Congress and, if the Government interfere with those activities, the
inherent right of individual civil disobedience is in no way suspended
1

Vide “Speech to Cngressmen, Poona”, 29-6-1944.
Vide Appendix “Stuart Gelder’s Cable to News Chronicle” , 12-7-1944.
3
Vide “Interview to Stuart Gelder”, 4-7-1944 and “Interview to Stuart Gelder”,
4-7-1944.
2

180

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

under the statement referred to by me. The statements constitute my
individualpersonal effort to end the political deadlock. They are more
addressed to the powers that be than to the people. If there is a hearty
response, there will be no occasion for civil disobedience, individually
or not.
Answering a question put by a reporter whether the Cripps proposals could be
compared with his recent statements, Mahatma Gandhi said:

My proposal is wholly different. The Cripps proposals were
unacceptable to me for the simple reason that they contemplated
almost perpetual vivisection of India and would have created an
effective barrier against Indian independence. I want to say this
without the slightest disrespect to Sir Stafford Cripps.1 He still remains
to me the same friend that he claimed to be when he was here. For me
friendships abide in spite of political differences.
One fundamental element in my attitude is that I shall never be a
party to the sale of the rights of the people of the States for the sake
of freedom of the people of British India. At the same time I am no
enemy of the Princes. I consider myself to be their friend and, if
anybody cares to understand, I am quite prepared to suggest a
solution at once honourable to them and to the people. I live for a
cause and, if I perish, it is for the cause.
A reporter suggested that it might be that His Majesty’s Government do not,
for the duration of the war, entertain any idea for the transference of power, and it was
feared that Mr. Jinnah would not be agreeable to accept Mahatma Gandhi’s suggestion
because a national government might, in his opinion, consolidate the position of the
Hindus in the centre. Mahatma Gandhi explained:

If Mr. Jinnah does not accept my suggestion or if the powers
that be do not, I would consider it most unfortunate. That would show
that neither of them wants India to be really free at this juncture and
give India a full share in winning the war for freedom and democracy.
I myself feel firmly that Mr. Jinnah does not block the way, but
the British Government do not want a just settlement of the Indian
claim for independence which is overdue, and they are using Mr.
Jinnah as a cloak for denying freedom to India. I have uttered my
warning in the talk I gave to Mr. Stuart Gelder.
Mahatma Gandhi said that it must be the duty of all fair-minded people to break
what he called “the diabolical conspiracy to stifle India’s aspiration”. He declared:
1

Vide also “Answers to Questions”, 15-7-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

181

I have the firmest faith that they may win the war in the trial of
brute strength, because brute strength when applied to limitless
finances will naturally be supreme, but it will be only a physical
victory and lead to another world war. This is the outpouring of a
lacerated heart.
The Bombay Chronicle, 14-7-1944

242. LETTER TO STUART GELDER
P ANCHGANI,

July 14, 1944
GELDER,

Many thanks for your wire. Englishmen do not know how to
treat dysentery. One has to be very careful about diet. When Dr.
Nayyar told me about the liberty you had taken about your food, I
told her you were bound to get ill. You dare not touch Indian sweets.
They are too rich and concentrated. How I wish you would take a
course at Dr. Mehta’s health clinic. You will be radically cured.
I know that your haste was due to your overzeal and with the
best of intentions. You could not be conscious of the discrepancies. I
wonder if they are now clear to you. I can forgive the premature
publications1 of the interviews, but how can I forgive your giving the
exclusive right to The Times of India? You were to send the thing,
when the time came, to your paper or if you wished to publish the
thing here too, you should have shared it with all. You do not know
what abuse 2 has been poured on my poor head.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
2

182

Vide Appendix “Stuart Gelder’s Cable to News Chronicle” , 12-7-1944.
Vide 2nd footnote of “Telegram to S. Sadanand”, 12-7-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

243. LETTER TO M. R. JAYAKAR
P ANCHGANI,

July 14, 1944
DEAR DR. JAYAKAR,

Many thanks for your kind letter 1 . Publication of the interview
was premature as I have explained in my public statement 2 . Having
given the fullest weight to your advice3 , I could not say to the Viceroy
more than I did.
I am not going to put you to the trouble of coming to
Panchgani. If Sir Tej comes as he had said he would, I would like you
to join him. In any case now I know your mind.4
I have the lawyers’ opinion5 . I am not making public use of it.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
THE R T. H ON ’BLE,
MALABAR HILL
BOMBAY 8

DR.

M. R. J AYAKAR

Gandhi-Jayakar Papers, File No. 826, p. 15. Courtesy: National Archives of
India

1

Dated July 11, 1944
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 12-7-1944.
3
The addressee had suggested to Gandhiji to add in his letter to the Viceroy,
vide “Letter to Lord Wavell”, 17-6-1944, the words: “Under altered conditions the
resolution of 1942 was not capable of being revived” in order to explain what he
would advise the Working Committee, if and when he met them.
4
Jayakar had said: “ . . . having now disclosed your view very clearly, I do not
think it will be right to rely upon lawyers’ opinions in confirmation of it.... Mr.
Munshi gave me a draft in Poona of a statement to be issued to the Press under the
signature of a few lawyers.... you are big enough to announce to the world your own
conclusions arrived at independently of any adventitious aids.... India will accept
your conclusions with grace and, as an aid to a future settlement, they have a value of
their own, which will not certainly be increased but may be diminished by the support
of lawyers.”
5
Vide Appendix “Opinion on Gandhiji’s Responsibility”, 6-2-1944.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

183

244. LETTER TO D. N.. SHIKHARE1
“DILKHUSHA’, PANCHGANI,

July 14, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I am herewith sending you a corrected report of your talk with Gandhiji at
Poona on the 28th ultimo.
With regard to your request2 in your letter of the 29th ultimo to Gandhiji that
he should remove the ambiguity about his attitude towards the Hindu Mahasabha, Shri
Savarkar and Qaid-e-Azam Jinnah respectively, I am to say that Gandhiji does not
think the latter portion of the report of his interview that is now being sent to you
leaves any room for ambiguity.
Yours sincerely,

S HRI D. N. SHIKHARE
623/26 SADASHIVPETH
DESHMUKHWADI
P OONA
From a copy: C.W. 10512

1

The addressee, a journalist and Editor, Mahatma Magazine, wanted to
“embody the correct version of the interview in the biography” of Gandhiji, which he
published in 1945. The enclosure to this letter is not traceable. However, the
addressee had requested Gandhiji “to write in your own handwriting the most inspiring
sentences of yours”, which he quoted: “I believe freedom is coming to India with an
incredible velocity. The present moment is the darkest hour before the dawn. To me,
mere prayer, if it is sufficiently deep, can bring about the desired change.”
2
The addressee wanted to know why Gandhiji went after Jinnah, and ignored
V. D. Savarkar, President, Hindu Mahasabha, when neither of them was pledged to
non-violence.

184

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

245. MESSAGE TO BENGAL PROVINCIAL STUDENTS
FEDERATION-I1
July 14, 1944
Fight and you will win through your work even without a
message.
The Bombay Chronicle, 21-7-1944

246. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
S EVAGRAM 2 ,

July 14, 1944
CHI. AMTUL SALAAM,

I did not expect a wire from you, but had hoped for a letter
today. I hope you reached there safely and did not lose any luggage.
Did you make a list of the articles? Did you get a good seat?
I hope you have settled down there comfortably. You must have
heard from Bhagirathji3 . Write to me about everything in detail.
Devote yourself exclusively to the work for which you have gone.
Have faith that it will include everything else. If you try to do more,
there will be a danger of your losing everything. Write to me and tell
me what you did about Nyamat’s4 daughter. I doubt whether by
taking her you have done real service to Nyamat or to the girl. I am
all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 479

1

This is extracted from a statement to the Press by Arun Das Gupta and Ajit
Roy, leaders of the Bengal Provincial Students’ Federation, regarding their interview
with Mahatma Gandhi. The statement read: “We, together with some other workers of
the Bengal Provincial Students’ Federation, toured Assam in June to help Sjt.
Bardoloi and other Congress leaders of Assam in raising the anti-Jap morale of the
people. With a letter of introduction from Sjt. Bardoloi we came to see Gandhiji and
tell him about conditions in Assam and our work. On the 14th July, we met
Mahatmaji. He discussed with us the report of our work in Assam. We told him: ‘For
the last two years we have been working for Congress-League unity. We shall work
for it all the harder now. A message from you will be invaluable.’ ” Vide also
“Message to Bengal Students’ Federation-II”, 17-7-1944
2
Permanent address
3
Bhagirathji Kanodia, businessman of Calcutta
4
An inmate of Sevagram
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

185

247. LETTER TO SURESH
P ANCHGANI,

July 14, 1944
BHAI SURESH,

I have your blazing letter. I appreciate your feelings and you
had better appreciated mine. I speak and act according to my lights. I
have never done anything to appease people. Fortunately for me
people are pleased by my words. If you will have patience, you will
see that what I have said is quite all right. Rest assured that I am not
likely to be misled by anybody’s bluff. The one and only one who
leads me is God.
Yes, one thing is certain, that all the rich men are not the
country’s enemies. And my non-violence draws no line between
friend and foe. It makes a friend out of a foe.1
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

248. ANSWER TO QUESTON2
P ANCHGANI,

July 14, 1944
I should gladly do so if there is no restraint. I have never, so far
as I can recall, been responsible for editing newspapers under restraint
or security. If I commit breach of the common law of the land, I am
there to be punished as I was in 1922. But I know I cannot expect any
such treatment from Government so long as I am distrusted.
The Bombay Chronicle, 14-7-1944

1

Vide also “Speech at Poona”, 1-7-1944.
The report said that Gandhiji was “replying to a question on the publication
of Harijan” which was discontinued from August 16, 1942, to February 10, 1946.
2

186

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

249. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
P ANCHGANI,

July 14, 1944
I have been receiving letters from several provinces complaining
of the ill-treatment of detenus. I cannot vouch for their accuracy. I
have no means of verifying the accounts. But correspondents who
have written are most of them known personally to me and they are
not likely to exaggerate.
One instance came to my notice only yesterday. It is from
Ajmer. The prisoner was fasting. His wife wrote several letters to me
asking me to advise her husband to give up the fast. As it was, the
prisoner was willing. I telegraphed1 to the Superintendent conveying
my advice to the prisoner to desist from fasting. He accepted it and
gave up his fast. I now learn that the prisoner was being prosecuted
under some jail regulations for having committed the crime of fasting.
I know when I was a prisoner in Yeravda that there was some
such regulation and I thought that when a prisoner gave up his fast, he
would not be prosecuted. I also fasted, and I could also be punished,
but I escaped punishment, I suppose, because I was regarded as a
celebrity. Assuming that I have been correctly informed, I would
plead with the authorities that they should ignore such cases. There
would be nothing wrong if they allowed prisoners to fast at will. The
most reasonable thing would be to investigate the complaints for
which they were fasting and promptly give redress, if the complaints
were found justified. These things have been done before. There is no
reason why that admirable practice should not be followed now.
I plead for humane treatment to prisoners, more especially when
they are in detention on mere suspicion or found guilty of crimes
created by special ordinances and not under the ordinary law.
Other cases that have come to my notice are not of fasting but
of alleged ill-treatment in order to break the spirit of prisoners. I dealt
with such cases when I edited the Young India and later the Harijan,
and in many cases the authorities gave redress.
I happen to know that such cases sometimes do not reach the
higher authorities. My purpose in bringing this to public notice is to
1

Vide “Telegram to Superintendent, Central Prison, Ajmer”, 17-5-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

187

seek redress. It is well known that in most provinces prisoners are
suffering hardships which are perfectly avoidable. All those who are at
all ill or are losing weight should at once be discharged. This will
surely not prejudice the war-effort or endanger the peace of the
country.1
I have received bitter criticism of my views 2 expressed in the
Gelder interview. Some of my correspondents say that under the
influence of Moderates and moneyed men, I have betrayed the cause
of the country. If for nothing else, for dealing with such criticism, I
am glad of the premature publication3 of the interview. I do not want
to sail under false colours. The country as well as the Government
should know me exactly as I am. I have never concealed the fact that I
am a friend of everybody, Moderates, moneyed men, Englishmen,
Americans or any other, irrespective of caste, colour or persuasion.
My belief and practice are directly derived from my non-violence.
My non-co-operation is non-co-operation with evil, not with the
evil-doer. Underneath my non-co-operation is my earnest desire to
wean the evil-doer from the evil or harm he is doing, so that I can give
him hearty co-operation. Again if I associate with the so-called
Moderates or with moneyed men, I do so to seek their co-operation in
the cause I am handling. But I approach them with an open mind, so
that I correct myself where I find myself in the wrong. I have known
of no cause that I have espoused that has suffered because of such
association.
Some critics have suggested that by my present attitude I am
lending moral weight to the Allied cause. They forget that my offer,
such as it is, is conditioned upon the Allies, in this case the British
Government, recognizing full independence, qualified during the
pendency of the war. I see, therefore, no conflict between the
principles enunciated in August resolution and what I have now
suggested. May I suggest to critics that they should wait till the British
Government have spoken? The statements made by me were meant in
the first instance for the Government. Mr. Gelder sprang a surprise.
1

What follows appeared independently in The Bombay Chronicle.
Vide “Interview to Stuart Gelder”, 4-7-1944.
3
Vide Appendix “Stuart Gelder’s Cable to News Chronicle” , 12-7-1944.
2

188

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

He has done so with the best of motives. After all, there is a higher
Power ruling all the actions of human beings.1
The Hindu, 16-7-1944, and The Bombay Chronicle, 15-7-1944

250. LETTER TO EDITOR-IN-CHARGE, “FREE PRESS
JOURNAL”
‘DILKHUSHA’, PANCHGANI,

July 15, 1944
DEAR EDITOR-IN-CHARGE,

I have your wire2 . My letter 3 to Shri Sadanand is a public reply
to a public question and is meant for publication. The proper thing
was to have waited for my reply before publishing the complaint
against me. Delay appears to me to be suspicious.
If Shri Sadanand is away, and if direction is considered
necessary, in a matter of ordinary course, you have means of taking
directions by telephone.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

This Was Bapu, pp. 154.5

251. LETTER TO LORD WAVELL
P ANCHGANI,

July 15, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

You have no doubt seen the authentic copies, now published in
the Indian Press, of the statements4 given by me to Mr. Gelder of the
1
The report in The Bombay Chronicle concluded: “Criticisms to Gandhiji’s
proposal still pour in here. Gandhijih as replied to them lying full length on a pallet.
He was speaking in a feeble voice and those close to him say that he can regulate his
voice and he often does so to conserve his energy. Rajaji was a silent listener again
today when Gandhiji talked to the Press. At the conclusion of the meeting, Gandhiji
humorously said, looking at Rajaji, ‘he would pass whatever his “Sub-editor” passed
for publication.”
2
Dated July 14, 1944, it read: “Your letter. Sadanand now at Delhi. Returning
latest Tuesday. Will then attend.”
3
Vide “Letter to S. Sadanand”, 13-7-1944.
4
Vide “Interview to Stuart Gelder”, 4-7-1944 and 4/6-7-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

189

News Chronicle. As I have said to the Press, they were meant primarily
to be shown to you. But Mr. Gelder, no doubt with the best of motives,
gave the interview premature publicity1 . I am sorry. Thepublication
will nevertheless be a blessing in disguise, if the interview enables you
to grant at least one of my requests contained in my letter 2 of 17th
June, 1944.3
I am,
Yours, etc.

M. K. GANDHI
The Hindu, 19-8-1944. Also C.W. 10506. Courtesy: India Office Library

252. LETTER TO SHANTIKUMAR N. MORARJEE
P ANCHGANI,

July 15, 1944
CHI. SHANTIKUMAR,

You were not present but Sumati 4 and Jehangirji [Patel]
witnessed the beast in me.5 They forgot that beast and understood my
love. I am tied to you all by the bonds of love. My unworthiness
prevents me from sending for you. But how long can I do without
you? I am sure you will wash off Sushila’s pain with love.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 844

1

Vide Appendix “Stuart Gelder’s Cable to News Chronicle” , 12-7-1944.
Vide “Letter to Lord Wavell”, 17-6-1944.
3
The Viceroy’s reply dated July 22, read: “ . . . I do not think, I can usefully
comment at present except to repeat what I said in my last letter that if you will
submit to me a definite and constructive policy, I shall be glad to consider it.”
4
Addressee’s wife
5
The addressee had been sent by Gandhiji to the dockyard to hand over the
gifts and a letter to Manu Gandhi; vide “Letter to Manu Gandhi”, 8-6-1944.
2

190

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

253. LETTER TO ANANTRAI P. PATTANI
P ANCHGANI,

July 15, 1944
BHAI ANANTRAI,

I have your letter. I had already learnt from Mathuradas 1 that
the ‘Castle’2 will have accommodation for me. But it is not my
business to run after conveniences. But they pursue me and sometimes
I am caught by one of them.
I don’t wish to enter into any discussion with you regarding
other subjects. Moreover you can always have Nanabhai’s help now
that he has been released.
I shall not let you compare yourself with Vajalbhai 3 because I
was indirectly acquainted with Gagabhai’s4 expertise. I place your
father5 above Gagabhai. Besides, as far as my knowledge goes, since
Vajalbhai became the divan only in his old age, there cannot be any
comparison. Hence I am going to measure you with the yardstick
applied in the case of your father.
Blessings from

BAPU
BHAVNAGAR
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Mathuradas Trikumji
Addressee’s residence at Panchgani
3
Vajalbhai Gaurishanker Oza, and his father, Gaurishanker Udayshanker Oza,
divan of Bhavnagar
4
ibid
5
Prabhashankar Pattani
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

191

254. ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS1
P ANCHGANI,

July 15, 1944
QUESTION: Will you kindly explain the exact difference between the Cripps
Plan and your own as revealed in the Gelder interview?

ANSWER: My plan contemplates an immediate recognition of full
independence for India as a whole, subject to limitations for the
duration of the war to meet the requirements of the Allied operations.
The Cripps Plan, as I understood it, dealt more with the future than
with the immediate arrangements. Moreover, in my opinion, the
Cripps Plan meant dismemberment of India, the Indian States being
set up as an all-extensive disintegrating factor. But if my plan is
considered by British statesmen to be not very different from the
Cripps Plan, it should be all the easier for them to accept it.2
What if Mr. Jinnah sticks to a plebiscite of Muslims only in the districts or
provinces where the Muslims are in majority?

Neither Qaid-e-Azam Jinnah nor the Muslim League have
pronounced their opinion on Rajaji’s Formula 3 . I would deprecate
anticipating them. Rajaji is with me. We have agreed for the sake of
conserving my limited energy that he should deal with the questions
arising from the Formula. For my part I would appeal to the
questioners, foreign or Indian, not to forestall the Muslim League.
How do you propose to fix the ratio of the League and Congress in the national
government?

I must not be drawn into details. If the indication of my mind
affords any satisfaction to the authorities, they should open the gates
of the prison, and let those who can speak with authority pronounce
upon my proposal or at least let me confer with them. As it is, I do not
know that I have not embarrassed them by my sharing my personal
opinion with the public before first sharing it with them. The
publication4 is premature and not of my seeking.
1

Sent by the London office of the United Press of India
Vide also “Interview to the Press”, 13-7-1944.
3
Vide “ C. Rajagopalchari’s Formula”, before 5-8-1942
4
By Stuart Gelder of News Chronicle, vide Appendix “Stuart Gelder’s Cable to
News Chronicle” , 12-7-1944.
2

192

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Will you meet Mr. Jinnah personally?

The question arises from ignorance of facts. I am always willing
to meet Qaid-e-Azam Jinnah.
What are your views on the Bombay Plan1 ? Do you think crisis like the one
which overtook Bengal could be permanently avoided by acceptance of such a plan?

The Bombay Plan is a post-war plan. Anyway, the question
should be addressed to the authors2 .
Gandhi-Jinnah Talks, pp. 81-2

255. LETTER TO NANDU KANUGA
[After July 15, 1944] 3
SHRI NANDUBEHN,

. . . 4 The important part was about to be left out. I don’t think
there was anything wrong in our people approaching the millionaires
in connection with Ba’s Memorial. How can we refuse what theyoffer?
Surely we may not hate them. More when we meet.
AHMEDABAD
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

256. LETTER TO NAVIN GANDHI
[After July 15, 1944] 5
CHI. NAVIN6 ,

Aren’t you a lazy fellow? You must be thinking that I am not at
all concerned about Manju7 and hence you don’t write to me.
However it be, I must have a postcard from you regularly.
Sushilabehn talked to me about medical fees. Sushilabehn has already
proceeded to Delhi; so I have to think about it. Have you had a talk
with the doctors? If you have, write to me in detail so that I can write
to them. I did not even dream that the question of fees would come
1

A fifteen-year plan for the economic development of India
Purushottamdas Thakurdas, J. R. D. Tata, G. D. Birla, Ardeshir Dalal,
Shriram, Kasturbhai Lalbhai, A. D. Shroff and John Mathai
3
In the source, the letter is placed after the letters of July 15, 1944.
4
Omission as in the source
5
In the source, the letter is placed after the letters of July 15, 1944.
6
Son of Vrajlal A. Gandhi, brother of Jaisukhlal Gandhi
7
daughter of Vrajlal A. Gandhi, brother of Jaisukhlal Gandhi
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

193

up. Anyway you need not worry on that account; it is my concern.
Let me have your opinion. Who is there with you now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

257. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
[On or before July 16, 1944] 1
I have thought over the matter carefully. I think that Sita2
should stay on in Sevagram. She will get the good company of
Aryanayakam and Ashadevi, and be educated on the lines of the
Talimi Sangh. She will get Gomati’s protection. Gomati is a saintly
woman. Kashi 3 and Durga also are there. And so her Gujarati,
Sanskrit, Hindi and English will be taken care of. If you do not like
this, you can put herin the Parsi school here which I visit daily.
Beyond this you cannot go.
About you, we shall think later.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4942

258. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
P ANCHGANI,

July 16, 1944
A correspondent asks me what those who, on being discharged,
have been served with restriction orders confining them within certain
areas or requiring them to report themselves periodically at police
thanas, should do. I regard all such restrictions as degrading and
could not myself submit to them. However I know men who, being
unable any longer to bear the jail hardships, have preferred the
restricted freedom. I must refuse to judge their conduct. Everyone
suffers according to his capacity. But it is a serious question for the
Government to consider whether it is a necessary part of war-effort to
wound the spirit of young men and women, whose only fault is that
they love their country’s independence before everything else.
The Hindu, 17-7-1944; also The Bombay Chronicle, 16-7-1944

1
2
3

194

From the postmark
In the source, the letter is placed after the letters of July 15, 1944.
Son and daughter of Vrajlal A. Gandhi, brother of Jaisukhlal Gandhi
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

259. LETTER TO TEJ BAHADUR SAPRU
PANCHGANI,

July 16, 1944
DEAR SIR TEJ,

Gandhiji has your letter of the 11th inst. as also the enclosure. Your statement
had appeared only in part in the Bombay papers. He was, therefore, glad to get the full
text. You must have seen in the Press the statements he has issued including the
authorised texts of the two notes of his talks with Mr. Gelder .1 For the present,
having thrown a ‘bombshell’ he is being inundated with ‘shell-shocked’ letters,
protests, abuse and what not. That was but to be expected. He is eager to have your
considered view.
He was thankful you remembered him. He reciprocates your kind sentiment.
Gandhiji felt very grateful to hear that your son was steadily improving. 2 He hopes
that he will be fully restored soon.
Yours sincerely,

P YARELAL
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

260. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
P ANCHGANI,
July 16, 1944
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I can understand your lamentation. But you do not listen to my
advice. You are bedridden. If instead of worrying about me you
prayed to God, you would recover quicker. Even if that did not
happen, you would have peace.
I am not an invalid that you imagine me to be. And mentally

1

Vide “Interview to Stuart Gelder”, 4-7-1944.
Vide “Letter to Additional, Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 15-7-1943.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

195

not at all. That is why whatever I do, I do with deliberation and care1 .
There was a time when you could understand me from a mere hint.
You could explain to others my intentions and my words. Why is it
that that is no longer so ? Think about it. The reason lies only in you.
If I were as ill as you and did not forget the outside world, I too would
be in the same situation. You do not understand Rajaji at all. His
modesty and his conduct are worth emulating. I did not lose my
alertness during my fast. And when I broke my fast he showed me his
draft. I am astonished that you can think him so mean as to take
advantage of my weakness. To say that my statement means Pakistan
shows ignorance. What can one do if Gelder bruit about it ? Rajaji’s
draft had nothing to do with the interview. Contain your anger. Calm
youself. And be sure that there is no contradiction in what I have
done. As for Paramanand, let me see what is possible. I hope Dilip is
calm. Send him to me if he is disturbed. Did your cloak fit ? I am
fine.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

261. LETTER TO JAIKRISHNA P. BHANSALI
P ANCHGANI,

July 16, 1944
CHI. BHANSALI,

Discipline demands that you should ask me. If you do not
observe it, who else will? But what guidance can I give you in this
matter? If you have faith in yourself, by all means go and relieve the
suffering of the people. I must admit, however, that you have excelled
me and I derive comfort from the thought that my teaching has
proved fruitful. Isn’t he a true teacher who is surpassed by his own
pupil? May God increase your strength still further.
I keep on reminding myself daily that I must go there as early
1

The addressee did not like Stuart Gelder publishing the interview; vide
Appendix “Stuart Gelder’s Cable to News Chronicle” , 12-7-1944

196

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

as possible in August. The climate here does suit me, of course.
Inform everybody. Manilal and Sita are arriving today.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8365. Also C.W. 7175. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

262. LETTER TO WINSTON CHURCHILL1
‘DILKHUSHA’, PANCHGANI,

July 17, 1944
DEAR PRIME MINISTER,

You are reported to have a desire to crush the simple “naked
fakir” as you are said to have described me. I have been long trying
to be a fakir and that naked—a more difficult task. I, therefore,
regardthe expression as a compliment though unintended. I approach
you then as such and ask you to trust and use me for the sake of your
people and mine and through them those of the world.
Your sincere friend,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 10499. Courtesy: India Office Library. Also This Was
Bapu, p. 140

263. LETTER TO LORD WAVELL
‘DILKHUSHA’, PANCHGANI,

July 17, 1944
H. E. THE VICEROY
VICEROY’S C AMP
DEAR FRIEND,

I ventured to write to you yesterday2 repeating my previous
1

In Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book I, p. 32, Pyarelal
explains: “This letter to the Prime Minister miscarried. It was the first instance, in
Gandhiji’s experience, of an important letter of his failing to reach its destination. A
copy was, therefore, sent to Churchill two months later. The only reply it fetched was
an acknowledgement with thanks through the Viceroy!” According to The Hindu,
19-7-1945, Gandhiji released this along with a statement to the Press on July 18,
1945.
2
The letter was, however, dated July 15; vide “Letter to Lord Wavell”,
15-7-1944.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

197

request. I feel that my effort would be incomplete unless I sent the
accompanying1 to the Prime Minister. May I seek your help, if you
agree, to send the enclosed in the quickest manner possible?
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 10502. Courtesy: India Office Library. Also
Gandhiji ’s Correspondence with the Government, p. 11

264. LETTER TO SAROJINI NAIDU
P ANCHGANI,

July 17, 1944
MY DEAR AMMAJAN,

Your precious letter. You must not be angry with poor me. Bear
with me for a while. Mists will roll away some time. You are my
message. At the Urdu Conference2 you will be all in all. Therefore do
not ask me for a formal message. That will landme in a sea of
troubles. I have refused to send messages. Let me spare every ounce
of energy for the task before us.
You should all behave better about the upkeep of the body. Or
is that to be reserved for me only?
Love from

S PINNER
S HRIMATI S AROJINI NAIDU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

265. LETTER TO ASHFAQ HUSSAIN
July 17, 1944
3

MY DEAR ASHFAQ ,

I never knew that you were a careless reader. Do you not see
that if the thing was to be put on the League Committee without the
1

Vide the preceding item.
The All-India Urdu Congress to be held at Hyderabad on July 22
3
An associate of Mahomed Ali
2

198

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

President sponsoring it, it should be before the public for discussion?
The League and others can now pronounce upon it.
Expect to see you at Sevagram.
Yours,

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

266. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
‘DILKHUSHA’, PANCHGANI,

July 17, 1944
BHAI JINNAH,

There was a time when I was able to persuade you to speak in
our mother tongue. Today I venture to write in the same. I had
already invited1 you while I was in jail. After my release I have not
written to you so far. But today I am prompted to do so. Let us meet
when you wish to. Please do not regard me as an enemy of Islam and
the Muslims here. I have always been a friend and servant of yours
and of the whole world. Do not dismiss me. I am enclosing a
translation of this letter in Urdu.2
Your brother,

GANDHI

[PS.]
Please write in Urdu. Kanu3 writes Gujarati in a beautiful hand.4
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal. Also
Hitavada, 1-8-1944

1

Vide “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 4-5-1943.
This sentence is reproduced from Hitavada. What follows is in Gandhiji’s
hand at the bottom of the Urdu translation of the letter.
3
To whom Gandhiji, presumably, dictated
4
The addressee’s reply of July 24, inter alia, read: “I shall be glad to receive
you at my house in Bombay on my return which will probably be about the middle of
August. . . . I would like to say nothing more till we meet. I am very pleased to read in
the Press that you are making very good progress, and I hope you will soon be all
right.”
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

199

267. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
P ANCHGANI,

July 17, 1944
CHI. MANUDI,

You must overcome your dislike of milk. You should cheerfully
take as much as the vaidya wants you to. After having stayed with me,
how can you have likes and dislikes? What one should eat, one must
like, and what one must not eat, one must not like. If Yukti gets well
completely, my faith in vaidyas will be deepened. And, if your vision
improves as also your malaria and other complaints are cured, then
you may send medicine for me.
Your handwriting is improving but it requires a lot of further
improvement still. Sushilabehn has left for Delhi. It will, therefore, be
some time before you get her letters again.
I am glad that Devdas paid a visit there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIV

268. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
P ANCHGANI,

July 17, 1944
BHAI MUNSHI,

I have your letter. I see no harm in starting a society. However
ask Sir Purushottamdas. Consult Mangaldas1 and Mavalankar also.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 7678. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi

1

200

Mangaldas Pakvasa
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

269. LETTER TO SHANTIKUMAR N. MORARJEE
P ANCHGANI,

July 17, 1944
CHI. SHANTIKUMAR,

Read the accompanying letter. If such a man can be
accommodated in any capacity, please make use of him. I think he is
trustworthy. You need not create a special job for him. The letter may
be used only if you think that such a man can be of real use
somewhere. Do you have in mind any shorthand writer? The Hindi
speeches may be published and sold by the Maharashtra Committee.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 4802. Courtesy: Shantikumar N.
Morarjee

270. LETTER TO B. G. KHER
P ANCHGANI

July 17, 1944
BHAI KHER,

Why did you run away without calling on me? Do come when
you are free and I will forgive you this lapse. Send me yours and
other people’s opinion about what I am doing.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI BALA S AHEB KHER
EX-MINISTER
KHAR, B OMBAY
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2769

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

201

271. LETTER TO NAGESH V. GUNAJI
PANCHGANI ,

July 17, 1944
1

BHAI GUNAJI ,

If you cannot read, Indu2 will read out this to you. Why should
we write to one another in English?
It is good that you have had a change of heart about Indu and
Bhai Tendulkar. After Doctor’s release, I shall have the marriage
solemnized at Sevagram, if you all wish it. Indu knows the conditions
attending weddings at Sevagram.
Blessings from

BAPU
BELGAUM
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

272. MESSAGE TO BENGAL PROVINCIAL STUDENTS’
FEDERATON- II3
Not for publication

P ANCHGANI,

July 17, 1944
My blessings you have in abundance for all the good work you
may have done. My advice to all the workers is that they should learn
to regard all good service as in itself a blessing. What is the use of
blessings of any man, however great he may be, if there is no real,
sustained work? Blessings often deceive receivers into believing that

1

Nagesh Vasudev Gunaji
Indumati, addressee’s daughter, and Dr. A. G. Tendulkar who were married on
August 19, 1945.
3
The message was given to Ajit Rai and Arun Das Gupta who stated: “On the
17th, Mahatmaji gave us another interview. We told him that we worked in Assam
according to our understanding of the Congress programme. We had called for unity to
resist the Japanese, to fight hoarders, to secure food for the people and for relief to
Bengal. In response to our request for his blessings, Gandhiji wrote out a
message. . . .” Vide also “Message to Bengal Provincial Students’ Federation—I”,
14-7-1944.
2

202

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

their work is finished. Let these words be an incentive to greater
effort. You should keep me in touch with your activities.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal. Also The Bombay
Chronicle, 21-7-1944

273. MESSAGE TO AJIT RAI AND ARVIND DAS GUPTA
Not for publication

P ANCHGANI,
July 17, 1944

My blessings you have in abundance for all the good work you
may have done. My advice to all the workers is that they should learn
to regard all good service as in itself a blessing. What is the use of
blessings of any man however great he may be if there is no real
sustained work. Blessings often deceive receivers into believing that
their work is finished. Let these words be an incentive to greater
effort. You should keep me in touch with your activities.
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

274. LETTER TO A. KALESWARA RAO
P ANCHGANI,

July 18, 1944
DEAR KALESWARA RAO,

Your illuminating note I have read with eagerness. May I make
use of it in my talks or correspondence with Communists? 1 Some of
the things you relate are painful. You will give me your reaction to
my latest exploit. Your exploitation2 of selections from the

1

Gandhiji did make use of it in his correspondence with P. C. Joshi; vide
“Letter to P. C. Joshi”, 30-7-1944.
2
In Reminiscences of Gandhiji, p. 141, Chandrashanker Shukla explains that
the addressee, in his letter, had quoted some passages from the Upanishads
corresponding to Gandhiji’s teachings of truth and non-violence. The addressee also
published Upanishad Pathamala during the year.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

203

Upanishads lies in front of me to be picked when I have a few
moments.
Yours,

BAPU
SHRI A. KALESWARA RAO

From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

275. LETTER TO SUDHIR GHOSH
‘DILKHUSHA’, P ANCHGANI,

July 18, 1944
DEAR SUDHIR,

I have seen your letter to Pyarelal and Nargisbehn1 too. Do
come whenever you have the time and wish to see me. Mr. Elmhirst2 I
know. I think I had the pleasure of meeting him once. He visited
Sabarmati Ashram when I was not there and then he expressed the
opinion that the babul plantation there was the best conceived and
most useful. Apart from any other interest I would like to meet him, if
he would come and is allowed to come to me.
Panchgani may be too early. I expect to be in Sevagram, Deo
volente, in the early part of August. You will have the date from the
Press.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Nargis Captain
Leonard Elmhirst, an agricultural economist and an educationist, who was a
close associate of Rabindranath Tagore, and Agricultural Adviser to the Government
of Bengal from 1944. He founded Sriniketain, the Rural Development Institute of
Santiniketan. Elmhirst was returning to England after completing an assignment “to
work out a development plan for harnessing the water resources of Bengal”. In
Gandhi’s Emissary, pp. 49-50, the addressee explains: “. . . I thought it would be a
good thing if he had a meeting with Gandhiji and conveyed to his friends in the
British Government. . . his impression of the state of Gandhiji’s mind and the
possibilities of a rapprochement between Gandhiji and the British. The two sessions
he and I had with Gandhiji did not give much of an indication about the possible
course of Gandhiji’s next political move. . . .”
2

204

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

276. LETTER TO ROY WALKER
‘DILKHUSHA’, PANCHGANI,

July 18, 1944
DEAR WALKER,

I was delighted to receive your letter1 . I had your booklet also. I
glanced through it. Nothing jarred on me. I must confess, I did not
read it critically; but I am asking Pyarelal and Khurshed Naoroji to
read it carefully and to send you their reactions. I shall look forward
to reading your second compilation2 .
As to the last paragraph 3 —all I can say is that I am
endeavouring to follow God’s guidance. I do not believe in a personal
deity, but I believe in the Eternal Law of Truth and Love which I have
translated as non-violence. This Law is not a dead thing like the law of
a king. It is a living thing—the Law and the Law-giver are one. For
those who realize this Truth, the Law-giver becomes a personal deity.
R OY WALKER , E SQ.
DICK S HEPPARD HOUSE
ENDSLEIGH S TREET
LONDON W. C. I
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Dated May 10, 1944, it requested Gandhiji to comment on The Wisdom of
Gandhi in His own Words, a selection of Gandhiji’s sayings, published by the
addressee in 1943.
2
Presumably, Sword of Gold, a biography of Gandhiji, published in 1945
3
Which read: “It is with a feeling akin to triumph that those of us who are
pacifists in a war-torn Europe hear of your return to physical liberty, for spiritual
liberty cannot be limited by any action of the India Office. We pray that you may, for
many years to come, continue to be one of the greatest forces for good in the world.”
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

205

277. LETTER TO SHYAMA PRASAD MUKHERJEE
“DILKHUSHA”,
P ANCHGANI,
July 18, 1944
DEAR DR. SHYAMA PRASAD,

It was a pleasure to receive your letter of 10th in appreciation of
my correspondence with Government. This however I write not
merely to acknowledge your letter, but to complain about the opinion
you have expressed on Rajaji’s formula on the communal tangle. I
had heard that you were in sympathy with the formula if you had not
fully endorsed it. Be that as it may I should have thought that regard
being had to the relations between us and also yourself and Rajaji, you
would have come and discussed the pros and cons before publishing
your views. I suppose it is common cause between us that the problem
should be solved, the earlier the better. If you have the time and are so
minded, we can still discuss the question.1 I expect Rajaji will be with
me at Sevagram which D[eo] V[olente] 2 I expect to reach early in
August.
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

278. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
P ANCHGANI,

July 18, 1944
CHI. MIRA,

Your best and descriptive letter is before me. Devdas described
your grief over my reverting to your original name. I have
capitulated. I am having rich experiences of life. I am learning every
day. I must not cause dear ones grief when it is avoidable. This was
and is avoidable. I know you forgave me long ago. But it is good to
ask for forgiveness.
My love never suffered any diminution. My fears about you
have not left me. I know you have given me your assurances. But I
1
2

206

Vide “Interview to Shyama Prasad Mookerjee”, 5-8-1944.
God willing
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

must inform you of my doubts if I have any. I like your choice of
trustees. Panditji is a tower of [a] trustee. Kanaiyalal1 is a good soul.
Devdas is a sound businessman and naturally entertains great regard
for you.
Your money causes me anxiety. I am eager to transfer the sum
to you. But I cannot get the proper account. You can understand the
difficulty. For donations separate accounts are never kept, so at a
given moment it is a difficult process to say what the Ashram’s
donations are.
That is your case when account was closed. And Narandas has
nothing free. I shall overtake that difficulty. I shall take some time.
But when you need the money for your adventure you have but to tell
me and I shall place a sum at your disposal. Khurshedbehn is here.
She is writing. You are following the papers.
Love.
BAPU
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

279. LETTER TO KAMALADEVI CHATTOPADHYAYA
July 18, 1944
DEAR KAMALADEVI,

I am late answering your letter of 4th. I am glad you
thoroughly realize the virtue of the wheel and the importance of the
village programme. Mridula is coming here. Khurshedbehn is already
with me. With two such stalwarts by my side, I am not likely to go
wrong. My dream is to have India’s women to lead the world of men
who have led women up to now.
Yours ,

BAPU
From the original : Kamaladevi Chattopadhyaya Papers. Courtesy : Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

1

Kanaiyalal Butail

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

207

280. A LETTER
‘DILKHUSHA’, PANCHGANI,

July 18, 1944
Your wire of 11th instant was received here on 14th, but due to
pressure of work on the staff that is here, it was given to me
onlytoday. Pressure on my time is answerable for the absence of the
promised letter. Evidently I forgot all about the letter I had promised.
I am sorry because I know your care and affection for me. This
is the treatment I am having: massage for about an hour all over the
body and a hot-water bath, lying in a full length tub for about 20
minutes. This is all very soothing for me. Often before entering the
tub I have hot-and-cold hip baths for five minutes each. My food, you
know, milk, vegetables, fruit and gur. Between three and four, I have
an earth bandage—this too, I think, you know. Clean earth is mixed
with water and made into a dough. I take a similar bandage before
retiring. Horrible medicine I have is bhilama. Boiled in water, strained,
mixed with milk, I had it for seven days. There has been an interval of
more than seven days. I propose to take it from tomorrow again for
seven days.
In Poona, I had what is supposed to be a specific against
hook-worm. It is called Carbon Tetrachlor Ethylene.
I am on the onward march. Dr. Jivraj Mehta is in Panchgani
looking after me. Sushila whom you know was with me even in jail. I
have sent her to Delhi.
The medical report is that anaemia is subsiding and probably
the two enemies, hook-worm and entamoeba histolytica, are lying low,
not gone altogether. I expect to go to Sevagram, Deo volente, in the
early part of August. I am here at least till the end of the month.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

208

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

281. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
P ANCHGANI,

July 18, 1944
RESPECTED MRIDULABEHN,

Your letter has been received. It was read out to Bapu. Respected Bapuji wants
me to say that he has no doubt made changes in the translation but such changes will
not distort or modify the meaning. Even so, if there are any doubts, somebody who
comes can check. As it is, it has been sent after checking.
It does not matter if the Congress Committee is not involved. We are
concerned only with propaganda. Hence, it is enough if it has been delivered at
Poona. It would be good if it could be translated into other languages also. It will not
be bad if it is translated into Marathi and published in newspapers. There is after all
nothing in it that we should regret. It was and is an open talk. Hence, Shri Audh and
you should in consultation decide how best this thing can be propagated. Bapu was
pleased to know that Bharatanandji1 would be looking after correspondence with the
Government.
You are free to come here whenever you choose.
Bapu is recovering slowly. Bapu gave an interview to the Press after hearing
from you. You will have seen in the newspapers the views that he expressed. What is
your opinion ?
Regards from

KANU
From the Gujarati original : C. W. 11116. Courtesy : Sarabhai Foundation

282. LETTER TO K. B. JOSHI
‘DILKHUSHA’, PANCHGANI,

July 19, 1944
DEAR JOSHI,

I was wondering why you had not written all these days. I
was inquiring about you only the other day. Vaikunthbhai 2 gave me
all the information in his possession. I quite agree with you that

1
2

Indian name given by Gandhiji to Maurice Frydman, a Polish engineer
Vaikunth L. Mehta, brother of G. L. Mehta

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

209

something should be done and that quickly. Fortunately
Vaikunthbhai is wide awake, and I am hoping that something will be
done. You will please keep in touch with me but you know our
ultimate goal. We have to reach a process whereby everyone can
manufacture paper in his own house just as everyone can do spinning
in his own house. I know that the problem is difficult; but if we are to
serve 40 crores of people, we must be able to devise some such
method as I have adumbrated. If I have relaxed the original
restriction, it is in order to reach that goal.
Yours,

BAPU
S JT. K. B. JOSHI
C/ O TULPULE ’S BUNGALOW
1195/3 SHIVAJI NAGAR
P OONA 4
From a photostat: G.N. 2761

283. LETTER TO DR. K. C. GHARPURE
P ANCHGANI,

July 19, 1944
DEAR DR. GHARPURE,

I have been having dismal reports about poor Manju 1 . I would
esteem it a favour, if you would kindly let me know her exact
condition. Dr. Jivraj Mehta being with me, he will help me to
understand your report even if it is technical.
Dr. Sushila Nayyar is just now not here. I have asked her to go
to Poona and be there till Manju can be discharged. She described her
talk with you about the surgeon’s fees. I had thought that there would
[be] no fees in a case like this. Manjula has no means of her own. Her
brothers are budding artists. They can pay with difficulty. But I can
understand the other side. I would have written to Dr. Peet if I was at
all acquainted with him. You can show this to him, if necessary. I can
well understand his needs, if he is a poor army surgeon. I have friends
to fall back upon. There need be no hesitation about charging the
1

210

Sister of Navin Gandhi, vide “Letter to Navin Gandhi”, after 15-7-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

fees. You will please send me the bill in that case.
I hope Manjula’s case will end well.1
Yours sincerely,
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy : Pyarelal

284. A LETTER
“DILKHUSHA”,
P ANCHGANI,
July 19, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I appreciate your very frank letter. I shall return the courtesy by
being equally frank.
The difference between now and August, 1942 is that at that
time I had no knowledge of the response the people both proCongress and anti-Congress would make. Now I know the kind of
response they made. The heroism, the suffering and the self-sacrifice
of those who took part in the struggle are beyond praise; but weighed
in the scales of Truth and Non-violence there were glaring defects in
the demonstration and I can only say that India failed to reach her
natural goal because of those defects. Whatever may be true of other
nations I have no doubt that India can come to her own fully only by
truthful and non-violent means. In the face of sabotage and the like
the rulers as usual lost their heads and resorted to reprisals unheard of
before. I write under correction. I have asked for an impartial tribunal
for investigation of the charges against the Congress and countercharges against the Government. Unless I am convinced to the
contrary, I shall continue to believe that the mole-hill of popular
violence has been shown on behalf of the Government to have been a
mountain and the Himalayan violence of the authorities has been
generally defended as no more than necessary for the occasion. I
must, therefore, refuse to judge popular action by the footrule of
Truth and Non-violence unless I can apply the same measure for the
1

The addressee in his reply dated July 28, 1944, said: “The operation on Miss
Manju has been a complete failure. The facial graft that was introduced has sloughed
away and as such Miss Manju is no better or worse after the operation. This
sometimes happens in grafts. They either take or don’t take. The grafting can,
however be repeated after six months.”
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

211

Governmental action. This is one difference.
The second difference is the terrible and progressive starvation
of the people. Whether it is due to the wrath of God or the
incompetence of the rulers or the universal pressure of the War is not
relevant to the elucidation of my reply.
I hold that these two causes mark a decisive difference between
now and 1942. I would be unworthy of my creed if I failed to make
use of all the resources of head and heart that God has vouchsafed to
me for discovering a solution of the deadlock. What is that solution
submitted by me ? It is nothing less than the present declaration of
freedom of India, limited during the War period by the exigencies of
the War. This limitation you know. If that offer is accepted then I
would be criminally guilty if I did not advise the Congress to accept it.
If my proposal reaches full fruition, what is today a war of brute
strength against brute strength would be turned into a war for the
liberation of the exploited people of the world. Then it would be a war
between predominantly moral strength plus minimum of brute
strength matched against pure brute strength which is being used for
the exploitation of China and the weaker states of Europe. I hope you
will now agree with me that my move is not one of political
expendiency but a necessary corollary of the creed which I cherish
dearer than life. If you have further difficulty about understanding
my position, please write again.
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

285. LETTER TO SWAMI ANAND
July 19, 1944
BHAI SWAMI,

I have your letter and also Vaikunthbhai’s. This time I am
including my reply to him in your letter. I have to cope with the mail.
We are not bent on securing importance, are we? On my part I would
suggest that all three of you should continue,1 which would be better
than the best.2 If, however, Bapa cannot accept you as you are, you
should move out of his clutches. You should manage without
1
2

212

As trustees of Kasturba Gandhi National Memorial Trust
Literally: “sweeter than jaggery”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

tendering your resignation, if you can. What I mean is that we would
have fulfilled our duty, if we earned a good name for the activity.
Please write to Nanabhai that he should carry on the work. I am
corresponding with Bhai Anantrai.1 His response has been good
enough. I expect everything will get along smoothly. Please send me
a copy of the decision given by Bapa so that I can guide you. You
may come over whenever you are confronted with a problem.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

286. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
P ANCHGANI,

July 19, 1944
CHI. ANAND,

Got your letter only today. Vidya was a very virtuous woman.
She had a golden heart and a keen urge for sacrifice. Her love was as
vast as the ocean. You have to live up to her expectations.
I hope to go to Sevagram in August.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

287. LETTER TO R. R. DIWAKAR
P ANCHGANI,

July 19, 1944
BHAI DIWAKAR,

I have not been able to read the entire material. You already
know my views 2 .
I would like all to court imprisonment on or before the 9th 3
while doing something or other. But that something should be a
1

Vide “Letter to Anantrai P. Pattani”, 15-7-1944.
About secret and underground activities, vide ”Discussion with a Friend”,
after 6-5-1944 and “Letter to R. R. Diwakar”, 18-5-1944; also Appendix “Discussion
with Underground Workers”, before 2-6-1944.
3
Of August, the second anniversary day of “Quit India” movement
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

213

normal activity of the Congress, not satyagraha. Do you get the
difference?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I am disgusted at our people writing in English.
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Mahatma, Vol. VI, between pp. 336 and 337

288. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS1
P ANCHGANI,

July 19, 1944
I am glad you have put the question exactly as you have seen it
in the critical Press. I confess that I am not able to go through all Press
criticisms and, therefore, I find myself at a disadvantage. Your
question, therefore, is doubly helpful to me. Let me remind critics at
the outset that publicity of the interview2 (to Mr. Stuart Gelder of the
News Chronicle) was not of my seeking. As I have already remarked3 ,
it was meant for the powers that be. I ask for a dispassionate
examination of my proposals on their merits. I should not mind a
climb down, if it resulted in the attainment of Indian independence. I
may say that the favourable war situation had nothing to do with my
proposal, if only for the simple reason that in the flush of
approaching victory, my proposal was not likely even to receive a
hearing. But as a lover of peace, not merely in India, but peace among
all mankind, I could not but make a proposal for what it is worth.
After all, there is such a thing as world opinion, apart from the
opinion of authorities.
A united, enlightened, powerful opinion of the world is bound
to affect those who are today wielding what appears to be absolute
power in waging the war, and experience has taught me that one
should not be afraid of being misunderstood or of rejection of one’s
1
The report said: “A journalist suggested to Gandhiji that it had been said by a
large section of the overseas Press that he (Gandhiji) had revised his attitude because
of the favourable war situation and also because the Congress suffered ‘a heavy defeat’
and that his latest stand was considered as ‘a climb down’.”
2
Vide “Interview to Stuart Gelder”, 4-7-1944 and 4/6-7-1944.
3
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 12-7-1944 and “Interview to the Press”,
13-7-1944.

214

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

proposal, if it is sound in itself.
The heavy defeat of the Congress I do not feel at all. I have not
a shadow of doubt that this passage through fire and suffering by
thousands of Congressmen and Congress sympathizers has raised the
status of India and the strength of the people. Throughout all my long
public life I have not experienced a sense of defeat, heavy or
otherwise. I know many Congressmen are labouring under a sense of
frustration. Poor men, they do not know the value of self-suffering.
But even that frustration is only momentary. Victory, that is,
independence of India as a whole, is a certainty. That it may not come
in my lifetime is a matter of indifference to me. I can but work for it
till the end of my life. Victory will come when God wills it.
Only today I wrote to a friend who wanted to know the
difference between now and August 1942. From it I quote relevant
sentences. I have said the difference between now and August 1942 is
that at that time I had no knowledge of the response the people, both
pro-Congress and anti-Congress, would make. Now I know the kind
of response they made. The heroism, suffering and self-sacrifice of
those who took part in this struggle are beyond praise, but weighed in
the scale of truth and non-violence there are glaring defects in the
popular demonstration. And I can only say that India failed to
reachher natural goal at the time because of these defects. Whatever
may be true of other nations, I have no doubt that India can come to
her own fully by truth and non-violent means. In the face of sabotage
and the like, rulers have as usual lost their heads and resorted to
reprisals unheard of before. I write this under correction. I have
asked 1 for an impartial tribunal for the investigation of charges against
the Congress and my counter-charges against the Government. Unless
I am convinced to the contrary, I shall continue to believe that the
molehill of popular violence has been shown on behalf of
Government to have been a mountain and the Himalayan violence of
the authorities has been generally defended as no more than necessary
for the occasion. I must, therefore, refuse to judge popular action by
the footrule of truth and non-violence unless I can apply the same
measure for Government action. This is one difference. The second
difference is the terrible progressive starvation of the people. Whether
it is due to wrath of God or incompetence of the rulers or universal
1

Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 15-7-1943 and 26-10-1943.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

215

pressure of war, is not relevant to the elucidation of my reply. I hold
that these two causes mark decisive differences between now and
August 1942. I would be unworthy of my creed, if I failed to make
use of all the resources of head and heart that God has vouchsafed to
me for discovering a solution of the deadlock. What that solution is, is
submitted1 by me. It is nothing less than the present declaration of
freedom of India, limited during the war period by the exigencies of
the war. This limitation you know. If the offer is accepted, then I
would be criminally guilty if I did not advise the Congress to accept it.
If my proposal reaches full fruition, what is today a war of brute
strength would be turned into a war for the liberation of the exploited
peoples of the world. Then it would be a war between predominantly
moral strength plus the minimum of brute strength matched against
pure brute strength which is being used for the exploitation of China
and the weaker States of Europe.
Rajaji’s offer2 has seen the light of day only now, but I had
personally subscribed to it when I was fasting in prison camp. It is
now sixteen months old. For the rest of the offer, I must carry out the
contract between Rajaji and myself. He is to bear the brunt of all
criticism that might be made about that offer.
Finally I would say to my critics to enter with me into the
sufferings not only of the people of India but of those,
whetherengaged in the war or not of the whole world. I cannot look at
this butchery going on in the world with indifference. I have an
unchangeable faith that it is beneath the dignity of men to resort to
mutual slaughter. I have no doubt that there is a way out. I am vain
enough to think that my malaria was a godsend, and He used
Government as His instrument for discharging me.
I should be never reconciled to myself if, for fear of hostile
criticism or wrath of impatient Congressmen or even possible
displeasure of members of the Working Committee, I did not express
personal opinion, the acceptance of which, I hold, must result in
bringing peace to the world, even out of the present turmoil.3
The Hindu, 22-7-1944
1
Vide “Interview to Stuart Gelder”, 4/6-7-2944 and “Interview to the Press”,
14-7-1944.
2
Vide Appendix “C. Rajagopalachari’s Formula”, before 5-8-1942.
3
The Bombay Chronicle, 20-7-1944, reported: “Gandhiji made it clear that
those who attributed motives to him did not touch him—it was like water on duck’s
back. He started the conference by saying: ‘I am empty-headed’ and ended by saying:
‘I hope I have given enough food’, and the Press agreed, ‘he had’.”

216

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

289. TELEGRAM TO STUART GELDER
Express

July 20, 1944

GELDER
C ARE F RANK MORAES
GREENFIELDS, C HURCHGATE R ECLAMATION
BOMBAY
RECEIVED
WIRE

IF

ATTEND
WILL

BOTH

WIRES.

READ

FURTHER

CLARIFICATION

CLIFF’S2

QUESTION

SOON

BE

YESTERDAY’S
NECESSARY.
WHEN

INTERVIEW.1

PRESS
WILL

RECEIVED.

IMMEDIATELY
HOPE

YOU

WELL.

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

290. LETTER TO AMIYA CHAKRAVARTY
P ANCHGANI,

July 20, 1944
DEAR AMIYA,

I was delighted to receive your letter. Death leaves no family
without His toll. Why should we not treat His messengers as friends
and pay the toll with a willing heart? I had to make His acquaintance
when I was quite a youth and I learnt to regard Death as a welcome
deliverance whether it is a suckling baby or one in prime of life like
your brother or an elderly person. I long ago ceased to regard as
affliction or punishment the so-called misfortunes. On my return to
India I think it was Kakasaheb who recited a verse and reminded me
that I was presenting no new thought when I expounded the view just
mentioned. From that time onward we have recited at the morning
prayer the following verse3 :
foinks uSo foin % lainks u So lain%Afoin~ foLej.ka fo".kks%
1

Vide the preceding item.
Norman Cliff of the News Chronicle, London; vide also “Cable to News
Chronicle”, 23-7-1944.
3
Meaning: That which goes by the name of adversity is not such; nor is that
prosperity which goes by that name. To forget God is adversity, ever to think of Him
is prosperity, Vide “Ashram Bhajanavali” subitem 16, 20-12-1930.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

217

laEiUukjk;.k Le`fr% A A
Hence the puzzle that taxes the philosphers of the West and the East
has no worry for me. I know this arises from my ignorance of writings
on philosophy. I console myself with the thought that my ignorance is
bliss if it promotes my peace of mind.
This is my contribution towards assuaging your grief and my
answer to the question propounded by you.
The second question is simple. Of course, there must be
organized resistance to organized evil. The difficulty arises when the
organizers of satyagraha try to imitate the organizers of evil. I tried
and failed hopelessly. The way of organizing forces of good must be
opposite to the evil way. What it exactly is I do not yet know fully. I
feel that it lies through perfection, as far as may be, of individuals. It
then acts as the leaven raising the whole mass. But I am still groping.
I hope I have given you sufficient food for thought for the time
being. More when we meet. I hope to be in Sevagram in the
beginning of August. Gurudev was an institution. We must feel the
loss.
Love.
BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

291. LETTER TO HARIBHAU JOSHI
P ANCHGANI,

July 20, 1944
DEAR JOSHI,

I am very sorry to learn about Acharya Javadekar’s
indisposition. I hope he will soon recover.
I remember Shripad well. He is brave and will go through the
mill cheerfully. Please give him my love when you next meet him. If
you represent Rajaji correctly, the version is only true so far as it goes.
But I will forbear and wait till we meet. Your questions are interesting.
I have promised to meet you in Panchgani even if the others cannot
join you. Therefore I shall conserve my limited energy till the time of
our meeting. But, if you do not mind, I would fix the date of our
meeting towards the end of the month. I am not gaining as much as I
had expected. Do you mind the delay? I suggest 25th instant at 4
218

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

p.m., i.e., if I am here till then. If the place does not finally suit me, I
shall have to pass the rest of the month in Poona.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 934. Courtesy: Haribhau Joshi

292. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
P ANCHGANI,

July 20, 1944
CHI. MUNNALAL,

Today I read your letter and application carefully through. The
work you are doing is very good. Keep it up. Regard it a sin to fall ill.
Please do not minimize the seriousness of that sin because I too have
committed it. Holding a belief is one thing and putting it into practice
quite another. Let nobody get infected by my shortcomings.Let what
is good in me infect people freely. Sadhana can infect us in this
sense.
Why is Kanchan silent? Tell her to write regularly.
The time is drawing nearer for my arrival in Sevagram.
Bhai Patil is a gentleman. I intend to write a note to him.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8471. Also C.W. 7176. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

293. LETTER TO BHANUSHANKAR
P ANCHGANI,

July 20, 1944
BHAI BHANUSHANKAR,

I have both your letters. I have just been able to finish reading
the second long one. You could have abridged both the letters and at
the same time conveyed more. I do not say this by way of criticism. I
see this defect in many writers. I have just pointed it out so that you
may try and learn brevity in writing.
What you have written is all right. But it is a half truth. This does
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

219

not mean that you have anywhere tried to hide the truth. I have no
doubt that you have written what you believe to be the whole truth.
But I who know the other side see but half truth in your letter. Just
think over this: If we give up all those whom you have criticized, who
will be left to work in the Congress? You and I? As a matter of fact
you alone can work because I sit with those whom you have criticized.
What then is my value? I do not write this to criticize you but to show
the defect in your argument. We have to work with the best possible
people available. Since we are imperfect ourselves we can make
progress only by putting up with imperfect co-workers. Though there
is some truth in your criticism, the world has seen the strength of the
Congress. That proves that on the whole the achievement of the
Congress is not bad. I shall write no more just now. Think over this
and, if you still do not see your way, write to me. The world is good, if
we are good. Let others do nothing or do something wrong. You go
on with your own proper work. There is no time to sit idle.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

294. LETTER TO R. R. DIWAKAR
P ANCHGANI,

July 20, 1944
BHAI DIWAKAR,

I wrote to you yesterday.1 Pundalik2 is still here, hence the
second letter. This shows how these things occupy my thoughts. I
think those who are underground should discover themselves and then
do whatever they like. It would be better if no militant step is taken as
long as I am out.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Mahatma, Vol. VI, between pp. 336 and 337

1
2

220

Vide “Letter to R. R. Diwakar”, 19-7-1944
Pundalik Katagade.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

295. ANSWER S TO QUESTIONS1
P ANCHGANI,

July 20, 1944
QUESTION:

1. Do you agree with inferences being drawn in London following the
publication of your interview 2 that you favour full entry of free Indian government
into war against Japan?
ANSWER:

Yes.

2. Regarding Pakistan there is a tendency here to interpret your last contact
with Mr. Jinnah as indicating your acceptance of Pakistan. Is this so?

Mr. Rajagopalachari’s Formula3 indicates my way of meeting the
communal difficulty. I am indifferent whether it is called Pakistan or
not.
3. In the event of free Indian government taking control of finance, what
policy will you advise regarding Anglo-American capital interest in India?

My advice would be to respect Anglo-American capital interest, which,
in the absence of agreement, is not considered by an impartial tribunal
inconsistent with Indian national interests.
4. Will you outline your conception of the role of a free India in the post-war
world with special relationship to the peoples of the British Commonwealth and the
United States of America?

If I have any say in post-war policy, the free national
government of India will promote a Commonwealth of all world States
naturally including British Commonwealth and America and also, if
possible, belligerent States so as to reduce to the minimum the
possibility of armed conflict between different States.
The Bombay Chronicle, 22-7-1944
1

The report said that the questions were cabled to Gandhiji from London, on
July 18, by Cavalcade, a British news magazine, which claimed that it had
“consistently supported the cause of Indian freedom, and added that it was advised by
Mr. Pulin Seal, Chairman of the Executive Committee of Indian Congressmen in
London, to ask if Gandhiji would give for publication his answers to four questions”.
According to the report, Gandhiji “handed over copies of” the questions and answers
to the Press on July 21 when he gave a statement; vide the following item.
2
Vide “Interview to Stuart Gelder”, 4-7-1944 and 4/6-7-1944.
3
Vide Appendix “C. Rajagopalachari’s Formula”, before 5-8-1942.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

221

296. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
P ANCHGANI,

July 21, 1944
1
1 have answered the question as a confirmed war resister; and if
I became a party to the August resolution and I now suggest what I
consider to be a perfectly honourable solution, it is because thereby I
expect to promote the war-resistance effort. I dream of a world where
there will be no strife between nations and nations. It is possible only
if Great Britain, America and Russia contemplate such world peace. I
deliberately omit China for, unfortunately China is not able like
Russia, Britain or America to stand alone, though much bigger than all
these three powerful nations and more ancient.
China is still menaced by Japan and needs all the assistance that
she can get before she can rise to her full height.
I see no chance for the groaning world, unless the three States
now demonstrate to the world that they have one mind, that they are
not putting forth the effort they are doing for any selfish design,
butthat they are truly fighting for all democracies on the face of the
earth.
My proposal is an acid test, and I have no shadow of doubt that
its hearty acceptance by Britain will immediately turn the scales and
ensure the defeat of the belligerent powers and fill exploited nations
of the earth with hope. You see that I am, therefore, fighting for no
small stake.2
The Bombay Chronicle, 22-7-1944

1

The reference is to the fourth question of the preceding item.
The report concluded: “Gandhiji invited questions and the Pressmen fired out
a few questions and when they stumbled and seemed to get stuck up, Gandhiji smiled
and said that he would lead them on. He could put even mischievous questions, he
said, but thought that was not the proper time for it.”
2

222

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

297. LETTER TO DWARKADAS SHAH
P ANCHGANI,
July 21, 1944
BHAI DWARKADAS SHAH,

I have your letter. An organization which has only Hindu
members can hardly be called a national organization. Moreover,
those who believe that independence can be achieved through nonviolence, should from today eschew any training based on violence. I
myself do not know what will happen after the attainment of
independence and therefore believe that that may be true in the case
of others too. I feel that this should clear your doubts.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

298. INTERVIEW TO THE UNITED PRESS OF INDIA1
P ANCHGANI,

July 22, 1944
I am not afraid of the word ‘diarchy’. 2 The arrangement
proposed seems to me to be as natural as the present is unnatural. If
Allied operations have to continue with India as the base, as they must,
my proposal is that they are only feasible and consistent with
immediate declaration of India’s independence. But I heartily agree
that there must be mutual trust. If it cannot be established, my
proposal is valueless. The winter of mutual distrust among the Boers
and Britons was overnight turned into a summer of mutual trust after
the sanguinary Boer War. In our case, when the victory becomes a
mutual interest, mutual trust follows as a matter of course.
The Bombay Chronicle, 23-7-1944
1

The report said that a special representative of the United Press of India
“sought elucidation from Gandhiji on the points raised by the British Press, specially
the Delhi correspondent of the London Times, on Gandhiji’s proposals that military
control shall be in the hands of the Viceroy and the Commander-in-Chief”.
2
The Times correspondent had remarked: “What is proposed in fact is a kind of
diarchy in the military field which would be practicable only on the assumption that
there is complete identity of aims and; mutual trust, and past events have done
nothing to create these.”
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

223

299. CABLE TO NORMAN CLIFF 1
P ANCHGANI,

July 23, 1944
NORMAN C LIFF
F OREIGN EDITOR
“NEWS C HRONICLE ”
LONDON
YOUR CABLE. I SHARE FULLY BRITISH SORROWS AND SUFFERINGS. MY ONLY
EXCUSE FOR INTERVENING IS THAT MY PROPOSALS ARE AS MUCH IN THE
INTERESTS OF BRITAIN AS OF INDIA AND I WANT THE POOREST IN INDIA SO FAR AS
THEY ARE INFLUENCED BY CONGRESS TO BE ACTIVELY IDENTIFIED WITH THOSE
SUFFERINGS.
ALREADY

ANSWER

SUBMITTED

FIRST

QUESTION.

PUBLICLY MUSLIM

“RAJAGOPALACHARI’S
LEAGUE

PROPOSAL

PRESIDENT WITH

MY

APPROVAL. PUBLIC BODIES ALREADY DISCUSSING FREELY EXPRESSING OPINION.”
ANSWER TO TWO “NO QUESTION WHATEVER OF MASS STRUGGLE NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT

FORMED

AFTER

MANNER

PROPOSED

BY

ME.

ASSUMING

GOVERNMENT AND CONGRESS ACCEPT PROPOSAL, IT PRESUPPOSES HEARTY COOPERATION WAR EFFORT WITHOUT INCURRING FINANCIAL LIABILITY.” ANSWER
TO THREE. “YOU SHOULD KNOW I CEASED TO BE MEMBER CONGRESS IN
NINETEEN-THIRTY-FOUR BUT CONGRESS CONSTITUTION DEFINITELY PLEDGES
CONGRESS TO NON-VIOLENCE.” ANSWER TO FOUR. “AUGUST RESOLUTION IS
NOBLE DECLARATION OF WHICH I AM PROUD. HOPE CONGRESS WILL NEVER
SUPERSEDE IT. CLAUSE RELATING TO SANCTION HAS CAUSED OFFENCE. I HAVE
SAID IT WAS NEVER PUT INTO OPERATION BY ME AND AT THIS STAGE I CANNOT
DO SO EVEN IF MY POWER IS REVIVED AFTER MY DISCHARGE. IF GOVERNMENT
DESIRE CONGRESS CO-OPERATION MY PROPOSAL HONOURABLE BOTH PARTIES
AND PROVIDES FOR ALL THAT GOVERNMENT CAN POSSIBLY WANT.” END
MESSAGE.

GANDHI
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

An extract from this has been reproduced in “Cable to News Chronicle”,
23-7-1944.

224

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

300. LETTER TO STUART GELDER
“DILKHUSHA”,
PANCHGANI,

July 23, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

In terms of your last telegram Gandhiji has asked me to send you his replies to
Mr. Norman Cliff’s questions for transmission to the News Chronicle instead of
writing them direct to London. I am enclosing too herewith a copy of Mr. Cliff’s wire
to Gandhiji, although I now understand that you have received the same also from
Mr. Cliff himself. Gandhiji desires me to say that he would like his replies to be sent
without any alteration or addition. You may, however, add your comment for purposes
of elucidation, if you find it necessary.
Gandhiji hopes that you are now on the road to recovery.
Yours sincerely,
PYARELAL
STUART GELDER, ESQ.
C/ O FRANK MORAES, ESQ.
“GREEN FIELDS”
CHURCHGATE RECLAMATION
BOMBAY
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

301. LETTER TO S. MOHAN KUMARAMANGALAM
P ANCHGANI,

July 23, 1944
DEAR MOHAN 1 ,

Do come with your friend at 4 p.m. on 28th instant. Your friend
may take two snap-shots without any notice to me.

1

Son of Dr. P. Subbaroyan

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

225

I am glad Joshi wants my reply. I have not been idle. I hope to be
able to send a reply1 at an early date.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
M. K UMARAMANGALAM S UBBAROYAN
C OMMUNIST P ARTY
190 B KHETWADI MAIN R OAD
BOMBAY 4
Chief Commissioner’s Office, Bombay, File No. 3001/H/, p. 123. Courtesy:
Government of Maharashtra

302. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
P ANCHGANI,

July 23, 1944
DAUGHTER AMTUL SALAAM,

I have your letters. I no longer have the strength to give orders.
I would only advise you to do what you think best. Whenever you
wish to come to the Ashram for treatment, you may do so. Serve
wherever you like. I do not know what work to take from you. It is
my nature to be content with whatever service people give. Those who
are content to stay in the Ashram may do so. Those who think they
can do better service elsewhere may work outside.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 480

303. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
July 23, 1944
Do not get in the least impatient. Observe with detachment
whatever happens. . . . Doctors have examined me. There has been
good improvement. The climate has agreed with me. But I do not wish
to stay on much longer now. Nor is it necessary to do so. I am pining
to return to Sevagram.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, pp. 201-2
1

226

Vide “Letter to P. C. Joshi”. 30-7-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

304. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
P ANCHGANI,

July 23, 1944
1
The Sind Home Minister , in defending the forcible prevention
of a member of the Sind Legislative Assembly from exercising his
right of attending the Assembly meeting, is reported to have said:
“Our information is that, since the release of Mahatma Gandhi, the
subversive movement had been restarted throughout India and that
leading personalities behind that movement were again trying to direct
it.” He referred in this connection to the escape from Karachi jail of
three under-trial prisoners concerned in the Marriot Road dacoity case
and said, “this is all in pursuance of the policy of reviving the
movement.”
All the information that I have gathered since my discharge is
absolutely contrary to the statement alleged to have been made by the
Sind Home Minister. May it be that he is badly served by his
informants? Is it not his duty to supply the public with details of the
information in his possession? Who are the leading personalities, and
what is the subversive movement?
If there is any connection between the escape from Karachi jail
of the under-trial prisoners and the supposed revival of the so-called
subversive movement, the least that is necessary is to mention these
names and show the connection.
I would not have taken notice of the Sind Home Minister’s
statement but for the fact that it is likely to be used by enemies of
India’s freedom to frustrate the efforts that I am making for the cause
of independence. I am sure the Sind Home Minister is as anxious as I
am for India’s freedom, attained through peaceful means.
I may add, too, that throughout this anxious period my attempt
has been, through the Press and in my talks with Congressmen and
others, to show that I am opposed unequivocally to sabotage and the
like. I have also stated in explicit terms that I never have had an
opportunity of starting civil disobedience and that the authority vested
in me by the A.I.C.C. expired on my imprisonment, and could not
automatically be revived by my discharge on grounds of ill-health.
1

Haji Muhammad Hashim Gazdar

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

227

Therefore assuming that civil disobedience is described as subversive
movement, which I deny, even that cannot be offered by anybody on
behalf of Congress.
But I have said at the same time that normal Congress activities
of a purely peaceful nature must be carried on even if restrictions are
imposed upon them. It is up to the authorities, therefore, if they are at
all inclined to respond to my advice, not to interfere with such
activities as were permissible, say, before August 1942, such as, for
instance, monthly flag demonstration, public meetings and the like.
The Bombay Chronicle, 24-7-1944

305. INTRODUCTION TO “DRAFT INSTRUCTION FOR
CIVIL RESISTERS”
P ANCHGANI,

July 24, 1944
The following is the literal translation of draft instructions1 for
the guidance of civil resisters. The draft was in Hindustani and copies
were prepared in both Devanagari and Persian scripts. It was prepared
on 7th August, 1942, and was placed before the Working Committee
and discussed on the 8th of August. The Working Committee was
again to have met on the morning of the 9th August. But that was not
to be.
I was to put before the Working Committee my view of the
negotiations which I was to carry on with the Government. They were
to cover a period of at least three weeks. The instructions were to see
the light of day only on failure of the contemplated negotiations.
The object of publishing the draft at present is twofold. It shows
how my mind was running at the time. The draft is an additional
answer to the adverse suggestions made in the Government indictment
about my non-violence. The second and more relevant object is to let
Congress workers know how I would have acted at the time.
I have come to know that my name was freely used to justify
acts of sabotage and the like. I would like every Congressman and for
that matter every Indian to feel that on him and her lies the
responsibility of freeing India from the incubus of foreign
rule.Non-violent suffering is the only way. Freedom of India means
1

228

Vide “Draft Instructions for Civil Resisters”, 4-8-1942.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

everything for us but it means also much for the world. For, freedom
won through non-violence will mean the inauguration of a new order
in the world.
There is no hope for mankind in any other way.
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, pp. 285-6

306. TELEGRAM TO MANORANJAN CHAUDHARY1
P ANCHGANI,

July 24, 1944
MANORANJAN C ARE NIRMAL BHATTACHARJI
R USTOM MANSION
ADENWALLA R OAD , M ATUNGA
BOMBAY
WELCOME TWENTY-SEVENTH FOUR AFTERNOON.2

GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 10514

307. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
P ANCHGANI,

July 24, 1944
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter. Without yet having any definite statement
from Narandas. I have already arranged for transfer to Devdas of
Rs. 25,000/- to be placed at your disposal. You are not likely to want
more at once. I hope to transfer more as soon as I hear from Rajkot.
I got rid of the cold long ago. The weather here has agreed with
me. Manilal and his daughter Sita are with me. We leave here for
Sevagram on 3rd or 4th.
Love.
BAPU
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1
2

Of the Bengal Hindu Sabha
Vide also “Letter to P. C. Joshi”, 30-7-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

229

308. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
P ANCHGANI,

July 24, 1944
CHI. AMRITLAL,

May you live long and render plenty of service. My blessings to
both the sisters.
I had read the pamphlets. I shall go through the new ones too.
I will start for Wardha on the 2nd of August.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI AMRITLAL NANAVATI
64 A/B 4 TH F LOOR, P ANNALAL TERRACE
GRANT R OAD
BOMBAY
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10803

309. LETTER TO PREMA KANTAK
P ANCHGANI,

July 24, 1944
CHI. PREMA,

Sushila has left for Delhi. I shall start on the 2nd of August and
go direct to Wardha. I do not know whether I will go via Bombay or
Kalyan. You may come along with me, or come afterwards whenever
you wish to. I am all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10431. Also C.W. 6870. Courtesy:
Prema Kantak

230

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

310. TELEGRAM TO T. B. SAPRU1
[July 25, 1944] 2
ARRANGEMENTS
FIRST

AUGUST.

MADE

FOR

REACHING

YOU

HERE.

SEVAGRAM

LEAVING

PANCHGANI

THIRD.

Gandhi-Sapru Papers. Courtesy: National Library

311. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
P ANCHGANI,

July 25, 1944
MY DEAR C. R.,

It is early morning. I feel your absence. Questions regarding
Pakistan crop up. Papers are being sent to you. But that is not enough.
Some questions I must answer myself. It is not right that I
shouldanswer them without you. I won’t drag you to Panchgani. But I
do want you to be in Sevagram when I reach there. I hope to be there
on 3rd August. Try to reach there that day and come with the
intention of settling down there till my fate is decided one way or the
other. Every decision of my fate must necessarily be final just for the
time being.
It is as wet as when you left. But I am flourishing. And I see that
I can like this place if there is a refuge for poor people. It has been
built for the rich or the upper middle class.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 2095

1
The telegram is extracted from Pyarelal’s letter dated July 25 to the addressee,
which, inter alia, read: “Gandhiji has decided to leave for Sevagram. . . . The stay here
had done him good and from the point of view of his health a further stay for a
fortnight would have been eminently desirable. But his soul yearned for Sevagram and
the doctors saw no good in thwarting his innate nature. Gandhiji has just sent you the
following wire.”
2
ibid

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

231

312. LETTER TO LALA DUNICHAND
“DILKHUSHA”,
PANCHGANI,

July 25, 1944
DEAR LALA DUNICHAND,

Gandhiji has your letter of the 15th inst. He desires me to thank you for the
information you have conveyed to him. He was not ignorant of those facts. He is
doing all he can. His statements and interviews in the Press will serve to give you a
picture of his present mind.
His health is fair only in the sense that it might have been worse. He intends
returning to Sevagram on the 2nd of August.
Yours sincerely,
LALA DUNICHAND, B. A.
KRIPANIVAS COTTAGE
AMBALA CITY
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

313. LETTER TO NATARAJAN
P ANCHGANI,
July 25, 1944
DEAR MR. NATARAJAN,

It was good of you to have sent your letter through Balasaheb1 . I
appreciate the kind thought that prompted it. I do not want to send an
argumentative letter in reply. All I wish to say is that it is the logical
corollary of the Congress resolution to which I was party.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

[PS.]
I have read your letter three times. You know how I value your
opinion. It occurs to me that you should invite Rajaji for a private and
friendly discussion.
M. K. G
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1

232

B. G. Kher
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

314. LETTER TO B. G. KHER
P ANCHGANI,

July 25, 1944
BHAI KHER,

Herewith letter from Natarajan. Read it. If his suggestion appeals
to you, persuade others to accept it. I myself would have explained
but, as you know, I have neither the time nor the energy to do so. If
you have fully understood Rajaji’s Formula1 , canvass for it earnestly.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Pyarelal committed no mistake in that.2 He deliberately told you
about it. The thing is not to be kept secret from persons like you. The
truth is that it is to be kept secret only from newspapers. The intention
is to avoid embarrassment to Churchill.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2771

315. LETTER TO KANAM GANDHI
July 25, 1944
CHI. KANAM,

I got your letter today. I shall not be able to always fulfil your
expectation of a reply by return of post. You have spoilt your
handwriting so much that now it is difficult to read it. Sita’s 3
handwriting is so beautiful that it deserves to be emulated by all of
you. No doubt she writes in English but whoever writes a good hand
in one script must necessarily write equally well in another.
About the injustice to the residents of Sevagram, ask me when
we meet.
I have had enough of watching the cinema4 all by myself
without my compatriots at Sevagram. When I am out and engaged in
1

Vide Appendix “C. Rajagopalachari’s Formula”, before 5-8-1942.
The reference is to Gandhiji’s letter dated July 17 to Winston Churchill; vide
“Letter to Winston Churchill”, 17-7-1944.
3
Addressee’s cousin.
4
Gandhiji saw feature film “Ramarajya” at his residence.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

233

some good activity I would remember all of you. There was no such
thing in the present case. Hence nobody has lost anything by not
witnessing the show. On the contrary, I have lost something after
having seen the picture. You may ask me what it is.
I hope to reach Sevagram on the 3rd.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

316. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
P ANCHGANI,

July 25, 1944
CHI. MRIDU,

I have your letter. I have explained everything to Kher Saheb 1 .
Hence I am not writing a separate letter to you. Are you coming or
not ? We are waiting.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C. W. 11230. Courtesy : Sarabhai Foundation

317. LETTER TO P. G. MATHEW
P ANCHGANI,

July 25, 1944
MY DEAR MATHEW,

I am grieved at your father’s passing away. I can understand
your remorse. How can one be angry with one’s father even if he
leaves nothing for the one? But let that be. Giving away in charity all
that you have come into, will be an adequate penance.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1543

1

234

B. G. Kher
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

318. LETTER TO C. M. DOKE
P ANCHGANI,

July 26, 1944
MY DEAR CLEMENT 1 ,

I had your sweet letter whilst I was a prisoner. From there I
wrote no letters.
Ba is ever with me though her body has been consigned to the
flames. Though I see this truth through the reason and the heart,
world-wide sympathy I have prized. It has made me realize the
goodness of God as never before.
I was glad to have some account of you from Manilal. He was
able to tell me that you had kept up the old tradition. Do tell me all
about the whole family—how and what they are doing. As I write this,
all the old associations revive and make me glad.
With love to you all,
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 745

319. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
P ANCHGANI,

July 26, 1944
CHI. SUSHILA,

I am glad that Manilal and Sita have come. I am still more
pleased that you yourself stayed behind. I had thought that that would
be beyond your capacity. You have risen higher in my estimation.
May God keep you both on a high plane.
I have had quite long talks with Manilal, though not to my
heart’s content. There wasn’t sufficient time for that. We will talk still
more after we reach Sevagram or on our way there.
1

Son of J. J. Doke who was a close associate of Gandhiji in South Africa; a
missionary on the staff of South African Baptist Missionary Society, Lambaland,
1914-21; Head of the Department of Bantu Studies, University of the Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

235

Sita is a very good girl. I have not been able to make friends
with her as much as I would wish. But I think, I will be able to do so.
She is intelligent. The most important thing is to see that she always
remains as healthy as she is today. Good health is the most important
blessing of life. Do not worry about her. If you worry about Manilal, I
would certainly consider you silly.
About myself Manilal will write. There is no cause for worry. I
am in God’s hands. He will do what He wants.
According to the present plan, I understand that you will arrive
after December. The immediate plan is that Manilal and Sita will join
me in Sevagram, via Akola, provided of course there are no
unforeseen developments.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4935

320. LETTER TO MANJULA M. MEHTA
P ANCHGANI,

July 26, 1944
CHI. MANJULA 1 ,

I have your letter. I feel that whatever is due to Ratilal2 should be
paid up. He will use it as he is destined to. How long can we keep a
watch over a person who has come of age? I regularly get from
Champa letters which are quite sensible.
I intend to start from here on the 1st for Sevagram. Do come
and see me there when you can.
I do not remember having received your letter in jail. Very few
letters were delivered to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI MAGANLAL P RANJIVANDAS MEHTA , B ARRISTER
82 GHODBUNDER R OAD
ANDHERI
From a photostat of the Gujarati; C.W, 1029. Courtesy: Manjula M. Mehta
1
2

236

Wife of Maganlal Mehta
Maganlal Mehta’s brother
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

321. LETTER TO BALKRISHNA BHAVE
P ANCHGANI,

July 26, 1944
CHI. BALKRISHNA,

I got your letter and liked it. I like Dinshaw’s temperament. His
wife also has a loving nature. Though there is no privacy, his place is
very peaceful. It has all the facilities. He knows everything about milk
diet and also other methods of treatment. If, therefore, you fully make
up your mind, you may go and stay for a year in Poona. Perhaps
your health may be completely restored. Even if it is not, you will lose
nothing. You will in any case be doing some service there. If you are
prepared to see everybody who wants to see you, you may even be
able to help some. In the Arogyabhavan your presence will itself
benefit the inmates. Think over all these points. As I am soon going
over there, we shall reach a final decision after I arrive.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 810. Courtesy: Balkrishna Bhave

322. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
July 26, 1944
BAPA,

I have your letter. Why such a decision? May not anyone tender
his resignation? But whether you undertake tours or refuse to budge
from your Delhi camp, Swami1 is willing to be relieved this moment.
But none from amongst Sir Purushottamdas and others is willing to let
you go. Swami wants the matter to be entrusted to an arbitrator who
should give his award. But should we take such a dispute to an
arbitrator? It is a question of difference of opinion. Some people
cannot see eye to eye. Yet both the parties or all of them might be
doing good work. Under the circumstances, they work separatelyand
preserve mutual amity. I am not issuing orders, I am simply
comparing notes.
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

Swami Anand; vide “Letter to Swami Anand”, 19-7-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

237

323. LETTER TO MANJULA GANDHI
July 26, 1944
CHI. MANJU,

I have your letter. Capitalize on your bhajans and forget all
your worries after putting your full trust in God. There is no rule that
because you are young in age you cannot acquire jnana. Jnana, that
is, atmajnana is not necessarily associated with age. I have seen many
an old and erudite fool. On the other hand an unlettered person like
Raichandbhai had come to possess atmajnana even at a tender age. I
hope to see you on the 1st evening or the 2nd morning. I very much
want you to pay me a visit after you are all right.1 Even if I am
arrested and taken away, you can stay at the Asharm or you may
reconsider your plans.
Blessings from

BAPU

MANJU GANDHI
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

324. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
P ANCHGANI,

July 26, 1944
I have read the debate in the Lords’ on the Indian question with
attention. I confess, I am disappointed. Lord Munster has correctly
summarized2 my proposals. It is the most constructive suggestion that
I could conceive. If it is not accepted, even as a basis for a friendly
discussion and for permission to be given to see members of the
Working Committee, who alone can speak with authority, I must
reluctantly come to the conclusion that the British Government do not
want a fair solution of what I consider is a deadlock, but what they
may not consider as such.
However earnest I may be in my efforts to reach a solution, I
know I can do nothing, if there is no response from the British
1

Vide “Letter to Dr. K. C. Gharpure”, 19-7-1944.
For excerpts from Munster’s speech, vide Appendix “Lord Munster’s
Speech”, 25-7-1944.
2

238

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Government. How I wish that the bogey of communal differences had
not been raised in the debate. I have contended, as I contend even
now, that differences there must be so long as there is a ruling third
party to exploit them. I have spoken what I feel to be the truth. The
occasion is too serious for me to hide it.
The Bombay Chronicle, 27-7-1944

325. LETTER TO RADHIKADEVI
[After July 26, 1944] 1
DEAR SISTER,

I have your letter. What else can one do but resort to a fast when
one is treated as less than human? I do not dare to interfere. Have
faith in God and put up with whatever happens.
Blessings from

BAPU
S MT. R ADHIKADEVI
VISHWANATH P RASAD C HAUBE
GOPALPUR
BALLIA
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

326. LETTER TO LORD WAVELL
P ANCHGANI,

July [26/] 2 27, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I must admit my disappointment over your letter 3 of the 22nd
instant. But I am used to work in the face of disappointment. Here is
my concrete proposal.
I am prepared to advise the Working Committee to declare that
in view of the changed conditions, mass civil disobedience envisaged
by the resolution of August 1942 cannot be offered and that full
1

In the source, the letter is placed after the letters of July 26, 1944.
From the reference to “Lord Munster’s Speech”; vide Appendix “Lord
Munster’s Speech”, 25-7-1944.
3
Vide last footnote of “Letter to Lord Wavell”, 15-7-1944.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

239

co-operation in the war-effort should be given by the Congress,if a
declaration of immediate Indian independence is made and a national
government responsible to the Central Assembly be formed subject to
the proviso that, during the pendency of the war, the military
operations should continue as at present but without involving any
financial burden on India. If there is a desire on the part of the British
Government for a settlement, friendly talks should take the place of
correspondence. But I am in your hands. I shall continue to knock so
long as there is the least hope of an honourable settlement.
After the foregoing was written, I saw Lord Munster’s speech in
the House of Lords. The summary given by him in the House of
Lords fairly represents my proposal. This summary may serve as a
basis for mutual friendly discussion.1
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, p. 6; also The Hindu,
19-8-1944

327. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
P ANCHGANI,

July 27, 1944
CHI. MANUDI,

I have your letter. That your weight should go down to 871b. is
a matter of shame. It is sinful to read up to 2 o’clock at night. If that
is the condition for passing, then I will have none of that kind of
education. If you are unable to obey the rules, you will have to come
to me. I would rather you remained uneducated than get educated in
this way. You are irregular about taking medicine too. What does that
indicate?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIV

1

Vide also “Interview to the Press”, 26-7-1944. For the Viceroy’s reply, vide
Appendix “Letter from Lord Wavell”, 15-8-1944.

240

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

328. TALK TO PANCHGANI CITIZENS1
P ANCHGANI,

July 27, 1944
Mahatma Gandhi said that he had been greatly benefited by his stay in
Panchgani and his health had considerably improved.
The Nawab of Wai who introduced the citizens to Mahatma Gandhi expressed the hope
that he would visit the place annually.
Mahatma Gandhi talked to the gathering quite informally, and replying to the
Vice-Principal of a local European school who said, he had seen Mahatma Gandhi in
Charlestown while he was a young boy nearly forty years ago in South Africa,
Mahatma Gandhi said, “Oh yes. I remember Charlestown well. Don’t I know
Charlestown where I got a good hiding?”2 and burst into laughter.
Mahatma Gandhi said that he liked Panchgani better than other hill stations he
had visited in India, but referred to the lack of accommodation and said that wealthy
people should construct quarters so that the poor could also take advantage of the
climate for recuperating their health.

The Bombay Chronicle, 28-7-1944

329. TELEGRAM TO STUART GELDER
Express

July 28, 1944

GELDER
C ARE F RANK MORAES
GREENFIELDS, C HURCHGATE R ECLAMATION
BOMBAY
SORRY

YOU

STILL

ILL.

LET

MORAES

COME

TAKE

CHANCE.

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

The report said that “heads of educational institutions, medical practitioners
and businessmen” met Gandhiji in the afternoon and “spent nearly half an hour with
him”.
2
Vide “An Autobiography—Part II”, Chapter IX.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

241

330. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
P ANCHGANI,

July 28, 1944
DAUGHTER AMTUL SALAAM,

I was pained to read your letter. Your duty is to go to Indore. I
will issue no order. I do not want any service from you. It would be a
different matter if you fell ill and needed some nursing and came to
Sevagram. Your duty is to stay outside and do whatever work you
know. It is not a question of my being angry. It is a question of my
own limitations. You may, therefore, do whatever service you like, but
outside Sevagram. Now that your health is all right there is no need at
all to go to Sevagram.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 481

331. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
P ANCHGANI,

July 28, 1944
CHI. KUSUM,

I have your letter. I hope to reach Sevagram, on the 3rd. I will
not go to Bombay. I shall catch the train at Kalyan. You may travel by
that train. If you do, meet Shantikumar. I myself am keen, of course.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI KUSUMBEHN DESAI
MEHTA P OLE
BARODA
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1851

242

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

332. LETTER TO VIJAYA M. PANCHOLI
P ANCHGANI,

July 28, 1944
CHI. VIJAYA,

I have your letter. I will reach Sevagram on the 3rd. Come over
there whenever you wish to. I will wait for your letter. Please reply this
letter. Tell Nanabhai that I have received his letter. Tell him that he
should certainly come to Sevagram. I am not stopping at Bombay.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7149. Also C.W. 4641. Courtesy:
Vijaya M. Pancholi

333. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
P ANCHGANI,

July 28, 1944
The question most discussed with me by visitors is whether I
approve of underground activities. These include sabotage, the
publication of unauthorized sheets, etc. It has been suggested to me
that without some workers going underground they could have done
nothing. Some have contended that destruction of property, including
dislocation of communication, provided that safety of human life
could be ensured, should surely be counted as non-violence.
Examples of other nations as having not hesitated to do all these
things and much worse have been cited. My reply is that no nation
has, so far as I know, deliberately used truth and non-violence as
exclusive means for the attainment of freedom. Judged by that
standard, I say unhesitatingly, that underground activities, even though
utterly innocent in themselves, should have no place in the technique
of non-violence. Sabotage and all it means, including destruction of
property, is in itself violence. Though these activities may be shown to
have touched the imagination and enthusiasm, I have no doubt that
they have harmed the movement as a whole.
I swear by the Constructive Programme. Let me recount the
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

243

items of that programme:
1.
Communal unity
2.
Removal of untouchability
3.
Prohibition
4.
Khadi
5.
Other village industries
6.
Village sanitation
7.
New or basic education
8.
Adult education
9.
Uplift of women
10. Service of the so-called aboriginals
11. Education in health and hygiene
12. Propaganda of rashtra bhasha
13. Love of one’s own language
14. Working for economic equality.
Unfortunately the workers have not developed in that
programme the living faith which I have. I can but re-emphasize the
importance of that programme. And, if the whole of India could be
converted to take to that programme, we should reach our goal in the
quickest manner possible.
To the workers who are still underground, I advise:
If you share my conviction that underground activity is not
conducive to the growth of the spirit of active non-violence, you will
discover yourselves and take the risk of being imprisoned, believing
that imprisonment, thus undergone, itself helps the freedom
movement.1
The Bombay Chronicle, 29-7-1944

1

Vide also Appendices “Discussion on Underground Activities”, after 31-31944 and “Discussion with Underground Workers”, after 31-3-1944.

244

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

334. LETTER TO SIR EDWARD JENKINS
AS AT S EVAGRAM ,
C AMP P ANCHGANI,

July 29, 1944
DEAR SIR EDWARD,

I thank you for your letter 1 of 16th July. I am thankful for the
enclosure of the letter to Miss Agatha Harrison.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S IR EDWARD JENKINS
THE VICEROY’S HOUSE
NEW DELHI
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, p. 35

335. LETTER TO SHARDA G. CHOKHAWALA
P ANCHGANI,

July 29, 1944
CHI. BABUDI,

I got your clean letter. I hope to reach Sevagram on the 3rd.
When will I see you and Anand? Though eager, I am not impatient.
Come only after you are completely all right. I did try but I could not
find a homoeopath who could convince me. I can put faith only if I
see some cases [of successful treatment]. Just now I don’t intend to
send for the book you mention. There is no time. But what can your
doctor teach me?
Blessings to you all from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9973. Courtesy: Sharda G. Chokhawala

1

Which read: “I am dealing with your letter [vide “Letter to G. E. B. Abell”,
13-7-1944] of 13th July to Mr. Abell who is in Simla. I am sending your letter [vide
“Letter to Agatha Harrison”, 13-7-1944] to Miss Agatha Harrison through the bag as
you wish.”
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

245

336. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
July 29, 1944
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

I am worried about Balkrishna. I hope he will get through the
present crisis. Will he like to stay at Dr. Mehta’s nursing home in
Poona? I don’t know whether or no Dr. Mehta will take up his case.1
Though I am there, I cannot be relied upon.2
I am very busy these days. My pen has strayed into Gujarati, so
I will let it go on. I haven’t read the whole of Munnalal’s letter. He
seems all right; that is all I can say now. I am happy that Krishnadas3
and Jajuji have been released. I am hoping to hear from them in
detail.
Mitu 4 must be doing well.
What is the matter with Manojna’s5 sister? Ask her to write to
me. I have sent Pyarelal to Bombay. He will be back by Saturday.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4442

337. LETTER TO GANGADHARRAO DESHPANDE
P ANCHGANI,

July 29, 1944
BHAI GANGADHARRAO,

I have heard everything from Bhai Pundalik. I have read your
account also. I hope that what I am doing will solve the problem. And
if any doubt still remains, write to me. You must keep yourself in
good health. You have yet to render a lot of service.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5224

1

Vide also “Letter to Balkrishna Bhave”, 26-7-1944.
What follows is in Gujarati.
3
Krishnadas Gandhi
4
Aryanayakam’s daughter
5
Wife of Krishnadas Gandhi
2

246

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

338. TALK TO BOMBAY CONGRESS LEADERS1
P ANCHGANI,

[July] 29/30, 1944
Ninth August is a great day and it is the duty of all to observe it.
But that part of the resolution which speaks of mass civil disobedience
cannot be brought into force because the authority to put it into force
was vested solely in me. Today I see no possibility of mass civil
disobedience either according to that authority or according to
circumstances.
Mass civil disobedience is one thing and the exercise of citizen’s
right and civil disobedience in pursuance of it is different. The people
have been exercising the right of defensive individual civil
disobedience since 1920. People in general may not understand the
difference between mass civil disobedience and civil disobedience for
the defence of individual citizen’s rights. But it is necessary to know
the differences.
On such occasions as 9th August, people have to understand the
difference, and exercise this right of individual civil disobedience for
the defence of civil rights. In such places where it is necessary to take
the permission of police for meetings, processions and such common
civil rights, permission from the police should be asked for. But, if
such permission is not granted, people should exercise their civil right
in spite of the refusal.3
2

Chief Commissioner’s Office, Bombay, File No. 3001/HP. Courtesy:
Government of Maharashtra

1

According to the source, this is a summary.
The source has “August”, evidently a mistake.
3
In the source, this was followed by a “copy of the draft letter to be addressed
to the Commissioner of Police, Bombay, by the leader of the procession on August
9”, which appeared as “approved” by Gandhiji “in pursuance of this policy”, vide
Appendix “Draft Letter to the Commissioner of Police, Bombay”, 15-8-1944.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

247

339. LETTER TO P. C. JOSHI
AS AT S EVAGRAM ,
C AMP P ANCHGANI,

July 30, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I had duly received your letter1 of 14th June and also your letter
of 26th of July sent with Shri Kumaramangalam.
Your answer to my first question provokes further question for
your reply. I understand that although the chief actors among the
Allied powers are by no means inclined towards real democracy, you
think that by the time the war ends, their designs will be confounded
and that the people all the world over will suddenly find
self-expression and overthrow the present leaders. In the peoples,
according to answer, I am entitled to include us, other Asiatics and
Negroes, for that matter perhaps, also the proletariat of Japan and
Germany. If such is your belief, I must confess that I do not share it
but I keep myself open to conviction. Meanwhile I suggest that the
title ‘people’s war’ is highly misleading. It enables the Government in
India to claim that at least one popular party considers this as people’s
war. I suggest, too, that Russia’s limited alliance with the Allied powers
cannot by any stretch of imagination convert what was before an
imperialistic war against that Nazi combine, into a people’s war.
Holding the view I do, it is superfluous for me now to answer
your argument that “this war has split the world into two camps”.
Between Scylla and Charybdis, if I sail in either direction, I suffer
shipwreck. Therefore I have to be in the midst of the storm. I
suggested a way out. Naturally it has been rejected because the powers
that be do not want to relax their grip on India. As I am composing
this letter to you, I have read and re-read your argument. Every
paragraph offends; for, to me, it lacks reality. Please believe me that
my prejudice against your party has nothing to do with my
examination of your answer to the first question.
Q. 2. Your answer, as far as it goes, I hold to be completely
satisfactory. I will not ask you for further proof about your finances.
After I have dealt with your answers, I will put my difficulties before
1

248

Vide Appendix “Letter from P. C. Joshi”, 14-6-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you. Your answers to the other questions do not admit of a categorical
reply. I understand your answers and appreciate them too. If I was
free from prejudices, I would have no hesitation in accepting your
answers.1 But my difficulty is real and I ask for your sympathy. When
I make the admission that I have prejudices, it is an appeal to you to
have patience with me and to disarm my prejudices in the best manner
you can. I can only give you my assurance that I am ready to see
anybody you want me to see, to read anything you want me to read
and to examine every argument or fact produced by you as
dispassionately as I can. I give you this further assurance that I have
not acted upon my prejudice, nor shall I do so, unless the prejudices
harden into a confirmed belief that your party represents a force of
evil and is really an obstacle in the way of the fight for freedom. I am
not likely to have that belief easily and, if I have it, you shall have
ample notice so as to enable you to wean me from it. I know your
worth. You have very able young men and women, as selfless as I
would claim to be. You are all hard working and possess great energy
and you impose strict discipline on your workers. All this I prize and
admire. I would not easily lose such a force because of any
preconceived notions of mine.
If I have been inordinately long in dealing with your answers
which you sent me so promptly, it was because, as you are aware, I was
preoccupied and also because I was examining the evidence that was
pouring in upon me unsolicited against your party. 2 I asked them to
let me use their names and they have given me the permission. I take
the latest first, i.e., Babu Manoranjan Chaudhary. I did not even know
that he was coming and when he did ask for an appointment3 , it was in
connection with my acceptance of the Rajaji Formula 4 . Butreally he
took the greater part of my time to tell me that the communists had
done great injury to the national cause. I am using a milder term than
1

Referring to this, the addressee, in his reply dated September 12, said: “It
hurts us more than you can imagine to read that our nation’s leader pleads prejudices
as standing in the way of examining slander against a young patriotic party.”
2
In his reply, the addressee said: “Mudslinging at political opponents is an
old weapon of those who have lost faith in the people and given up all moral values.”
3
Manoranjan Chaudhary was asked (vide “Letter to Manoranjan Chaudhary”,
24-7-1944) by Gandhiji to meet him on July 27. Dealing with this, Joshi said in his
reply that Manoranjan Chaudhary was the agent of Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee who
was bitterly anti-communist as he had been exposed by the communists.
4
Vide Appendix “C. Rajagopalachari’s Formula”, after 5-8-1942.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

249

was really used before me. He has left papers which I have not been
able to study. And he has also left with me a printed book 1 which I
have glanced through personally and it makes bad reading. The
printed book can be seen by any deputy you may choose to send.
Probably you have seen it yourself.2
The other is Sjt. Kaleswara Rao of Bezwada. He also sent me a
long letter from which I quote the salient passages3 (see enclosure 4 ).
Add to this the numerous letters I have received from correspondents,
known and unknown, all impeaching the party. I understand, too, that
Shri Jayaprakash Narayan is also ‘disillusioned’.
You have referred me to Mian Iftikharuddin5 and Shaukat
Ansari, both of whom I know well and for whom I have great regard.
Unfortunately Iftikharuddin is in jail. I have never talked about
Communism to Shaukat, because I know him and his wife Zohra apart
from their politics. But no general assurance from them will obliterate
the evidence that has forced itself upon me and of which I have given
you a bird’s-eye view. I will ask you not to dismiss all this evidence as
so much prejudice. I would ask you not to be angry with your critics,
however ignorant they may be. You will have legitimate cause for
anger, if their criticism is malicious and conceived with a hostile
intent. Lastly, I ask you to believe me that I want to impress the
services of every one of you for the cause of independence to be
fought along the lines that I have chalked out for myself and the
whole country. And if I am convinced that I am going astray and that
yours is the correct method, I would like to be won over by you

1

War Against the People, by Kalyani Bhattacharya. Joshi alleged that she was
not the author, but Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee got it written and paid for its
publication.
2
Joshi said that he had not read it but glanced through it. Immediately on
receiving it, he had asked the Bengal Committee of Communist Party whether he
should answer it in People’s War to which they replied: “Need not bother because it
had been withdrawn from circulation as all decent Bengalees who read it felt disgusted
over it.”
3
Regarding Kaleswara Rao’s accusation, Joshi asked Gandhiji to call
Sundarayya, the Andhra Communist leader, and Kaleswara Rao together and judge or
to hold a trial in public with C. Rajagopalachari and Mrs. Sarojini Naidu as judges.
4
Not reproduced here.
5
President, Punjab Provincial Congress Committee

250

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

toyour side and I will sincerely and gladly serve as an apprentice
wanting to be enlisted as a unit in your ranks.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Correspondence between Mahatma Gandhi and P. C. Joshi, pp. 17-22

340. INTERVIEW TO “NEWS CHRONICLE”1
[PANCHGANI,

July 30, 1944] 2
Mr. Amery knows better, but it is convenient for him to brush
aside my offer 3 by saying that the formula is not even the starting
point. Had it not been the starting point, there would not have been all
the discussion about my formula that has taken place in the Press.
Asked if he shared the feeling that the British Government is planning
to by-pass the political problem by focussing public attention on economic
issues, Gandhiji said:

Imagine the economic regeneration of England if she is
1
The report said that this was in answer to the statement made by L. S. Amery,
Secretary of State for India, during a debate in the House of Commons on July 28.
According to The Indian Annual Register, 1944, Vol. II, p. 308, Amery had said: “ . ..
So far as India’s future constitution is concerned . . . an agreed constitution could only
be arrived at if the predominantly Muslim provinces were free to adhere or stand
out.... Apart from that particular issue . . . one central demand upon which he does not
leave any room for ambiguity . . . is the demand for the immediate recognition of
India’s independence under a provisional government, in which the only powers
reserved to the Viceroy are those which deal with the control of active military
operations. All reserve powers indispensable to ensure that the various functions of
administration are co-ordinate with war effort and also those indispensable to
safeguard the constitutional position for minority elements—all those are to
disappear. Well, that is, after all, just the demand upon which the negotiations with
the Congress broke down two years ago and were bound to break down. I will only
invite the House to read Mr. Gandhi’s statements side by side with those then issued
by Congress leaders, to see that, in this respect at any rate, there has been no real
advance. Indeed Mr. Gandhi now adds the further stipulation that India is to bear no
part of the cost of her own defence. So long as those are the basis for his proposals,
they obviously do not form even the starting point for a profitable discussion either
with Lord Wavell or with the interned Congress leaders.”
2
The interview appeared as reported under this date-line.
3
Vide “Interview to Stuart Gelder”, 4/6-7-1944 and “Interview to the Press”,
14-7-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

251

politically subjected to an extraneous power. I can understand
theruthless exploitation of the economic resources of India by a
power that has held her in bondage for over 150 years, but that will
not be economic prosperity for India. It will spell economic dejection
and political degradation. I am amazed that British statesmen who
happen to be ruling India today are not satisfied with the mere
rejection of a plan conceived in all honesty, but that they should even
suggest that the political question should be shelved during the war
and that attention should be concentrated on India’s economic
salvation1 .
The Hindu, 1-8-1944

341. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
P ANCHGANI,

July 30, 1944
2
I have noticed this. It has caused me pain as also amazement
that the representatives of the British nation, who have a long and
distinguished record of heroic fight for political freedom, should
divorce the economic development of India from political subjection
and give the former preference over the latter. To me it looks like
putting the cart before the horse, and I have not yet seen any horse
performing the trick of pushing the cart with its nose. It was, therefore,
a pleasure to find two noted industrialists, Mr. J. R. D. Tata and Sir
Homi Mody, summarily rejecting the idea put forth in the House of
Commons and holding out, I suppose, from bitter experience, that the
economic development of India was dependent upon the solution of
the political deadlock, in other words a proper national government
functioning at the Centre. I suppose they had in mind the gigantic
concessions that have been made during recent years to British
monopolists. They must have had in mind also the strangling of
Indian enterprise. What can, therefore, happen without a national
government is not the economic development of India, but its
exploitation and degradation.
1

Vide also the following item.
According to the report, Gandhiji was alluding to “the House of Commons
debate with particular reference to the consensus of opinion . . . that the economic
development of India was of greater importance than the solution of the political
deadlock”. Vide also the preceding item.
2

252

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Members of the House of Commons, not knowing the realities
in India, may philosophize and talk of the immediate importance of
economic development. I wish they can see what is going on today
inIndia. I have no shadow of doubt in my mind that the Bengal
famine, as also famines in other parts of India, were man-made and
not God-made. I need not impugn the honesty of the rulers who have
been sent out to India from Britain.
I hold that in spite of all the honesty that the British rulers can
summon to their assistance, it is impossible for them to get behind the
Indian skin and know the real disease. The consensus of opinion in
the House of Commons, therefore, is for me a terrible pointer. It
confirms me in my opinion that the “Quit India” resolution was no
hasty cry conceived in anger. To put the same in parliamentary
language, it demands that India must be now governed by Indians
chosen by her own people—not a coterie but the whole mass of the
people without distinction of race, creed or colour. It is unfortunate
that the House of Commons has once more missed the opportunity of
making the issue between the Allied powers and the Axis powers a real
issue of democracy versus autocracy, or the exploitation of classes or
nations by a class or a nation armed to the teeth. My offer presented
that issue in the clearest possible language that I could command. It
was presented on behalf of all the exploited nations and races of the
earth. It is a great pity that the Lords and the Commons have turned
down my offer. The Allies will have their victory, but the exploited
races will not feel the glow of it. They will know that the seeds of
another and deadlier war will be sown by that very victor. I ask myself
the question: ‘Must rivers of blood flow for such an empty victory?’
Asked when he expected to meet Mr. Jinnah, Mahatma Gandhi said:

I expect to meet the Qaid-e-Azam as soon as he wants me, of
course, health permitting. The publication of the Formula1 is in
pursuit of negotiations for a communal settlement. It is not an idle
effort. It is conceived in all sincerity. It is unfortunate that the
criticism that has been levelled against it, so far as I can see, has been
conceived out of prejudice or careless study of the Formula. Nor is it
an offer on the part of any party. It is a contribution from two
life-servants of the nation towards the solution of the communal
tangle, which has hitherto defied solution. It is in open invitation to all
1

Rajaji Formula; vide Appendix “C. Rajagopalachari’s Formula”, after
5-8-1942.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

253

parties to apply their minds to the solution. The Rajaji Formula is
intended as a help to all lovers of the country. It is the best we could
conceive, but it is open to amendment, as it is open to rejection or
acceptance.
Gandhiji told that British Government’s rejection of the offer does not affect
the Rajaji Formula in anyway whatsoever. As far as he remembered, Gelder did notthe
proposal, and, if he did, he must have got it from Rajaji and not from him.1

In a way the rejection of my offer for the resolution of the
political deadlock enables all parties to concentrate their attention on
communal settlement. Whilst I had said and repeat that the presence of
a third party effectively prevents a solution, it was never meant to
convey that I would make no attempt at an honourable solution, even
while the third party continued to dominate this land of ours. No one
will be more pleased than I, if we can pull through a solution which
satisfied all parties.
To a reporter who asked if Mahatma Gandhi would advocate Congressmen
going back to jail in view of the British Government’s rejection of his proposals,
Mahatma Gandhi said:

Have you ever known any sane person without any cause going
to jail, or after discharge going back to jail? But a person who holds
his self-respect or his country’s liberty dearer than life itself invites
suffering even unto death in defending either and, in that process, if
jail comes his way, he welcomes it. The question, therefore, should be
addressed to the Government: ‘When do you propose to take back to
jail those whom you have released?’ I know that Government are not
going to oblige you by answering your question.
The Hindu, 1-8-1944

342. LETTER TO SHWAIB QURESHI
P ANCHGANI,

July 31, 1944
MY DEAR SHWAIB,

Your description of the boy brings tears to the eyes. I have a
vivid recollection of my struggle with the child. God’s peace on him
and you, the parents.
So, you see, the Qaid-e-Azam and I are to meet. If the
publication of the C. R. Formula was blameworthy, I must share the
1

254

This paragraph is reproduced from The Bombay Chronicle, 31-8-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

blame equally with him. Anyway you will work away, I know.
Love to both.
BAPU
S HWAIB S AHEB QURESHI
BHOPAL
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

343. LETTER TO REKHDE
AS AT S EVAGRAM , via WARDHA , 1

July 31, 1944
MY DEAR REKHDE,

Your letter makes me sad. Yours is not the only case of its kind.
And I am quite helpless. Cases such as yours are inevitable in a
national struggle. Values have to be changed. We cannot live the old
life and still be in the struggle.
I am extremely sorry, I cannot send an encouraging letter to
your liking.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

344. LETTER TO JANAKIDEVI BAJAJ
July 31, 1944
CHI. JANAKIBEHN,

If God is kind, I shall arrive there on the 3rd just to see how you
are doing. I said “kind” through ignorance. God is always kind. If
we do not recognize that kindness, that is our stupidity. We are,
however, all subject to His Will, whether willingly or unwillingly. If,
therefore, it is His Will, we shall meet on the 3rd. I am glad that
Madalasa 2 and Om3 will be there. I will, of course, miss Savitri4 . About

1

Permanent address
Addressee’s daughter
3
ibid
4
ibid
2,

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

255

Kamala 1 I needn’t say anything. She is a very busy woman. Now, if I
mention more names, I will have to take another slip of paper and,
moreover, where is the time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3033

345. LETTER TO A. V. THAKKAR
July 31, 1944
BAPA,

This is just to make you laugh, if I can. When there is a clash of
temperaments, father-son, husband-wife, friend-friend, do not break
off their relationship but live separately. Compared to you, Swami is
as meek as a woman. We have among us men who have more than one
wife. You have a right to have many wives like Swami. All these days
you put up with him. Pull on for a few more years. Little more of life
remains. And I have explained how to carry on.
You are working with all your strength. But how many tasks can
you look after? When the volcano has burst, this memorial seems a
very trivial matter. I cannot bear to see people like you sacrificing
their all for its sake. But I am keeping silent because I think that the
women and children in the villages may gain something from it.
BAPU

[PS.]
I hope to reach Sevagram on the 3rd.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1193

346. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
[July 31, 1944] 2
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

What about Amritlal? Do bring Prahlad here if you wish to. How
is the new arrangement working? If there is much work in the field,
1
2

256

Addressee’s daughter-in-law, Kamalnayan’s wife
From the G.N. Register
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

some of us should give to it as many hours as we can spare. The work
of weeding and so on is easy. Stock the grass, etc., in the godown.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10614

347. LETTER TO KASHIBEHN GANDHI
[July 31, 1944] 1
CHI. KASHI,

I might say, you have now crossed the threshold of old age. You
have, however, to live for many more years, not merely for the sake of
living but for rendering service. One who lives merely for the sake of
living does not truly live; only he who lives for the sake of service can
be said to live [truly]. And he who dies in harness also lives [for ever].
Hence give up all worries, and devote yourself to such service as your
mind and body permit.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

348. LETTER TO SHRIKRISHNA SINHA
[July 31, 1944] 2
BHAI SHRIKRISHNA SINHA,

Read the enclosed wire. Do as you think right. I do agree that
no time should be given to the collection of the Kasturba purse at the
cost of any social service. Whatever can be collected without any great
effort should be considered valuable [enough]. I have not replied to
the wire. You should do it yourself.
Bapa writes and says that you and Anugraha Babu 3 keep
indifferent health. Preserve your health. You have yet to render a lot
of service.
I leave Panchgani tomorrow. God willing, I shall reach
Sevagram on the 3rd.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

In the source, the letters are placed among those of this date.
ibid.
3
Anugrah Narayan Sinha.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

257

349. MESSAGE TO PEOPLE OF ASSAM1
P ANCHGANI,

July 1944
If the people feel that the present policy of the Government on
settlement and immigration is oppressive and anti-national, let them
fight it non-violently or violently, if necessary.
The Bombay Chronicle, 19-12-1944

350. LETTER TO ARUNA ASAF ALI
[On or before August 2, 1944] 2
PRIYA ARUNA,

You must not discover yourself unless you feel the wrong of
secrecy. You must not be displeased if I hold an opinion which does
not coincide with yours. I shall not love you the less because I cannot
see eye to eye with you. You should be patient with me. Do nothing in
a hurry. I have not judged anyone. I have given my opinion about
certain acts. You will harm the cause by acting against your
judgement.3 See me when you like. Don’t be in a hurry. Don’t be
sad.
Love.
BAPU
From a copy: K. M. Panikkar Papers. Courtesy: National Archives of India

1

The report said that Gopinath Bardoloi, ex-Premier of Assam, had “told the
United Press [of India] that in view of the seriousness of the problems as a result of
the Assam Government policy on the matter vitally affecting the province, it was
referred to Mahatma Gandhi in July last when two Congressmen of Assam were sent to
Panchgani”. Vide also “Message to People of Assam”, before 16-8-1944.
2
The text of this letter suggests that it was written after Gandhiji’s statement
to the Press dated July 28, 1944 (vide “Statement to the Press”, 28-7-1944), and
before the addressee’s letter dated August 2, which appears to have been written in
reply to this. It read: “If only I could honestly feel that our mode of resistance was
wrong, life would become so simple. To be permitted to act under what is known as
the willing suspension of disbelief or better still blind discipline would take an
enormous load off my shoulders. But you are bent on testing our mettle. We will now
go into voluntary inaction for a while.”
3
In her letter dated August 1 the addressee, writing on behalf of her co-workers
who were still underground, had written that they were willing to submit to Gandhiji’s
orders, suspend their activities and surrender themselves.

258

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

351. INTERVIEW TO “DAILY WORKER”
BOMBAY,

August 2, 1944
You promise all aid to the Allied war effort. 1 How concretely will the
character and quantity of the war effort in India and other countries be changed
through the establishment of a national government in India?
Q.

Mahatma Gandhi replied that the question required a detailed answer, whereas
the basis of his offer was to give moral weight to the Allied cause. This the cause
lacked at present.
Asked to explain what he meant by “adding moral weight to the Allied cause”,
Mahatma Gandhi said:

The Allies are today making brave declarations about
democracy and liberty which to me, or, to put it plainly, to the
exploited nations, mean nothing. Mere declarations, pleasing to the
ear, can give no satisfaction to the sufferers. By “the exploited
nations” I mean the Asiatics and Africans. If the Allies are fighting
for democracy, their democracy should include all the exploited races
of the earth. Facts, as I see them, prove the contrary. Almost all, if not
all, parties agree that India was never so much under foreign
domination as it is today.
A clear acceptance of the Indian demand for independence and
the consequent establishment of a national responsible government,
subject to the limitations I have mentioned, would immediately change
the character of the Allied cause. It will be immediately differentiated
from the cause of the Axis Powers, if the latter’s fight can be
described as a cause.
What material gain will accrue to the Allies from the recognition of India as an
independent country, subject to the provision accepted by you?

I must refuse to descend from the platform I occupy. Surely, if
the character of the Allied cause is so radically altered, as I claim it
must be by the acceptance of my offer, all else must follow as a matter
of course. But whether it does or not, I want the acceptance of my
offer to be on the unadulterated moral basis. It should be enough for
the Allies to have the guarantee that their military operations will not,
in any way, be adversely affected by India being counted as an
1

Vide “Interview to Stuart Gelder”, 4-7-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

259

independent nation, not merely in word but in fact.
I hold that the effect of the declaration of India’s independence,
accompanied by simultaneous sincere action, should, by itself, take the
wind out of the sails of the Axis Powers. And I should be surprised if
they do not capitulate almost immediately on the declaration.
Suppose England was under foreign rule today, like India, and
the ruling power was engaged in a war with some other nation or
nations, and involved England willy-nilly in the war. Suppose further
that the foreign power suddenly declared England independent
without the latter having put up an armed fight for freedom, would
not every Englishman enthusiastically support the erstwhile foreign
ruler, now turned a friendly power? You can now understand what
will happen to India if, when Britain is in sight of victory, she were to
declare the independence of India.
Having said all this to elucidate my answer, I wish to suggest that
my offer furnishes a basis for honourable negotiation and release of
the members of the Congress Working Committee. A discussion of
details and filling in the gaps, deliberately left in my offer, must
follow as a matter of course.
The correspondent then told him that the Tory Press in Britain confuses the
people by stating that “Gandhi still adheres to the ‘Quit India’ resolution 1 .’’ They
exploit the fact that the British people are unaware of the burning anti-Fascist and
patriotic content of the resolution. The correspondent asked him to clarify his
statement that the resolution was “innocuous2 ”.

The whole of the resolution is a noble document. The ‘Quit
India’ slogan is an innocuous and natural cry. The sting was in the
sanction clause of the resolution authorizing me to offer mass civil
disobedience in the event of the rejection of the national demand. As I
have said, my authority has lapsed, and even if it has not, I cannot
organize mass civil disobedience at the present moment. Therefore,
the resolution should be read without the sanction clause, and I
challenge anybody to take exception to a single word in that
resolution. ‘Quit India’, read together with the Congress offer that the
Allied operations on the Indian soil might continue, means nothing
more and nothing less than that the British rule should end in its
1
Vide Appendix “Resolution Passed by All-India Congress Committee”,
8-8-1942.
2
Vide “Interview to the Press”, 13-7-1944.

260

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

entirety, even while the war is going on—if the war is merely for the
deliverance of the exploited nations of the earth.
The correspondent next reminded him of his statement that the Cripps offer1
contemplated almost perpetual vivisection of India and asked him what it meant.
Mahatma Gandhi smiled and said:

Surely it can mean only one thing. The Cripps offer divided
India into Princely India and democratic India. Is not that vivisection?
The correspondent told him that a lot of propaganda was being made in
reactionary circles in England, particularly by the Tory Press, to the effect that if
Gandhiji’s demand was granted, the minorities would suffer. Mahatma Gandhi replied:

That is a function belonging to the Rajaji Formula2 . I can only
say that the Formula contemplates the fullest protection to the smallest
minority. If there are any gaps left in it, they will be filled in at the
time of mutual discussion that must precede a final settlement.
The Bombay Chronicle, 3-8-1944

352. A FOOTNOTE 3
[After August 2, 1944] 4
We do not think Gandhiji would make any such admission. Has
he not said that every art would be richer for the artist spinning?
Gandhiji would accept the Poet’s offering for what it is worth but he
would accept nothing as a substitute for hand spinning.
From a photostat: C.W. 10510. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

1

Vide Appendix “British Government’s Proposal : Note by the Secretary of
State for Dominion Affairs”, 2-3-1942.
2
Vide Appendix “C. Rajagopalachari’s Formula”, before 5-8-1942.
3
This footnote, revised by Gandhiji, appears in K. R. Kripalani’s article
“Gandhi and Tagore” in Gandhiji —His Life and Work. It refers to the following
passage “ . . . and Gandhiji today would be the first to admit that the Great Sentinel
had more than earned his right to his bread and did not need to spin to justify his
existence. . . .” The draft of the footnote submitted to Gandhiji read: “Gandhiji would
admit nothing of the sort. Gurudev claimed exemption from spinning on the ground
of his being a poet, but Gandhiji said: ‘No. Your art will be all the richer if you spin.”
For Gandhiji’s foreword to the book, vide “A Word for the Reader”, 29-8-1944.
4
Valji G. Desai had sent the draft of the footnote to Gandhiji on August 2,
1944.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

261

353. LETTER TO ACHYUT PATWARDHAN
[After August 2, 1944] 1
BHAI A.,

I have your letter. I do not wish that you should come out in the
open until you are convinced at heart. I have only pointed out to the
contradiction between non-violence and underground activities and
destruction of property. There is no question at all of the Congress
control in this matter. I would like to go to the extent of saying that
anything done without full understanding will harm the Congress. I
shall not be hurt at all if you and other workers do not agree with me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

354. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
S EVAGRAM , W ARDHA ,

August 3, 1944
CHI. MIR

All your letters were received. Came here today with a
large party including S. Kumar2 his wife3 , Dr. J. Mehta4 and Khurshedbehn 5 . I am very well. Yes, you should go slow, make no haste in
choosing the soil.6 The Ashram has grown out of all proportion.
Love.
BAPU
S HRI MIRABAI
BUNDRA TEA ESTATE
P. O. P ALAMPUR
KAGRA VALLEY , P UNJAB
From the original: C.W. 6499. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9894
1

This letter was in reply to the addressee’s letter of August 2, 1944
ibid
3
The supersription in this and the other letters of the addressee is in
Devanagari script.
4
Shantikumar Morarjee
5
Sumati Morarjee
6
The addressee explains: “This was in connection with the site of a small
ashram which I was planning to start on my own, in the north-west of the United
Provinces.”
2

262

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

355. LETTER TO GOPINATH BARDOLOI
August 3, 1944
MY DEAR BARDOLOI,

I have your letter. I have read the papers and I have had long
chats with the friends. I will not, because I cannot, give specific
instructions. But I would lay down general principles to guide you.
There should never be the slightest departure from truth and
non-violence. There should be perfect fearlessness. There should be
no secrecy, and there should be complete non-co-operation with evil.
Thus under the lure of saving starving people I may not co-operate
with evil even as I may not pour milk in a poison bowl in the hope of
feeding the poor.
The Bihar example will mislead if not properly understood. I
co-operated and spent the money that was collected. There were two
parallel collections. Ours was the biggest and best spent. Today there
is no such scope. Do not think of the past except to learn lessons from
it.
Love.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

263

356. LETTER TO K. SRINIVASAN
August 3, 1944
1

DEAR SRINIVASAN ,

Khurshedbehn who is with me just tells me that you have lost
your dear daughter. I am lying down, so she takes this to my
dictation.It was like news to me, when she mentioned the tragedy and
yet as I think of it I have a fear that I saw the news somewhere and
might also have thought of writing to you, and then [some]thing
intervened between the thought and the execution of it. Very often
such things have happened in my life. Whether I have written to you
or spoken to you about the tragedy, my writing to you now need not
be superfluous. Having suffered myself in the same manner I can
appreciate all the more your grief. Accept therefore the sympathy of a
fellow-sufferer in life’s march.
Did you ever know that in Sevagram Mahadev was a regular
reader of The Hindu and in the detention camp first Pyarelal and then
I took Mahadev’s place and often found things in The Hindu which
we did not find in the other papers?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

357. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

August 3, 1944
CHI. RAMDAS,

I have gone through your letter. I hope Usha is all right now. In
operations, our calculations do not prove true. Do not be in a hurry to
come here. When everything is all right, you may pay a short visit. I
arn quite well. Dr. Mehta is here and looks after me. Manilal is still at
Akola.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
1

264

Editor, The Hindu
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

358. DISCUSSION WITH D. RAMASWAMI1
S EVAGRAM ,

[On or after August 3, 1944] 2
Re-organization of the villages is a very intricate problem, but if
we can find even half a dozen workers of the right type, we can solve
it in due time. The time factor is important, but given the right start
the thing will grow like a snowball. You have heard of Booker T.
Washington. We have to produce better workers than even him in
order to achieve our object.
As for you, your ambition will be fulfilled if, besides your
ability and enthusiasm, you introduce something else in your life, i.e.,
a living faith in God. Then all insipidity will vanish. A cosmopolitan3
outlook is a necessity but it can never be a substitute for God. God is
there, but our conception of God is limited by our mental horizon and
by our physical environment. For instance, when you read the Bible,
you find that the God of the Hebrews was quite different from the
God of Jesus Christ. You are dissatisfied with the prevalent idea about
God for the simple reason that those who profess belief in God do not
present a living God in their own lives.
Unless you have a living faith in God to sustain you, when
failure stares you in the face, there is disappointment for you. You
may develop a revulsion for the work that you have taken up. You
may begin to feel that after all what Dr. Ambedkar said was the right
thing and you made a mistake in rejecting the high posts which you
had been offered. My advice to you is that you should not leave this
Ashram till you have found God. In spite of my limitless failings I am
a seeker after Truth and so are my companions in this place. The
Ashram, apart from its inhabitants, the sum total of energy that it
represents, the principles for which it stands, may enable you to know
God to the extent that you may be able to say ‘God is’, just as you
can say ‘Truth is’.
RAMASWAMI:

I can say that in the sense that Truth is the antithesis of

1

A young Harijan graduate who gave Gandhiji a report of his work in the
villages and sought his help and guidance. Gandhiji was pleased with his report.
2
The discussion took place at Sevagram Ashram. After his release Gandhiji
reached there on August 3, 1944.
3
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase here has “humanitarian”.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

265

falsehood.
GANDHIJI:

That is good enough. The seers have described God as
“ Neti, neti” (‘Not this, not this’). Truth will elude you. The sum total
of all that is true is Truth. But you can’t sum up all that is true. Like
most of those who have had Western education, you have got an
analytical mind. But there are things that can’t be analysed. God who
can be analysed by my poor intellect won’t satisfy me. Therefore I do
not try to analyse Him. I go behind the relative to the absolute and I
get my peace of mind.
R . I have carefully gone through your writings in the Harijan and Young India .
Your way of life appeals to me very much. It offers scope for the exercise of individual
will. The idea of God introduces a determinism and that limits man. It interferes with
his free will.

G.

Is there such a thing as free will? Where is it? We are mere
playthings in the hands of Providence.
R.

What is the relationship between God and man, between-Truth and God?

G.

I used to say ‘God is Truth’. That did not completely satisfy
me. So I said ‘Truth is God’. He and His law are not different. God’s
law is God Himself. To interpret it man has to resort to intense prayer
and merge himself in God. Each one will interpret the same in his or
her own way. As for the relationship between man and God, man does
not become man by virtue of having1 two hands. He becomes man by
becoming a tabernacle of God.
R.

When my idea of God itself is not clear, your talk of man becoming a
tabernacle of God makes things still more confusing. . . .
G.

Yet it is the true conception Unless we have the realization
that the body is the house of God, we are less than men. And where is
the difficulty or confusion in conceiving Truth as God? You will
concede that we are not tabernacles of Untruth; we are of Truth2 .
Everyone who wants to live a true life has to face difficulties in
life, some of which appear insurmountable. At that time it is faith in
God, that is, Truth alone, that will sustain you. The fellow-feeling
which makes you feel miserable because of your brother’s misery is
godliness. You may call yourself an atheist, but so long as you feel
akin with mankind you accept God in practice. I remember of
1
2

266

Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase here adds “two feet and”.
Gandhiji was then silent for a moment.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

clergymen who came to the funeral of the great atheist Bradlaugh 1 .
They said they had come to pay their homage because he was a godly
man.
If you go back with a living faith in God, in Truth, I have no
doubt that your work will flourish. You should feel dissatisfied with
everything till you have found Him and you will find Him.2
An Atheist with Gandhi, pp. 28-31; also Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase,
Vol. I, Book I, pp. 57-8

359. DISCUSSION WITH A FRIEND3
[On or after August 3, 1944] 4
FRIEND:

If you pray to God, can He intervene and set aside the law for

your sake?
GANDHIJI: God’s law remains unaltered but since that very law
says that every action has a result, if a person prays, his prayer is
bound to produce an unforeseeable result in terms of His law. . . .5
But do you know the God to whom you pray?

No, I don’t.
To whom shall we pray then?

To the God whom we do not know—we do not always know the
person to whom we pray.
Maybe, but the person to whom we pray is knowable.

So is God; and since He is knowable, we search. It may take a
billion years before we find Him. What does it matter? So, I say, even
if you do not believe, you must continue to pray, i.e., search. “Help
thou my unbelief” is a verse from the Bible to be remembered. But it
is not right to ask such questions. You must have infinite patience, and
inward longing. Inward longing obviates all such questions. “Have
faith and you will be whole” is another tip from the Bible.
1

Charles Bradlaugh
According to Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, D. Ramaswami had decided
to stay at the Ashram for some time and search for God through the service of his
fellow-beings.
3
According to the source “a veteran nationalist leader from South India” came to
see Gandhiji at Sevagram about the same time as Dr. Ramaswami; vide the preceding
item.
4
ibid
5
Omission as in the source
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

267

When I look at nature around me, I say to myself, there must be one Creator,
one God and to Him I should pray.

That again is reasoning. God is beyond reason. But I have
nothing to say if your reason is enough to sustain you.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book I, p. 59

360. LETTER TO USHA GANDHI
[After August 3, 1944] 1
CHI. USHI,

Your letter is very good. But why with a pencil? Now that your
tonsils have been removed, won’t you put on some flesh?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

361. MESSAGE FOR TAGORE DAY2
[On or before August 4, 1944] 3
Organizing yourself, you will achieve success. This is the
message of Gurudev. Make this message your motto.
The Hindu, 6-8-1944

362. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
S EVAGRAM ,

August 5, 1944
Many Congressmen ask me how to celebrate the forthcoming
9th of August. That date was a turning point in India’s fight for
freedom. I had intended to spend 9th August, 1942 in peaceful
introspection and to inaugurate negotiations for a settlement. But the
Government or Fate had decided otherwise. The Government went
mad, and so did some people. Sabotage and the like were resorted to
1

From the contents; vide the preceding item.
This was read out at a public meeting held in Hyderabad on August 4 under the
Presidentship of Hasan Yar Jung Bahadur.
3
ibid
2

268

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and many things were done in the Congress name or in my name. I
am aware that I do not represent the Congress mind always. Many
Congressmen repudiate my non- violence. The Working Committee is
the only body which can legitimately and truly represent the
Congress.
As an old servant of the country, however, I can advise, and
Congressmen are at liberty to treat my advice as instructions. I have
already said1 that mass civil disobedience cannot be offered now; but
mass civil disobedience is one thing and individual action in defence
of self-respect and liberty is wholly another. It is a universal duty for
all time, the discharge of which requires no sanction save that of one’s
own conscience. In a previous note, I have pointed out when and
where the duty arises. But the forthcoming 9th is a special occasion.
There has arisen much misunderstanding about the Congress
purpose and mind. I must avoid all avoidable risks. Therefore, in all
places except in Bombay, my advice is not to disregard special police
prohibitions for that day. For Bombay, I have already given advice
through the Mayor of Bombay. I need not reiterate the advice here. I
have selected Bombay as the most suitable place for the simple reason
that it is most easily accessible to me and is the place where the
historic meeting of August 1942 was held. Whatever it is to be, it will
be a symbolic act. Curiosity is natural and pardonable, but I plead for
restraint. The self-imposed curb will be finished if I succeed in
carrying conviction to the human family, that every man or woman,
however weak in body, is the guardian of his or her self-respect and
liberty. This defence avails, though the whole world may be against
the individual resister.
I have suggested the present symbolic procedure to see whether
those who organize the demonstration have co-operation from the
local public. Freedom of 400 million people through purely
non-violent effort is not to be gained without learning the virtue of
iron discipline, not imposed from without, but sprung naturally from
within. Without the requisite discipline non-violence can only be a
veneer.
The second thing that I should like done on the forthcoming
9th August is for those who have gone underground to discover
themselves. They can do so by informing the authorities of their
1

Vide “Talk to Bombay Congress Leaders”, 29/30-7-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

269

movements and whereabouts or by simply and naturally doing their
work in the open without any attempt to evade or elude the police. To
go underground is to elude the police. Therefore, real discovery is to
discover oneself to the party eluded. Nothing should be done unless
the conviction has gone home that a particular action is essential for
the cause. In the absence of such a conviction, those who see this note
may ignore it and should follow what they consider best for the
country.
What everyone should do on the 9th, whether they have the
conviction as to nonviolence or not, or whether they are Congressmen
or not, is to carry out on the 9th the whole or any part of the
fourteenfold programme reiterated in my recent note1 . Just for
example, everyone should spin. Communities should find ways of
giving expression to mutual understanding and brotherhood. Hindus
and Muslims may organize joint programmes of prayers—God may
bless the Quaid-e-Azam and me with wisdom to reach a common
understanding in the interest of India. Hindus should visit Harijans
and render them the service they may need. The spirit of service and
helpfulness should pervade the atmosphere everywhere.
I have experienced friendliness from Englishmen and
Americans wherever I have met them, whether officials or laymen. I
invite their co-operation especially on the 9th. Let them realize that
the August resolution was not conceived in hatred. It was an
unvarnished statement of the natural right of the people of this land.
To those who share my faith I would advise fasting and prayers
on the auspicious day. This must not be a mechanical act. It must be
done without ostentation, for self-purification and penance. Its
uplifting power is capable of being tested by every individual for
himself.
If the demonstration is carried out in the spirit in which I have
conceived it, I have no doubt that it will lead to an early end of the
misery of the masses.
The Hindu, 7-8-1944

1

270

Vide “Statement to the Press”, 28-7-1944
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

363. LETTER TO NAGINDAS T. MASTER
S EVAGRAM ,

August 5, 1944
BHAI NAGINBHAI1 ,

You will see my statement 2 today in the newspapers. First
I thought of detailing my entire programme in Bombay in my
statement. But I propose to make some changes in the programme. I
shall however have them only with your consent. This is very
important. So either you may come personally or should send one of
your trusted men. Much depends upon the success of the programme.
Premabehn will give you this letter. If for some reason you cannot
come or you cannot send some representative then send the reply
through Premabehn. Premabehn will tell you in brief the changes that
I propose to make.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

364. INTERVIEW TO SHYAMA PRASAD MOOKERJEE3
S EVAGRAM ,

August 5, 1944
Gandhiji says that his association with the Rajaji Formula is personal and is
meant to commit nobody but himself. He is, therefore, anxious that people should
express their opinion freely and fearlessly. I gathered from our conversation that he
welcomed such criticism for he was open to conviction. If he discovered any flaw in
the Formula he would have no hesitation in correcting the error. In his opinion the
Formula is intended to be just to all. If, therefore, any community was likely to be
unjustly affected by the Formula being given effect to, the flaw should be brought to
his notice. He was also anxious that people should remember that if an agreement was
1

Mayor of Bombay
Vide the preceding item.
3
This was issued to the Press on August 6 by Dr. Shyama Prasad Mookerjee,
Working President, Hindu Mahasabha, who had stated: “I had a long interview with
Mahatmaji yesterday in my individual capacity and fully explained why I and those
who think like me are so strongly opposing Mr. Rajagopalachari’s Formula from the
point of view of India as a whole. The discussion was full and frank. . . . This is not
the gist of the whole conversation. That part of it only is given which is necessary to
ease the public mind of the fear that any criticism of the Formula would weaken
Gandhiji’s influence or position.” This was published with Gandhiji’s approval.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

271

reached between Quaid-e-Azam Jinnah and himself it would be open to all parties to
advocate their points of view before the plebiscite is held and the plan would come
into effect only in case of transfer by Britain of full power and responsibility in the
governance of India. There was, therefore, ample time for a calm and dispassionate
discussion. He also said that the Rajaji Formula was a way of reducing to a concrete
form the Congress resolution on self-determination1 and nothing could operate
without the consent of all sections. . . . He assured me that he had always welcomed
criticism and that he had flourished on it and that his influence could not be weakened
by it.
Gandhi-Jinnah Talks, p. 83

365. LETTER TO B. R. AMBEDKAR
S EVAGRAM ,

August 6, 1944
2
Thank you for yours of July 31 received yesterday. The
Hindu-Muslim question is for me a lifelong question. There was a
time when I used to think that when that question was solved India’s
political troubles would be over. Experience has taught me that it was
only partly true. Untouchability I began to abhor when I was in my
teens, But it was a question with me of religious and social reform.
And though it has attained a great political importance its religious
and social value is for me much greater. But I know to my cost that
you and I hold different views on this very important question. And I
know, too, that on broad politics of the country we see things from
different angles. I would love to find a meeting ground between us on
both the questions. I know your great ability and I would love to own
you as a colleague and co-worker. But I must admit my failure to
come nearer to you. If you can show me a way to a common meeting
ground between us I would like to see it. Meanwhile, I must reconcile
myself to the present unfortunate difference.
The Bombay Chronicle, 3-1-1945
1

Vide Appendix “A Resolution”, before 9-8-1944.
Which inter alia read: “ . . . the Hindu-Muslim problem is not the only
communal problem that has to be settled. . . there is a communal problem between the
Hindus and the untouchables, which is also awaiting solution. . . . An all-round
settlement between the Hindus and other minorities, I am sure, will become necessary
if India’s political goal is to be achieved. . . . But, if you are anxious to solve the
Hindu-untouchable problem as you are to solve the Hindu-Muslim problem, I shall be
glad to formulate points on which a settlement is necessary. . . .”
2

272

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

366. LETTER TO M. VISVESVARAYYA
August 6, 1944
DEAR SIR VISVESVARAYYA,

It was good of you to send me such a full letter. In the political
field one has to receive with as much good grace as is possible
knock-out blows. I have therefore regarded it as a school for learning
self-control and training in non-violence I should have thought that,
having dabbled in the dewangiri of a big Indian State,1 you would not
run away from the political field. This is not to lead you into any
temptation. You have enriched the life of the country by your
unrivalled engineering skill. I have been following too your writings
on planned economy.
Besides your contribution as a great engineer, what has
captivated me is the art you have cultivated of keeping up in old age
robust physical and mental energy. I have not forgotten the way in
which you used to climb up the Nandi Hill without any effort. I would
like you to give the young men and women of the country the secret,
as you have known it, of feeling young and vigorous even in old age.
It is a rare gift in our country.
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

367. LETTER TO S. K. BELVALKAR
August 6, 1944
DEAR DR. BELVALKAR,

I thank you for your letter. Usha2 has misled you if she told you
that I had read through your volume on the Gita. I wish I could have
found time to do so. What, however, I did tell her was that the volume
was before me and from the little time I was able to give to it I found
it fascinating and I expected to profit greatly by my study of it.
Though I call myself a devotee of the Gita I cannot lay claim to
any scholarship. My knowledge of Sanskrit is limited and so is my
knowledge of the Hindu scripture. All I can claim is an inexhaustible
1
2

The addressee was Dewan of Mysore State from 1912 to 1918.
Addressee’s daughter

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

273

love for them. However, I shall certainly give you my further reaction
when I have been able to read through your book.
Of course I never thought that you wrote your book with any
commercial intention.
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy
: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

368. TELEGRAM TO M. R. JAYAKAR
WARDHAGANJ,

August 7, 1944
DR. J AYAKAR
WINTER R OAD
BOMBAY
SAPRU1
COMING
CONVENIENT.

WEDNESDAY.

PLEASE

COME

IF

GANDHI
Gandhi-Jayakar Papers: File No. 826. Courtesy: National Archives of India

369. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
August 7, 1944
CHI. AMRIT, 2

I have your letters. I was glad S. 3 was able to go to Simla and
give you some time. She is still in Poona looking after Manjula4 . Did I
tell you that Dr. Jivraj Mehta was with me? I must ask him to write to
you. He helps in a variety of ways and looks after my body without
the slightest fuss. I do not even know that he is doing it. He is
supposed to have come merely to keep company.
You must not worry.
Love to all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 4146. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7781
1

T. B. Sapru
The superscription in this and the subsequent letters to the addressee is in
Devanagari script.
3
Dr. Sushila Nayyar
4
Vrajlal Gandhi’s daughter who had paralysis of the face following a mastoid
operation.
2

274

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

370. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
S EVAGRAM ,

August 7, 1944
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

I was wondering why I had not received the customary rakhadi
from you. Well, I got it today. Has Shankerlal also returned ? What are
your plans ?
Blessings to all of you. I am all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI ANASUYABEHN
MARINE DRIVE
BOMBAY
From the Gujarati original : S. N. 32769

371. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
August 7, 1944
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

This is a painful story. There is only one remedy for this, viz., to
act as Chimanlal1 advises. You should yourself talk it over with him.
Regard me as non-existent. If a difference still remains in your
viewpoints, then please accept his. In no case, however, should there be
ideological differences. If there is any let me know.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4443

1

Chimanlal Shah

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

275

372. INTERVIEW TO UNITED PRESS OF INDIA
S EVAGRAM ,

August 7, 1944
QUESTION: You said in Panchgani: “All my recent declarations are quite
consistent with all my previous declarations on the communal problem.” But in the
past you had said: “Partition means a patent untruth. My whole soul rebels against the
idea . . . . To assent to such a doctrine is for me denial of God (Harijan, 13-4-1940). 1
The partition proposal has altered the face of the Hindu-Muslim problem. I have
called it an untruth. There can be no compromise with it. . . . It cannot come by
honourable agreement (Harijan, 4-5-1940). 2 I consider vivisection of India to be a
s i n . . . . ( Harijan, 24-5-1942) .” 3 Would you kindly enlighten me how they are
consistent? The Mahasabhaites seem to argue in the above style and hence
clarification is sought.

ANSWER: Though I would avoid answering all questions on the
subject before the forthcoming meeting between Quaid-e-Azam and
me, I must not postpone answering yours. I know my present attitude
has puzzled and pained many people. I have not revised the opinion
quoted by you. At the same time that I made the statement you refer
to, I was also a party to the self-determination resolution of the A. I.
C. C. I hold that the Rajaji Formula gives effect to that resolution. I
would however urge critics not to mind my inconsistencies, so-called
or real. Let them examine the question on merits and bless the effort
if they can.
What is your reaction to Mr. Jinnah’s speech 4 ? If Mr. Jinnah does not
accept your proposal or your talks with him end in failure, will you withdraw your
support to Rajaji’s proposals or will the proposals stand?
Q.

A. I do not believe in dying before my death. I do not approach
the forthcoming visit with the expectation of failure. I always hope for
the best and prepare for the worst. I would therefore ask you not to
anticipate failure. Ask me when failure stares you and me in the face.

1

Vide “My Position”, 9-4-1940.
Vide “Hindu-Muslim Tangle”, 29-4-1940.
3
Vide “Question Box”, 18-5-1942.
4
Presiding over the half-yearly session of the All-India Muslim League Council
at Lahore on July 30, M. A. Jinnah spoke at length criticizing Rajagopalachari’s
Formula and Gandhiji’s association with it.
2

276

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Q. What have you got to say to the Sikhs who have expressed apprehension in
the All-Party Sikh Conference at [Amritsar] 1 that you will further surrender to the
Muslim League?

A. My Sikh friends are unnecessarily perturbed. I can settle
nothing for anybody but myself. The Congress Resolution is a sacred
trust and I have no doubt that it will be discharged fully. Brave people
are never frightened by bogeys. Let the Sikh friends examine the
proposal on merits. And if they find an evident flaw in it, I shall
correct it and so, I am sure, will the Quaid-e-Azam if he is satisfied
that there is a flaw.
Gandhi-Jinnah Talks, pp. 83-4; also The Hindu, 9-8-1944

373. LETTER TO JOACHIM ALVA2
[Before August 8, 1944] 3
You should save every ounce of my energy. You have abundant
material from my writings on the Press. . . .4 You should have pity on
me. . . .5 I should make no exception. If I do, I shall be done for. Say
you have excused me.
The Bombay Chronicle, 15-8-1944

374. LETTER TO TEJ BAHADUR SAPRU
[Before August 8, 1944] 6
DEAR SIR TEJ,

I have put P. on an important job. I presume you will reach
Wardha in the evening on 8th. Though I have gained much by my
stay in P[anch]gani, I must be cautious. Mornings are, therefore,
1

The source has “Lahore”. The Working Committee of the All-Parties Sikh
Conference, which met on August 1, rejected the Rajaji Formula.
2
Editor, Forum
3
The letter was written in connection with the first anniversary of Forum
which fell on August 8, 1944.
4
Omissions as in the source
5
ibid
6
Gandhiji had returned to Wardha from Panchgani on August 3, 1944 and had
discussions with the addressee on August 9, 1944. From the reference to the addressee
reaching Wardha on August 8, it appears that the letter was written before that date.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

277

devoted to massage. I am at your disposal after 12 on 9th. K. B. has
made all arrangements for your stay in Wardha. You will be rec[eived]
at the station on 8th and you decide where you will stay. If I have
misunderstood your letter, you will please wire. The rest when we
meet.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

375. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
August 8, 1944
The question asked is whether my statement contemplates civil
disobedience or its avoidance. It asserts a universal right which
becomes a duty when there is an attack upon its ordinary exercise. It
therefore contemplates civil disobedience if Government wants it.
Twenty-five citizens of Bombay sent notices on the 3rd instant to the
Police Commissioner of their intention to march in batches of five and
offer silent prayers and sing Jhandavandan and Vandemataram at a
common gathering place and asked for permission to perform the
act. 1 If permission is not granted, there will certainly be disobedience.
In order that the public may not know the time or place, the Police
Commissioner has been fully informed, while the public has not been.
If this extraordinary forbearance is not appreciated and the authorities
withhold permission and interfere with the simple symbolic exercise
of a public right, the fault would be that of the authorities. The Press
and the public have to judge whether, under circumstances such as
these, civil disobedience does not become a duty.
The Hindu, 10-8-1944

1

Vide Appendix “Draft Letter to the Commissioner of Police, Bombay”, after
19-8-1944.

278

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

376. LETTER TO RAJA GOVINDALAL SHIVLAL
ASHRAM,
S EVAGRAM ,

August 8, 1944
DEAR RAJA SAHEB,

Gandhiji has your letter of 16th inst.
Your argument is built partly on fallacy and partly on disregard of facts.
Acceptance of the C.R. formula by Gandhiji concedes nothing but the insistent
demand of the minorities for self-determination. It carries no other implication. Far
from absolving the seceding units from ‘moral obligation’ to give their support to
[the] freedom movement, it lays down that the separation can only come after
attainment of complete independence with [the] co-operation of those who claim the
right to secede. Further, it stipulates the creation of a special machinery for the joint
administration of matters of common concern to the two sovereign states such as
defence, foreign affairs, railways, currency, economic planning, etc. The provision
embodying this arrangement will be an integral part of the charter for separation.
Nationalist Muslims are not let down by the formula, since they were parties
to the self-determination resolution of the Working Committee that met at

Delhi in April, 1942.
The need for them to stand by their principles will be even
greater under independence. That will be the real testing time for
them.
Yours sincerely,

R AJA GOVINDALAL S HIVLAL
S HRI S ADAN
15 NARAYAN DABHAOLKAR R OAD
MALABAR HILL
BOMBAY-6
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

279

377. LETTER TO PRATAP DIALDAS
ASHIRAM, S EVAGRAM ,

August 8,1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I do not know whether I sent you any reply to your letter of 24th July to Bapu.
This is just to say that he will thankfully accept the donation of Rs. 10,000/which Shrimati Jasodabai Lokoomal proposes to make.
As desired by her it will be equally divided between the Harijan and the
Rashtrabhasha cause.
He has also accepted your request and you therefore would be free to draw
according to requirement for Rashtrabhasha work in Sind from the portion earmarked
for [the] Rashtrabhasha cause.
I have sent a copy of your letter and Bapu’s directions on that to
Shri Shantikumar Morarjee.
Yours sincerely,

S HRI P RATAP DIALDAS
HYDERABAD
S IND
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

378. TELEGRAM TO SHYAMA PRASAD MUKHERJEE
S EVAGRAM ,
August 9, 1944
DR. S HYAMA P RASAD MOOKERJEE
ASUTOSH MOOKERJEE R OAD
C ALCUTTA
YOU MAY PUBLISH YOUR LETTER 7TH INSTANT BUT YOUR INTERPRETATION

OF

MY REMARKS REQUIRES AMENDMENT. ADVISE AWAITING MEETING.

GANDHI
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

280

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

379. LETTER TO GENERAL MANAGER, OXFORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS
S EVAGRAM ,

August 9, 1944
DEAR SIR,

With reference to your letter of 2nd inst., since the Oxford
University Press is not conducted for profit, I should think that a net
profit being stipulated for, there should be no objection to a minimum
profit. The only inducement to the Navajivan Trust, and for that
matter also for me, to have a well-known concern like yours
publishing Shri R. K. Prabhu’s compilation can be to acquire the
widest publicity possible outside India for it.
The Navajivan Press exists only for printing writings like
Shri Prabhu’s compilation as cheaply as possible for Indian readers.
The object therefore undoubtedly is to publish an edition as cheap as
possible and certainly cheaper than yours. Therefore it would be
improper to hold over publication of such an Indian edition till your
stock is exhausted. If you rely chiefly on Indian sales, I think the
contemplated publication by you might be dropped. Labours of the
authors will not go unrewarded in any case. I will ask the Navajivan
Trust to cover them and publish their compilation whenever they are
in a position to do so.1
Yours sincerely,

THE GENERAL MANAGER
OXFORD UNIVERSITY P RESS
P OST BOX 31
BOMBAY
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

Vide also “Draft Letter to Thacker & Co. and Oxford University Press”,
5-7-1944.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

281

380. LETTER TO KAILASH NATH KATJU
ASHRAM, S EVAGRAM ,

August 9, 1944
DEAR KATJUJI,

I had your letter of 24th July which I placed before Bapuji.
By the time this reaches you you will have seen the summary of Bapu’s recent
talk with Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherji—not the United Press summary that has
appeared in the Bombay Chronicle of the 7th August, but the authentic and authorised
version. . . .
Gandhiji cannot and will not be party to an arrangement which implies
freedom to wage war against India and imperil her defence. “That would be sin”, and it
cannot be had by ‘agreement’. That would be a contradiction in terms.
Yours sincerely,

DR. K.N.KATJU
19 E DMONDSTONE R OAD
ALLAHABAD
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

381. SPEECH AT SEVAGRAM
August 9, 1944
Gandhiji made enquiries from the Superintendent of Police . . . about local
restrictions and he assured him that he would abide by them.

This day is different from the other days Today you pray that
God may bless Quaid-e-Azam and me with wisdom to reach a
common understanding in the interest of India. Let this be your
constant prayer as you go on spinning.1
The Hindu 11-8-1944

1

Gandhiji was opening the 60-minute non-stop mass spinning in the
afternoon.

282

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

382. TRIBUTE TO MAHADEV DESAI1
WARDHAGANJ,

August 10, 1944
August l5 is the second anniversary of Mahadev Desai’s death.
Two or three correspondents have administered a gentle rebuke. The
following is my paraphrase of the first of their remarks:
You have become President of the Kasturba Memorial
Fund Trust. Mahadev renounced everything for your sake and
even laid down his life for you. He died at a much younger age
than Kasturba and yet how much he achieved in that relatively
short space of time! Kasturba was verily a sati, but while India has
produced many satis, all will admit that it has produced only one
Mahadev. If he had not chosen to throw in his lot with you, he
might have been living today. His talents would have enabled him
to achieve front rank distinction as a savant and man of letters. He
might have even been rich, brought up his family in all material
comfort and provided his son with the highest education. Instead,
he chose to merge himself in you. You regarded him as your son.
May I ask what you have done for him?
These sentiments seem to me to be natural. The contrast between
the two is too striking to be missed. The one was ready to drop off
like a fully ripe fruit. The other had yet to ripen and mature. Life still
lay before Mahadev as ordinary standards go. He had aimed at living
up to a hundred years. The amount of material that he had piled up in
his voluminous note-books called for years of patient labour to work
up and he had hoped to do all that. In his trunk was found a memo of
my talks taken down on the day previous to his final end. Probably,
none besides myself can today make them out, and even I don’t know
to what use he would have put them. He was a living example of “the
wise, who live and work as if they were born to immortality and
everlasting youth”. 2 But, if all our dreams could be realized, life
would become a phantasmagoria, and there would be utter chaos on
1

The Gujarati original appeared in Gujarat Samachar, 13-8-1944. This is an
“authoritative translation” by Pyarelal.
2
"The wise should devote
themselves to learning and worldly welfare as if they were immortal and would never
grow old, and follow the path of dharma as if Death had seized them by the hair.”
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

283

earth. God in His mercy, therefore, has ordained that His will alone
should prevail on earth.
Mahadev, though an idealist and a dreamer, never allowed his
feet to be taken off the firm earth. He, therefore, adorned everything
that he attempted. To Mahadev’s admirers, I can only offer this
consolation, that he lost nothing by his association with me. His
dreams rose above scholarship or learning. Riches had no attraction
for him. God had blessed him with high intellect and versatile tastes
but what his soul thirsted for was the devotional spirit. Even before he
came to me, he had assiduously sought and cultivated the company of
devotees and men of God after his heart. One may say that it was in
furtherance of this quest that he came to me and, not obtaining full
satisfaction even with me, (shall I say) he turned his back upon me in
the fullness of youth, leaving behind him his weeping relations and
friends, and set forth to seek realization of his quest in the bosom of
his Maker. The only fitting service that I can render his memory is to
complete the work which he has left behind him unfinished, and to
make myself worthy of his devotion—obviously a more difficult task
than merely raising a fund for his memorial. It can be fulfilled only
through Divine grace. Mahadev’s external goal was the attainment of
swaraj; the inner, to fully realize in his own person his ideal of
devotion, and if possible to share the same with others.1
The raising of a material memorial to the deceased’s memory is
outside my scope. That is a task for his friends and admirers to take
up. Does a father initiate a memorial for his son? I was not responsible
for the Kasturba Memorial. In my previous statement 2 I have
explained its origin. I have become the President of the Committee
only in order to ensure the use of the fund in accordance with its
object. If friends and admirers of Mahadev similarly set up a
committee to raise a memorial fund and invite me to become its
president and give guidance for its proper use, I shall gladly accept it.3
A word to litterateurs. They know or should know that he put
the charkha above literature. He took delight in spinning for hours. It
was a daily duty. He would encroach upon his sleeping hours to finish
1

The Gujarati here adds: Mahadev did love showing off his erudition. Let no
one have any illusion about it. However, he cast it off after coming to me.
2
Vide “Speech at Poona”, 1-7-1944.
3
The Gujarati here adds: “It has been my profession for fifty years.” The
paragraph which follows is not found in the Gujarati original.

284

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

his daily minimum of spinning. Why this insistence? Not, I assure
them, to please me. He threw in his lot with me after much
deliberation. I never knew him do a thing without conviction. He
thought with me that the material salvation of India’s teeming but
famishing millions was bound up with the charkha. He discovered too
that this daily labour with the hand enriched whatever literary work he
did. It gave it a reality which it otherwise lacked. The raising of funds
is good and necessary. But a sincere imitation of Mahadev’s
constructive work is better. The monetary contribution to a memorial
fund ought not to be a substitute for the more solid appreciation.
The Hindu, 12-8-1944

383. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL SETALVAD
WARDHA ,

August 11, 1944
1
I am writing to you in my mother tongue which I believe you
will tolerate.
The Congress policy has been definite and determined. With this
nothing can be mixed. An independent India cannot entertain any
other stranger in its midst. The consent which I have given to a
particular scheme depends upon the fact that it is based on a cardinal
principle of the Congress.2 I command an influence over the masses
and therefore I cannot hide that which I consider against the good of
my country. An advantage would be taken of this situation by my
opponents and this was not outside the pale of my thoughts. But this
fear comes out of the weakness of our forces.
To remove this fear, the way lies in freely but respectfully
expressing our opinion and only in this way can we conquer and win;
this is my respectful opinion. Permit me to tell you that no particular
work of mine has resulted in any loss to my country. At least I have
never heard that it has. All your writings, I have read with great
patience and care but I have always felt that you do not examine my
side with patience and care. Your time is occupied mostly in different
types of work and this is not beyond my constant thought.
In the end it seems to me that the substance of your letters leads
1
2

The Gujarati original is not available.
The addressee was against the Rajaji Formula and Gandhiji’s acceptance of it.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

285

to the inference that India is going to be for very long time under the
rule and sway of the English. From your writings this appears to be
India’s destiny. But my firm belief is quite the opposite of this.
Moreover you crush our spirit and make us appear blind. Our leaders
also forget this fundamental difference in our views. This is the reason
I believe why you are so pessimistic and we so optimistic.
It is my sincere desire that a so-called rash step1 which I propose
to take may not result in any loss to the country.
Your younger brother,

M. K. GANDHI
S IR C HIMANLAL S ETALVAD
MALABAR HILL , B OMBAY
From a copy: File No. 3001/H-P. 129. Commissioner of Police, Bombay

384. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

August 11, 1944
CHI. DEVDAS,

I have been forgetting to write about Dinshawji 2 . In case you
have not received a copy of my letter to him, I shall have one enclosed
with this. We have to make the trust deed3 on these lines.
Ghanshyamdas4 , Mahavir Prasad Poddar, Dinshaw, you and I will be
the trustees. Ghanshyamdas was to talk to you about this matter. If he
has not spoken to you, consult him before finalizing it. Send me the
draft of the document. I believe it can be drafted in Hindi. It will have
to be registered.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

The reference is to Gandhiji’s proposed talks with M. A. Jinnah.
Dinshaw K. Mehta
3
For the proposed nature-cure clinic; vide “Letter to Mahavir Prasad Poddar”,
17-8-1944.
4
G. D. Birla
2

286

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

385. LETTER TO JAYANTILAL
S EVAGRAM ,

August 11, 1944
CHI. JAYANTILAL,

I have your letter. Your modesty has vanquished me. If what
you say is the whole truth, I have nothing to say. I shall use the
money. I shall not disclose your name. You come to Sevagram after I
am finished with Jinnah Saheb. We shall talk further. I shall try to
understand you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

386. NOTE TO JAGDISH K. MUNSHI1
[On or before August 12, 1944] 2
1. Division of India is like poison to my mind; because I am
also of the view that it is sinful to do so.
2. The Delhi Resolution of April 23 [, 1942] was concerned with

1

Gandhiji dictated this note in Gujarati to the addressee, eldest son of K. M.
Munshi, with the remark: “I intend appointing you as my lawyer and so listen to what
I am saying and argue it out with Bapaji.” The Gujarati original however is not
available. For K. M. Munshi’s letter dated August 9 to which this was a reply, vide
Appendix “Letter from K. M. Munshi”, 9-8-1944. Regarding this note K. M. Munshi
writes: “My opposition to the proposed negotiations with Jinnah evidently annoyed
Gandhiji. For, before replying to me, he adopted the rather curious method of sending
me a message dictated to my son who was staying with him. This was a warning to
me. In my long and intimate association with him, such a thing had never happened
before, nor after.”
2
From the contents it is obvious that this note was written before the letter to
K. M. Munshi dated August 12, 1944; vide the following item.
3
The source says in a footnote that the resolution was passed on April 11,
1942. According to The Indian Annual Register the resolution was communicated to
Sir Stafford Cripps on April 2. It was however released to the Press on April 11 after
the failure of the negotiations. For the text of the resolution, vide Appendix “A
Resolution”, before 9-8-1944.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

287

self-determination. After this on April 30 1 , Rajaji’s Resolution was
turned down and Jagat Narayan’s Resolution2 about not partitioning
India was adopted. In my view this was a highly inappropriate and
hasty step and due to this alone Jinnah has been able to spread poison
in the Muslim masses.
3. I had discussed this matter with Maulana3 also. According to
him, in spite of Jagat Narayan’s Resolution, I still retain the authority
to discuss the matter with Jinnah because the Resolution of April 2 still
stands.
4. Later on when I had negotiations with Jinnah I had asked him
whether he would accept help from a foreign Power if he was granted
a sovereign State. To this he said: “Yes.”
I then asked him if, after securing that help, he would invade
India. To this (also) he said: “Yes.”
Then I told him: “It would be a sin to do such a thing and I
cannot be a party to it.”
5. When Dr. Latif4 mentioned Pakistan I asked him to discuss
the question with Maulana; but it was in deference to Maulana’s wish
that I discussed it with him.
6. Rajaji’s offer does not seem to have the virulence of his
earlier talk and hence I am in agreement with it. According to this
offer if there can be a separate treaty regarding Defence, Foreign
Affairs and Communications, I do not see any harm in giving him the
rest. And after this, Pakistan seems to have no meaning at all.
7. It is not that everybody has been in agreement with me about
everything from the beginning of [my] life. There is bound to be a
difference of opinion and it is good that it is there. But nobody has
ever told me that I have done anything in bad faith. Thus it was that I
had won over Motilal5 , C. R. Das and others. In spite of difference of
opinion they often came to me and shed tears when they saw my
1

“April 29” according to a footnote in the source.
Which read: “The A.I.C.C. is of opinion that any proposal to disintegrate
India by giving liberty to any component State or territorial unit to secede from the
Indian Union or Federation will be detrimental to the best interests of the people of
the different States and provinces and the country as a whole and the Congress,
therefore, cannot agree to any such proposal.”
3
Abul Kalam Azad, Congress President
4
Syed Abdul Latif
5
Motilal Nehru
2

288

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

determination to abide by Truth. From his death-bed C. R. Das had
enjoined upon his followers: “Do as this man says. He is a true
leader.” I wish to conquer even Jinnah with trust and love. I have no
other weapons at all.
8. Jinnah too has complete faith in me. He knows that I have no
axe to grind in these negotiations. And he seems to have somewhat
softened by my last letter1 , and hence, my only advice can be that at
such a time nobody should create any obstacle. Jinnah has hated me
since the day I asked him in a meeting to give up English and speak
in Gujarati. Sir Chimanlal Setalvad also feels the same way about me
from that day and it has not changed to this day.
9. Jinnah is definitely not unselfish. He is prone to be easily led
by others because of his vanity. (Just) because I am going to meet him
I am not led away by him. I have not accepted everything that he has
said. Otherwise it would mean that he has won me round. That is why
even when I meet him it will be with some misgivings.
10. Munshi has raised a new cry, and I cannot stop him. And it
would not befit me even if I did it.
11. But Munshi very much loves to dominate everywhere and
become a leader. I know that everybody hates him for that reason.
Everybody believes that even in the Congress he wants to set up his
own protagonists. But how can one prevent a person if he is capable
of spreading his influence because of his own power? Only the person
who has all his teeth intact can crack a betel-nut and so, there is no
need to be scared of him. He seems to be much perturbed. Hence, at
such a time we should do only that which we feel is correct. If he
shows me the statement2 , I shall certainly go through it.3
Pilgrimage to Freedom, Vol. I, pp. 438-40

1

Vide “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 17-7-1944.
Vide “Note to K. M. Munshi”, after 14-8-1944.
3
This is followed by the following note, presumably by the addressee:
Rajaji’s and Dr. Subbaroyan’s talks would imply the following:
(1) Gandhiji and all others believe that the negotiations will most probably
break down and maybe we shall have to court imprisonment.
(2) Gandhiji feels that if these negotiations do not have the sanction of the
people, it would mean that it is his last contribution to politics, and he would have to
make his exit for good.
(3) All will be released by September 15.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

289

387. TELEGRAM TO ANIL CHANDRA
Express
August 12, 1994
ANIL C HANDRA
32 NANDAN R OAD
C ALCUTTA
PROVISIONALLY

THIRD

SEPTEMBER

SEVAGRAM.

WRITING.

GANDHI
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

388. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
August 12, 1944
BHAI MUNSHI,

Your letter1 . I have told a few things to Jagdish 2 but I am still
writing this reply for your satisfaction. It does not matter if others do
not understand me. You are among those who do know me. I am sure
you know that, in spite of my accepting Akhand 3 Hindustan on
principle, I am
the originator of the Congress principle of
self-determination. A believer in non-violence, I can maintain the
unity of India only if I accept the freedom of every part. The moment
I felt that the Pakistan of Jinnah’s imagination was sinful, I started
believing in the Congress principle of self-determination, for instance,
during my talks with Dr. Latif.
I understand what you have written about the Punjab. I shall
study whatever comes from there. If I have committed a mistake, it
would not take long to put me right. All my statements imply the
usual proviso that mistakes, if any, should be provided for. I would
certainly find no fault at all if you fearlessly oppose Rajaji’s Formula.
Where the intentions are honest, fear of public blame has no place at
all. Possibly your statement will not be ready by the time I meet
1

Vide Appendix “Letter from K. M. Munshi”, 9-8-1944.
Vide the preceding item.
3
Undivided
2

290

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Jinnah. But if you have prepared it, do send it. I shall go through it. If
it needs to be improved or changed, I shall do so. Have no fear. I shall
do nothing in haste. If you have time and if you think it is necessary,
meet Rajaji and me. And I think it will certainly be necessary to meet
after our interview.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7680. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi

389. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS BIRLA
August 12, 1944
BHAI RAMESHWARDAS,

I have been wanting since long to write to you but just couldn’t
find the time. However, now I must. Jinnah Saheb’s letter may arrive
any time now. I have written to him to let me know three or four days
in advance. I am under a great deal of pressure that in no case should
I put up at Birla House. 1 I have plainly said that I cannot give up
staying at Birla House without any reason. The question arises only if
for some reason my stay at Birla House is deemed improper. In that
case you should not hesitate to tell me. This issue arose in Poona also,
and at that time it was agreed that there could be no hesitation from
your side. I do not remember if you were present then. I had
discussed the matter with Ghanshyamdas. By way of caution and in
order to safeguard your interests, it is my duty to ask you now that I
will be leaving for Bombay shortly.
The other matter is more important though it is not as urgent as
the question of where to stay in Bombay. If I am about to be arrested
it will give me some satisfaction if I am able to accomplish all that I
must before my arrest. I believe that the work of the Talimi Sangh2 is
quite valuable, and I wish to arrange for half a lakh of rupees for it.
I wish to return the money that was received as donation for
Mirabehn. It would only be proper to return it to her. Normally the
money for the Talimi Sangh must be drawn from the Satyagraha
Ashram funds. There is some money there but Narandas has invested
1
Some friends had argued that it would not be in the interests of the Birla
family if Gandhiji were to be again arrested while staying with them.
2
Hindustani Talimi Sangh

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

291

it in constructive work. I can draw upon it but I can only do so at the
cost of that work. And as far as possible I don’t want to do that. All
told, it may require half a lakh or one lakh. I do not know the exact
amount that has to be paid. The amounts that have been coming over
the years are registered as charities, and it takes time to trace them out.
All the books of the Ashram are lying here and there. To trace out
such amounts even from well-maintained ledgers is like seeking a
needle in a haystack. Nevertheless I have given instructions that all
such accounts should be examined.
There is some miscellaneous expenditure too. Something has to
be done about that. That will require about half a lakh, though I have
not figured out the exact sum.
Can you easily provide for all this? You can certainly say ‘no’
without any hesitation. All my undertakings are in the hands of God.
If God does not wish that a particular work should be held up, He
provides me with the means through someone or another as His agent.
Hence, even if I do not get the money I will not be angry with God or
with you. Till now I have never cut the tree under which I have taken
shelter and with God’s grace I shall not do so in future.
I hope all of you are keeping well. I am sending this letter with
Chi. Jagdish. He has come here with Bhai Munshi’s letter1 . Nowadays
it is difficult to decide what should and what should not be sent by
post.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: C.W. 8060. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

390. LETTER TO DR. GOPICHAND BHARGAVA
August 12, 1944
BHAI GOPICHAND,

I have read your letter to Pyarelal. Munshiji had been there and
he has posted me with news from there.
What you write about Rajaji is not correct. I have already
discussed the matter with Rajaji. Whatever be the case, I am not going
to meet him 2 with that in mind. To me, Rajaji’s formula is the final
1
2

292

Vide “Letter to K. M, Munshi”, 12-8-1944.
M. A. Jinnah
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

thing. If it is proved that there is any fault in it, I can amend it. You at
least should not have any fear in your mind. If anybody from Puniab
desires to meet me, I shall certainly meet him. For instance people
from Bengal were here. Even if I have not been able to satisfy them, at
least I have succeeded in removing their feeling of disappointment. In
fact my impression is that I have even been able to satisfy them. Even
if somebody cannot come here from Punjab, he can certainly write.
You will have recovered your health.
From a copy of the Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

391. TELEGRAM TO M. A. JINNAH
Express

August 13, 1944

QUAID-E-AZAM JINNAH
MOUNT P LEASANT R OAD
BOMBAY
THANKS
WIRE
JUST
AFTERNOON SUITS ME.

RECEIVED.

NEXT

SATURDAY

FOUR

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

392. LETTER TO UMASHANKAR DIXIT
ASHRAM, S EVAGRAM ,

August 14, 1944
DEAR DIXIT,

Gandhiji had your letter of the 10th instant.
He would naturally like to know your views, but he has hardly any time left,
every available minute being already booked up, to give an appointment before
leaving for Bombay.
He expects to be in Bombay for only a day or so. In case his stay there is
extended you can try to see him in Bombay.
In the meantime he would like you to send him your formula.
Yours sincerely,

S HRI UMASHANKAR DIXIT
231-234 KALBADEVI R OAD
BOMBAY
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

293

393. LETTER TO VALJI G. DESAI
S EVAGRAM ,

August 14, 1944
CHI. VALJI,

I feel relieved that I am able to pay off today this measure of
my debt to you. I feel that something still remains to be paid. You are
not bound to accept the changes I have suggested. You may accept
them if you feel that they are improvements. This will be sent by
registered post.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7499. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

394. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
S EVAGRAM ,
August 14, 1944
CHI. LILI,

You are still what you were at the age of fourteen-extremely
restless and scared and never satisfied in any situation whatever. Must
you go on like this the whole of your life ? Why can you not
understand the simple thing that you are engaged in studies and it is
your duty to complete them ? The Ashram teaches you to do only
limited work of service while carrying on the studies. Try to
understand this if you can. Even if you do not understand, you will
hear nothing else from me. Think of something else only when you
have completed your studies.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI LILAVATIBEHN UDESHI
G. E. MEDICAL C OLLEGE
LADIES S TUDENTS ’ HOSTEL
P AREL, G.I.P. R LY .
BOMBAY
From a copy Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

294

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

395. NOTE TO K. M. MUNSHI1
[After August 14, 1944] 2
My reluctance to comment on the Rajaji Formula has led to my attitude being
misunderstood by many friends all over the country.

On the whole it is my advice that you should maintain peace till
the conference to be held between us is over.
BAPU
I cannot approve of the Rajaji Formula. The division of a Hindu and a Muslim
area is conditional in the Formula. . . . A partition, on the other hand, will enable the
Hindus and Muslims in those provinces to settle down in their respective areas.

The second argument does not seem to support the first One.
My objections to the Rajaji Formula, however, go deeper. . . . The force
behind disruptionism is the urge to convert Islam in India into a religio-political
party and to dominate the country by overawing the Nationalists into submission. . .
. Mr. Jinnah’s recent utterances are too fresh to be forgotten easily. He will accept no
alliance on a conditional acceptance of Pakistan as in the Formula, and if any is made
it will not last a day after the principle of Pakistan is accepted by the Nationalists.

These objections are not deeply rooted. If you have no better
argument, nothing will be lost by remaining silent.3
Pilgrimage to Freedom, pp. 435-6

1

The addressee had sent the draft of his statement to Gandhiji to “suggest
changes if necessary”, along with his letter dated August 14, 1944. The draft, from
which only extracts are reproduced here, was in English. Gandhiji’s comments in
Gujarati were published along with the English translation.
2
ibid
3
The statement was not issued to the Press.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

295

396. LETTER TO TARA SINGH1
S EVAGRAM ,

August 15, 1944
DEAR MASTER TARA SINGH,

I thank you for your reasoned letter of the 5th instant. It came
into my hands only today. It was received here on the 10th. The post
has become very heavy. Even important letters such as yours do not
come into my hands immediately they are received. I have not so
recovered as to permit my working all hours of the day. This preface
is merely to show you the importance I attach to your letter.
But nothing is lost by the delay. We shall come to no final
terms. The smallest interest will have the same weight as the largest.
That is the requirement of my creed. It is a lapse if I do not live up to
it. With this assurance, I would leave you for the time being. Pray that
both of us may have the strength to do what is wholly right and not to
tone down the right for the sake of expedience.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Hindu, 8-10-1944

397. LETTER TO KONDA VENKATAPPAYYA
August 15, 1944
MY DEAR VENKATAPPAYYA,

I have your two letters and your three notes. You are truly
amazing. I suppose you are much older than I. But your energy never
wanes. May it be always thus. How about Savitri?
With love,
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 3226

1

Releasing the letter to the Press, Sarmukh Singh Jhabal, a Sikh Congressman
of the Punjab, had stated: “Master Tara Singh released his own letter to Gandhiji with
regard to the Rajaji Formula, but Gandhiji’s reply has not been published, although it
was in Masterji’s hands at the time he released his own letter.”

296

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

398. LETTER TO M. R. JAYAKAR
August 15, 1944
DEAR DR. JAYAKAR,

I am grateful to you for your two letters. The long one is
illuminating. I am aware of the dangers. I am not afraid of coming
away with empty hands.1 I am doing what I have done all my life. I
know you believe in the all-pervading Deity. I ask you to pray that I
may be blessed with the strength to do the right thing.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhi-Jayakar Papers: File No. 826. Courtesy: National Archives of India

399. LETTER TO DADACHANJI
August 15, 1944
DEAR DADACHANJI,

I have read your letter to Pyarelalji. You are too lawyerlike for my taste. Your goodness is marred by your lawyer-likeness.
You should have mercy on me and mine. We are all overworked and I
am an ailing man though in harness. I know the Indo-Burman
question but the way is not clear to me. That was all that Pyarelal
meant though he could not convey his meaning to you. Can you goad
a willing horse? You have owned horses, motors, etc. Just recall your
experience of your horses and your friends. Believe me to be more
than a willing horse.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

The reference is to the proposed meeting with M. A. Jinnah.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

297

400. LETTER TO DAHYABHAI V. PATEL
August 15, 1944
CHI. DAHYABHAI,

I was pressed hard to stay with you but I did not yield. I cannot
leave Birla House just because my staying there displeases some. I
should certainly like to stay with you and moreover I have never seen
your home. But I must do what I think is my duty.1
I am hoping to arrive there on Saturday. It is possible that I
might return on Sunday.
Blessings to all from

BAPU
S HRI DAHYABHAI P ATEL
68 M ARINE DRIVE
BOMBAY

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 162

401. LETTER TO SHANTIKUMAR AND SUMATI MORARJEE
August 15, 1944
CHI. SHANTIKUMAR AND SUMATI,

We are all arriving there on Saturday. We shall be staying at
Birla House. You should both call there, as you are aware what
comforts I require at present.2 The rest when we meet.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 848

1

Vide also “Letter to Rameshwardas Birla”, 12-8-1944
Gandhiji had stayed with the addressees while convalescing at Juhu from May
11 to June 15, 1944.
2

298

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

402. INTERVIEW TO DUTY SOCIETY DEPUTATION1
S EVAGRAM ,

August 15, 1944
Mahatma Gandhi was in a cheerful mood talking to the deputationists and was
smiling throughout. When asked by the Mahatma, Mr. Ibadat Yar Khan explained to
him about the development that has taken place during the last 20 years, specially the
establishment of an engineering college and the foundation of a medical college
during the term of Dr. Sir Ziauddin Ahmed, the Vice-Chancellor of the University . . .
The deputation also discussed the present political situation with the Mahatma
and urged for an honourable settlement between the League and the Congress in the
forthcoming meeting of the two great leaders of the Hindus and the Muslims. Mr.
Gandhi showed his willingness to concede every reasonable demand of the
Mussalmans and said:

I want that myself and the Quaid-e-Azam should be locked up
and should not be allowed to come out till we come to some decision
to remove this deadlock.
The members of the deputation again requested him to end the deadlock and see
India governed by Indians themselves for which he had been trying for such a long
time. Gandhiji replied:

I wish to see a free India in my lifetime, for God knows what will
happen when I am no more.
The Bombay Chronicle, 20-8-1944

403. ADVICE TO ASSAM CONGRESS LEGISLATORS
[Before August 16, 1944] 2
The United Press learns that Gandhiji has advised the Assam Congress
legislators who are outside jail to attend the Legislature to register their views on
important matters such as land settlement, food, evacuation, etc.
Regarding the question of Congressmen co-operating with Government
measures with regard to the food problem, Gandhiji is understood to have stated that
co-operation [with] Government measures regarding the food problem in the country
was impossible.

The Bombay Chronicle, 17-8-1944
1

Of the Aligarh Muslim University, led by Ibadat Yar Khan and consisting of
Mohammed Ashfaq, Amiruddin Alvi and A. M. Safi
2
The report of this and the following item appeared under the dateline:
“Gauhati, August 16”.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

299

404. MESSAGE TO PEOPLE OF ASSAM
[Before August 16, 1944]
I have no message of hope for my Assamese brothers and sisters
but I send my deep sympathy for them. May God bless you all to
come out of the ordeal successfully.
The Bombay Chronicle, 17-8-1944

405. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
S EVAGRAM ,

August 16, 1944
BHAI SATIS BABU,

Received your letter. Balvantsinha has well apprised me of
your work. I am amazed at your tireless efforts. Isn’t it your
discovery that cow’s milk is available in so much quantity in Bengal?
And that the milkmen are all Muslims! Balvantsinha has become your
devotee. I like it. He himself is a goseva enthusiast. He works hard. I
have found his knowledge to be haphazard and his outlook is not
scientific. He therefore needs guidance. He has strongly refuted this
opinion and believes—or had been believing—that I have, maybe
unknowingly, done him an injustice. There always has been
antagonism between Parnerkar1 and Balvantsinha and it has always
caused me trouble. I was not able to take from them as much work as
I wanted to because of this antagonism. Now Parnerkar is also there
and he has got the work of his liking. He also loves to serve the cow. I
happily watch from this distance this confluence of the three and also
hope that its outcome will be good.
I have a few minutes during which I am dictating this letter. You
must have understood the reason for my giving a little background. I
shall be satisfied if both of them remain there and you can take full
work from them although both are required here. The work of the
goshala here goes on but perhaps it is not satisfactory. I do not at all
want either of them to leave your work to come here. Nor do I want
both of them to come here. I can have no definite programme. God
only knows what will happen. I am reaching Bombay on the 19th. Let
1

300

Yashwant M. Parnerkar
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

us see what happens.
I hope Hemprabha1 is all right, and Arun2 , too.
Amtul Salaam has reached there. She certainly will meet you.
She will work under Bhagirathji.
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

406. LETTER TO MAHAVIR PRASAD PODDAR
August 17, 1944
MAHAVIR PRASAD,

I do not know whether Ghanshyamdas has told you about my
scheme for nature cure. If my ideas can be implemented, I would have
used, to the best of my ability, all my God-given talents. These ideas
came to me while I was at Dinshaw’s Arogya Bhavan3 . I shall not give
a full account of their evolution. Here I am giving you in short the
ideas in their final form.
Select a plot of a thousand acres near any village. It will be
better if the land is situated in a salubrious region. It does not matter if
the village is far away from a town or the railway station. Select two
such plots or at least one. Get a layout of the land made right now—
even before purchasing the land. Keep in view the following points
while making the plan. Have the roads marked out in the plan. One
road shall be broad but right now it will not be made motorable, only
bullock-carts or horse-driven carriages will ply on it. The plot must be
provided with fresh water. There should be a nice swimming-pool, a
gymnasium or two to provide facilities for physical exercise.
Arrangement should be made to grow fruits, trees, vegetables and
foodgrains. There shall be facilities on this land to treat patients by
nature-cure methods. Nature cure will include the various methods of
mud-pack, treatment with water, such as hip-bath, friction-bath,
steam-bath, etc., treatment with light, such as sun-bath,
suryanamaskara4 , moon-bath, watching the stars, utilizing all the lights
of the rainbow through the medium of cloth, water, glass bottle, etc.,
treatment with air such as pranayama5 , subsisting on air, etc. In the
1

Addressee’s wife
Addressee’s son
3
At Poona
4,
Name of an exercise; literally, ‘worship of the Sun’
5
Breathing exercises
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

301

initial stage, use of modern devices like electricity, etc., will be
avoided. This is with a view to initially using mechanical aids to the
minimum and developing such devices as the villagers can use easily
as also exploring their usefulness. Not only will sick persons be
treated in this institution, but even normal persons likely to benefit
from nature cure will be admitted to it. We should try to give vigour
and vitality to the weak. Children will be admitted to the institution
with this view, and efforts will be made to build their health according
to the laws of nature. Health will be our prime concern. Special
emphasis will be placed on preservation and improvement of health.
Thus the aim of this institution will be self-reliance in all respects and
its message will be universal. It will tend to become an ideal village
with facilities for basic education and village industries like khadi, etc.
Initially it will certainly require a lot of money but I cannot think of a
better use of money than this. A trust should be constituted for this
purpose. I had thought of Dinshaw Mehta, Ghanshyamdas, and myself
as trustees; Ghanshyamdas added two more—Devdas and you. I had
of course thought of you but I had no idea how far you could go with
this. If I accept your name you should free yourself from all other
work and devote yourself to this work. Ghanshyamdas believes in
nature cure and he can either attract donations or give one himself.
Devdas will fulfil this function by becoming Ghanshyamdas’s
representative. I will be the guide—since the whole idea is mine. It can
be said that I am a devotee of nature cure for the last fifty years. This
venture was conceived with the expectation that Dinshaw could be put
in charge of fully implementing the ideas. And I shall like very much
your joining this provided you can devote the rest of your life entirely
to this work. Meet me at the earliest if you find these ideas good
enough.
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

302

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

407. INTERVIEW TO PEGGY DURDIN1
[After August 17, 1944] 2
Does the Viceroy’s rejection3 of your offer in any way lessen the
desirability of or urgency for a communal settlement now?
Q.

A. Not in the least. As I have already said in several interviews
the simultaneous publication of my offer to the Viceroy and the Rajaji
Formula established a wholly unintended connection between the two.
The rejection makes the urgency doubly urgent. This I say although I
believe that past experience shows that so long as there is a third party
dividing communities and interests there is no adjustment possible.
This has never meant for me that I should not strive for a settlement
even before independence.
Q. From the point of view of non-violence, is it not preferable for a national
government to take office after, rather than during, the present war?

A. Not if a national government comes into being even during
the war by the spontaneous act of Great Britain or the Allies. For then
the war itself will have changed its course and the peace to come will
be wholly honourable and calculated to promote non-violence.
Q.

Would not a strong group of nationalist ministers, Hindu and Muslim,
responsible under the present constitution to the Viceroy rather than to the
Legislature in point of fact, nullify the Viceregal veto? Would not a common front
presented by strong nationalist leaders make acceptance of their programme and
plans inevitable?
A. No such manipulation can possibly electrify the whole nation.
Such an experiment is doomed to failure ab initio. It would lack trust
on the part of the British Government in the people of India.
Q.

I am not clear on your attitude toward mass civil disobedience. Am I right in
thinking that you would consider its use justified if your appeal to the Viceroy and the
talks with Mr. Jinnah fail?
A.

Mass civil disobedience can only take place if other efforts to

1

Correspondent of Time and Life . The source had reproduced the interview from
The Free Press Journal.
2
The correspondent met Gandhiji in August shortly after the Viceroy’s
rejection of Gandhiji’s proposals. Gandhiji’s correspondence with the Viceroy was
released to the Press on August 17, 1944.
3
Vide Appendix “Letter from Lord Wavell”, 15-8-1944.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

303

achieve the object aimed at fail. Here the object is independence.
Appeal to the Viceroy was for a settlement. The appeal having failed
the case for civil disobedience is complete. Successful negotiations
with the Quaid-e-Azam need not affect the case for civil disobedience.
But as I have said—for reasons I need not enter into here but which I
have already publicly stated—I may not offer civil disobedience at the
present moment. Mass civil disobedience is conceived as an entirely
effective substitute for a bloody war and is any day far superior to it.
But just as wars do not take place just for the sake of war, but only for
a cause just or unjust, mass civil disobedience can take place only for
a cause wholly just. If I have understood your question correctly, this
answer ought to set at rest all your doubts.
Q.

By American management of a section of the Burma-Assam Railway and
part of the port of Calcutta I think we can say that the war in Burma is being
shortened. Would a national government permit such American controls?
A.

I have already answered the question in my previous public
statements. Permission for all such controls is clearly indicated under
my offer. Of course, it is only for the purpose of the war.
Q. Would you consider courting rearrest if your proposals or those of yourself
and Mr. Jinnah are not accepted?

A. I really do not know future plans. You will believe me when I
say that they are in God’s hands.
Q. Non-violence may be relative, not absolute. Some participation in the
already existing violence, participation for the purpose of producing real and lasting
peace, may be unavoidable and even desirable. Is this a fair statement of the position?

A. It is a fair statement. I cannot challenge it merely because it is
likely to lead to dangerous abuse from the non-violent standpoint.
Pure unmixed non-violence is impossible as Euclid’s line.
Q.

I understand your answer to mean that mass civil disobedience presents no
solution of the present deadlock.
A.

You are right.

Q. May I quote you as saying that the national government you conceive of
would do nothing which, as far as the war in the Far East is concerned, would
jeopardize one additional American life or which would lengthen the war for an
American soldier—that such a government would on the contrary make every effort to
hasten the conclusion of the war against Japan?

A.

You will be safe in using the language as if it was mine.
The Hindu, 4-10-1944
304

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

408. TELEGRAM TO M. A. JINNAH
Express

S EVAGRAM ,

August 18, 1944
QUAID-E-AZAM M. A. JINNAH
MOUNT P LEASANT R OAD
MALABAR HILL
BOMBAY
YOUR
YOU

PHONE
WILL

AND
SOON

WIRE.
RECOVER.

DEEPLY.
ANXIOUSLY

GRIEVED.
AWAIT

HOPE
FURTHER

NEWS.

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

409. LETTER TO MRS. K. L. RALLIA RAM
S EVAGRAM ,

August 18, 1944
DEAR SISTER,

Gandhiji had your letter of 4th August and the enclosure. He desires me to
thank you for both. He is glad that you wrote. I regret that owing to heavy pressure of
work he cannot write himself. Of course all genuine attempts to establish unity have
his blessings.
Yours sincerely,
PYARELAL

MRS. K. L. R ALLIA R AM
5 M ASON R OAD
LAHORE , N.-W. RLY .
From the original: Gandhi Papers, File No, 84. Courtesy: National Archives of
India

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

305

410. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
August 18, 1944
BHAI JINNAH,

How was it you fell ill all of a sudden? The whole world was
looking forward to our meeting. I had entertained high hopes,
although, I must admit, I had my own apprehensions. Hence when
Fatimabehn1 conveyed to me the news of your illness, I was shaken. I
hope God will soon restore you to health, hasten the meeting to which
the whole world is looking forward and that the meeting will lead to
the welfare of India.
I hope Fatimabehn or someone else will keep me informed
about your health.
Your brother,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

411. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
S EVAGRAM , W ARDHA , C. P.,
August 18, 1944
CHI. MRIDULA,

I had your telegram. I have replied to it. I hope Kanjibhai will
be able to come on Tuesday.
It is not right that you keep falling ill. I think you alone are to
blame for it. You do not take care of your health and are stubborn.
You are thereby wasting your body and you will end up by becoming
unfit for work. Had you been a little patient and spent a fortnight at
Panchgani, you would have greatly benefited. Had you come to
Poona, I would have had you treated by Dinshaw right before my
eyes. It is quite likely that you would have learnt a wonderful way to
improve your health. I cannot accept your explanation that there was
a lot of work to do in Gujarat. Satyagrahis of the front rank should
also learn to look after their health. I have not written all this to
admonish you but to warn you for the future. Keep me informed
1

306

Addressee’s sister
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

about your health. If you are well enough to come here, do come.
Bring your mosquito-net with you. Then you will have nothing to fear
from the climate here.
I find the mosquitoes a nuisance, otherwise the air is good.
I cannot say when it will be possible for me to meet the Quaide-Azam.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C. W. 11117. Courtesy : Sarabhai Foundation

412. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA
S EVAGRAM , (WARDHA ),

August 18, 1944
The published correspondence shows that I left no stone
unturned to conform to the Viceregal requirements. The final
Government reply is positive proof that the British Government have
no intention of winning public support. I do not confine myself to the
Congress, since its main demand has been backed by almost all
political parties.
So far as the technical winning of the war is concerned, they
have evidently no need for such support. Moral support they seem to
despise. Boiled down, the Viceroy’s proposition means that unless all
the main parties agree as to the constitution of the future and there is
agreement between the British Government and the main parties, there
is to be no change in the constitutional position, and the Government
of India as at present is to be carried on. The names of the parties
given in the Government reply are illustrative only. I have no doubt
that on due occasions more will be exhibited as from a conjurer’s bag
and who knows how and when the British Government will agree to
surrender control?
It is as clear as crystal that the British Government do not
propose to give up the power they possess over four hundred millions,
unless the latter develop strength enough to wrest it from them. I shall
never lose hope that India will do so by purely moral means.
The problem of food, meanwhile, remains unsolved. Only a
1

1

Vide “Letter to Lord Wavell”, 15-7-1944 and 26/27-7-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

307

national Government envisaged by me can provide a genuine
solution. Any other will be a mirage. It is most unfortunate that at this
critical juncture the Quaid-e-Azam has fallen ill and under medical
advice cannot see me till he is free from his illness. A proper
heart-agreement between us can induce a revision of the firm refusal
of the British Government as conveyed through His Excellency’s
letter. Let us all pray that the Quaid-e-Azam may be soon restored
enough to see me and that God may so dominate our hearts as to lead
us to a right solution.
I would like to assure all parties to be affected by our solution
that we will not come to any terms which will compromise or ignore a
single interest. The Rajaji Formula is capable of being amended if it is
found to contain flaws as many Hindu and Sikh friends have
suggested it does. No solution is likely to last unless, on the face of it,
it is right and is acceptable to the people of India as a whole.
The Bombay Chronicle, 19-8-1944

413. LETTER TO AMRITLAL SHETH
S EVAGRAM ,
August 19, 1944
BHAI AMRITLAL,

You have indeed removed my fear by taking a pledge. Even so
I continue to have some fear. I have been wanting to write to you
these many days, but have not had the time.
Why can’t you two warriors meet ? I have not written to
Shamaldas. We have a gigantic task before us. I have come to
understand from our talks that you have started believing in ahimsa
and truth. The strength derived from these two virtues should be
organized. It seems to be going waste these days. True ahimsa needs
no organization. It is always organized.
Chi. Chhaganlal has given me clippings from a Gujarati paper. I
enclose the ones which concern you. Can’t newspapers be published
without such advertisements ?
Blessings from

BAPU
A. J. S HETH
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

308

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

414. LETTER TO ANUGRAHA NARAYAN SINHA
S EVAGRAM ,

August 19, 1944
BHAI ANUGRAHA BABU,

In a worthy cause the effort carries its own blessing. Your work
is noble, no doubt, still, if you need my blessings, you have them. I
hope Shrikrishna Babu and you are in good health. Write to me about
Rajendra Babu.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

415. LETTER TO M. R. JAYAKAR
S EVAGRAM , W ARDHA ,

August 20, 1944
DEAR DR. JAYAKAR,

Many thanks for your letter1 of 17th instant [and] good wishes.
Do you know for the moment our meeting has been delayed owing to
Quaid-e-Azam’s illness?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

[PS.]
Your letter which was marked for express delivery was received
only today.
Gandhi-Jayakar Papers: File No. 826. Courtesy: National Archives of India

1

Which, inter alia, read: “I wish you all success in your efforts, although I feel
more or less certain that, between the arrogance of the Government of India and the
equal arrogance of the Muslim League leader, your work is very difficult, if not
impossible. . . . With all differences of view, I wish you success in your magnificent
undertaking.”
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

309

416. LETTER TO POTHAN JOSEPH
August 20, 1944
1

DEAR POTHAN ,

So your daughter Cookie 2 is to be married on 10th September.
May the pair be happy and live long for the service of God and man.
Love.
Yours,

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

417. LETTER TO SAROJINI NAIDU
S EVAGRAM ,
August 20, 1944
MY DEAR BULBUL-E-HIND,

Though I seem to have neglected you, you have not neglected
me. Thank you for it. The reason for not sending you even love
letters is that work before me has taxed all my time and energy. I have
not asked you to come because I have relied only on God’s guidance.
I do not know what I am going to say when I face beard the lion. 3 I
rely on Him giving me the word. You can fill in the details.
Love to you all.

S PINNER

[P.S.]
I have your latest A.R.S.’s letter.
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

Editor of a number of dailies which included The Voice of India, The Indian
National Herald, The Indian Daily Mail, The Hindustan Times, The Indian Express and
The Dawn
2
Anna
3
The reference presumably is to Gandhiji’s impending meeting with Jinnah

310

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

418. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
August 20, 1944
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

Shakaribehn1 is very unhappy because of what Sharda 2 had to
go through here. I remember Kanu 3 telling me something about it.
Please write to me and tell me all that you know about the matter.
Shakaribehn says that Lilavati4 and Krishnachandra had displayed an
altogether wrong attitude. I should know everything about this in
detail. You are a very patient man, but you also have a duty towards
the Ashram. It is not your absolute duty to suffer any injustice meted
out to Shakaribehn or Sharda. Your duty towards the Ashram is a
thing like. . . .5
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10610

419. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
August 20, 1944
You have entered the forest.6 May you cross it and live many
more years. After all your faith in me is not blind. It is unshakable
and will remain so. Mustn’t I become and continue to be worthy of
such faith?
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 202

1

Addressee’s wife
Addressee’s daughter
3
Son of Narandas Gandhi
4
Lilavati Asar
5
Omission as in the source
6
In the 51st year of one’s life one is supposed to enter vanaprastha, the third
of the four ashramas or stages of life.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

311

420. LETTER TO V. V. NENE
August 20, 1944
BHAI NENE,

I have your letter. I had no knowledge that I would be arrested
so soon or arrested at all. I did have a plan but was arrested before it
could be announced. And there were to be negotiations first. I cannot
say whether or not I would have met Jinnah Saheb.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From the Hindi original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

421. LETTER TO HUMAYUN KABIR
S EVAGRAM ,
August 21, 1944
MY DEAR HUMAYUN,

I value your frank letter received today. You deserve a long
reply but I must be brief, if I am to reply at once which I am doing.
I do not endorse any Pakistan but I do endorse Rajaji’s scheme
even if it be called Pakistan. It is a concrete form of the Congress
resolution. The Rajaji Formula merely furnishes a basis for discussion.
It opens a way to the solution of the communal tangle. Everybody
who does not like it is free to oppose it. If you think that it will harm
the country you are bound to oppose it. If Muslim opinion dislikes it,
it must go. It will go also if Hindus and others oppose it. The Rajaji
Formula furnishes a scheme for voluntary acceptance. There is no
room for discussion, if it is to be imposed by force. I could be no
party to a forcible imposition of a thing even if of my own coining.
Here therefore there is no question of ignoring or disregarding
nationalist Muslims of any other section. Quaid-e-Azam represents the
League. I represent nobody but myself.
I did read your contribution to Bharat Jyoti. Your book, I am
sorry, I have not been able to touch.
You should know that we (Rajaji and I) have reserved the right
to oppose even the modified scheme of partition, if it ever goes to the
312

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

poll. We are not enamoured of it. But if there must be sovereign states,
we have said what we will voluntarily endorse. But we would be
pleased if the country, i.e., in this case the majority of Muslims
concerned reject it jointly with other inhabitants of the areas
concerned.
So you see that you should come if you can spare the time. It is
not too late.
Amtul Salaam had a lot to say about you and your wife’s
kindness to her. She also told me that you had stolen a Hindu girl for
wife1 , that she was extremely devoted to you and that she was able to
remain Hindu.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

422. LETTER TO K. G. GOKHALE
S EVAGRAM ,

August 21, 1944
BHAI GOKHALE,2

The question of parole is most difficult.
What is good for one need not be good for all. The general rule
should be no acceptance of parole. It admits of many exceptions. I
must not judge past cases.
Membership of Food Committees also presents difficulties. If a
person like Gangadhar Rao finds that he can serve the people without
compromising national interest, I must refuse to sit in judgment on
him. And I have no time to examine his conduct on merits.
Post of jail visitor I hold generally to be of little advantage. But
I cannot lay down hard and fast rules.
I must plead with you to absolve me from advising you
personally. You must judge for yourself and act fearlessly. Principles
of conduct can be, and have been laid down. Their application is no
easy task. Appasaheb’s letter was not shown to me. There was no
1
2

Shanti
The superscript and subscription are in Devanagari.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

313

need. He was asked to deal with your letter. He did according to his
light.
Yours ,

M. K. GANDHI
K. G. GOKHALE, B. A. PLEADER , M.L.A.
C/ O A.V. G HARE, E SQ.
ESTATE MANAGER OF S ARDAR R ASTE
P. O. T ALIKOT
DISTT. B UAPUR
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

423. LETTER TO BARI KHAN
S EVAGRAM ,
August 21, 1944
MY DEAR BARI1 ,

You have done well in writing to me. I have advice from all
quarters. But I have chosen the one Infallible Adviser. I feel secure in
His bosom.
You should come after I have seen the Q. A.
Love.
BAPU
BARI KHAN SAHIB
21 ALKAPURI
BARODA
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

314

Brother of Amtussalaam
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

424. LETTER TO KISHORELAL G. MASHRUWALA
BOMBAY,

August 21, 1944
CHI. KISHORELAL,

Your letter and the Government’s action on it have agitated
everyone. I could not bring myself to pull up Gomati. When all is said
and done she is a well brought up and responsible girl. Still, it is
difficult to be patient at such times. So she is coming. Manilal of
course will come. It might be all right if Nilkanth were not to come.
As for Gomati’s poor brother, why should he be left out ? Without
Swami of course everything will seem dreary. But what will you do ? I
am hoping you will send back everyone with laughter on their faces.
But even if this hope is not realized, I am ready for it. Many sacrifices
will have to be made. He will do as He wills. We have to learn the
mantra of living by dying.1
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and
Dr. Sushila Nayyar

425. LETTER TO ABDUR REHMAN
August 21, 1944
BHAI ABDUR REHMAN,

The Nightingale of India has sent on to me the letter you wrote
her. I have perused it carefully. As far as I am concerned I have
made up my mind that Dominion Status will not be acceptable to me,
even if the Congress changes its stand. So long as the Hindus and the
Muslims live in fear of each other, we will always have the British as
our overlords. It has been my endeavour to give up that fear myself
and persuade others to do the same. It is with that very purpose that I
am going to meet the Quaid-e-Azam. Let us see what God grants us.
. . .2 I have faith in democracy. In non-violence nothing else is
1
For Gandhiji's affirmation, twenty-four years earlier, of his faith in the power
of the soul which ‘lives’ by ‘dying’, Vide “Doctrine of the Sword”, 15-8-1920.
2
The letter is demaged here.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

315

conceivable. It is another matter whether ultimately we accept it or
not. For me there is no other way.
From the Hindi original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladvi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

426. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
Silence Day, August 21, 1944
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

I do not wish to get work from you beyond your capacity.
“Regard me as non-existent” 1 merely means that I shall be in jail or
some such situation. There doesn’t seem to be any other way for me.
You know yourself the high regard I have for you. So long as I am
out, I am with you. I am aware of your faith in me.
Chimanlal is the principal manager. His sacrifice is great indeed.
You yourself admire his sacrificing his family life and other things.
Doesn’t this show that he would not be taking any decision with a
view to his own self-interest? I have had a talk with him and in order
to save my time he has agreed that if there is any complaint or
difference of opinion Jajuji’s 2 decision will be acceptable to all. I
hope you will at least agree that when there is a difference of opinion
one should not claim that one’s view is always correct. You are right
in saying that the work should be divided. But even then sometimes
there is a clash of views. In organizations someone’s opinion has to be
accepted as final.
This should clear all your doubts. However, if there is still
anything more you may ask me. You should not get upset at all.
Come what may, don’t lose your peace of mind.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4444; also C.W. 5980

1
2

316

Vide letter to the addressee, “Letter to Krishnachandra”, 7-8-1944.
Shrikrishnadas Jaju
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

427. LETTER TO NAGINDAS T. MASTER1
August 22, 1944
BHAI NAGINBHAI,

Whatever best you think you should do. I have not thought over
it seriously. If you want to do Satyagraha or act against law you must
give previous notice. If you do not act [up] to this, it shall not be
called a non-violent satyagraha. I am not in favour of [a] mass civil
disobedience movement.
From a copy: File No. 3001/H, Commissioner of Police, Bombay

428. LETTER TO ANUPAM N. KAVI
S EVAGRAM ,

August 22, 1944
BHAISHRI ANUPAM,

It is good that you opened my eyes. If you continue to show me
my errors in this way I shall correct them. At the moment I feel
ashamed neither on account of the Rajkot episode 2 nor the present
one. My nature will make me act only in the manner I do.
ANUPAM NANALAL KAVI
129 GREAT WESTERN BUILDINGS
BAKEHOUSE LANE
F ORT, B OMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

The Gujarati original is not traceable.
On March 3, 1939, Gandhiji had undertaken a fast on “the moral issue of
restoring a solemn pact between the Thakore Saheb of Rajkot and its people”. The
fast was broken on March 7.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

317

429. ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS1
August 23, 1944
QUESTION : Mahatmaji, you have been during your whole political career a

strong supporter of the integrity of India and an opponent of vivisection. How do you
reconcile your present position in giving support to Rajaji’s proposals ?

: There is no change in my views. I am even today as
much against vivisection of India as ever before. Rajaji’s formula
concedes right of self-determination, but it does not concede
Pakistan—an indefinite and undefined expression. As a believer in
non-violence I cannot use force in keeping people of a particular area
inside India if they want to separate. All I can do is to persuade them.
ANSWER

Q. Whatever be the result of your negotiations with Mr. Jinnah, don’t you
think that the British statesmen taking advantage of Rajaji’s offer, which has your
support, will divide India into two parts and establish two rival federations instead of
one and thereby find an additional reason for the continuance of British control ?

A. I do not think the British statesmen will do it, unless they want
it themselves and have independently so decided. They know that
forty crores of people cannot be kept under permanent bondage. The
world forces are moving so fast that whether the British Government
will or not India must be free at no distant date. Furthermore, Rajaji’s
formula definitely lays down that the exercise of the right of selfdetermination can only accrue after independence.
Q. The non-Muslims of the Punjab and of Bengal feel panicky
about Rajaji’s formula because they are afraid that under this formula
the non-Muslims in the separated areas will be thrown into Pakistan.
A. From the reports that I receive it is evident that so far as the
Punjab is concerned there is already Pakistan in action. The religious
and cultural rights of the non-Muslims they say are denied to them.
My informants say that undue restrictions are placed on non-Muslim
leaders and their womenfolk cannot even move about freely for fear
of molestation. If this is a true picture I don’t think the position will
be in any way worse in “Pakistan” if ever it is established.
The people of the Punjab and Bengal need entertain no false
fears, as I am not going to sell them off. I have no right to do so. No
individual can barter away rights of brave people endowed with self1

318

The questions were asked by Lala Brijlal.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

confidence. Today I enjoy the confidence of the people because they
believe that their interests are safe in my hands and I cannot betray
them. If tomorrow I act against their wishes and interests I shall be
stoned by these very people who now trust me. I am rather pained at
the nervousness exhibited by the Sikhs who are a brave community.
Unless they have lost the chivalrous spirit and bravery which the
Gurus infused in them, they need entertain no fear about my coming
talks with Mr. Jinnah.
I have already explained in my Press statement and I repeat
again that nothing will be done by me or us to the prejudice of any
section of the Indian population and whatever proposals are agreed to
between Quaid-e-Azam Jinnah and myself will be open to
confirmation, amendment and rejection by the representatives of
various communities and interests. There is no idea of forcing
anything on anybody against his will.
Q. If Pakistan ever comes into existence don’t you
think,
Mahatmaji, the existence of a rival independent state in the northwest will be a constant danger to the independence of India ?
A. Thirty crores and over of inhabitants living in India have
nothing to fear from two crores of Muslims living in the north-west.
If the former are so weak as not to be able to defend themselves
against two crores in the north-west, then they have no right to ask
for independence.
I have no doubt in my mind that if India becomes independent,
Indians will be able to defend themselves against any outside aggression with the resources at their disposal.
Q. Mahatmaji, all your attempts during the last twenty years or over for
bringing about Hindu-Muslim unity have gone in vain and Hindu-Muslim relations
today are as much strained as ever before. Don’t you think that India has been put on
the wrong track and communal electorates are the bane of the Indian constitution? The
Muslim demand for Pakistan and Mr. Jinnah’s propounding of the two-nation theory
are the natural sequences of separate electorates and communal reservations and so
long as the principle of separate electorates on religious basis continues to disfigure
the constitution of our country, there is no chance of the Hindus and Muslims living
at peace as members of the great Indian nations ? If you agree with the above
contention why don’t you give a right lead to the country by pressing for joint
electorates as the basis of political rights ?

A. I do believe that separate electorates have done more harm
than good.
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

319

430. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
S EVAGRAM

August 23, 1944
BHAI JINNAH,

I learn from the newspapers that your fever has gone down.
Thank God. But you continue to be weak and the doctors have
advised visitors not to insist on appointments just yet. I had your letter
yesterday. May Allah grant you early and complete recovery. I don’t
want you to hurry for my sake. Only I can fix up my time for other
work and for visitors if you inform me the earliest possible date for
our meeting. I shall be grateful if you ask someone to intimate this to
me through a letter, a telephone call or a telegram.
Your brother,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

431. LETTER TO JHAVERBHAI PATEL
August 23, 1944
1. In the social order of my conception, as much production as
possible would be located in the villages, and that too through the
power of people’s hands and feet. But this ideal cannot always be
realized. We have to accept compromise at some point. Experience
alone can decide the limits of such compromise. Every worker can
decide the limit for himself; but when he works as a member of some
institution he has to submit to the limit accepted by the institution. He
helps the institution and accelerates its progress towards its goal if he
further narrows the limit accepted by it, as Vinoba has done.1 I cannot
go further than this in my reply. But you will perhaps be able, on the
basis of this, to formulate in fewer words a policy befitting or
supporting my conception. Try to do it and if you frame any such
formula, please show it to me.
2. For me, India begins and ends in the villages; that is, what I
1

Vinoba Bhave had restricted himself to the activities of the Paunar Ashram
near Nalwadi.

320

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

find possible in one village I would apply to all villages in similar
conditions. If I think, and can persuade the institutions concerned to
think, about paper-making from this point of view, we might find it
easier to reach our goal. If the people of a village can produce energy
from some source in the village itself so that they can invent a device
whereby, instead of every person making paper, a few hands are able
to produce all the paper needed, I would welcome such an invention.
If the attempt to produce everything through the power of man’s
hands and feet puts such constraints on him that further development
of this triple faculties would be completely arrested, I would regard
such an arrangement as faulty. By triple faculties I mean those of the
body, the mind and the spirit.
3. If I have understood the third question correctly, you will see
that it is implied in the second. If you do not, please put it up to me
[accordingly]. I have deliberately compressed the language to enable
persons like you to solve more easily the problems that arise in the
course of their work.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1357

432. LETTER TO SHAMALDAS GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

[Before August 24, 1944] 1
CHI. SHAMALDAS 2 ,

I take it that your letter about Munshiji will yet come.
Today I shall write on another subject. Some Gujarati
newspapers come here. I hardly read any but others do. One of them
is Chhaganlal. He and other readers of the Gujarati newspapers are of
the opinion that vulgarity in advertisements displayed in Gujarati
papers is frightening. Pyarelalji says that some Urdu and Hindi
newspapers surpass Gujarati papers in this respect. Some years ago I
had commented on the subject in Harijan. It yielded good results for
1

From the reference to advertisements in Gujarati newspapers it appears that
this was written before the letter to the addressee dated August 24, 1944; vide “Letter
to Shamaldas Gandhi”, 24-8-1944 and also “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 24-9-1944.
2
Editor, Vandemataram
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

321

a time. Later on it became as bad as before. I therefore asked
Chhaganlal to give me clippings. One of the clippings of the Gujarati
papers he has given me is from Vandemataram. I send it herewith. I
have now only a short while to live. God will take as much work from
me as He wants. Are these the drumbeats of approaching independence ? Can’t you do without this earning ? Is it only on this
condition that you can bring out the newspaper ? Ponder over it and
let me know.
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Baladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

433. LETTER TO SITA
S EVAGRAM ,

August 24, 1944
MY DEAR SITA,

What a refreshing thing to hear from you. So you are a
practising barrister. I hope with plenty of work! Are you in possession
of full health now? I shall certainly read Dr. John’s effort.
Yours,

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

434. LETTER TO SHARDA G. CHOKHAWALA
August 24, 1944
CHI. SHARDA,

I have not heard from you recently. I would say that I have
detained you for the sake of your health. I see now that you do not
like to come over here. I do not mention here, for want of time, all
that I have heard.1 But if your health permits, come over here
immediately. You would not be an additional burden wherever I go. I
do not know when I shall go to Bombay. But if you wish to meet me
there, and then come along with me, you may do so. I hope everyone
is all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 10048. Courtesy: Sharda G. Chokhawala
1

322

Vide “Letter to Chimanlal N. Shah” , 20-8-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

435. LETTER TO JIVANJI D. DESAI
S EVAGRAM ,

August 24, 1944
BHAI JIVANJI,

Mridulabehn1 has a good many complaints against Navajivan
Karyalaya and the [Gujarat] Vidyapith. She says that when one seeks
your help for my work, one always gets a negative reply. The result is,
you do not profit from the ideas that occur to workers like her. You
attach no value to the help offered by these workers. You behave with
absolute confidence in yourself as if whatever you do is beyond
criticism or improvement. Since you are involved in these complaints,
and since you are one of the founders of these institutions, people
generally believe that what the Gandhians do can hardly warrant any
criticism. And the Gandhians, on their part, boastfully say to workers
like her: ‘Look at our work and our skill in keeping our balance. We
are supplying cheap and ennobling literature to the people; and we
never sit idle. We have acquired the secret of unremitting work. Now,
we do not understand what you critics want to say. You cannot find
fault with the work we are doing. We do not work the way you do. It
does not suit us. The field for service is very wide. You can do as you
please and let us do what we like. So our plea is that we should bear
with each other and carry on our work. Moreover, we are always ready
to carry out Gandhiji’s wishes.’ Mridulabehn depicts this picture of
Navajivan Karyalaya and the Vidyapith and allied institutions. The
language is not hers but mine. I have used garish words. Without them
I cannot make you see Mridulabehn’s meaning as I understand it. She
is sarcastic but not virulent. I have regarded her criticism as friendly.
You also should take it in the same spirit and give her whatever help
she needs and you can give. She has cited two instances. The reply 2
which I gave to the Government’s allegations has been translated into
many languages by the Aundh Press. According to Mridulabehn, a
Gujarati translation in simple language and in my style can be
rendered truthfully only by those who are called Gandhians.
Mridulabehn is particular about this style of language. She tried to
1

Daughter of Ambalal Sarabhai
Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 15-7-1943.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

323

secure this translation but no one paid any heed. It is getting late and I
shall therefore cut my letter short. But this is enough to explain to you
what Mridulabehn wants. Please send your reply to me.
I gave this letter to Mridulabehn to read. She wants to add two
points to it. First, it was my idea to send the material to the Aundh
Press. This is right. I thought that due to the scarcity of paper, etc., it
would be difficult to sort out things anywhere else. Secondly, she
expects mutual understanding between you and her, so that she should
not be required to rush to me. This is right so far as it goes. But
sometimes it may become unavoidable to come to me. There is no
means in the world to bar this road in anticipation.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

436. LETTER TO SHAMALDAS GANDHI
[August 24, 1944] 1
CHI. SHAMALDAS,

I am pleased that you sent your reply by return of post.
Congratulations and blessings. I wish you would lead the people along
the right path keeping your own hands clean in spite of any number
of temptations. Such workers do not starve to death. I am satisfied
with the restrictions you have imposed on yourself. I had your
telegram too.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

324

The source places this letter among those of August 24, 1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

437. LETTER TO SATYAVATI
August 24, 1944
1

CHI. SATYAVATI ,

A question has arisen whether I have written in respect of the
two points. I think I have. If I am mistaken, here I write again. I don’t
believe you can gain anything by violating [the restrictions]2 imposed
upon you. If you can, do come over in the cold season wherever I
might be. Let us see what happens. I see your letters to
Khurshedbehn.
Sushilabehn3 arrived here today. Today she told me what was
written about you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

438. LETTER TO TARADEVI NAYYAR
S EVAGRAM ,

August 25, 1944
DEAR SISTER,

I know you want to have Sushila with you for a good many
days. Sushila was going there direct. You may as well say that I have
made her get down on the way. Her luggage too is lying at Bajajwadi.
I need Sushila here. Hence I wish you would let her remain here. What
I would like most is all the three of you coming here. Then I shall be
able to see you, Pyarelal will be able to see you, and it will be
convenient in every way. If you really cannot come, then I shall send
Sushila when I conveniently can. Remember that my days are
numbered. Hence I would again urge you to come.
Blessings to the three of you,

BAPU
From the Hindi original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1
2
3

Granddaughter of Swami Shraddhanand
Illegible
Sushila Nayyar

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

325

439. LETTER TO R. K. PRABHU
S EVAGRAM ,

August 26, 1944
my dear prabhu,
Yours to hand. I have offered what has appeared to me the
fairest terms. If the main source of revenue is India, then there is not
much in seeking publishers with a foreign fame. I am quite clear that
we in India must sell at the lowest price. Will the Oxford Press be
satisfied if the Navajivan Trust covers the cost hitherto incurred and let
us have what they have printed. I write this subject to confirmation by
the Trust. Do not be agitated. Come to see me if necessary.
Yours,

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy
: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

440. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
August 26, 1944
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

I expressed myself in my usual way. What I said1 is for
everyone. When the complaints regarding utensils, etc., continue
unabated the person in charge of the section takes the blame upon
himself. Why should this then upset you? I have even said that if we
cannot mend such matters we should either forget about running the
Ashram, or accept the rule of living in utmost simplicity. We should
not have guests and should be content with whatever activities we are
able to carry on. You should have been thoroughly satisfied with what
I had said.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4445

1

326

Vide letter to the addressee, “Letter to Krishnachandra”, 21-8-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

441. LETTER TO GANESHSHASTRI JOSHI
August 27, 1944
SHRI VAIDYARAJ JOSHIJI,

Gandhiji has received your letter of the 24th. He has directed me to reply
to you.
As it is time for postal clearance today I just want to inform you that since
yesterday he has been having three to four loose motions a day. He has started using
the commode. If you have any other suggestion, please let us know. An examination
of the stools indicates that the germs of dysentery are causing the havoc.
Yours,
SUSHILA NAYYAR
From a photostat of the Hindi: C.W. 932. Courtesy: Ganeshshastri Joshi

442. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
S EVAGRAM ,

August 28, 1944
CHI. MIRA 1 ,

Yours of 22nd received yesterday. You are having a bad time.
You must take care of yourself. If you feel like coming here, of
course you will not hesitate. You will not fear me. I am a changed
man I hope. You may look to me to find you Rs. 50,000. Narandas is
over head and ears in work. I do not care to trouble him. You can
either recall what was received or tell me what is the limit up to which
you would spend.
Love.
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

In Devanagari

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

327

443. LETTER TO G. V. MAVALANKAR
S EVAGRAM ,

August 28, 1944
DADA 1 ,

Raojibhai2 writes to tell me that there has been a terrible calamity
in Gujarat. The rains have been excessive. This means that we shall
have to start a relief fund. Think over this. Write to me and give
details. Let me know if I have to do anything. I read very few
newspapers. A single activity takes up all my time.
Blessings from

BAPU
DADA MAVALANKAR
MAHARASHTRA S OCIETY , E LLIS BRIDGE
AHMEDABAD , B. B. & C. I. RLY .
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1250

444. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI M. PATEL
August 28, 1944
CHI. RAOJIBHAI,

I have your letter. Keep me informed about the calamity. I have
written to Dada and asked him to make inquiries and do what is
necessary.3 If my help is required, he may ask for it. Kanjibhai will
probably be there. If so, show him this letter. We really miss Sardar.
Now all of you must become sardars 4 . I am utterly useless.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI R AOJIBHAI
R AVINDRA & C O., P RARTHANA S AMAJ
C HARNI R OAD , B OMBAY 4
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 10219. Courtesy: Ravindra
R. Patel
1

Ganesh Vasudev Mavalankar (1888-1956); Speaker, Legislative Assembly,
Bombay; Speaker, Lok Sabha, 1947-56
2
Raojibhai M. Patel
3
Vide the preceding item.
4
Literally, ‘leaders’

328

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

445. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
August 28, 1944
CHI. AMRITLAL,

Sushilabehn has come and she hunts up the letters addressed to
me. In one of them you have asked for a couple of lines from me. If I
have not sent them earlier, here they are.
Worthy work needs no support. I am already convinced of the
value of your work 1 ; why then do you need my support? All of you
have a better knowledge of Hindustani than I. Go further ahead.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI AMRITLAL NANAVATI
C HUDA R ANGANARNI KHADKI, K ELAPITH
S URAT, B. B. & C. I. RLY .
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10804

446. LETTER TO KANAM GANDHI
[SEVAGRAM , “V IA ” WARDHA , (C.P.)]2

August 28, 1944
CHI. KANAM,

Your letter of August 15 is lying with me. I see that you have
tried to improve your handwriting. You should pay still more careful
attention to improving it. I will not discuss now the matters you have
raised in your letter. I see that much of what you write, you do just for
the sake of writing, What you write shows intellectual speculation but
not good sense. Good sense is very necessary. Write little, but whatever
you write, write after careful deliberation, courteously and with
genuine curiosity for knowledge. You are no longer a mere child. I
was certainly glad that all of you came here but I was not satisfied with
the way you behaved and with what you said. I did not see any
courtesy in your behaviour. I saw a good deal of impertinence in your

1
2

Propagation of Hindustani
As on the letterhead on which the letter is written

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

329

way of talking. What you said was all superficial. It can be seen even
in your letter. If you can get rid of these defects, you will go far.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

447. LETTER TO BALVANTSINHA
August 28, 1944
CHI. BALVANTSINHA,

I have your letter. It is worthy of a sinha1 . Ghanshyamdasji
worked according to his capacity and so did Swami. The thing is that
we should rest content with whatever anyone offers us or else there is
only disappointment in store for us. Is it a small thing that Satis Babu
appreciated your merits much more than others? There will never be a
cause for disappointment if you work with detachment. We should not
sit in judgment on others.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1946

448. TELEGRAM TO G. V. MAVALANKAR
August 29, 1944
IF

GUJARAT

KASTURBA
YOURSELF

FLOOD

FUND,
FLOOD

YOU
DISTRESS

SITUATION
SHOULD

DEMANDS
SUSPEND

AND

CESSATION
DEVOTE

COLLECTION.

BAPU
Sansmarano , p. 156

1

330

‘Sinha’ means a lion.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

449. A WORD FOR THE READER1
AUTHORIZED TRANSLATION 2

Who can accept the propriety of my writing a preface for this
venture? But if by doing so, I can help fill the purse for the poor, why
need I hesitate? I understand this is not meant to be a presentation
volume. The profit from its sale will add to the purse to be presented
to me for Daridranarayana. A few words from me by way of a
foreword will, they argue, help the sale. This is enough temptation for
me. If the book correctly expresses my views on truth and
non-violence and kindred matters I am sure its circulation will do
good. Looking at the list of contributors3 , I feel they must have done
justice to what I stand for.
M. K. GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

August 29, 1944
From a facsimile: Mahatma, Vol. VI, facing p. 337

450. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
August 29, 1944
BHAI JINNAH,

I have your letter. I got neither a telegram nor a letter by the
return of post. That made me impatient and I sent the telegram.
Afterwards I got your reply. Thanks. I am glad to learn that you are
keeping well.
I have fixed my engagements up to the 7th September. I have
kept myself free after that date. Hence I can present myself on or after
the 9th, whenever you call me.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

Gandhiji drafted this in Gujarati for a souvenir volume Gandhiji -His Life and
Work which was to be published on his 75th birthday.
2
This is in Gandhiji’s hand.
3
Which among others included Albert Einstein, Pearl S. Buck, Verrier Elwin,
F. R. Moraes, Marjorie Sykes, J. B. Kripalani, Mahadev Desai, S. A. Brelvi, Maurice
Frydman, G. A. Natesan and R. K. Prabhu with an introduction by Jawaharlal Nehru
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

331

451. NOTE TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
August 29, 1944
The foregoing is not enough for my satisfaction. Nor should
you be satisfied with this. We should not be so easily satisfied.
BAPU

[PS.]
About Munnalal’s objection, I feel that meetings of the
permanent ashramites should be called from time to time and a record
should be kept of the suggestions made and decisions taken. Is there
anything impractical in this?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10604

452. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
S EVAGRAM ,

August 29, 1944
DAUGHTER AMTUL SALAAM,

In my letter of yesterday I forgot to answer a question of yours.
Bhagirathji writes to me that the work will not be held up for lack of
funds.
Everything is fine. Parnerkar is all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 482

332

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

453. LETTER TO V. V. NENE
August 29, 1944
BHAI NENE,

I have your letter. I had no idea that I would be arrested so soon,
if at all. I had planned a programme but before it could be released I
was arrested. 1 But there were to be negotiations first, isn’t it? I cannot
say whether I would have met Jinnah Saheb or not.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

454. LETTER TO DR. JAYADEV KULKARNI
August 29, 1944
BHAI KULKARNI,

The same question has been raised by others too. I have
answered it. It is impossible for me to be acquainted with all the
circumstances. Therefore it is almost impossible for me to answer
questions individually. I have, of course, laid down the general rule.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
DR. J AYADEV KULKARNI
577 M ATHGALI
BELGAUM
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

The reference is to the Quit India movement of 1942.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

333

455. LETTER TO B. L. RALLIA RAM
August 29, 1944
BHAI RALLIA RAMJI,

Although my reply is delayed, this much I can say with certainty
that neither of us will take any step to the detriment of the interests of
others.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
R EV . B. L. RALLIA R AM
OFFICE OF THE HONORARY S ECRETARY
C/ O Y. M. C. A., L AHORE
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

456. LETTER TO BHAGIRATH KANODIA
S EVAGRAM ,

August 29, 1944
BHAI BHAGIRATH,

Your letter astonishes me. Rajaji can never dupe me. Those who
talk thus understand neither Rajaji nor me. Those who say such things
would do better to put it in writing. I have never said anything of the
kind.
Blessings from

BAPU
BHAGIRATHJI KANODIA
8 R OYAL EXCHANGE P LACE
C ALCUTTA
From a copy of the Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

334

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

457. MESSAGE FOR ALL-INDIA STUDENTS’ FEDERATION1
WARDHAGANJ,

August 30, 1944
Conduct your proceedings in your mother tongue, in the
national language or if necessary in all the languages of India, but not
in a foreign language.
And for the sake of Daridranarayana, do spin for at least half
an hour every day.
If you cannot do these two things kindly return this to me.
The Bombay Chronicle, 2-9-1944, and The Hindu, 1-9-1944

458. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
August 31, 1944
I have seen an Orient Press report to the effect that I have
consented to receive the salute of Khaksars on my arrival in Bombay.
I may say that I have given no such consent. I am going to Bombay as
an individual. I can, therefore, receive no salute. I invite individuals
and organizations to devote themselves to silently praying that we may
both be wisely guided by the Almighty. I would ask then to avoid all
demonstrations. Let the leaders of all communities devise ways and
means of cultivating friendly relations with one another.
The Hitavada, 1-9-1944

459. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA, C.P.,
August 31, 1944
MY DEAR BELOVED BROTHER,

I had your letter. I wanted to write immediately on receiving it.
But overwhelming work delayed my reply till now. I have received all
you have been saying. My whole heart goes out to you in your grief.
1

Lalu Shah, Joint Secretary of the Federation, met Gandhiji to take a message
from him to the Students’ Conference to be held on September 2 and 3 in Bombay and
discussed with him questions regarding the constructive programme and other aspects
of the students’ movement.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

335

But I would beseech you to bear it. You will find in the end that we
have not betrayed the country. A society based on non-violence
cannot be built except With the free and willing consent of all its
component parts. I plead for trust. You should not despair of me.
With love,
Yours,

LITTLE BROTHER
T. R. Venkatarama Sastri Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

460. LETTER TO HOOTEN
August 31, 1944
DEAR COL. HOOTEN,

Many thanks for your kind letter. How can I forget you? I recall
our many cordial chats about medical work in villages.
About the part I have played during this terrible world crisis, my
conscience is absolutely clear.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
C OL . H OOTEN
EUROPE HOTEL , G ERARDS C ROSS
BUCKS, E NGLAND
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

461. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
August 31, 1944
BHAI JINNAH,

I have your telegram. Thanks.
I had written a letter to you on the 29th. You must have got it.
As mentioned in it I have already fixed up appointments with various
people up to the 7th. I can, therefore, start from here on 8th
September at the earliest and reach there on the 9th. I hope the day
will suit you. If it does, kindly let me know.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

336

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

462. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
August 31, 1944
CHI. NARANDAS,

A fund of Rs. 75 lakhs is being collected1 . Let its fate be what it
will. I do not know how much from it will be made available to you.
You who are at the root of this collection should however carry on
with your work in your own manner. This means that you should be
able to collect money according to your plan. Those who have been
always helping you for the Rentia Baras 2 purse should understand
this. And if they do, they should send you their contributions this time
also as they have been doing in the past. Whenever you feel that such
donors require a word from me, you may use this letter. It would
certainly pain me if the purpose of the Kasturba Fund is
misunderstood and in consequence further expansion of your work is
obstructed. I will regard the Fund as having been put to good use only
if its work, like your work, spreads throughout the country.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8610. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

463. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
S EVAGRAM ,

August 31, 1944
DEAR DAUGHTER AMTUL SALAAM,

Seven annas had to be paid for your unstamped letter. Why are
you in such a great hurry? Such waste is not a sign of our poverty.
I do not remember that I failed to address you as ‘Daughter’. I
allowed the pen free play. I do not see any difference between
‘Daughter’ and ‘Chi’. It might have made some difference if I had
written ‘Behn’. But is there any cure for suspicion?
You can do any work without seeking my consent. Then the
1

For the Kasturba Gandhi National Memorial
Bhadrapad Vad 12, Gandhiji’s birthday according to the Vikram calendar,
which was observed as spinning day
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

337

question of my displeasure will not arise at all. When you had asked
me earlier, I had told you what was proper work for you. The work
which you are doing covers the Hindu-Muslim problem too.
I waited for the Maulvi you mention. But he never turned up. It
was clear you had made a mistake. In spite of it, I had sent word to the
Maulvi that he could certainly come.
You must have received the letter I sent through Bhagirathji.
You can certainly draw Rs. 75 a month for your expenses. Do
not ask your brothers for it. If they send anything of their own
accord, pass it on to the Ashram.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 483

464. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
August 31,1944
CHI. LILAVATI,

I have your letter. You did a good thing in passing on Ba’s
diary for Sushilabehn. I have held it up with me. I want to read it and
may even have to make use of it. Sushilabehn says that it has been
given as a trust to her. I told her that entrusting it to me would be as
good as entrusting it to her. What you write about tile case there is
terrible, but such things keep happening. It will be enough if you
learn to be alert. More if and when we meet. Find some time, if you
can, to meet Mamasaheb1 .
Blessings from

BAPU
S MT. L ILAVATIBEHN UDESHI
G. S. M EDICAL C OLLEGE , L ADY S TUDENTS ’ HOSTEL
P AREL, G.I.P. [RLY .], B OMBAY
From a photostat of the Gujarati: (C.W. 10215. Courtesy: Lilavati Asar

1

338

V. L. Phadke
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

465. LETTER TO SUCHAN
[August 1944] 1
DEAR SUCHAN,

Not only our country but all countries can go on for ever with
the help of hand-labour.
My swadeshi excludes mill-cloth. Mills can take the country
downhill. You should look up the literature on this subject.
Yours,

BAPU
P. R. C OLLEGE
C OCANADA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

466. NOTE TO DEVPRAKASH NAYYAR
[August 1944] 2
After discussing everything with Aryanayakum do what you
think best.
3

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi: Documents relating to Gandhiji. Courtesy:
National Archives of India

467. TELEGRAM TO M. A. JINNAH
S EVAGRAM ,

September 1, 1944
QUAID-E-AZAM JINNAH
MOUNT P LEASANT R OAD
BOMBAY
YOUR
NINTH.

WIRE 4 .

THANKS.

HOPING

REACH

YOU

FOUR

O’CLOCK

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

The letter is placed among those of August 1944.
The note is written on a letter of August 1944.
3
E. W. Aryanayakum, Secretary, Hindustani Talimi Sangh
4
Dated August 30, saying that September 7 or any day thereafter would suit the
addressee for meeting Gandhiji
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

339

468. LETTER TO B. G. KHER
September 1, 1944
1

BHAI BALASAHEB ,

Bhai Lalubhai had brought the resolution drafted by students
for the students’ conference. His sincere entreaty created a good
impression on me. He pressed me hard and somehow exacted a
message 2 also. That message is not a message but an invitation to bind
the students. I was not very willing to do even that much, nor did I
have the time. I did not like the resolution. Pyarelal offered and tried
to shorten it. His draft was fairly good but I was not satisfied. He does
not get a minute to spare. After the arrival of the Bishop of Rangoon
his work has increased a lot. I, therefore, took up the drafting of the
resolution in my own hand. I did this on the spur of the moment, but
the work was too much. Whatever I have done is enclosed herewith.3 It
seems to me that I have compressed a great deal in a short space,
multum in parvo. But persons with superficial knowledge of a subject
sometimes suffer from such a delusion and are pleased with
themselves. I would not be surprised if that is what has happened in
the case of this draft, for I have finished it somehow in intervals
snatched from a busy schedule. You may, therefore, add anything to
or remove anything from the draft. You need not fear that I would
feel offended. He is a true co-worker who finds out the shortcomings
of his colleague and helps him to correct them in a friendly spirit.
The interview with the Bishop shaped very well. The result lies in
the hands of God.
I hope your study of Urdu is going on. If it was discontinued
owing to pressure of work, please resume it. Drop by drop fills the
ocean.
I am reaching Bombay on the 9th to meet the Quaid-e-Azam.
I hope you will have no difficulty in reading and understanding
this letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2772
1

Premier of Bombay, 1937 to 1939
Vide “Message for All-India Students Federation”, 30-8-1944.
3
The draft resolution is not available.
2

340

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

469. LETTER TO MANGALDAS PAKVASA
September 1, 1944
1

BHAI MANGALDAS ,

I got your letter and your note. Both are useful. I hope to reach
there on the 9th. I shall return at the earliest on the 10th. If you can
get time while I am there, please do come and see me. Otherwise write
to me at Sevagram and ask for power of attorney of any kind you
need. It is a matter of satisfaction that your health is improving,
though slowly.
Blessings from

BAPU
MANGALDAS P AKVASA
29 DUNGARSINH R OAD
MALABAR HILL
BOMBAY
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4687. Courtesy: Mangaldas Pakvasa

470. SPEECH AT A. I. S. A. MEETING-I
S EVAGRAM ,

September 1, 1944
More than two years have passed since we last met. I have come
to know a little, that is to say, not the whole of what happened outside
[the jail] during these two years. It seemed as though one age had
succeeded another, bringing in the process trouble for the whole of
India. How could the Charkha Sangh have escaped it?
Today, we have once again come together under these
circumstances but whatever little work we might yet be able to do
would not be enough for us. A large amount of the Charkha Sangh
property has either been destroyed or is in Government custody.
Besides, many of our colleagues could not be among us today. Here, I
am not talking of Congressmen but of those who were especially
helpful in the Sangh work and are its trustees. But I have realized that
even with these few we can carry on the Sangh work. We are sure of
1

President, Legislative Council, Bombay, 1937-47

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

341

their ability to do it.
I have thought a great deal over the subject of khadi during my
detention. I shall briefly state the conclusions I have arrived at.
The most important discovery I made was that the foundation of
the A.I.S.A. was so weak that the Association could be easily wiped
out of existence. It had not taken root in the life of the people. The
Government could destroy it by imprisoning its leaders. Though some
of its activities continued, I saw clearly that the Government could
exterminate it at its pleasure. That is to say, my belief that the
movement for the revival of the spinning-wheel was indestructible,
whatever the circumstances, had been dashed to the ground. The work
had not been organized on an imperishable basis.
I am not a man to accept defeat easily but it was in the jail that I
discovered that we live at Government’s mercy and it hurts me. If it
were in my power I would choose to live at no one’s mercy except
God’s. True, it is Divine dispensation that no man may live without
the goodwill of his fellow-beings but I am not talking of such help.
My activities are founded on my own thinking. The Charkha Sangh
was also founded on the same principles. In South Africa, I discovered
that if India was to survive and progress non-violently, it could only
be through the charkha—the charkha alone can be a symbol of
non-violence. We may draw strength from other symbols as well but
such strength may not lead to the world’s well-being.
I realized in jail that there was something wrong in our method
of khadi work, which must needs be amended. I had asked India to
carry on spinning. I knew how this spinning work was to be carried
on. But I did not lay the necessary stress on the requisite outlook and
the spirit which was to underlie it. I looked at it from its immediate
practical aspect. All my co-workers also laid stress on this practical
side. So I suffered it, and also lent my helping hand to it. We have
gone far in that direction. But today I cannot continue to ask people
to spin in that manner.
I contemplated how to work in the future. I even thought of
disbanding the Sangh on my own and distributing its property and
funds among the people. I saw that our work would be incomplete, so
long as we did not carry the message of the charkha to every home.
That, I thought, accounted for our being far from our ideal. There are
seven lakh villages in India. Thousands of them do not even know
what the charkha is. This is our fault and it is because of this fault that
342

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

we have failed to put khadi work on a sound basis. You must ponder
over it.
All the thought and study I have been giving to this subject
lately make me feel that the work would have to be decentralized if it
is to spread far and wide and take permanent root. The above line of
thought led to the idea of decentralization and I thought it would be
very good indeed if its worth could be proved. I realize that the
difficulties in my way are many but then hardly anyone has devoted
as much thought and effort to the charkha as I have. This is a rather
tall claim and it also smacks of pride, but not to mention it on the
right occasion would be false modesty. In the jail too I had no other
thought but the charkha.
The strength behind all my activities including civil
disobedience is derived wholly from the charkha to which I have
devoted most of my energy and funds. Most of the ten million rupees
of the Tilak Swaraj Fund was also used up for the spinning activity.
This brought about a spate of charges against me but I regard them as
so many bouquets. For whatever I did, I did after due deliberation and
with full knowledge of its consequences. I did not deceive anyone.
Nothing was spent on the charkha without convincing the public
about it. That is how this institution came into being.
After much reflection and study I have arrived at the definite
conclusion that, however intense, my sadhana 1 of the charkha has
remained imperfect and I must admit that my study too has not been
as thorough as it ought to have been. Today, my words have a greater
force because I can see these things more clearly.
Besides the Charkha Sangh members, as well as sympathizers
and those who share my feelings, today’s gathering includes some
representatives of the public also. Had we only directed the strength
the country displayed during the movement along the right channels,
we could have shown how much public support we had. But we failed
to do so. The fault is not yours but mine and when I say all this, it is
not so much to blame you, as to whip up your intelligence and my
own.
We plied the charkha but mechanically, not intelligently. Had
you yourselves appreciated the full significance of the charkha, you
would have given it the same importance as I do. It also has political
1

Spiritual discipline

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

343

significance. It has however no place in the dishonest game of politics.
More than any other thing it is the charkha that stands for clean, noble
politics. If there is [no] truth in this statement, how can we claim
swaraj through the charkha? It certainly does not mean that as soon as
the yarn snaps swaraj comes to nought.
It is often alleged that workers of the A.I.S.A. and the
A.I.V.I.A., if not Gandhiites in general, are unintelligent and lifeless.
People repose trust in them. But they (the Gandhiites) are not able to
tell the people what exactly are the problems facing the country and
how our programme is calculated to resolve these problems and take
us to our goal. On the other hand, Marxian literature is fast increasing
in the country and Gandhiites are not able to resist the impact of these
external forces.
We say that we are devoted to non-violence. If so, we must reveal
in our lives the force of non-violence. Unless we can reveal its force in
our own lives, we will not be true Gandhiites. In fact, there is no such
thing as Gandhism. If anything, it is non-violence that deserves to be
called an ideology. Every member of the Charkha Sangh should be a
living witness of non-violence. If he is a devotee of non-violence or
Gandhism, he must be a live wire. Today Gandhism is a word of
reproach. It no more connotes something virtuous or praiseworthy.
Let us admit we have failed to make non-violence a part of our being.
Otherwise we would find the charkha established in every village. I
confess that I have failed. Had I been an adept in this art, I would have
produced a concrete pattern of reconstructed village life in Sevagram
at any rate. But today even if I put the charkha in the hands of the
people of Sevagram they do not accept it. We teach them how to use
it, tempt them by providing them with work, pay them more wages
and serve them in various ways, yet all to little purpose. But my faith
in the charkha is unshakable even when I have failed as President of
the Sangh.
That is why I said that we should admit that we have failed to do
what we ought to have done. It is not due to want of sacrifice in
us. Amongst us are men and women who have sacrificed much. My
head bends low before them. When I think of each of them my heart
is deeply moved. My conscience tells me that a country which
abounds in persons instilled with such a spirit of sacrifice can never
fail. Yet in spite of this sacrifice, we have not yet made our country
free. Freedom is coming, perhaps sooner than we believe. But it does
344

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

not satisfy me. I even question my own share in it and then console
myself with the thought that we have at least tried our best. I do not
hold anybody guilty. I am only pointing to the situation as it is.
Correct assessment of a situation is also a sign of intelligence. We
should not feel satisfied with what we have done. We have tried our
best, no doubt. But had we been able to develop the work of the
Sangh according to the standard we had set before ourselves, there will
not be the despair amongst us which we see today. In that case we
would have accomplished forthwith a non-violent swaraj.
I lay before you a hard prescription. If you are prepared for it,
well and good. But it should not be accepted in ignorance, nor out of
foolhardiness. You should examine it thoroughly. If you agree with
me you would wind up the A.I.S.A. and distribute all its property and
assets among its workers for carrying on the work. The Sangh need
not keep even a pice for future activities. All of us should be
convinced that the charkha is the symbol of non-violent economic
self-sufficiency. If we and the people grasp this significance of the
charkha not a pice need be spent on propaganda for the charkha.
There would then be no reason to fear Government ordinances either.
Nor need we look to the rich for alms. We shall without effort become
the centre of hope, and the people will come to us of their own
accord. They will not go elsewhere to seek work. Every village will
become the nerve-centre of independent India. India will then not be
known by her cities like Bombay and Calcutta, but by her 400
millions inhabiting the seven lakhs of villages. The problems of
Hindu-Muslim differences, untouchability, conflicts, misunderstandings and rivalries will all melt away. This is the real function of the
Sangh. We have to live and die for it.
You will argue it is a very big task requiring much intelligence. I
tell you that this cannot be acquired by mere study in libraries. We
have to develop it by the labour of our hands. This is the idea
underlying the Nayee Talim according to which the intellect is
developed by the effort put forth by the hands and feet. Books need
not be burnt but their importance is only secondary. The charkha has
to rank first of all. In the same manner the pursuit of the charkha
must become the mainspring of manifold other activities like village
industries, Nayee Talim, etc. If we are able to adopt the charkha
intelligently we can revive the entire economic life of our villages
once more. But we can progress only as far as the strength of our

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

345

members takes us. I do not wish to create a fresh universe, like
Vishwamitra, who wanted to take Trishanku to heaven but the poor
fellow remained suspended half way. Therefore, we have to work
within the limits of our strength with our feet on the hard earth.
If we ourselves disband the Sangh the Government will have
little left to attach. They could surely not destroy us all, for our
strength would have gone up to forty crores. If they want to liquidate
us we shall submit to it cheerfully. And what does it matter if a few
million among us are done away with? An ocean does not dry up if a
few drops evaporate. Nothing can diminish its greatness. Similarly, the
more we are suppressed, the more powerful we shall grow. The only
condition is that we must recognize the power of non-violence.
We must carry on untiring research on the charkha. No doubt
we have put in a lot of effort for the charkha and made some
improvements in it. We have also manufactured scores of charkhas but
now we have to produce an expert, a shastri who is well-versed in the
manufacture of machines. We should like him to devise such charkhas
as can yield more and better quality of yarn. But even if we fail to
find such an expert, I am not going to accept defeat. I will prove my
point with the help of reasoning. We should have undying faith in the
charkha. When faith materializes it manifests itself through reason. It
is not self-luminous. For when faith transcends its bounds and finds
another medium to express itself it shines forth all the more. Faith is
never lost; in fact it grows and sharpens the intellect. And then faith
can challenge reason. It is no use merely making speeches or giving
lectures; we must make scientific experiments and declare from the
house-tops the results of our experiments. We have been suppressed
and we have to work our way up. Let us therefore do away with
mutual recriminations, disabuse our minds of any reservations, iron
out all the differences and thus simplify our work. We should repose
full confidence in our representatives and be frank. We are votaries of
truth and should, therefore, not be afraid of speaking the whole truth,
for the greater the fear in our hearts, the less we shall be able to speak
the truth. That is why the Gita gives the pride of place to fearlessness.
I am telling you this on the strength of my inner experience. We
should be fearless and not hide anything. Selfishness has already
impeded our progress and unless we get rid of it, we would not be able
to organize our strength and would thus prove traitors to Mother
India.
[From Hindi]
Charkha Sanghka Navasamskaran, pp.

346

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

471. SPEECH AT A.I.S.A. MEETING-II
S EVAGRAM ,

September 2, 1944
Yesterday, I was a little hasty while talking to you. Some work
was indeed done but later I kept thinking over it. I had undertaken the
stupendous task of preparing a draft for you. I even entered silence
for the purpose. After much reflection last night and this morning I
have prepared a draft which I shall now read out for your
consideration.
1. The village is the centre for the charkha, and the Charkha
Sangh can realize its highest ambitions only when its work is
decentralized in the villages. Keeping this in view, this meeting of the
A. I. S. A. resolves that the following changes be implemented in its
present methods of work:
(a) The largest number of workers whose one passion is the
charkha and whom the A. I. S. A. approves should go to the villages.
(b) The present sales-depots and production-centres should be
curtailed.
(c) Training institutions should be developed and teaching
courses enlarged.
(d) The Sangh should permit any province or district which
wants to be independent and self-sufficient to become so.
2. A Standing Committee composed of the members of the
A.I.S.A., A.I.V.I.A. and the Hindustani Talimi Sangh should be
formed in order to issue necessary directions in the light of the new
ideology. The three institutions must realize that their task is to
achieve perfect non-violence. Complete swaraj will follow in its wake.
The three institutions must be so equipped that the entire government
machinery should depend upon them and not vice versa. This means
the workers of these three bodies should attain in some measure the
quality of a sthitaprajna1 . They must be men of secure understanding. If this is not possible we should stop making tall claims for the
charkha. We shall have to lower our ideal and plan our work
accordingly.
This united body composed, as suggested above, of members of
1

Bhagavad Gita, II, 54-72

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

347

the three Sanghs should so regularize the constructive work that all
political activity will be dependent on it. Today our condition is most
pitiable.
Some workers of the A. I. S. A. complained to me that they do
not receive any help from Congressmen. The experience of the last
two years is also before us. During my detention, I read a lot of
newspapers and was aware of the wretchedness that was apparent in
our workers.
Now after talking to them it has all become very clear to me.
In the jail, I read all the Communist literature [I could get]. It
contained nothing new for me. Whenever Maulana Hasrat Mohani
visited the Ashram, we used to spend the day in such discussions.
Today the Socialists have a number of sincere workers holding
university degrees. Those among them who are neutral come to me
and ask me to put my philosophy and my faith before the world. I
have placed before the world a novel idea which, although it has no
long history of its own, represents my achievement based On forty
years’ experience.
We must admit that we have few degree-holders among us. We
have neither much money nor any comparable efficiency. I realize all
these difficulties but undaunted I made my way through them
cheerfully for seventy-five years. I hope you will be equally fearless.
We can make intelligent progress along our chosen path and
face the challenge coming our way only if we have this courage. What
indicates light is its progressive dispelling of darkness. Absence of
light is darkness. It has been the law of the world that light spreads.
Darkness then has nowhere to go but cease to be. That is the way of
non-violence too. My deep-rooted faith in non-violence gives me the
courage to fear nothing—and in spite of impediments my progress
has not stopped. This manifestation of non-violence will be clear to
you only after my death, not before it.
We have been looking up to the Congress because we have been
crippled so far. It is true that with the Congress help, our work can be
carried on, but then it was I who had introduced the Charkha Sangh
Resolution1 in the Congress realizing that the Sangh was to continue
1
The Resolution, passed on September 22, 1925, inter alia, read: “It is
resolved that the Congress do now take up and carry on all such political work as may
be necessary in the interests of the country, and for this purpose do employ the whole

348

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

longer.
But it is our fault that we have not won the confidence of
Congressmen sufficiently to make them come to us to help them in
village work. If we were capable of doing this, which Congressmen
would dare remain outside the Sangh? Nay, the Congress and the
Sangh would then have felt one with each other, and the one would
have acted as a supplement to the other, i.e., the Sangh would have
carried out the Congress constructive programme, and the Congress
would have fought the Government in the legislatures. There would
then have been no antagonism between the two.
Therefore, we have to look at the whole thing from a new angle
and a new order of priorities. I have put nothing new before you. It
would indeed be a great achievement if you could prove the power of
the charkha through your own lives. Today, we are in a strange
situation. I have no doubt at all that we have failed to realize the
significance of the charkha only because of the inadequate manner in
which we have done our khadi work.
It cannot be denied that believers in big industry and
industrialization are also the friends of India. But the difference
between them and me is like that between the two poles. Citydwellers
might well follow those who advocate mill production. But if you of
the countryside were, even by mistake or oversight, to take to it, the
picture of India would be thoroughly changed. Her face would then
be altered beyond recognition. Thereby hundreds of millions of our
poor people will meet their end while only a few millions will survive.
I do aspire to live for 125 years. But I cannot bear the sight of a crore
of people living after reducing to ashes 39 crores. What I have tried to
do is to serve the most oppressed and the handicapped, and to keep
pace with them. It has been our endeavour to do this work through
khadi during these years. Not many years ago we began. If you feel
that no changes are desirable, well and good, but I will not accept
defeat. You should come to a decision after weighing all the pros and
of the machinery and funds of the Congress, save and except such funds and assets as
are specially earmarked and belong to the All-India Khaddar Board and Provincial
Khaddar Boards, which shall be handed over with all existing financial obligations to
the All-India Spinners’ Association started by Mahatma Gandhi as an integral part of
the Congress organization, but with independent existence and full powers to
administer these and other funds for the fulfilment of its object.” For Gandhiji’s
speech introducing the Resolution, vide “Speech at A.I.C.C. Meeting, Patna”, 22-91925.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

349

cons. Who knows when it will be possible for so many of us to meet
again? I have laid my heart open before you.
If you believe that the charkha is the supreme symbol of our
objective and that we have not been able to achieve our objective by
the present methods then our mode of working must needs be
changed.
I do not mean to say that all we did so far was absolutely wrong.
Whatever we did, we did with devotion to truth. And that is no small
matter. Even with our limited funds, we were able to distribute among
our village brethren more than four and a half crores of rupees up to
date. The amount we spent in organizing this work was in comparison
little. Yet from the standpoint of our objective, the work is not up to
the standard. We must not allow ourselves to be weighed down by the
commercial aspect of our work. Jawaharlal has sent me a book
describing the achievements of the co-operative movement in China.
That movement, it seems to me, is nothing compared with what we are
doing here. But judged by our own objective we have done little, very
little. We have not yet reached the seven hundred thousand villages.
We have done only one per cent of what the mills have done. Then
what is there to be proud of? That is why I say that if we are not
prepared to change our methods we shall be reduced to a mere
philanthropic institution. I shall not be ashamed of it. If, on the other
hand, we want to uphold our claim for khadi we shall have to live up
to it. We should not deceive the public. We must think out ways and
means of increasing our strength. If in seeking to change our mode of
work you agree that it would be well to close the A.I.S.A. in its present
form, rest assured that it would add to your strength.
[From Hindi]
Charkha Sanghka Navasamskaran, pp. 9-14

472. LETTER TO METROPOLITAN OF CALCUTTA
S EVAGRAM ,

September 3, 1944
DEAREST FRIEND,

It is now 3.30 a.m. I must write now or the work before me may
crowd out this note.
I have your clear letter written during your tour in the villages. I
350

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

know you will believe me when I tell you that in all I have written
about the rulers, I have written as I have felt and never with evil
intention. I have never hidden my own people’s failings or errors. I
hope I shall never forfeit your friendship.
I had a rare time with the Bishop of Rangoon and his chaplain.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
THE METROPOLITAN
BISHOP HOUSE
C ALCUTTA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

473. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
September 3, 1944
CHI. AMRIT,

1

I have got up very early to write a few important letters. This is
one of them. The A. I. S. A. meeting leaves me little leisure during the
day. I read no newspapers and very little correspondence. The marvel
is I am keeping well in spite of the stress. How I wish you were here.
But God’s will be done and it is the best that can happen.
No extension to the hospital can be made today. Everything is
uncertain and things are expensive. Let your money go to the
contemplated Mahadev Memorial Fund. The use may be decided
afterwards. You should make your suggestion.
Do not worry about the women’s conference. Everything is in
the melting pot.
Sushila is getting on.
Mrs. Swaminathan2 and Mrs. Menon, her relative, are here.
Have lovely khadi from Beryl and of course your annual shawls.
It has struck four and I must not tarry long with you.
Love from us all.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
You must keep well and not fret or be impatient.
From the original: C.W. 4147. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7782

1
2

The superscription and the subscription are in Devanagari script.
Ammu Swaminathan

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

351

474. TELEGRAM TO G. V. MAVALANKAR
September 3, 1944
YOUR

LETTER.

YOUR

RULE

ASSOCIATION

TO

WITH

DISTRESSED

GOLDEN

RULE

IS

AUTHORITIES

PEOPLE,
IS

NON-CO-OPERATION,
YOU

FOLLOW

BUT

BRINGS

NEED

REAL

NOT

FEARLESSLY

YOUR

IF
RELIEF

HESITATE.
OWN

CONSCIENCE.

Sansmarano , p. 158

475. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
September 3, 1944
Reference has been made to me from Gujarat1 as to the
association by Congressmen with the authorities in relieving distress
which has overtaken areas through devastating floods. The Congress,
as an organization, is not functioning. The general rule is
non-co-operation, while the Government is warring against the
Congress. There should be no hesitation about individuals associating,
if effective relief can thereby be given to the distressed people. Every
case should be judged on its own merits. The test should be, is any
initiative and responsibility left with the individuals? The golden rule
is to follow fearlessly one’s own judgment even at the risk of its
proving erroneous.
The Hindu, 5-9-1944

1

According to The Bombay Chronicle, 7-9-1944, Kanaiyalal Desai, President,
Surat District Congress Committee, and President, Gujarat Central Congress Workers’
Committee, had “three hours’ discussion with Gandhiji on the present political
situation and relief work in Gujarat. . . . Gandhiji had also made it clear that
Congressmen in no circumstances should resort to mass civil disobedience.”

352

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

476. LETTER TO ABDUL MAJID KHAN
September 3, 1944
MY DEAR KHWAJA,

Or shall I call you Khwaja Saheb and be formal?
Minister Nurie has broken his journey to tell me about his talks
with you and generally about your Majlis. He says you are angry with
me for having neglected you. What can be the meaning of my
neglecting you? When heart speaks to heart, there is no occasion for
speaking. I have been following your writings. Surely you will not
want me to waste my time telling you how well you were doing your
work !!! All I want to assure you about is that I shall not be faithless to
you or the Majlis or Islam. Now do say you are not angry. How are
you keeping?
Love.
Yours,

BAPU
ABDUL MAJID KHAN S AHEB
GANDHI ASHRAM
C HARKHA S ANGH KHADDAR BHANDAR
ALLAHABAD
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

477. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
September 3, 1944
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

Please give Bhai Baburam1 the fare and food, and also Rs. 10 in
addition.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10611

1

An inmate of the Ashram who worked under Bharatanand (Maurice Frydman)

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

353

478. SPEECH AT A. I. S. A. MEETING—III
S EVAGRAM ,

September 3, 1944
Today, I will try to explain my thoughts to you more clearly
and present them to you in a different frame from what I have said
during the last two days. Our work had a very humble beginning.
When I started khadi I had with me, apart from Maganlalbhai 1 and
others who had elected to live and die with me, Vithaldasbhai2 and a
few sisters. Vithaldas was, at that time, fighting for the labourers, but
[at my call] he gave up his shop and joined me in this unremunerative
work. We had then not the faintest idea as to what the future had in
store for us. We have travelled a long way since then and today about
two crores of people have come under the influence of the charkha.
So far, we have maintained that the charkha has the power to bring us
freedom. With its help we have been able to provide the village people
with a large amount of money. But can we still hold, as we have always
maintained, that swaraj is impossible without the charkha? So long as
we do not substantiate this claim the charkha is really no more than a
measure of relief, to which we turn because we can do nothing else
about it. It would not then be the means of our salvation.
Secondly, we have failed to carry our message to the crores of
our people. They have neither any knowledge of what the charkha
can do for them nor even the necessary curiosity for it.
The Congress did accept the charkha. But did it do so willingly?
No, it tolerates the charkha simply for my sake. The Socialists ridicule
it outright. They have spoken and written much against it. We have no
clear or convincing reply to offer to them. How I wish I could
convince them that the charkha is the key to swaraj! I have not been
able to justify the claim all these years.
Now for my third point: non-violence is not something of
the other world. If it is, I have no use for it. I am of the earth and
if non-violence is something really worth while I want to realize
it here on this earth while I am still alive. The non-violence I want is
one which the masses can follow in practice. And how else can it be
1
2

354

Maganlal Gandhi
Vithaldas Jerajani
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

realized except in a society which has compassion and other similar
virtues as its characteristics?
If you go to the house of one who has use for violence you will
find his drawing-room decorated with tigers’ skins, deers’ horns,
swords, guns and such like. I have been to the Viceregal Lodge, I also
saw Mussolini. In the houses of both I found arms hanging on the
walls. I was given a salute with arms, a symbol of violence.
Just as arms symbolize violence the charkha symbolizes nonviolence, in the sense that we can most directly realize non-violence
through it. But it cannot symbolize non-violence so long as we do not
work in accordance with its spirit. The sword in Mussolini’s hall
seemed to say ‘Touch me and I will cut you.’ It gave a vivid picture
of violence. It seemed to ask you to touch it and realize its power. So
also we must illustrate the power of the charkha so that a mere look at
it may speak to us about non-violence. .But we are bankrupt today.
What is our answer to the Socialists? They complain that we have been
harping on the charkha for years and yet we have achieved nothing.
The charkha was there during Muslim rule also. Dacca was
famous for its muslin. The charkha then was a symbol of poverty and
not of non-violence. The kings took forced labour from women and
depressed classes. The same was later repeated by the East India
Company. Kautilya 1 mentions in his Arthashastra the existence of
such forced labour. For ages the charkha was thus a symbol of
violence and the use of force and compulsion. The spinner got but a
handful of grain or two small coins, while ladies of the court went
about luxuriously clad in the finest of muslins, the product of
exploited labour.
As against this, I have presented the charkha to you as a symbol
of non-violence. If I did not make it clear to you so far, it was my
mistake. You know I am among the maimed and can move but slowly.
Yet I do believe that the work done so far has not been a waste.
I shall now pass to my fourth point. We have not yet proved that
there can be no swaraj without the charkha. It cannot be proved so
long as you do not explain it to Congressmen. The charkha and the
Congress should become synonyms.
The task of proving the superiority of non-violence is a difficult
one. We have to fathom its depths if we are to realize its truth. I have
1

Chanakya, the celebrated writer on statecraft

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

355

always supported all that I have said so far. The world is going to put
me to the test. It may declare me a fool for my tall talk about the
charkha. The task of making the charkha, which for centuries had
been a symbol of poverty, helplessness, injustice and forced labour,
the symbol now of mighty non-violent strength, of the new social
order and of the new economy, has fallen on our shoulders. We have
to change history. And I want to do it through you.
I hope you follow what I am saying. But if in spite of it you do
not believe that the charkha has the power to achieve swaraj, I will ask
you to leave me. Here you are at the crossroads. If you continue with
me without faith you will be deceiving me and doing a great wrong to
the country. I beg of you not to deceive me in the evening of my life.
It is I who am responsible for defects in our working so far. The
fault is mine because I have remained the head even when I was
conscious of its defects. But let bygones be bygones. Do we honestly
believe today that the charkha is the emblem of non-violence? How
many of us are there who believe so from the depths of our heart?
Now we have the tricolour flag. What is it but a piece of khadi of
specific length and breadth? You can well have another piece in its
place. But behind that khadi cloth lie encased your feelings. It is a
symbol of swaraj, a symbol of national emancipation. We cannot
forget it. We will not remove it. We are prepared to die for it. So also
the charkha should be an emblem of non-violence.
What does the charkha, as an emblem of non-violence, signify in
the economic sphere? Call it self-sufficiency or what you like. In the
name of national reconstruction and self-sufficiency millions are
being bled white in Western countries, as also in other countries for
their sake. Ours is not a self-sufficiency of that pattern. The charkha is
the way to get rid of exploitation and domination. I am not so much
concerned with words as with the thing itself. Still, words have a
miraculous power. They embody the feelings, which then acquire a
definite shape with the aid of language.
We are familiar with the controversy in our religion as to
whether God has a form or no. The believers in form prefer to
worship God through an emblem. So if non-violence is to be pursued
as an ideal, the charkha must be acknowledged as its true form and
emblem, and kept ever before view. Whenever I think of non-violence
356

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the picture of the charkha comes before me. A nirakaravadi1 would
not accept Krishna. He has one foot on the mountain top and the
other in the clouds above. But we tread the solid ground. We cannot
visualize non-violence in the abstract. So we choose an object which
can symbolize for us the formless. That is what the charkha does for
me and that is why I worship it. If you can realize this truth, you will
understand the force of my argument. Even to Jajuji I had never
before spoken with so much conviction. Jerajani says I am being
hasty. Unless you understand and imbibe this spirit behind my
worship of the charkha you will not gain an understanding of
non-violence even for a hundred years. That capacity for nonviolence which I find in the charkha can also be perceived by you
only if you approach it with a heart like mine. That is why I say:
Follow me or leave me. If you want to come with me, I will give you a
scheme and do everything possible. If you have not understood what I
mean I am prepared to sit and discuss it with you the whole day. But if
you say that you have grasped my meaning when you really have not,
you will be deceiving both yourselves and me. Ours is not an
association for making profit. We do not seek loaves and fishes. There
are a thousand fields in which we can serve the country. Why then
remain in charkha work and sail under false colours? Please do not
therefore remain with me under an illusion. Let me go my way alone.
But if it were found that I was myself suffering from an illusion and
that my belief in the charkha was mere idol-worship, either you may
burn me to ashes with the wood of the charkha, or I myself would set
fire to the charkha with my own hands.
If the Charkha Sangh has to go, let us wind it up with our own
hands. That will put an end to all our struggle like the sun clearing the
mist. Then the charkha which has for the moment put us into a
labyrinth of difficulties will be left in the hands of a few who believe
in it, and may in their hands prove to be a mighty weapon. If you
regard it as sheer folly I certainly have no ambition to run an idiots’
association and thus degrade the country. On the other hand, if you
can demonstrate non-violence through the charkha, it will not merely
move but sweep forward. You will not then have to worry about
keeping it alive.
I repeat that you either leave me alone or digest what I say and
follow me. I have brought this new idea to you after two years
1

One who holds that the Supreme is formless

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

357

of penitential thinking. I do not know if I have succeeded in
conveying my idea to you. If I have been able to carry conviction
please do one thing. Those of you who want to remain with me give
me in writing that you regard the charkha from today as the emblem
of non-violence. You have to make your decision today. If you do
not or cannot regard the charkha as the emblem of non-violence and
yet remain with me, then you will thereby put yourself in an awkward
plight and also drag me down with you.
[From Hindi]
Charkha Sanghka Navasamskaran, pp. 14-20

479. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
3.25 a.m., Silence-day
[On or before September 4, 1944] 1
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

I saw yesterday that my point had not been understood.
The matter of utensils, etc., was only an instance. It made me see
the extent of our imperfections.
In my view, in moments of crisis we have not shown the qualities
that the inmates of the Ashram should have. Those qualities cannot be
cultivated in a day. A handful of you may maintain some order. But
how does that help ? What knowledge do women have ? What part can
they intelligently play ? Can everybody sacrifice himself in a way that
would befit the Ashram ? Can you stand today before India as an
embodiment of the Ashram ? Let us realize our weakness. There is
something lacking in my training. If that is the case, then we must
proceed with that realization. Balkrishna cannot be of much help in
this. Jajuji can. Vallabh can. If you want, do discuss it with me. If I
have been able to put across my point, you can take a decision without
discussing it with me. I shall accept whatever you do. I see no harm
since Jajuji has been involved. His guidance would be invaluable. You
should not think it shameful to wind up the Ashram. Its winding up
may mean building it up. If you wind it up, give thought to my idea
1

From the reference to the winding up of the Ashram and Gandhiji’s visit to
Bombay, it appears that this was written before Gandhiji left for Bombay on
September 9, 1944. Silence-day, i.e., the Monday before that, was on September 4.
Vide also “Letter to Chimanlal N. Shah”, 16-9-1944.

358

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of a smaller one.
Do not feel perturbed. Have the utmost patience. All of you
should read this and think it over. There is no harm if you cannot
come to any decision before I go to Bombay.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 10664-A

480. LETTER TO R. K. PRABHU
S EVAGRAM ,

September 4, 1944
MY DEAR PRABHU,

You shall certainly be present at the interview with Mr. Hawkins.
Yours,

BAPU
S HRI P RABHU
“THE BOMBAY C HRONICLE ”
F ORT, B OMBAY
From a photostat: G.N. 9228

481. LETTER TO R. E. HAWKINS
S EVAGRAM ,

September 4, 1944
DEAR MR. HAWKINS,

Do please see me in Bombay. I hope to reach on 9th. You will
arrange the time when I reach there.You won’t feel disappointed if I
cannot find the time. I should be obliged if we can discover a way out.
Yours sincerely,

M. K.GANDHI
THE GENERAL MANAGER
THE OXFORD UNIVERSITY P RESS
B. I. BUILDING
NICOL R OAD
BOMBAY
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

359

482. LETTER TO BIDHAN CHANDRA ROY
S EVAGRAM , WARDHA ,

September 4, 1944
DEAR DR. BIDHAN,

If you do not know my mind as you presume to know my
pulse, the fault is wholly yours. If you have not found me forward to
initiate political discussions with you, it is due to a delicate
consideration for you. I may not take an undue advantage of your
kindness in coming to me in your medical capacity. People have a
right to expect you to know my mind.
I have not accepted the two-nation theory. I have accepted the
principle of self-determination underlying it.
The second thing has been assured in the formula.
Ask any questions you like.
Yours,

BAPU
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy
: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

483. LETTER TO SHARDA G. CHOKHAWALA
September 4, 1944
CHI. BABUDI,

Please do come. I will be in Bombay on the 9th. I showed your
letter to both. I thought it would please them, and it did.
Blessings to all from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 10049. Courtesy: Sharda G. Chokhawala

360

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

484. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
September 4, 1944
DAUGHTER,

The silken mosquito-net is not required. I got the jaggery. Jiten
Babu 1 has come to get my signature when I am very busy. We shall
think later about the rules and so on.
Sushila tells me that you have fallen sick. What is to be done
now? It won’t do you any good if you insist on staying there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 484

485. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
Silence Day, September 4, 1944
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

I have your letter. Why are you wasting so much time over such
a trivial matter? You did what seemed to be proper at the time. This
should be enough. Your letter is a symptom of an unhealthy mind.
Get rid of it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4446

486. NOTE TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
[On or after September 4, 1944] 2
Read the letter I have written to Chhaganlal. Think over it and
then do what you consider right. It does not matter if you do not
include Abha’s3 name just now. I have no objection.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8470. Also C.W. 7177. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah
1

Jitendra Chakraborty, Secretary of the Bengal Charkha Sangh and
Joint-Secretary of the Kasturba Seva Mandir, who had come to get Gandhiji’s
approval for the Mandir’s constitution
2
The letter is written below a letter from the addressee dated September
4, 1944.
3
Daughter of Amrita Lal Chatterjee
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

361

487. TELEGRAM TO NARANDAS GANDHI
WARDHAGANJ,

September 5, 1944
NARANDAS GANDHI
R AJKOT
JANAKIDEVI

BAJAJ

PRESIDING

OUR

FUNCTION1 .

WRITING.

BAPU
From a microfilm: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8611. Courtesy: Narandas dGandhi

488. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKAR H. PAREKH
September 5, 1944
BHAI PRABHASHANKAR,

I have your postcard. Please bear in mind that it is for you to
win over Champa2 . You alone know how to do it.
Vandemataram from

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI P RABHASHANKARBHAI
DERA S HERI
R AJKOT 3
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XX

489. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
[On or after September 5, 1944] 4
Your letter is as usual frank. If I consulted my friends in
carrying out my experiments, it could not be said that they were
undertaken with God’s permission. Besides, whom can I expect to
come with me when I plough in fresh fields? More or less all my
1

Rentia Baras Day; vide also letters to the addressee, “Letter to Narandas
Gandhi”, 6-9-1944 and 10/12-9-1944.
2
Champa R. Mehta, addressee’s daughter
3
The address is in the Devanagari script.
4
The letter is written below a letter from the addressee dated September
5, 1944.

362

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

important experiments were started single-handed and co-workers
came in later. I know that this experiment is a very dangerous one
indeed. But it is also capable of yielding very great results. I can
forget about it only when I realize that it is harmful. All of you can
attack my reason. But you can strike at my heart only in One way—
by repudiating me. If you are convinced that the views you have
expressed are correct, it is your dharma to repudiate me and expose
me. The examples you have cited from the Shastras are faulty. You
form your opinions in haste and change them equally hastily.
Whatever you do, do after careful thinking.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 8469. Also C.W. 7176. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

490. LETTER TO BALKRISHNA BHAVE
[On or after September 5, 1944] 1
All this has been written very frankly. My experiment has not
been understood fully. The fact that all my conduct seems to be
contrary to the statement2 you have quoted should make you think.
But this discussion . . .3
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 811. Courtesy: Balkrishna Bhave

491. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

September 6, 1944
CHI. NARANDAS,

I sent you a wire yesterday saying that Janakibehn would arrive
there on the Rentia Baras Day. She will of course be accompanied by
1

The letter is written below a letter from the addressee dated September 5,

1944.
2

The reference is to a private statement issued in 1938 regarding the
discontinuance of accepting from women such service as would involve bodily
contact, vide “To Ashram Inmates”, 2-6-1938.
3
The letter is incomplete.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

363

somebody.
About the fund, do what I have suggested in my letter. 1 I will,
however, do whatever I can. Kanaiyo will write more.
I am likely to be in Bombay on the 9th.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
You have entered the sixtieth year of your life, haven’t you? We
must all try to live up to a hundred. You have much work to do yet.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8612. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

492. LETTER TO VIJYALAKSHMI PANDIT
S EVAGRAM ,

September 6, 1944
CHI. SARUP,

I want to include your name as a trustee for the Kasturba
[Memorial] Fund. But I can have your name only if you can give time
for it and attend the Trust meetings and you are fully convinced of
the object of the Trust, namely, that it will be utilized only for the
children and women of the villages of India. Inform me
telegraphically. I shall be in Bombay on the 9th and 10th.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

364

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 31-8-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

493. TALK WITH STUDENTS’ DELEGATION1
September 6, 1944
H. P. MISHRA: We won’t like your seeing Mr. Jinnah as you are likely to be
duped and the Hindus are likely to be exploited by Mr. Jinnah at our cost.2
GANDHIJI: I will not ignore or compromise a single interest, be

sure.
Students from Bengal who requested Mahatma Gandhi not to decide on a
settlement were asked by the Mahatma:

Have I not done any good for Hindus?
Hari Prasanna Mishra questioned Mahatma Gandhi whether he accepted
responsibility for what was going on in Bengal resulting from the Communal Award.
To this Gandhiji replied:

How can I?
The Bengal students requested Mahatmaji to leave the communal question to
the Sabha and the League.3
Mahatma Gandhi assured the students that he would not do anything without
consulting Bengal. Despite these assurances, the students informed Gandhiji of their
intention to continue picketing and Gandhiji replied:

If you thus prevent me, I will have to wire Mr. Jinnah that I am
arrested and so postpone the meeting.
The Hindu, 9-9-1944, and The Hitavada, 8-9-1944

494. LETTER TO MASTERJI MAHARAJ
S EVAGRAM , W ARDHA ,

September 7, 1944
4

MASTERJI MAHARAJ ,

Thank you for the cheque you have sent for the Kasturba
Memorial Fund. I hope to see you some day.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2167

1

The students, led by Hari Prasanna Mishra, General Secretary of the All-India
Hindu Students’ Federation, picketed Gandhiji’s hut in Sevagram.
2
These two sentences are from The Hitavada.
3
ibid
4
One of the gurus of the Radhaswami sect of Hindus
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

365

495. LETTER TO BAGARJI
September 7, 1944
BHAI BAGARJI,

I send herewith a letter 1 for Masterji Maharaj acknowledging
receipt of his cheque. I have written this with the pen you gave me.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2162

496. A CIRCULAR LETTER
S EVAGRAM ,

September 8, 1944
BHAI,

Day before yesterday, that is, on the night of the 6th, Shri
Deshpandeji told me that Jajuji is not fit for the post of Secretary as he
does not have administrative, that is, management talent although he is
a saintly man. He can hold the highest position in a society of saints.
In support of his opinion he told me that the Provincial Secretaries or
Agents of the A.I.S.A., who have returned from here, have all gone
back disappointed and helpless. Therefore, hefears that the A.I.S.A. is
going to die under its own weight. If this is true, as head of the
A.I.S.A., I have to give it a second thought because my experience is
completely contrary to Deshpandeji’s opinion. My experience tells
me that true saintliness implies efficiency, and Jajuji is a living
embodiment of this truth. I have, therefore, decided to have Jajuji’s
administrative talents verified. I have already talked to Jajuji and he
also agrees to this. If you have accepted Jajuji as Secretary out of
despair and only to please me, you have not been truly faithful to the
A.I.S.A. and if Deshpande’s prophecy comes true and the A.I.S.A.
comes to nought, in my opinion, it will not be on account of Jajuji but
due to your own weakness. How can any secretary, however able,
attain success without the whole-hearted co-operation of his
subordinates? The A.I.S.A. has no power to compel any one. Its
strength lies in the whole-hearted co-operation among all its office1

366

Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

bearers, i.e., their mutual love and fellow-feeling. If this is lacking
nothing avails. Please, therefore, let me have your true opinion
whether Jajuji is unfit for the secretaryship, whether he lacks
administrative talents, whether you have reluctantly accepted his
candidature. If your answer is in support of Deshpandeji’s statement,
please write to me substantiating your objections with concrete
instances so that I can decide the course of my duty.
Kindly send an early reply.
Yours,
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

497. LETTER TO T. B. SAPRU
ON THE WAY TO BOMBAY,

September 8, 1944
DEAR SIR TEJ,

I have your letter. I am going in hope but without expectation.
So if I return empty-handed, I shall not be disappointed. I hope you
will find the patient substantially on the ro[ad] to full recovery.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhi-Sapru Papers. Courtesy: National Library, Calcutta. Also G.N. 7575

498. LETTER TO BISHOP OF RANGOON
ON THE TRAIN FOR BOMBAY,

September 9, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your kind letter bringing me your good wishes. I am in
God’s good hands. I fancy I understand what you mean.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
R T. R EVD . B ISHOP OF R ANGOON
HOTEL C ECIL
DELHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

367

499. LETTER TO SECRETARY, KASTURBA MEMORIAL
FUND
BIRLA HOUSE,
BOMBAY,

September 9, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I am enclosing herewith a scheme outlining the curriculum for
the education of women for your consideration.
Yours sincerely,

S ECRETARY
KASTURBA NATIONAL MEMORIAL F UND C OMMITTEE
S CINDIA HOUSE
BOMBAY
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

500. LETTER TO SUDHIR GHOSH
BIRLA HOUSE,
BOMBAY,

September 9, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

Gandhiji desires me to thank you for your letter of the 29th August enclosing a
letter from Mr. Graham White.
You certainly can come to Sevagram with Mrs. Ghosh on Gandhiji’s return
after the meeting with Quaid-e-Azam Jinnah.
Yours sincerely,

P YARELAL
S RI S UDHIR GHOSH
TISCO HOTEL
JAMSHEDPUR
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

368

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

501. TALK WITH M. A. JINNAH 1
BOMBAY,

September 9, 1944
It was a test of my patience. . . . I am amazed at my own
patience. However, it was a friendly talk.
His (Jinnah’s) contempt for your Formula (Rajaji Formula) and
his eontempt for you is staggering. You rose in my estimation that
you could have talked to him for all those hours and that you should
have taken the trouble to draw up that formula.
He says you have accepted his demand and so should I. I said,
“I endorse Rajaji’s Formula and you can call it Pakistan if you like.”
He talked of the Lahore Resolution2 . I said, “I have not studied it and
I do not want to talk about it. Let us talk about Rajaji’s Formula and
you can point out any flaws that you find there.”
In the middle of the talk he came back to the old ghost: “I
thought you had come here as a Hindu, as a representative of the
Hindu Congress.” I said, “No, I have come here neither as a Hindu
nor as a representative of the Congress. I have come here as an
individual. You can talk to me as an individual or as the President of
the League, whichever way you prefer. If you had agreed with Rajaji
and accepted his Formula, you and he would have gone before your
respective organizations and pleaded with them to accept it. That is
why Rajaji came to you. You would then have placed it before other
parties, too, in the same way. Now you and I have to do it.” He said
he was the President of the League. Where was the basis for a talk if I
was there representing nobody except myself? Who was to deliver the
goods? I was the same man as he had found me in 1939. There was
no change in me. I almost felt like saying, “Yes, I am the same man
and since you think it is no use talking to me, I will go away.” But I
resisted the temptation. I told him, “Is it not worth your while to
convert an individual? I am the same man no doubt. You can change
my views if you can and I will support you whole-heartedly.” “Yes, I

1

The meeting lasted three and a quarter hours. Gandhiji reported the talk to C.
Rajagopalachari.
2
Of March 23, 1940; vide Appendix “Resolution Passed by All-India Muslim
League”, 23-3-1940.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

369

know, if I can convert you, you will be my Ali1 ,” he said. 2
He said I should concede Pakistan and he would go the whole
length with me. He would go to jail, he would even face bullets. I said,
“I will stand by your side to face them.” “You may not,” he said.
“Try me,” I replied.
We came back to the Formula. He wants Pakistan now, not after
independence. “We will have independence for Pakistan and
Hindustan,” he said. “We should come to an agreement and then go
to the Government and ask them to accept it, force them to accept our
solution.” I said I could never be a party to that. I could never ask the
Britishers to impose partition on India. “If you all want to separate, I
can’t stop you. I have not got the power to compel you and I would
not use it if I had.” He said, “The Muslims want Pakistan. The
League represents the Muslims and it wants separation.” I said, “I
agree the League is the most powerful Muslim organization. I might
even concede that you as its President represent the Muslims of India,
but that does not mean that all Muslims want Pakistan. Put it to the
vote of all the inhabitants of the area and see.” He said, “Why should
you ask non-Muslims?” I said, “You cannot possibly deprive a
section of the population of its vote. You must carry them with you,
and if you are in the majority why should you be afraid?” I told him
of what Kiron Shankar Roy had said to me “If the worst comes to the
worst, we in Bengal will all go in Pakistan, but for goodness sake do
not partition Bengal. Do not vivisect it.”
“If you are in majority,” I said, “you will have your choice. I
know it is a bad thing for you, but if you want it all the same you will
have it. But that will be an adjustment between you and me. It cannot
occur while the Britishers are here.”
He began to cross-examine me on the various clauses of the
Formula. I said to him, “If you want clarification of those things, is it
not better to have it from the author of the Formula?” “Oh, no”, he
did not want that. I said, “What is the use of your cross-examining
me?”
He recollected himself. “Oh, no. I am not cross-examining
you”, and then added: “I have been a lawyer all my life and my
1

A cousin and son-in-law of the Prophet. He was among the first to accept the
Prophet’s message.
2
According to the source, Gandhiji observed afterwards: “It was a most
revealing remark. I was meeting the prophet of Pakistan looking for his Ali!”

370

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

manner may have suggested that I was cross-examining you.” I asked
him to reduce to writing his objections to the Formula. He was
disinclined. “Must I do so?” he asked. “Yes, I would like you to.”
He agreed.
In the end he said, “I would like to come to an agreement with
you.” I answered, “You remember that I have said that we should
meet not to separate till we had come to an agreement. He said, yes, he
agreed. I suggested, “Should we put that also in our statement?” 1 He
said, “No, better not. Nevertheless that will be the understanding
between us and the cordiality and friendliness of our talk will be
reflected in our public utterances, too.”2
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book I, pp. 84-6

502. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS3
September 9, 1944
“We have had frank and friendly talks and we are resuming our talks on
Monday at 5.30 p.m. Tomorrow is the 21st day of Ramzan 4 and, therefore, all
Mussalmans have to observe it. And I have, therefore, requested Mr. Gandhi to oblige
me not to have a meeting on the 21st day of Ramzan.” Here Gandhiji interrupted and
said:

No obliging; willing to surrender.
Mahatma, Vol. VI, p. 341

1

Vide the following item.
After Gandhiji gave this report to C. Rajagopalachari the following
conversation took place:
RAJAJI : Do you think he wants a settlement?
GANDHIJI: I am not certain. He thought he probably did.
RAJAJI : Then you will get it through.
GANDHIJI: Yes. . . . If the right word comes to me.
3
At the end of the first day’s talks, M. A. Jinnah, on behalf of Gandhiji and
himself, dictated this statement. Earlier, in reply to a question by a newsman whether
he had brought anything from Jinnah, Gandhiji had said: “Only flowers.”
4
Ninth month of the Hijri year in which Muslims observe fast during daytime.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

371

503. LETTER TO VICEROY
C AMP “BIRLA HOUSE”, BOMBAY,

September 10, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I wrote1 to you on July 17, 1944, asking you kindly to send a
letter of same date addressed to the Prime Minister. May I know
whether that letter was sent as requested? I am asking because so far I
have had no acknowledgement of my letter.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
H. E. THE VICEROY
VICEROY’S HOUSE
NEW DELHI
From a copy: C.W. 10500. Courtesy: India Office Library, London

504. LETTER TO WANDA DYNOWSKA
BOMBAY,

September 10, 1944
DEAR UMA 2

All I can say about the affliction through which Poland is
passing is that no small nation of Europe is to expect any real help
from the Allied Powers in spite of their professions to the contrary.
You know I proposed a solution. It was summarily rejected. Let us
rely upon God, the Rock of Ages.
With love,
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1206. Also C.W. 5101. Courtesy: Wanda Dynowska

1
2

372

Vide “Letter to Winston Churchill”, 17-7-1944.
ibid.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

505. TELEGRAM TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BOMBAY,

September 11, 1944
NARANDAS GANDHI
R ASHTRIYASHALA
R AJKOT
KAMALNAYAN
KEEP

HIM

NOT

COMING
LONGER

WITH
THAN

THREE

JANAKIDEVI[’S]

MESSAGE1 .

DAYS.

BAPU
From a microfilm: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8614. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

506. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
September 11, 1944
DEAR QUAID-E-AZAM,

I received your letter2 yesterday at 3.30 p.m. I was in the midst
of appointments. I hasten to reply at the earliest opportunity.
I have said in my letter to you, it is implied in the Rajaji Formula
and I have stated publicly that I have approached you as an
individual. My life mission has been Hindu-Muslim unity, which I
want for its own sake, but which is not to be achieved without the
foreign ruling power being ousted. Hence the first condition of the
exercise of the right of self-determination is achieving independence
by the joint action of all the parties and groups composing India. If
such joint action is unfortunately impossible, then too. I must fight
with the assistance of such elements as can be brought together. I am
glad, therefore, that you did not break off our talks when I refused to
assume or accept a representative capacity. Of course I am pledged to
use all the influence I may have with the Congress to ratify my
agreement with you. May I remind you that the Rajaji Formula was
designed in the first instance for your acceptance, and submission
thereafter to the League?
It is true that I said an ocean separated you and me in outlook.
1
Vide also telegram and letters to the addressee, “Telegram to Narandas
Gandhi”, 5-9-1944; “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 6-9-1944 and 10/12-9-1944.
2
Dated September 10; vide Appendix “Letter from M. A. Jinnah”, 10-9-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

373

But that had no reference to the Lahore Resolution of the League.
The Lahore Resolution is indefinite. Rajaji has taken from it the
substance and given it a shape.
Now for the points raised by you:
1.
I have already answered this in the foregoing.
2. The constitution will be framed by the Provisional
Government contemplated in the Formula or an authority specially set
up by it after the British power is withdrawn. The independence
contemplated is of the whole of India as it stands.
The basis for the formation of Provisional Interim Government
will have to be agreed to between the League and the Congress.
3. The Commission will be appointed by the Provisional
Government. “Absolute majority” means a clear majority over
non-Muslim elements as in Sind, Baluchistan or the Frontier Province.
The form of plebiscite and the franchise must be a matter for
discussion.
4. “All parties” means, the parties interested.
5. “Mutual agreement” means agreement between contracting
parties. “Safeguarding defence, etc.,” means for me a central or joint
board of control. Safeguarding means safeguarding against all who
may put the common interests in jeopardy.
6. The power is to be transferred to the nation, that is, to the
Provisional Government. The Formula contemplates peaceful transfer
by the British Government. So far as I am concerned I would like the
transfer to take place as early as possible.1
Yours sincerely

M. K. GANDHI

The Hindu, 29-9-1944

507. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
September 11, 1944
2

Speaking in Hindustani at the end of the prayers at Bombay, on September
11, Gandhiji as usual appealed for contributions to the Harijan Fund. Referring next
to the exuberant affection of the crowd on the previous evening he said that after
1
For the addressee’s reply, vide Appendix “Letter from M. A. Jinnah”,
11-9-1944.
2
The Hindustani version is not available.

374

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

years of training such exhibition was a reflection on the good name of Bombay. It
was a bad sign. But for the precautions taken on the spur of the moment he and some
of the sisters accompanying him might have been hurt and so too Mr. Shantikumar1 .
And what is more, in the confusion, the latter might have easily lost the Harijan purse
that he was carrying. They knew how jealous he was of every pie belonging to the
Harijans. Therefore he requested the public never again to repeat the performance of
the day before. Why should the volunteers have to form a cordon around him? He did
not want to have any guard. God alone was his guard. He was doing God’s work and he
had faith that so long as He required his services He would protect him.
Referring to his meeting with Mr. Jinnah, he said, he knew how eager they
must be to be acquainted with the progress of the talks. It was a natural eagerness on
their part which he would like to satisfy as far as possible consistently with the
interest of the cause which they all shared with him in common.
All that he could say at the present stage was that Jinnah Saheb and he had met
as old friends on Saturday (September 9), and again that day (Monday). He added that
they would be meeting again the next day from 10.30 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 5.30 to
7 p.m. This would leave them a little time to attend to other work and to digest the
substance of the talks. They fully realized what a heavy responsibility rested on their
shoulders. They knew that millions were watching the talks and were anxious that a
settlement should be arrived at which would subserve the interests not of any
particular group or community, but of the whole of India. Gandhiji said:

Our goal is the attainment of independence for the whole of
India. It is for that we pray and are pledged to lay down our lives.
Jinnah Saheb and I have only God between us as witness. My constant
prayer these days is that He may so guide my speech that not a word
might escape my lips so as to hurt the feelings of Jinnah Saheb or
damage the cause that is dear to us both. I am sure the same is the case
with Jinnah Saheb. He told me today, “If we part without coming to
an agreement, we shall proclaim bankruptcy of wisdom on our part.”
What is more, the hopes of millions of our countrymen will be dashed
to pieces. Today the eyes of all the oppressed people of the world are
on us. We therefore are fully alive to our responsibility and are
straining every nerve to come to a settlement. But we realize that
ultimately the result lies in God’s good hands. You should therefore
all pray that He may guide us and give us wisdom to serve the cause
of India.
An assurance that he would not sacrifice the interests of a single individual or

1

Shantikumar N. Morarjee

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

375

community was given by Mahatma Gandhi.1
In conclusion, Mahatma Gandhi appealed to the Press to put a curb on their
inventiveness and not to give free rein to their imagination. Since neither he nor Mr.
Jinnah was opening his lips to anybody, there could be no question of leakage.
Gandhi-Jinnah Talks, pp. 38-9, and The Hindu, 13-9-1944

508. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BOMBAY,

September 10/12, 1944
CHI. NARANDAS,

I have your letter. I understand what you say. I like your
suggestion. Give on loan to the Kathiawar Khadi Mandal the money
not already invested. When a new association is formed, it may make
its own arrangement. Make some suggestions regarding the new
association. Consult friends there.
Janakibehn will not be able to go. Chi. Kamalnayan is going
with her message. Do not detain him for more than a day or two. He is
sparing time from an extremely tight schedule. I hope your
programme will succeed. If the programme does not succeed so well
there this time as in the previous years, console yourself with the
thought that it is your own venture that has now become a
country-wide movement. If, therefore, your little rivulet, which was the
source, looks small in comparison, you should not feel bad about it.
Whether I will live long enough to see the National Fund put to good
use or whether others who follow me will manage it in a worthy
manner, is entirely in God’s hands. For us one step is enough.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
September 12, 1944
On further reflection, I feel that our real money is neither gold
nor silver nor copper, but yarn. And at present we have no rival in
regard to that. How nice would it be if the quantity this time is much
larger than before! I should be happy if in the end you become the
1

376

This paragraph is from The Hindu.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

first mint of yarn. Yarn is produced at many places. But not all of
them become mints. Think what makes a mint what it is.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8613. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

509. TALK WITH M. A. JINNAH 1
September 12, 1944
He drew a very alluring picture of the Government of
Pakistan. It would be a perfect democracy. I asked him if he had not
told me that democracy did not suit Indian conditions. He did not
remember it. He asked me to tell him what he had said. So I told him
all that and said that I might have misunderstood him. In that case he
should correct me. But when I repeated in detail what he had said, he
could not say no. He said, yes, he had said that, but that was with
regard to imposed democracy.
Then he said, “Do you think it is a question of religious
minority with us?” I said, “Yes.” If not, he should tell me what it was.
He harangued. I won’t repeat all that here. I asked him what would
happen to the other minorities in Pakistan: Sikhs, Christians,
Depressed Classes, etc. He said they would be part of Pakistan. I asked
him if he meant joint electorates. He knew I was coming to it. He said,
yes, he would like them to be a part of the whole. He would explain
the advantages of joint electorates, but if they wanted separate
electorates they would have it. Sikhs would have Gurumukhi if they
wanted and the Pakistan Government would give them financial aid. I
asked, “What about Jats?” At first he pooh-poohed the idea. Then he
said, “If they want it, they will also have it. They will have separate
existence if they want it.” I said, “What about Christians? They also
want some place where they are in a majority and where they can rule,
as for instance in Travancore?” He said that was a problem for the
Hindus. I said supposing Travancore was in Pakistan? He said he
would give it to them. He cited the instance of Newfoundland. The
rest of the talk was nothing. I am to continue exploring his mind.2
GANDHIJI:

Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book I, p. 86

1
2

Gandhiji reported the talk to C. Rajagopalachari.
For the discussion which followed with Rajaji, vide the following item.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

377

510. DISCUSSION WITH C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
BOMBAY,

September 12, 1944
RAJAJI :

Find out what he1 wants.

GANDHIJI:

Yes, that is what I am doing. I am to prove from his
own mouth that the whole of the Pakistan proposition is absurd. I
think he does not want to break. On my part I am not going to be in a
hurry. But he can’t expect me to endorse an undefined Pakistan.
RAJAJI :

Do you think he will give up the claim?
GANDHIJI: He has to, if there is to be a

settlement. He wants a
settlement, but what he wants he does not know. I want to show him
that your Formula is the only thing that he can reasonably ask for.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book I, pp. 86-7

511. LETTER TO AHMED NAWAZ JUNG
[After September 12, 1944] 2
JANAB NAWAB BAHADUR,

I have your English letter as also a Hindi translation of the holy
Koran. I have with me the Hindi translation by Hasan Nizami Saheb. I
shall try to compare both the translations. If you can, please send
three more copies.
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

512. TELEGRAM TO DR. SHAUKAT ANSARI
BOMBAY,

September 13, 1944
DOCTOR S HAUKAT ANSARI
R AJPUR R OAD
DELHI
PLEASE
LOSS.

CONVEY

FARID

MY

CONDOLENCES

OVER

HIS

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

M. A. Jinnah
This draft letter was written ill reply to the addressee’s letter dated September
12, 1944.
2

378

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

513. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
September 13, 1944
After the morning session of the talks, as Jinnah and Gandhiji emerged . . . the
waiting group of reporters asked the usual question: “Anything for us?” The leaders
halted and . . . Gandhiji spoke:

I have nothing, but I will go for you. Yesterday you read
something in our faces. Here are we both. I would like you not to read
anything in our faces except hope and nothing but hope.
At this stage Gandhiji turned to Mr. Jinnah and asked:

Am I right? Have you seen the papers this morning?
“Why bother,” answered Mr. Jinnah.

They have written so much terrible.
Gandhiji turned round to the Pressmen again and said:

You do not know what people who are bent on mischief will do.
All of you know both of us. You should leave us absolutely alone or
if you can read our hearts and faces you must submit what you have
written to one of us. Otherwise you should be asbolutely silent if you
want to serve India and humanity.
The Bombay Chronicle, 14-9-1944

514. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
September 14, 1944
DEAR QUAID-E-AZAM,

I have your letter of the 13th instant. 1 I understood from our
talks that you were in no hurry for my answer I was, therefore, taking
the matter in a leisurely fashion, even hoping that as our talks
proceeded and as cordiality increased, mutual clarification would
come of itself and that we would only have to record our final
agreement. But I understand and appreciate the other viewpoint. We
should take nothing for granted. I should clarify your difficulties in
understanding the Rajaji Formula and you should do likewise
regarding yours, i.e., the Muslim League Lahore Resolution of 1940.
1

In his letter the addressee had complained that he had not received Gandhiji’s
reply to his letter of September 11.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

379

With reference to the Lahore Resolution, as agreed between us I
shall deal with it in a separate letter.
Perhaps at the end of our discussion, we shall discover that Rajaji
not only has not put the Lahore Resolution out of shape and mutilated
it but has given it substance and form.
Indeed, in view of your dislike of the Rajaji Formula, I have, at
any rate for the moment, put it out of my mind and I am
concentrating on the Lahore Resolution in the hope of finding a
ground for mutual agreement.
So much for the first paragraph of your letter.
As to the second, I do hold that unless we oust the third party we
shall not be able to live at peace with one another. That does not mean
that I may not make an effort to find ways and means of establishing
a living peace between us.
You ask for my conception of the basis for a provisional interim
government. I would have told you if I had any scheme in mind. I
imagine that if we two can agree it would be for us to consult the other
parties. I can say this, that any provisional government to inspire
confidence at the present moment must represent all parties. When
that moment arrives, I shall have been replaced by some authoritative
person, though you will have me always at your beck and call when
you have converted me or I you, or by mutual conversion we have
become one mind functioning through two bodies.
As to the third point, the provisional government, being the
appointing authority, will give effect to the findings of the
Commission. This I thought was implied in my previous answer.
Rajaji tells me that ‘absolute majority’ is used in his Formula in
the same sense as it is used in ordinary legal parlance wherever more
than two groups are dealt with. I cling to my own answer. But you will
perhaps suggest a third meaning and persuade me to accept it.
The form of the plebiscite and franchise must be left to be
decided by the provisional interim government unless we decide it
now. I should say it should be by adult suffrage of all the inhabitants
of the Pakistan area.
As to the fourth, ‘all parties’ means you and I and everyone else
holding views on the question at issue will and should seek by
peaceful persuasion to influence public opinion as is done where
democracy functions wholly or in part.
380

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

As to the fifth, supposing that the result of the plebiscite is in
favour of partition, the provisional government will draft the treaty
and agreements as regards the administration of matters of common
interest, but the same has to be confirmed and ratified by the
governments of the two States. The machinery required for the
settlement and administration of matters of common interest will, in
the first instance, be planned by the interim government, but subsequently will be matter for settlement between the two governments acting
through the agencies appointed by each for that purpose.
As to the sixth, I hope the foregoing makes superfluous any
further reply.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Hindu, 29-9-1944

515. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
September 15, 1944
DEAR QUAID-E-AZAM,

This is in terms of our talks of Wednesday the 13th instant.
For the moment I have shunted the Rajaji Formula and with
your assistance am applying my mind very seriously to the famous
Lahore Resolution of the Muslim League.
You must admit that the Resolution itself makes no reference to
the two nations theory. In the course of our discussions, you have
passionately pleaded that India contains two nations, i.e., Hindus and
Muslims, and that the latter have their homelands in India as the
former have theirs. The more our argument progresses, the more
alarming your picture appears to me. It would be alluring if it was
true. But my fear is growing that it is wholly unreal. I find no parallel
in history for a body of converts and their descendants claiming to be
a nation apart from the parent stock. If India was one nation before
the advent of Islam, it must remain one in spite of the change of faith
of a very large body of her children.
You do not claim to be a separate nation by right of conquest,
but by reason of acceptance of Islam. Will the two nations become
1

For the addressee’s reply, vide Appendix “Letter from M. A. Jinnah”,
14-9-1944.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

381

one if the whole of India accepted Islam? Will Bengalis, Oriyas,
Andhras, Tamilians, Maharashtrians, Gujaratis, etc., cease to have their
special characteristics if all of them become converts to Islam? These
have all become one politically because they are subject to oneforeign
control. They are trying today to throw off that subjection.
You seem to have introduced a new test of nationhood. If I
accept it, I would have to subscribe to many more claims and face an
insoluble problem. The only real, though awful, test of our
nationhood arises out of our common political subjection. If you and
I throw off this subjection by our combined effort, we shall be born a
politically free nation out of our travail. If by then we have not learnt
to prize our freedom, we may quarrel among ourselves and, for want
of a common master holding us together in his iron grip, seek to split
up into small groups or nationalities. There will be nothing to prevent
us from descending to that level and we shall not have to go in search
of a master. There are many claimants to the throne that never
remains vacant.
With this background, I shall present you with my difficulty in
accepting your Resolution.
I. Pakistan is not in the Resolution. Does it bear the original
meaning Punjab, Afghanistan, Kashmir, Sind and Baluchistan, out of
which the name was mnemonically formed? If not what is it?
2. Is the goal of Pakistan pan-Islam?
3. What is it that distinguishes an Indian Muslim from every
other Indian, if not his religion? Is he different from a Turk or an
Arab?
4. What is the Connotation of the word “Muslims” in the
Resolution under discussion? Does it mean the Muslims of India of
geography or of the Pakistan to be?
5. Is the Resolution addressed to the Muslims by way of
education, or to the inhabitants of the whole of India by way of
appeal, or to the foreign ruler as an ultimatum?
6. Are the constituents in the two zones to constitute
“Independent States”, an undefined number in each zone?
7. Is the demarcation to take place during the pendency of
British Rule?
8. If the answer to the last question is in the affirmative, the
proposal must be accepted first by Britain and then imposed upon
382

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

India, not evolved from within by the free will of the people of India.
9. Have you examined the position and satisfied yourself that
these “Independent States” will be materially and otherwise benefited
by being split up into fragments?
10. Please satisfy me that these Independent Sovereign States
will not become a collection of poor States, a menace to themselves
and to the rest of India.
11. Pray show me by facts and figures or otherwise how the
independence and welfare of India as a whole can be brought about
by the acceptance of the Resolution?
12. How are the Muslims under the Princes to be disposed of as
a result of this scheme?
13. What is your definition of “minorities”?
14. Will you please define the “adequate, effective and
mandatory safeguards” for minorities referred to in the second part
of the Resolution?
15. Do you not see that the Lahore Resolution contains only a bare
statement of the objective and does not give any idea as to the means
to be adopted for the execution of the idea and the concrete
corollaries thereof? For instance: (a) Are the people in the regions
falling under the plan to have any voice in the matter of separation
and, if so, how is it to be ascertained? (b) What is the provision for
Defence and similar matters of common concern contemplated in the
Lahore Resolution? (c) There are many groups of Muslims who have
continuously expressed dissent from the policy of the League. While I
am prepared to accept the preponderating influence and position of
the League and have approached you for that very reason, is it not our
joint duty to remove their doubts and carry them with us by making
them feel that they and their supporters have not been practically
disfranchised? (d) Does this not lead again to placing the Resolution
of the League before the people of the zones concerned as a whole
for acceptance?
As I write this letter and imagine the working of the Resolution
in practice, I see nothing but ruin for the whole of India. Believe me, I
approach you as a seeker. Though I represent nobody but myself, I
aspire to represent all the inhabitants of India, for I realize in my own
person their misery and degradation, which is their common lot,
irrespective of class, caste or creed. I know that you have acquired a
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

383

unique hold on the Muslim masses. I want you to use your influence
for their total welfare, which must include the rest.
In this hastily written letter, I have only given an inkling of my
difficulty.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Hindu, 29-9-1944

516. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
September 15, 1944
DEAR QUAID-E-AZAM,

I have yours of the 14th instant,1 received at 9.40 a.m.
I woke up at 3 a.m. today to finish my promised letter 2 on the
Lahore Resolution.
There is no mistake about the date, for I wrote in answer to your
reminder of the 13th instant.
Independence does mean as envisaged in the A.I.C.C.
Resolution of 1942. But it cannot be on the basis of a united India. If
we come to a settlement, it would be on the basis of the settlement,
assuming, of course, that it accrues general acceptance in the country.
The process will be somewhat like this. We reach by joint effort
independence for India as it stands. India becoming free will proceed
to demarcation, plebiscite and partition if the people concerned vote
for partition. All this is implied in the Rajaji Formula.
As to the provisional interim government, I am afraid I cannot
carry my answer any further than I have done. Though I have no
scheme for the provisional government, if you have one in connection
with the Lahore Resolution, which also, I presume, requires an interim
government, we can discuss it.
The Formula was framed by Rajaji in good faith. I accepted it in
equal good faith. The hope was that you would look at it with favour.
We still think it to be the best in the circumstances. You and I have to
put flesh on it, if we can. I have explained the process we have to go
through. You have no objection to it. Perhaps, you want to know how
I would form the provisional government if I was invited thereto. If I
1
2

384

Vide Appendix “Letter from M. A. Jinnah”, 14-9-1944.
Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

was in that unenviable position, I would see all the claimants and
endeavour to satisfy them. My co-operation will be available in that
task.
I can give you full satisfaction about your inquiry, “What I
would like to know would be, what will be the powers of such a
provisional interim government, how it will be formed, to whom it will
be responsible.” The provisional interim government will be
responsible to the elected members of the present Assembly or a
newly elected one. It will have all the powers less that of the
Commander-in-Chief’during the war and full powers thereafter. It will
be the authority to give effect to the agreement that may be arrived at
between the League and the Congress and ratified by the other parties.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Hindu, 29-9-1944

517. LETTER TO P. C. JOSHI
BOMBAY,

September 15, 1944
DEAR JOSHI,

Many thanks for your letter1 .
I do not mind the warmth into which you have been betrayed. I
must apologize for the offence my language has caused you. You will
believe me when I tell you that I wrote in all good faith. I could not
come close to the party if I did not disclose even my prejudices. I had
expected appreciation for my friendly approach and frankness.
Nevertheless I must continue my study of the party and its leaders.
I have accepted your advice. I placed your letter in Shri
Bhulabhai’s hands and asked him to instruct and guide me.I shall not
worry you directly with letters. I shall try to know you through the
common friends you mention. Sarojini Devi is with Shri Bhulabhai.
Rajaji is with me. I shall show your letter to him when it comes back
from Shri Bhulabhai.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Correspondence between M. K. Gandhi and P. C. Joshi, p. 36

1

Dated September 12, which was in reply to Gandhiji’s letter dated July 30;
Vide “Letter to P. C. Joshi”, 30-7-1944.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

385

518. TELEGRAM TO G. D. BIRLA
BOMBAY,

September 16, 1944
GHANSHYAMDAS BIRLA
BIRLAHOUSE
BENARES
MY
DEFINITE
WISH
YOU
SHORTEN
STAY THERE
IF

SHOULD
I WANT

GO
MUSSOORIE.
YOU.

YOU

WILL

BAPU
From a copy: C.W. 7869. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

519. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
BOMBAY,

September 16, 1944
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

I read your letter addressed to Manilal. I have some free time
today and, therefore, am writing letters.
I have written to Sharda and told her that she should not put off
her visit for fear of public criticism.
Your idea of disbanding the Ashram seems right. We should let
ourselves be seen as we are. We are likely to make better progress as
individuals after disbanding the Ashram. Even after it is disbanded,
those who are one at heart may stay together and jointly take up some
activity. Those who wish to stay on in Sevagram may do so.
Everybody may leave in an orderly manner and after due thought.
Talk and exchange views among yourselves along these lines.
I understand what you say regarding me. It should involve no
burden on Chhaganlal and Kashi. Neither of them should have to join
directly in the cooking.
This letter may be read by all concerned.
I hope Shakaribehn is perfectly calm. You must have thought
about the problem of her training. It must not be neglected.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
If Lajjavati’s Patel arrives there, send him over here.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10644

386

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

520. LETTER TO MUNNALAL AND KANCHAN SHAH
September 16, 1944
CHI. MUNNALAL AND KANCHAN,

My return has been delayed. If I had definitely known that I
would be staying here so long, I would have brought Kanchan with
me. Still, if she had come, God knows what she would have done
because I hardly talk with anyone. She would not have been able to
serve me either. The chief service is being done by Dinshawji, and the
rest by Manilal. From that point of view, therefore, it is all to the good
that Kanchan stayed there. Both of you got an opportunity for
introspection.
I hope you meet Bhai Patil often. His health must have
improved.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8385. Also C.W. 7178. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

521. LETTER TO SHARDA G. CHOKHAWALA
BOMBAY,

September 16, 1944
CHI. BABUDI,

A man had gone to receive you [at the station]. It’s a pity your
husband’s younger brother has passed away. May God help both of
you and your family to bear [the loss]. The cycle of life and death is
bound to go on. If you are refraining from coming for fear of public
opinion let me tell you that both of you have passed beyond all this
and need not yield to this false sense of shame. Mourning of this kind
is futile. It should not come in the way of our routine. You are not
going to pay me a visit for pleasure. It is your duty to come to me,
especially on an occasion like this. I shall surely be here till Tuesday,
if not longer.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

387

522. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
September 16, 1944
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

I hope you are at peace. This is a time of severe trial for all of
us. Think Over what must be done now, and if possible be ready with
the answers before my return.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4447

523. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
September 16, 1944
Gandhiji said that at prayer time there was usually great rush. People came to
him to give money for the Harijan Fund and to take autographs. Due to this, children
and weak persons experienced considerable difficulty every day. Gandhiji, therefore,
said that only those who wanted autographs or who wanted to give him money should
stay behind while the rest should leave the prayer ground immediately the prayers
were over.
Secondly he said that the moment he started moving, everybody rushed after
him. This caused trouble. Women and children were put to inconvenience. At Juhu
there was a lot of space. Though there was not as much space here, there was enough.
There was no need to crowd. If nobody crowded and followed him, people would be
able to go away from the prayer ground soon. They would be happy and he would be
comfortable. He would also be able to collect money and give autographs at leisure.
Thirdly Gandhiji said that the prayers began with a Buddhist invocation followed by
two minutes’ silence. The silence was an integral part of the prayer. He found people
talking during the silence. When silence was a part of prayer they should close their
eyes and contemplate. Nobody should talk. This was the proper behaviour and correct
discipline. Everyone should observe this discipline.

The Bombay Chronicle, 17-9-1944

388

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

524. LETTER TO SIR EVAN M. JENKINS
BIRLA HOUSE,
MOUNT P LEASANT R OAD ,
MALABAR HILL , B OMBAY,

September 17, 1944
DEAR SIR EVAN,

I thank you for your letter of 13th instant1 . This is the first time
in my experience that an important letter has miscarried. Here are
copies of the missing Communications.2
Though the psychological moment has passed, I attach very
great importance to my letter which was written in answer to a deep
heart searching. Therefore even at this late hour I should like my
letter to be sent to the Prime Minister.3
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S IR EVAN M. J ENKINS , K. C. S. I.
VICEROY’S C AMP
INDIA
From a photostat: C.W. 10501. Courtesy: India Office Library, London

1

Intimating that Gandhiji’s letter dated July 17 to the Viceroy had not been
received and requesting Gandhiji to send a copy of it as well as the enclosure
2
Vide “Letter to Winston Churchill”, 17-7-1944.
3
G. E. B. Abell in his letter dated September 20 informed Gandhiji that the
letter was forwarded to the Prime Minister by “Fast air-mail”.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

389

525. LETTER TO VISHWAS N. NAIK
BOMBAY,

September 17, 1944
DEAR NAIK,

The matter you refer to has been fixed up. 1 I return Shri
Munshi’s letter.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

526. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September 17, 1944
CHI. NARANDAS,

Your programme seems to have succeeded all right. Send me a
report of the work there. How did Kamalnayan acquit himself. A letter
from Kamalabai is enclosed. Fix a monthly allowance of Rs. 30 for
her, with effect from September.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8615. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

527. LETTER PURUSHOTTAMDAS TANDON TO
September 17, 1944
BHAI PURUSHOTTAMDASJI,

Today I have some leisure, so I am going through the file of old
letters. Your letter is there. You must have tried a truss for your
hernia. How could a man like you get hernia? Or does anyone
develop hernia without provocation?
I did not mean what you interpret from my telegram. I had
1

The addressee had requested Gandhiji to write a letter to K. M. Munshi
permitting him to appear in the trial of his elder brother Vasant Naik, M.L.A., on
September 21, 1944.

390

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

written only about the matter of health. However, the opinion you
have sent will prove helpful to me. Our talks are going on. I cannot
say what the outcome will be.
BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

528. LETTER TO PUNDALIK KATAGDE
September 17, 1944
BHAI PUNDALIK,

I have your letter. I do believe that those who have committed
mistakes should admit them only if they are convinced that it is their
duty to do so, and not because I want them to. The call for observance
of duty must come from within. Hence I will not issue a public
statement. It would be misunderstood.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4226

529. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
[Before September 18, 1944] 1
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

I got your letter which I have passed on to Narandas for his
information. It would have saved me trouble if you had first discussed
the matter with him and written to me only in the event of an impasse.
And don’t you have there veterans like Nanalal2 and Nanabhai3 ?
Why be tired of collecting money? An area which has need for a
certain kind of work will always provide funds for the activity. True,
there are different ways of working in an area where such need is not
felt. However, if a worker wants to collect funds in connection with his
work and he enjoys doing it, he also learns through it. If funds were
showered on us from above, we would not have known how to use
them.
1

In the source this letter is placed before those of September 18, 1944.
Nanalal Kalidas Jasani, Secretary and partner of Dr. Pranjivan Mehta and also
member of Saurashtra Harijan Sevak Sangh
3
Nrisimhaprasad Kalidas Bhatt, Principal, Lok Bharati Sanstha, Sanosara
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

391

If Bhagwanji1 gives us work worth Rs. 80 doesn’t it become our
duty to pay him an equal amount?
Are we not at present using the building of the Kelavni Mandal? Why
do they want to evict us from there?
If they did, where would you carry on your work? Why not in
the Dhedh or Bhangi colony?
As for Bhangwanji, he is already used to working in this
manner. You seem to feel embarrassed. Come over whenever you wish
to. Nothing is definite about me, so you can even come over here.
You can accompany me wherever I might proceed from here, in case I
am unable to spare any time here.
I am returning the letter concerning Wankaner.
Blessings from

BAPU
C. J OSHI
HARIJAN S EVAK S ANGH ,
R AJKOT
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

530. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
BOMBAY,

September 18, 1944
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter from Rewari. Devdas has given me your
messages. He adds that your body has become dilapidated. I fear I
have to take the blame for it in part, if not wholly. How I wish I could
also take the credit of repairing it! Why not take a course at Dinshaw’s
or under Shiv Sharma? Both are here at present. S. S. has come
specially. I have not begun his drugs but he is here to induce me.
I have dismissed all fear about your coming under anybody’s
influence. After all we are under God’s guidance.
I am handing Devdas another Rs. 5,000 for you. You shall
certainly have whatever comes for you in future. I am asking
Sevagram to send you the 500.
1

Bhagwanji Purushottam Pandya of Wadhwan, Kathiawar, who was collecting
money for Kasturba Gandhi National Memorial Trust

392

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Tell me how the cows were saved from the butcher’s hand. I
would plead with you to put your body in order before you take up
the serious responsibility of building and running an ashram.1 My
talks are dragging on. God alone knows the end of them. There is one
good thing. I am bearing the strain well. I am keeping fit in spite of
the two enemies within—the hookworm and the amoebae. It is good
too that we are within stone’s throw of each other. Manilal is attending
on me. He is my bed-fellow. Devdas too is here, so is Rajaji.
Khurshedbehn is on the office staff and so is Mridula, I expect,
temporarily. They are all working full speed—not to mention
Pyarelal, Sushila and Kanu. Pyarelal has a shorthand writer and typist.
He is a rare man—silent and hard-working. He is from the extreme
South. Abha is here for medical examination. There is nothing wrong
with her. Manu has come back from Karachi with her father2 .
Pyarelal’s mother and baby 3 are too here. And they are all very
happy. I have given you a full budget of news. Today is the silence
day which I am devoting to clearing arrears.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6500. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9895

531. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
September 18, 1944
CHI. MARY,4

I have seen your letter to Manilal. You seem to be flourishing
there5 . I suppose you are not to be expected to be back in the near
future. I do not mind; you are doing good work there as you were
doing here. Kamala 6 was with me for a few days in Sevagram. She
seems to be quite happy in Khedi and loves her work.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 6084. Also C.W. 3414. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr
1

Vide last footnote of “Letter to Mirabehn”, 3-8-1944.
Jaisukhlal Gandhi
3
Nandini, Pyarelal’s brother’s daughter who had lost her mother
4
The subscription and the superscription are in Hindi.
5
South Africa
6
Margaret Jones, an English friend of the addressee who was carrying on the
khadi work during her absence
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

393

532. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
September 18, 1944
MY DEAR C.R.,

Here is my draft reply 1 unrevised. You may add, amend or do
what you like with it. The reply should go tomorrow as early as
possible.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 2096

533. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
BOMBAY,

September 18, 1944
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

You will see I am in Bombay almost daily meeting M.A.
Jinnah.2 God only knows what the result will be.
I had your wires. Of course, they were withheld from me whilst I
was in detention. Manilal is with me in personal attendance. He
reminds me of old days. He is very restrained. Though I know he
wants me to fix up the Phfinix Trust, he never mentions it. But I have
it constantly in mind. Sita4 is in Sevagram. She is a most lovable girl.
Devdas too is here for the time being.
And how are you faring? Is there the slightest chance of your
coming here for a short stay? Manilal says you are too aged to
undertake the, for you, fatiguing stay in India. Is Hannah nursing you
as devotedly as ever?
Love to you all,
3

UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
1

Presumably, to M. A. Jinnah; vide “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 19-9-1944.
For the purport of Gandhiji’s talks and correspondence with Jinnah during
this period, vide “Talk with M. A. Jinnah”, 9-9-1944 to “Speech at Prayer Meeting”,
27-9-1944 and Appendix “Letter from M. A. Jinnah”, 10-9-1944 to 27-9-1944; ibid.,
“Statement on Proposed Fast” ,29-10-1944; and Gandhiji’s letters of November
1944.
3
In the Aga Khan Palace Jail from August 9, 1942 to May 6, 1944
4
Daughter of Manilal Gandhi
2

394

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

534. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September 18, 1944
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter about Kamalnayan. What you say is correct.
Are you still suffering from any after-effects of your fall? I would be
happy if you thought of paying a visit to Sevagram some time.
What is your opinion regarding the suggestion in Chhaganlal’s letter?
I am enclosing a letter from Mirabehn also. Send me your reply
to her. I will forward it to her. Follow the suggestion made by her.I
am tied up here. I don’t know when I shall be able to get away.
Blessings from

BAPU

Enclosures: 2
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8616. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

535. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
BOMBAY,

[September 18, 1944] 1
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

Your letter is full of news. I have written a letter to Chokhawala2
advising patience.
The arrival of Gokhale is welcome. I am hoping to reach there
on 27th October, when I hope to do something for him. There is no
need for him to lose heart. Sushilabehn has gained a great reputation.
She may succeed with Gokhale too. Where was Govind taking his
meals till now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10612

1
2

From the G.N. Register
Gordhandas Chokhawala, addressee’s son-in-law

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

395

536. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
September 18, 1944
CHI. SUSHILA,

I got your two letters. The country’s condition is exactly as you
describe it to be. But surely God’s hand must be behind this. We shall
have performed our dharma if we acquit ourselves creditably in our
own field and shed lustre on it.
Manilal has devoted himself completely to my service, and is
thus paying his filial debt. Do not worry about him. Sita 1 has
taken her place in the Nayee Talim school at Sevagram. Sumi2 is
with her, as also the daughter of a Bihari gentleman named
Lakshmi Babu. The fourth is Ashadevi’s own daughter. There
are thus four girls in all. Ashadevi has become their mother. She is a
learned woman. According to me this type of education is the
best. All these four girls learn with the other children at Sevagram,
and also teach them a few things. Do not get frightened at this news.
Sita herself voluntarily decided to join this school. But of course it was
I who was responsible for putting the idea in Manilal’s and Sita’s
minds and luring them on. I would have tried to lure you too, if you
had been here. God alone knows, of course, whether you would have
yielded or not. Now that you have learnt to drive a car, how can I keep
pace with you? By all means go ahead.
I have talks with Jinnah Saheb practically daily. Before you get
this letter you will have known the result.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4936

1
2

396

Addressee’s daughters
ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

537. LETTER TO LAKSHMIDAS P. ASAR
September 18, 1944
CHI. LAKSHMIDAS,

I have your two letters, which are both transparent. Replies for
the question of Jajuji1 are coming in from others as well. I shall
therefore write nothing for some time. I am thinking about a
clarification regarding non-violence. It is not necessary at all to quit
the Council2 simply because you cannot manipulate your hand and
hence cannot spin. Can we not imagine the possibility of some people
who might have lost one hand and therefore cannot spin and yet be
the greatest khadi workers of them all? Is there any rule that a
person’s hand may not remain unoccupied?
Blessings from

BAPU
HARIJAN ASHRAM
S ABARMATI
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

538. LETTER TO BHAGIRATH KANODIA
September 18, 1944
BHAI BHAGIRATHJI,

I read your letter to Pyarelal. I never said that Rajaji had
betrayed me. He can never betray me. He has never done so. My
association with Rajaji is very old. Lately our opinions have come to
differ but our love for each other continues to be what it has always
been. What Monoranjan Babu writes has only been written in jest.
What can I do if people do not appreciate my jokes? You may use this
letter in any way you consider necessary.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
2

Shrikrishnadas Jaju; vide “A Circular Letter”, 8-9-1944.
Of A.I.S.A.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

397

539. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
September 19, 1944
DEAR QUAID-E-AZAM,

Many thanks for yours 1 of the 17th instant. I am sorry to have
to say that your answers omitting 1, 2 and 6 do not give satisfaction.
It may be that all my questions do not arise from the view of
mere clarification of the Lahore Resolution. But I contend that they
are very relevant from the standpoint of a seeker that I am. You
cannot expect anyone to agree to or shoulder the burden of the claim
contained in the Lahore Resolution without, for instance, answering
my questions 15 (a) and 15 (b)2 which you brush aside as not arising
by way of clarification.
Dr. Ambedkar’s thesis, while it is ably written, has carried no
conviction to me. The other book mentioned by you, I am sorry to
say, I have not seen.
Why can you not accept my statement that I aspire to represent all the
sections that compose the people of India? Do you not aspire? Should
not every Indian? That the aspiration may never be realized is beside
the point.
I am beholden to you, in spite of your opinion about me, for
having patience with me. I hope you will never lose it, but will
persevere in your effort to convert me. I ask you to take me with my
strong views and even prejudices, if I am guilty of any.
As to your verdict on my policy and programme, we must agree
to differ. For, I am wholly unrepentant. My purpose is as a lover of
communal unity to place my services at your disposal.
I hope you do not expect me to accept the Lahore Resolution
without understanding its implications. If your letter is the final word,
there is little hope. Can we not agree to differ on the question of “two
nation” and yet solve the problem on the basis of self-determination?
It is this basis that has brought me to you. If the regions holding
Muslim majorities have to be separated according to the Lahore
1
2

398

Vide Appendix “Letter from M. A. Jinnah”, 17-9-1944.
Vide “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 15-9-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Resolution, the grave step of separation should be specifically placed
before and approved by the people in that area.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Hindu, 29-9-1944

540. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
BOMBAY,

September 19, 1944
In the course of his speech at the prayer meeting, Gandhiji said that he did not
know how many Muslim brothers and sisters were there in the audience but there was
at least one, namely, Raihanabehn Tyabjee. That was enough for his present purpose.
His earnest prayer to all present was that if they had the good of the country at heart
and wanted India to be free and independent at the earliest moment they should
establish the closest bonds of friendship between Hindus and Mussalmans and
members of all other communities. That was the least that every one of them was
expected to do and could do. Was there anyone among them who doubted that if they
could become one at heart the coming of independence would be accelerated? Ever
since his return to India he had been proclaiming that truth from house-tops. That did
not mean that they could afford to rest in idleness and freedom would by itself drop
into their lap. If that was realized many other things would follow as a matter of
course.
Referring to his talks with Mr. Jinnah he said that he considered it to be their
great good fortune that they—two brothers—were having their friendly talks. He was
not at liberty to divulge the nature of their talks. But they could rest satisfied that
they were not talking without hope. The day he felt that there was no more hope, he
would not hesitate to say so. He wanted them all to fraternize with one another on the
Id Day and pray that God may guide them aright.
Concluding, he warned the people against putting faith in speculations in
which both the foreign and the Indian Press were indulging.
Sometimes they found all kinds of prophecies. God was with them. They were not
being led by prophecies, but by the spirit of God. The papers published all kinds of
guesses and messages were also sent abroad. It would not benefit the people to depend
on these reports. It would, in fact, be wrong to believe in them.

The Bombay Chronicle, 20-9-1944

1

For the addressee’s reply, vide Appendix “Letter from M. A. Jinnah”,
21-9-1944
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

399

541. LETTER TO NANJI KALIDAS
BIRLA HOUSE, B OMBAY,

September 20, 1944
BHAISHRI NANJIBHAI,

I read your telegram and letter to Bapa 1 . It has made me
unhappy. You had told me clearly that your donation would go to the
central fund without any condition. Your letter says that a committee
has been formed to manage your contribution and that the money
would be in its possession. If it is so, your contribution will not be
included in the existing Fund. Then you can use it as your committee
thinks proper. But I would urge that an illiterate village woman’s
name should not be associated with it.
I hope there is some improvement in your health.
Blessings from

BAPU
R AJSHRI S ETHSHRI NANJI KALIDAS
P ORBANDAR (KATHIAWAR)
From Gujarati: C.W. 8617. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

542. LETTER TO B. ORELAND
C AMP BIRLA HOUSE,
MOUNT P LEASANT R OAD ,
MALABAR HILL , B OMBAY,

September 21, 1944
DEAR LIEUT. ORELAND,

I was pleased to receive your letter of 17th instant. I do not
remember the pundit mentioned by you. Your question is very
appropriate. My interpretation of the Mahabharata is that it is a
penetrating study of man and shows that fruits of violence whether
used for a good cause or bad are evil. The Pandavas won but an
empty victory. Bhishma was right in accordance with the social usage
in vogue in those days. He was true to the salt he ate. We would go
entirely wrong in estimating the men and women of the Mahabharata
1

400

Amritlal V. Thakkar
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

according to the modern standard, which need not be considered
necessarily higher than in the times of the Mahabharata. The story of
the epic has to be read in its setting. Then Bhishma would appear to
be a lofty soul.
M. K. GANDHI
LIEUT . B. ORELAND
104 F IELD P ARK
S.E.A.C.
B.A.P.O.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

543. LETTER TO SITA GANDHI
BOMBAY,

September 21, 1944
CHI. SITA,

I got your letter written in a beautiful hand. We will now be
meeting soon. Talk to me then.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
The correct word is not raha but rah 1 .
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4937

544. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
September 21, 1944
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

I have your letter. Even if our talks remain inconclusive, I have
decided to reach there on the 1st. I shall return after attending to the
2nd 2 .
I hope Vallabh Swami undertook the fast after due thought. It
has become difficult to fix the proper conditions for fasting.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10613

1
2

Way or path
Gandhiji’s birthday celebrations

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

401

545. A CIRCULAR LETTER
BOMBAY,

September 21, 1944
BHAISHRI,

I am writing this circular in Gujarati since all those to whom I
intend to send it know the language. I send with this a list of ten
additional trustees. At first I thought I would send the names merely
for your information. As my duty becomes clearer to me, I realize
that I must function as Chairman without insisting on having my own
way. A list of members of the Executive Committee is also attached.
I have kept the following considerations in mind in drawing up
both these lists. We should include those who understand my method
of work best and who have had some experience of village work or
who share my point of view regarding village work. I am painfully
aware that I have not been able to include as many women as I should
have liked to. This Memorial Fund is in memory of an uneducated
woman who had been touched by the ideal of service to villages, and it
would, therefore, be but fitting that the Board consists wholly of
women. I would then feel that my efforts in this field have been fully
rewarded. But the time for this has not yet come. Let us all hope that
such mature and able women will get trained up for this work.
You may, without any hesitation whatever, reject any names in
the list which you disapprove of. If you wish, we may elect the
additional members at a meeting of the trustees. Kindly send me your
opinion at an early date.
List of additional trustees:
1. Shri Mangaldas Pakvasa
2. Smt. Ashadevi Aryanayakum
3. Smt. Gosibehn Captain
4. Smt. Raihana Tyabji
5. Smt. Mridula Sarabhai
6. Shri Gulzarilal Nanda
7. Shri Ganesh Vasudev Mavalankar
8. Shri Shrikrishnadas Jaju
9. Shri Lakshminarayan Babu (of Bihar)
402

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

10. Smt. Janakibehn Bajaj
Members of Executive Committee
1. Shri M. K. Gandhi (Chairman)
2. Sir Purshottamdas Thakurdas (Vice-Chairman)
3. Shri Amritlal V. Thakkar
4. Smt. Ashadevi Aryanayakum
5. Smt. Mridula Sarabhai
6. Shri Ganesh Vasudev Mavalankar
7. Shri Shrikrishnadas Jaju
8. Shri Devdas Gandhi
I am,
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 4873. Courtesy: N. B. Khare

546. TELEGRAM TO PURUSHOTTAM M. PATEL
September 22, 1944
P URUSHOTTAM MOTIBHAI P ATEL
C HAIRMAN , I NDO -BRITISH F RIENDSHIP GROUP
BRAUNTON 114
THANKS1 .

MANY

GOD’S

WILL.

GANDHI
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

547. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
September 22, 1944
DEAR QUAID-E-AZAM,

Your letter of yesterday 2 (21st instant) so disturbed me that I
thought I would postpone my reply till after we had met at the usual
time. Though I made no advance at our meeting, I think I see some
what clearly what you are driving at. The more I think about the
1

The addressee had wished Gandhiji success in his efforts to achieve unity and

freedom
2

Vide Appendix “Letter from M. A. Jinnah”, 21-9-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

403

two-nation theory the more alarming it appears to be. The book
recommended by you gives me no help. It contains half-truths and its
conclusions or inferences are unwarranted. I am unable to accept the
proposition that the Muslims of India are a nation, distinct from the
rest of the inhabitants of India. Mere assertion is no proof. The
consequences of accepting such a proposition are dangerous in the
extreme. Once the principle is admitted there would be no limit to
claims for cutting up India into numerous divisions, which would spell
India’s ruin. I have, therefore, suggested a way out. Let it be a
partition as between two brothers, if a division there must be.
You seem to be averse to a plebiscite. In spite of the admitted
importance of the League, there must be clear proof that the people
affected desire partition. In my opinion, all the people inhabiting the
area ought to express their opinion specifically on this single issue of
division. Adult suffrage is the best method, but I would accept any
other equivalent.
You summarily reject the idea of common interest between the
two arms. I can be no willing party to a division which does not
provide for the simultaneous safeguarding of common interests, such
as Defence, Foreign Affairs and the like. There will be no feeling of
security by the people of India without a recognition of the nutural
and mutual obligations arising out of physical contiguity.
Your letter shows a wide divergence of opinion and outlook
between us. Thus you adhere to the opinion often expressed by you
that the August 1942 Resolution is “inimical to the ideals and
demands of Muslim India”. There is no proof for this sweeping
statement.
We seem to be moving in a circle. I have made a suggestion. If
we are bent on agreeing, as I hope we are, let us call in a third party or
parties to guide or even arbitrate between us1 .
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Hindu, 29-9-1944

1

For the addressee’s reply, vide Appendix “Letter from M. A. Jinnah”,
23-9-1944.

404

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

548. NOTE TO SHRIMAN NARAYAN
[September 22, 1944] 1
I have gone through this letter.2 I also listened to what Bhadantji
had to say. Your letter seems to have been written in a hurry. You
should have waited for Nanavati’s3 reply. It is one’s duty to correct
any lapse of memory or mistakes due to haste. I see nothing wrong in
what Nanavati tells me.
I expect to arrive there on the 1st.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, pp. 300-l

549. LETTER TO AZIZ-UL-HAQUE
[On or after September 22, 1944] 4
DEAR ERIEND,

I am deeply grateful to you for your kind letter and book 5 . I
shall read it, I know, with interest.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

According to the source this note is written under a letter dated September 22,
from Maganbhai Desai to the addressee, which he had shown to Gandhiji before
posting. The letter had sought to clarify the position implied in a letter from the
addressee to Bhadant Anand Kausalyayan that the Hindustani Prachar Sabha would
conduct examinations only in Urdu.
2
ibid .
3
Amritlal T. Nanavati
4
The letter is written under the addressee’s letter dated September 22, 1944.
5
Man behind the Plough
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

405

550. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
September 23, 1944
DEAR QUAID-E-AZAM,

Last evening’s talk has left a bad taste in the mouth. Our talks
and our correspondence seem to run in parallel lines and never touch
one another. We reached the breaking point last evening but, thank
God, we were unwilling to part. We resumed discussion and suspended
it in order to allow me to keep my time for the evening public prayer.
In order that all possibility of making any mistake in a matter of this
great importance may be removed I would like you to give me in
writing what precisely on your part you would want me to put my
signature to.1
I adhere to my suggestion that we may call in some outside
assistance to help us at this stage.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Hindu, 99-9-1944

551. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
Id [September 23, 1944] 2
BHAI JINNAH,

I was wondering what I shall send you today. It should be fair
on my part to let you and your sister3 share equally the crisp chapatis
they make for me. Here is your share. Please regard it as a token of
my love and do please help yourself to it.
Id greetings from

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

The addressee in his reply said: “ . . . I may say that it is not a case of your
being asked to put your signature as representing anybody till you clothe yourself
with representative capacity and are vested with authority. We stand by, as I have
already said, the basic and fundamental principles embodied in the Lahore Resolution
of March 1940. I appeal to you once more to revise your policy and programme, as
the future of this sub-continent and the welfare of the peoples of India demand that
you should face realities.”
2
The letter has been placed among those for September 1944. Id fell on this
date.
3
Fatima

406

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

552. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
BOMBAY,

September 24, 1944
Whoever has given currency to the news about the Sevagram
Ashram has not served the cause of truth. The only truth about the
news is that the disbandment and transformation of the Sevagram
Ashram is under contemplation. No decision has yet been taken. But
the suggestion that it has anything to do with my supposed
dissatisfaction with the conduct of the Ashram during my
incarceration is altogether untrue. On the contrary I have expressed
my unstinted admiration for the single-minded devotion with which
they carried on the Ashram under those difficult and anxious 21
months. If it is ultimately decided to disband the Ashram it would be
for the purpose of raising the activities of the members to a higher
level than heretofore.
The Bombay Chronicle, 25-9-1944

553. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH1
September 24, 1944
DEAR QUAID-E-AZAM,

I have your two letters of September 232 in reply to my letters of
the 22nd and 23rd.
With your assistance, I am exploring the possibilities of reaching
an agreement, so that the claim embodied in the Muslim League
Resolution of Lahore may be reasonably satisfied. You must,
therefore, have no apprehensions that the August Resolution will stand
in the way of our reaching an agreement. That Resolution dealt with
the question of India as against Britain, and it cannot stand in the way
of our settlement.
I proceed on the assumption that India is not to be regarded as
two or more nations, but as one family consisting of many members
1

Gandhiji’s draft is available under G.N. 2056.
Vide last footnote of “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 23-9-1944 and Appendix
“Letter from M. A. Jinnah”, 23-9-1944.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

407

of whom the Muslims living in the north-west zones, i.e., Baluchistan,
Sind, North-West Frontier Province and that part of the Punjab where
they are in absolute majority over all the other elements and in parts
of Bengal and Assam where they are in absolute majority, desire to
live in separation from the rest of India. Differing from you on the
general basis, I can yet recommend to the Congress and the country
the acceptance of the claim for separation contained in the Muslim
League Resolution of Lahore, 1940, on my basis and on the following
terms:
The areas should be demarcated by a commission, approved by
the Congress and the League. The wishes of the inhabitants of the area
demarcated should be ascertained through the votes of the adult
population of the areas or through some equivalent method.
If the vote is in favour of separation, it shall be agreed that these
areas shall form a separate State as soon as possible after India is free
from foreign domination and can, therefore, be constituted into two
sovereign independent States.
There shall be a treaty of separation, which should also provide
for the efficient and satisfactory administration of Foreign Affairs,
Defence, Internal Communications, Customs, Commerce and the like,
which must necessarily continue to be matters of common interest
between the contracting parties. The treaty shall also contain terms for
safeguarding the rights of minorities in the two States. Immediately on
the acceptance of this agreement by the Congress and the League, the
two shall decide upon a common course of action for the attainment
of the independence of India.
The League will, however, be free to remain out of any direct
action, to which the Congress may resort and in which the League
may not be willing to participate.
If you do not agree to these terms, could you let me know in
precise terms what you would have me to accept in terms of the
Lahore Resolution and bind myself to recommend to the Congress? If
you could kindly do this, I shall be able to see, apart from the
difference in approach, what definite terms I can agree to. In your
letter of 23rd September, you refer to “the basis and fundamental
principles embodied in the Lahore Resolution” and ask me to accept
408

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

them. Surely, this is unnecessary when, as I feel, I have accepted the
concrete consequence that should follow from such acceptance.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Hindu, 29-9-1944

554. LETTER TO G. V. MAVALANKAR
BOMBAY,

September 24, 1944
DADA,

I read your letter to Bapa. If you can make it possible somehow,
please do come to Wardha on the 2nd.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1251

555. TALK WITH M. A. JINNAH 2
September 24, 1944
Jinnah had refused even to discuss Bapu’s proposal, as he (Bapu) was not
vested with authority; he represented nobody.

[ JINNAH:] “If you want defence and so many things in common,
that means that you visualize a centre?”
[ GANDHIJI:] No, but I must say, in practice, there will have to be a
body selected by both parties to regulate these things. Then he came
to the August (1942) Resolution. He said it was inimical to Muslims.
“But don’t you see that it is absolutely a baseless charge? With all the
legal acumen that is attributed to you, why cannot you see that it deals
with only India and the British rule? It has nothing to do with the
Muslims. You can refer the matter to a lawyer of eminence
impersonally and take his opinion whether there is anything in it
1

For extracts from the addressee’s reply, vide Appendix “Letter from M. A.
Jinnah”, 25-9-1944.
2
According to the source this report is taken from Pyarelal’s diary which
appears to have been based on Gandhiji’s narrative to C. Rajagopalachari, giving
“the story of the final breakdown of the talks”.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

409

which could be considered inimical to the Muslim League or the
Muslims.” He said he did not need to do so. “Why should I want
another’s opinion when I know it for myself?” I broached the subject
that I had fixed up to be at Sevagram on the 2nd October. I would
like to leave on the 30th and would be back in four or five days. He
said, “Why must we take so long? We had better close up now. I will
have everything ready on Tuesday. You will examine the copies1 and I
will do so.” He had the introduction also ready and read it out. I said
I had nothing to say against it, but if I had a copy I could examine it.
He said I could do so on Tuesday. I said all right. He would not have
a third party, nor would he produce his own scheme. He condemned
the August Resolution. He suggested in so many words that amends
should be made, i.e., it should be retracted.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book I, pp. 93-4

556. A MESSAGE
September2 25, 1944
I have omitted sending messages to a number of friends but I
must associate myself with the Acharya’s cause since we are
childhood friends. We have been together since the days of his father.
Please let him see this.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

557. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
[September 25, 1944] 3
MY DEAR C. R.,

If you are satisfied that my letter of yesterday 4 is the last word
you should do the following:
1. You should ask Jinnah to see you. He told me he had nothing
against you, etc. If Bhulabhai has thoroughly understood the position
he too may see Jinnah. You may both offer to see him together.
1

The reference is to their correspondence.
The source has “August/September”.
3
From the reference to the letter to M. A. Jinnah of September 24, 1944, as
“letter of yesterday”; vide “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 24-9-1944.
4
ibid.
2

410

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

2. I attach great importance to the legal opinion on Jinnah’s
interpretation of August Resolution.
3. Consider the following letter to Jinnah:
“MY DEAR QUAID-E-AZAM,

Yesterday’s talk1 leads me to inflict this letter on you for which
please forgive me.
I see force in your argument that the para5 in my letter of
yesterday can be interpreted to touch the League sensitiveness. Please
therefore read the following instead: ‘Any member or group from
among the Congress or the League members will be free to resort to
direct action including C. R. in the course of the campaign of
Independence.’ This is however a minor matter. In the context in
which the offending paragraph appears, its friendly intention is
unmistakable.
The main purpose of this letter is to ask you to think fifty times
before you throw away my offer. It is an earnest effort to meet
essential requirements of the Lahore Resolution. I would like you,
before you reject it, to let me address the League Council, indeed even
the open session of the League.
I ask you not to take responsibility on your shoulders of
rejecting my offer. You are too technical when you dismiss my
proposal for arbitration or guidance on the ground that I have
approached you as an individual and not in any representative
capacity. Is it not enough that I have approached you in the spirit of
service in the cause of unity?
I repeat the suggestion I made you during our talk of yesterday
that counsel’s opinion should be invited on your interpretation of the
August (1942) Resolution of the A. I. C. C. Rajaji for whose integrity
and legal ability you have high regard, agrees with me that the August
Resolution is in no way inimical to the Muslims. You are wrong in
saying that the Congress is a Hindu or communal organization. Will
you be inimical to non-Muslims if the League fought single-handed
for the Independence of the whole of India whether considered as
one India or two or more?”
4. It may be good to call in Shiva Rao, if you have not done so
already.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 2057

1

Vide “Talk with M. A. Jinnah”, 24-9-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

411

558. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
September 25, 1944
DEAR QUAID-E-AZAM,

Yesterday’s talk leads me to inflict this letter on you, which I
trust you will not mind.
Our conversations have come about as a result of your
correspondence with Rajaji in July last over his Formula and your
consultations with the League Working Committee thereon, and my
own letter1 to you suggesting a meeting between you and me. My
proposal of yesterday is an earnest effort to meet the essential
requirements of the Lahore Resolution. I would like you, therefore, to
think fifty times before throwing away an offer which had been made
entirely in the spirit of service in the cause of communal harmony. Do
not take, I pray, the responsibility of rejecting the offer. Throw it on
your Council. Give me an opportunity of addressing them. If they
feel like rejecting it, I would like you to advise the Council to put it
before the open session of the League. If you will accept my advice
and permit me, I would attend the open session and address it.
You are too technical when you dismiss my proposal for
arbitration or outside guidance over points of difference. If I have
approached you as an individual, and not in any representative
capacity, it is because we believe that if I reach an agreement with
you, it will be of material use in the process of securing a
Congress-League settlement and acceptance of it by the country. Is it
irrelevant or inadmissible to supplement our efforts to convince each
other without help, guidance, advice or even arbitration?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Hindu 29-9-1944

1

412

Vide “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 17-7-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

559. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
September 26, 1944
DEAR QUAID-E-AZAM,

In view of my letter to you of yesterday, left to myself, I would
have refrained from dealing with your letter 1 before our meeting
today. But I have deferred to Rajaji’s advice to finish the chain of
correspondence.
I confess I am unable to understand your persistent refusal to
appreciate the fact that the Formula presented to you by me in my
letter of the 24th as well as the Formula presented to you by Rajaji
give you virtually what is embodied in the Lahore Resolution,
providing at the same time what is absolutely necessary to make the
arrangement acceptable to the country. You keep on saying that I
should accept certain theses, while I have been contending that the
best way for us, who differ in our approach to the problem, is to give
body to the demand as it stands in the Resolution and work it out to
our mutual satisfaction. It is on this plan that I understand Rajaji’s
Formula is to be conceived, and it is on the same plan that I have tried
to work it out in the course of and as a result of our talks. I contend
that either gives you the substance of the Lahore Resolution.
Unfortunately, you reject both. And I cannot accept the Lahore
Resolution as you want me to, especially when you seek to introduce
into its interpretation theories and claims which I cannot accept and
which I cannot ever hope to induce India to accept.
Your constant references to my not being clothed with
representative authority are really irrelevant. I have approached you
so that, if you and I can agree upon a common course of action, I
may use what influence I possess for its acceptance by the Congress
and the country. If you break, it cannot be because I have no
representative capacity, or because I have been unwilling to give you
satisfaction in regard to the claim embodied in the Lahore
Resolution.2
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Hindu, 29-9-1944
1

Vide Appendix “Letter from M. A. Jinnah”, 26-9-1944.
For the addressee’s reply of even date, vide Appendix “Letter from M. A.
Jinnah”, 26-9-1944.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

413

560. LETTER TO KAMALNAYAN BAJAJ
September 26, 1944
CHI. KAMALNAYAN,

I have read your letter. We shall not do it at the time announced,
we shall do it in the Ashram. I shall receive the purse at 2 o’clock. We
cannot ask for regular permission. No harm will come to those who
join. Sometimes it benefits to be ignorant of the law. This is one such
instance.
Please take things easy. It will be enough if the visiting friends
are properly accommodated. All else is in God’s hands.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

561. TELEGRAM TO KISHORELAL G. MASHRUWALA
Express

BIRLA HOUSE, M ALABAR HILL , B OMBAY,

September 27, 1944
KISHORELAL MASHURWALA
S EVAGRAM
WARDHA
GOD

BLESS

YOU.

TAKE

FULL

REST.

REACHING

SOON.

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

562. LETTER TO KASHI GANDHI
Vijayadashami1 , Wednesday, September 27, 1944
CHI. KASHI,

It was by chance that I learnt that today was Dussehra. My
purpose in writing this letter is to inform you that Pyarelal’s mother
will be reaching there. If she comes, she should be given Ba’s2 room.
1
The tenth day of the bright half of Ashwin or Aso, considered to be an
auspicious day
2
Kasturba Gandhi had died on February 22,1944 in the Aga Khan Palace, Poona.

414

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

If you are there, you may live in my room, that is, occupy the room
which Manilal used as his sitting room. If more accommodation is
needed after my return, we will arrange for it. Upto Monday, I believe,
there will be some ceremony or religious worship going on in Ba’s
room. Think over what arrangement should be made for Pyarelal’s
mother till then. We will all arrive there on Sunday. Accompanying
me will be Sumatibehn, Patel, Shantikumar, Mridulabehn,
Khurshedbehn, Jaisukhlal, Kanu, etc., Dr. Jivaraj and another Doctor
friend, Mataji and Sharda (Babu).
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33078

563. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING1
BOMBAY ,

September 27, 1944
Gandhiji said he was not addressing them in Hindustani as before, because he
wanted his words to go straight to the hearts of the audience, most of whom were
Gujaratis. He had particularly the women in mind who were not accustomed to
Hindustani speech.
Referring to the leakage of the correspondence between him and
Quaide-e-Azam and its unauthorized publication in a certain section of the Press, he
observed that he had warned 2 the Press before against indulging in conjectures,
because he felt that would damage the cause. But what had appeared in the Press now
was more than a mere conjecture. It seemed that they had somehow managed to get
actual copies of the correspondence. Perhaps it was clever on their part, but that did
them little credit. Journalism, like every institution, had its own code of ethics and he
was not there to pass judgment. All he could say was that he himself had, perhaps,
followed a different code of ethics even in the field of journalism.
He assured them that the leakage had not occurred from his office, and he had
strong reasons for his belief. He had the other day drawn the Quaid-e-Azam’s attention
to the leakage, but the Quaid-e-Azam was indifferent. Public men had to cultivate that
indifference, or else life would become impossible. But it was for the public not to
take relish in such happenings. If the public strongly disapproved all such practices,
the Press would not repeat them. It was intolerable that anyone should try to pry into
1
2

This was issued as an “authorized version” of the Gujarati speech.
Vide, “Interview to the Press”, 13-9-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

415

and give publicity to private correspondence without authority.
He told them that when the talks were over, he would let them know the result.
That stage had been reached yesterday, but as copies of the correspondence were not
ready, its actual release had to be postponed till today. Authorized copies of the
correspondence had now been sent to the Press with a prefatory statement by the
Quaid-e-Azam.
Hitherto he had told them that he was not without hope with regard to the
outcome of the talks. He had to confess that the result that he was hoping for had not
materialized. But he had no sense of disappointment or despondency. He was
convinced that even out of that breakdown good would result.
Although Quaid-e-Azam and he had known each other fairly well in public life
before, they had never come into such close personal contact. Their conversations
were carried out with friendliness and cordiality. He wanted all the communities to
cultivate the same spirit of friendliness and cordiality in their relations with one
another. They should try to convert one another through it.
They might ask, “Why was it then that he and the Quaid-e-Azam had failed to
convert each other?” His reply was that he had tried his level best to go as far as he
could to meet the Quaid-e-Azam’s viewpoint. He had taken incalculable pains to
understand him and to make himself understood. But he had failed.
He had placed before the Quaid-e-Azam Rajaji’s Formula, but that did not
commend itself to him. He had thereupon put forth another proposal of his own in its
place, but even that had failed to secure Jinnah Saheb’s approval. In the same way,
Jinnah Saheb’s proposal had failed to commend itself to him. If either of them had
been weak, they would have possibly come to some sort of agreement, but as
responsible men they could not afford to be weak. A helmsman had to be firm and
unwavering, or else the ship would founder upon the rocks. Each one of them had tried
to convince the other. It was possible that both of them might be in the wrong. But
so long as each felt himself to be in the right, he could not let go his hold.
The news of breakdown, he knew, would cause grief to the friends of India and
might give cause for jubilation to their enemies. He drew their attention to the last
sentence in his1 statement in which he had said that it was not the final end of their
effort.
Although they had been unable to appreciate each other’s viewpoint, the
public could help them to do so. They should not lose heart. If there was anyone who
had reason to feel disappointed it was he. He had knocked at the Quaid-e-Azam’s door.
But he had already observed there was no despondency in him. It was not for a votary
1

The source has “their”. The reference is to M. A. Jinnah’s statement; vide
Appendix “M. A. Jinnah’s Statement”, 27-9-1944.

416

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of truth and non-violence to feel despondent if his effort at times failed to yield the
result aimed at. Failure should only serve as a spur to further effort. God alone knew
what was best for them. It was not for them to question God’s ways. Therefore, instead
of feeling despondent, they should regard the breakdown as a challenge to their faith
and as an incentive for greater effort for establishing true unity among the various
communities.

The Hindu, 29-9-1944

564. LETTER TO SHRIMAN NARAYAN
[After] September [27,] 1 1944
CHI. SHRIMAN,

I got your manuscript2 . I will try to read it. Maganbhai says that
what you have written about Hindi-Urdu has caused much confusion.
You must have received my letter3 . I will be leaving on the 30th; or
may be even earlier,
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 301

565. TELEGRAM TO VIJAYALAKSHMI PANDIT
Express

September 28, 1944

VIJAYALAKSHMI P ANDIT
2 M UKERJEE R OAD
ALLAHABAD
SEND

FORMAL

ING
IF

FURTHER

NONCOMMITTAL
REPLY.

REACH

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
SEVAGRAM

SECOND

PROMISOCTOBER

CONVENIENT.

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Gandhiji’s date of departure was not decided till September 27; vide “Telegram
to Kishorelal G. Mashruwala”, 27-9-1944.
2
Of The Gandhian Plan
3
Vide “Note to Shriman Narayan”, 22-9-1944.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

417

566. LETTER TO M. S. SUBBULAKSHMI1
BOMBAY,

September 28, 1944
DEAR SUBBULAKSHMI,

Rajaji has told me everything about your good work in
connection with Kasturba Memorial Fund by using your musical gifts.
May God bless you.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI2
From a photostat: C.W. 10600. Courtesy: T. Sadasivam

567. LETTER TO GIRDHARLAL T. MODI
BOMBAY,

September 28, 1944
BHAI GIRDHARLAL,

Sushilabehn told me about your illness. I wish very much to call
on you, but you know how helpless I am.
Pyarelalji will tell you more. Get well soon.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 10213. Courtesy: Jayabehn Modi

1
(b.1916); a renowned Carnatic musician, she received the Magsaysay Award
in 1974 for public service through music.
2
The signature is in Tamil.

418

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

568. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS1
September 28, 1944
It is a matter of deep regret that we two could not reach an
agreement. But there is no cause for disappointment. The breakdown
is only so-called. It is an adjournment sine die. Each one of us must
now talk to the public and put our viewpoints before them. If we do so
dispassionately and if the public cooperate, we may reach a solution
of the seemingly insoluble at an early date. My experience of the
previous three weeks confirms me in the view that the presence of a
third power hinders the solution. A mind enslaved cannot act as if it
was free. I need not impute base motives to the rulers to prove what
seems to me to be an axiomatic truth. Nevertheless, I am going to
continue to work for the solution as I have been during these three
weeks. The questions for consideration are simple. Has the Rajaji
Formula or mine made a reasonable approach to the Lahore
Resolution? If they or either of them is such an approach, all parties,
and especially the members of the Muslim League, should ask the
Quaid-e-Azam to revise his opinion. If Rajaji and I have stultified the
Lahore Resolution we should be educated. The chief thing is for the
Press and the public to avoid partisanship and bitterness.
To a question on his future plans, whether he proposed to concentrate on a
Hindu-Muslim settlement or take up political work, seeking imprisonment if
necessary, Mahatma Gandhi replied:

I shall act as my inner voice tells me.
Asked how far the offer he had made had conceded the demand made in the
Lahore Resolution of the League, Mahatma Gandhi emphasized that the Rajaji
Formula or the formula that he presented conceded the substance of the League
demand. He said:

In my opinion, either formula gives as much as can reasonably
be expected with due regard to the interests of the whole of India.
In answer to a question whether his offer was to be treated now as withdrawn,
he said that so far as he was concerned the offer he had made stood. It was not made in

1

A Press conference of about 40 Indian and foreign journalists was held at
Birla House; Sarojini Naidu, C. Rajagopalachari, Bhulabhai Desai, Nagindas Master,
M. Y. Nurie, Dr. M. D. D. Gilder and S. K. Patil were among others present. Gandhiji
first read out his statement.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

419

any bargaining spirit. He said:

I think it is a just solution of the problem and it is in the spirit of
the policy which the Congress has consistently adopted in connection
with the communal question, namely, self-determination.
A number of questions were put on the representative character of the two
leaders who conducted the negotiations and why Mahatma Gandhi prolonged the talks
when he was apprised of Mr. Jinnah’s views on the first day of the talks. Mahatma
Gandhi answered:

I am a man reputed to have inexhaustible patience and I had no
reason to despair of either being converted by the Quaid-e-Azam or
in my turn converting him. Therefore, so long as there was the
slightest possibility, I clung to the hope that we shall pull through to a
solution. Haste in such cases is a most dangerous thing. You should,
therefore, conclude that yesterday was really the moment when the
public should have been taken into confidence. As for myself, I am
entirely satisfied that we have not wasted these three weeks. I have no
doubt whatsoever that we know now each other better than ever
before.
When you agreed to meet Mr. Jinnah, did you meet him on the basis that he
was the sole representative of the Muslims?

I have never admitted that claim, but I have said throughout that
the Muslim League is by far the most representative Muslim
organization. It would have been folly on my part not to recognize
this, but I have always been aware that there is outside the League a
large body of Muslims which does not see eye to eye with the League
and which does not believe in the two nations theory.
Mahatma Gandhi asserted that the fight for freedom had not been suspended
when he approached the Quaid-e-Azam. He said:

My approach to the Quaid-e-Azam was itself a part of the fight
for freedom.
Asked if there was any possibility of the two leaders meeting again in the near
future, Mahatma Gandhi said:

I hope so. It is for the Press and the public to make it possible
and hasten the date. I assure you that we have not parted as enemies,
but as friends.
If the Rajaji Formula or his own formula had conceded the substance of the
Lahore Resolution, then why not agree to the Resolution itself?

Although the Resolution does not say so, if you study the
420

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

correspondence, it shows that it is based on the two nations theory and
it has been known as the Pakistan Resolution. Further, I had to
examine the Resolution in view of the interpretation put upon it by the
Quaid-e-Azam in his numerous speeches and statements in elucidation
of the Resolution. It is indisputable that the Resolution, while it does
not enunciate that theory, is based upon that theory. The
Quaid-e-Azam has insisted upon that. Therefore, I urge that apart
from the two nations theory, if I could accept the principle of division
of India in accordance with the demand of the League, he should
accept it. But unfortunately it was just there we split.
Asked about Mr. Jinnah’s views regarding a provisional interim government,
he said:

I am not sure that the Quaid-e-Azam puts great weight on the
interim government. I gave all the explanation of my conception of
an interim government without any reservation. It is quite clear in my
letters1 . If I did not go any further, it was because I could not and,
even if you cross-examine me any further, I would have to say I could
not go any further. But if, as you suggest, the Quaid-e-Azam attached
greater weight to it, then it was open to him to put it into concrete
form. I would have then taxed myself and spared no effort to accept
the proposition or to make some other suggestions.
Mahatma Gandhi was told that those Muslims who did not see eye to eye with
the League had no real Muslim backing. He replied:

Therefore, I have said that the League is by far the most
representative of Muslim opinion, but I cannot despise the others by
simply saying that they have no Muslim backing. What does it matter
if they have no more Muslim backing if the opinion represented by a
single Muslim, or by a body of Muslims whom you can count on
your fingers, is intrinsically sound? The way of approaching a
question is not to examine the numerical strength of those behind the
opinion, but to examine the soundness of the opinion on merits, or
else we will never reach a solution, and if we reach one, it will be a
blind solution simply because it is the wish of the largest body. If the
largest body goes wrong, it is up to me to say you are wrong and not
to submit. The rule of majority does not mean that it should suppress
the opinion of even an individual, if it is sound. An individual’s
opinion should have greater weight than the opinion of many, if that
1

Vide “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 14-9-1944 and 15-9-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

421

opinion is sound on merits. That is my view of real democracy.
Mahatma Gandhi was asked what he thought of the idea of formation of
provinces on linguistic, cultural and communal basis. He replied that since 1920 he
was for provinces on a linguistic basis. As for redistribution on a cultural basis, he
did not really know what it meant and he was unable to understand how provinces
could be reconstituted on communal lines unless there was a suggestion that there
should be inter-migration of the various communities to concentrate in particular
areas. It seemed to him to be fantastic and impossible. He said:

We are not inhabiting a country full of deserts and wastelands.
We are a densely populated country and I do not see the slightest
chance for such redistribution. In that respect the Lahore Resolution is
quite sound—where there is an obvious Muslim majority they should
be allowed to constitute a separate State by themselves and that has
been fully conceded in the Rajaji Formula or my formula. There is
not much distinction between them. That right is conceded without the
slightest reservation. But if it means utterly independent sovereignty
so that there is to be nothing in common between the two, I hold it is
an impossible proposition. That means war to the knife. It is not a
proposition that resolves itself into a voluntary or friendly solution.
Therefore, the Rajaji Formula and my formula have presented
certain things to be in common between sovereign States. Therefore,
there is no question of one party overbearing the other or the Centre
having an overbearing Hindu majority. I think our formula should be
critically and sympathetically examined and it would be found that
the formula concedes everything that could reasonably be conceded if
we consider ourselves to be one family. Children of the same family,
dissatisfied with one another by reason of change of religion, if they
should separate, then the separation should be within ourselves and
not separation in the face of the whole world. When two brothers
separate, they do not become enemies of one another in the eyes of
the world. The world will still recognize them as brothers.
A journalist said that some of the Nationalist Muslims felt that the Congress
through Mahatma Gandhi meeting Mr. Jinnah had put them in a false position and
that they might have to change their attitude towards Indian nationalism.
Mahatma Gandhi replied that it was an extraordinary suggestion. Nationalist Muslims
were nationalists simply because they could not be otherwise. He said:

I am a nationalist, not in order to please anybody, but because I
cannot be otherwise. And If I approached the Quaid-e-Azam, I
approached him in the common interests of myself and Nationalist
422

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Muslims and other Nationalists. Nationalist Muslims, so far as I know,
were delighted when I approached the Quaid-e-Azam and were
looking forward to a proper solution in the confidence that I would
not sell the interests represented by them.
Undoubtedly, a Nationalist Muslim represents the nation, but he
represents the Muslims also, who are a part of the nation. He would be
guilty of disloyalty, if he sacrifices the Muslim interests. But my
nationalism has taught me that I would be guilty of disloyalty if I
sacrifice the interests of a single Indian.
Asked if there was any difference between his present attitude towards the
Muslim League demand and the stand he took in 1942, Mahatma Gandhi said:

There is very great difference. In 1942, Rajaji had not ‘burst’
on the scene as he did at the Aga Khan Palace with a concrete
proposition. It reflects very great credit on his persistence. He never
takes up a standpoint without the fullest consideration and having
taken it up, he follows it to the bitterest end. He had abundant faith in
my loyalty and he never gave me up as I have never given him up.
When he found me in the Aga Khan Palace and presented the
Formula, I did not take even five minutes and I said ‘Yes’ because I
saw it in a concrete shape.
My mind is narrow. I have not read much literature. I have not
seen much of the world. I have concentrated upon certain things in
life and beyond that I have no other interest. Therefore, I could not
realize the meaning of Rajaji’s stand and I disliked it. But when he
came with a concrete formula—I myself a concrete being of flesh and
blood—and when he had put something in concrete shape, I felt I
could hug it and touch it. Therefore, you see the vast difference
between 1942 and today. However, thereby I have not departed from
the Congress standpoint in general terms. Congress has accepted
self-determination and the Rajaji Formula has also accepted the
principle of self-determination and therefore the Formula had become
common ground.
Proceeding, Mahatma Gandhi explained that he accepted the principle of
sovereign States, consistent with friendliness. He said:

Friendliness suggests that before the whole world we must act as
one nation, not united by extraneous circumstances, or united by
force of British arms, but united by a greater force, that is, our own
determined will.
Gandhi-Jinnah Talks, pp. 42-6, and The Bombay Chronicle, 29-9-1944
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

423

569. INTERVIEW TO “NEWS CHRONICLE”1
BOMBAY,

September 29,2 1944
Mr. Gandhi told me today why his talks with Mr. Jinnah failed to produce a
solution of the Hindu-Muslim differences.

I could not accept the two nations basis. This was Mr. Jinnah’s
demand. He wants immediate recognition of the North-West Frontier
Province, Sind, the whole of the Punjab, Bengal and Assam as
sovereign and completely independent Pakistan.
He wants Mr. Gandhi to agree to this amputation from the rest of India without
consulting the wishes of the inhabitants by plebiscite. He has rejected the
Rajagopalachari Formula. I asked Mr. Gandhi what he was prepared to recognize as
Pakistan and on what basis there could be any hope of agreement in future. He was
frank and precise. He replied:

I want to make it clear that I believe Mr. Jinnah is sincere, but I
think he is suffering from hallucination when he imagines that an
unnatural division of India could bring either happiness or prosperity
to the people concerned. It was my suggestion that provided there was
the safeguard of a plebiscite there could he sovereignty for the
predominantly Muslim areas, but it should be accompanied by bonds
of alliance between Hindustan and Pakistan. There should be common
policy and working arrangement on foreign affairs, defence,
communications and similar matters. This is manifestly vital to the
welfare of both parts of India.
This arrangement, Mr. Gandhi said, could not interfere with the internal life of
Muslims who would not be subject in any way to Hindu domination. Such a division
would not create an artificial split between people who whatever their religious faiths
are descended from a common stock and are all Indians.

Unfortunately, Mr. Jinnah would have none of it and asked me
to agree to the principle of two nations entirely separate.
I asked Mr. Gandhi if he had adopted the attitude because he thought he could
not ‘sell’ such a division to the country or because he thought it wrong in principle.
He replied.
1

Of London, represented by Stuart Gelder
The Hindu, 2-10-1944, however reports this interview under the dateline,
September 30.
2

424

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Because it is fundamentally wrong in principle. If I had thought
Mr. Jinnah’s view was right, even though the whole world were against
me, I would have accepted it personally and given him my
unquestioned allegiance.
If Mr. Jinnah agreed to your view of division, but insisted there should be no
plebiscite or a plebiscite in which only Muslims would vote, would you settle on this
basis?

Never. How could I agree in a personal or any other capacity to
decide the future of millions of people without their having anything
to say about their destiny?
What was your impression of Mr. Jinnah’s attitude on the question of an
interim national government which you outlined1 to me in July?

Mr. Jinnah has said that he is deeply interested in independence,
but it did not seem to me that he set as great store by it as immediate
recognition of the Pakistan he wants. Whereas, you see, my view has
been all along that we cannot be free among ourselves until we are
free from imperial domination. We have parted as friends. These days
have not been wasted. I am convinced that Mr. Jinnah is a good man.
I hope we shall meet again. I am a man of prayer and I shall pray for
understanding. In the mean time, it is the duty of the public to digest
the situation and bring the pressure of their opinion upon us.
Gandhi-Jinnah Talks, pp. 47-8

570. SPEECH AT: PRAYER MEETING2
BOMBAY,

Friday, September 29, 1944
Addressing them at the end of prayers, Gandhiji said that he had been seeing
large number of men and women joining in prayers every evening and contributing to
the Harijan Fund. He wished to tell them something about Harijans this evening since
he would have no opportunity of addressing the people tomorrow in view of his
decision to leave for Sevagram tomorrow afternoon. For years he had been working
for the removal of untouchability. Wherever he went, he emphasized that
untouchability was a curse which required to be removed, root and branch. It was a

1

Vide “Interview to Stuart Gelder”, 4/6-7-1944.
Since it was the eve of Gandhiji’s departure for Sevagram, the evening
prayers in the Rungta House compound were attended by a crowd of three thousand—
the biggest congregation of the week.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

425

tragedy that this curse still persisted in India. Many Harijans had been coming and
seeing him. He was ashamed to find that even in a place like Bombay which claimed
to do so much for the downtrodden, Harijans found it difficult to find houses to live in.
It was no use merely contributing to the Harijan Fund. The real duty of the people lay
in working for the uplift of the Harijans. Gandhiji said:

It is not for you and me to decide who is low or who is high for
we are all children of God. The Hindu religion would not survive
without the eradication of the curse of untouchability.
Even in the matter of communal unity, concluded Gandhiji, if we treated all as
brothers and sisters, the present dark clouds would clear and give place to bright
sunshine.

The Bombay Chronicle, 30-9-1944

571. LETTER TO MOHAN KUMARAMANGALAM
BOMBAY,

September 30, 1944
MY DEAR MOHAN,

You have done this very cleverly. But I had better not Say more
just now.
BAPU
S HRI KUMARAMANGALAM
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

426

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

572. LETTER TO M. R. JAYAKAR
BOMBAY,

September 30, 1944
DEAR DR. JAYAKAR,

Many thanks for your kind letter1 . I did what I thought was the
best for the country. Of course, you should now express yourself
freely on the question. That way only we shall arrive at the truth.
I am preparing for my departure and writing this against time.
Hence this brief note.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhi-Jayakar Papers: File No. 826. Courtesy: National Archives of India

573. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
September 30, 1944
BHAI MUNSHI,

See the enclosed2 and, if you can throw light on it, do so. Homi
Taleyarkhan had asked me about this and my reply3 was published in
the Jame [Jamshed] 4 .
I am writing this in a hurry. Take care of your health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7682. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi
1

Dated September 29, which read: “So your talks have failed. I am not
surprised. There could be no meeting-ground between you two. . . . Your efforts have
now ended and I suppose I am at liberty now to express my sentiments on the nature
and result of your effort if I choose to do so.... It is frankly my opinion that the
Muslim League leader has gained more from you than he has lost to you. . . . Your
formula is in Mr. Jinnah’s hands and . . . he will use this formula as a bargaining
counter with the British Government and also as the starting point in future
negotiations with Indian leaders. If at such negotiations Mr. Jinnah revives the
Formula . . . you will be powerless to resist it. Therein lies the danger in my opinion.
To me . . . Jinnah would prefer a settlement with the British, rather than with his own
countrymen. . . .”
2
Not available
3
ibid
4
ibid
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

427

574. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
BOMBAY,

September 30, 1944
CHI. ANAND,

I am leaving for Wardha today. I have your letter. You may
come over to Wardha when you want. Be at peace.1
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI ANAND HINGORANI
S HARDA VILLA
F YZABAD R OAD
LUCKNOW, U. P.
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

575. LETTER TO HUNDRAJ M. PARWANI
October 1, 1944
DEAR PARWANI,

I had your letter.2 I am powerless. I have no authority. Moreover
I do not understand Sind politics.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI HUNDRAJ MULCHAND P ARWANI
BUNDER R OAD
KARACHI , S IND
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

A Gujarati daily published from Bombay
The addressee, in his letter dated August 1, had suggested that under the
extraordinary circumstances prevailing in Sind Province the Congress members of
the Sind Legislative Assembly should have resigned.
2

428

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

576. LETTER TO DONALD G. GROOM
S EVAGRAM ,

October 1, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I am sure you will be welcome on your terms whenever you
return.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
F RIEND DONALD G. G ROOM
F RIENDS S ETTLEMENT
HOSHANGABAD (C. P.)
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

577. LETTER TO MOHAMMED ABDULLA
October 1, 1944
DEAR SHEIKH SAHEB 1 ,

I got your telegram at Bombay. I could not spare a minute. I
hope your function was a success. Mridulabehn 2 has given me a full
report. She has also given me your book on Kashmir. I shall read it
when I get the time.
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
Leader of the National Conference, later Chief Minister of Jammu and
Kashmir State
2
Mridula Sarabhai

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

429

578. LETTER TO JAUHARILAL JHANJHORIA
S EVAGRAM ,

October 1, 1944
BHAI JAUHARILAL

I had sent your letter to Baijnathji1 . I see that you people have to
resolve the dispute yourselves. I have already said what I wanted to.
Blessings from

BAPU
JAUHARILAL JHANJHORIA
OLD TOPKHANA , M AIN R OAD
INDORE
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

430

Baijnath Mahodaya
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX I
LETTER FROM DR. NAYYAR AND DR. GILDER TO COL. BHANDARI 1
DETENTION CAMP,
January 31, 1944
DEAR COL. BHANDARI,

As you know, Smt. Kasturba Gandhi has been gradually losing ground. Last
night she had very little sleep, and this morning she had a bad collapse. She became
very short of breath (respiration 48), the pulse was very feeble in volume and tension
and 100 to the minute, and her colour was ashy grey. She recovered after about twenty
minutes’ treatment. Now—at midday—she is restless, complains of pain in the left
chest and back, is cyanotic and dyspnoeic. The pulse rate is 108, the B.P. is 90/50,
respiration
Under these circumstances we would like to have the help in consultation of
Dr. Jivraj Mehta (Yeravda Central Prison) and Dr. B. C. Roy (Calcutta) who have been
here in her former illness and in whom she has faith. We might state that the patient’s
condition is such that if the help of these doctors is to be of any use it should not be
delayed.
We might also point out that, as she has to be watched all night and day,
nursing has become difficult and the patient herself has been constantly asking for
Kanu Gandhi and Dr. Dinshaw Mehta.
Yours sincerely,
S. NAYYAR
M. D. D. GILDER

PS.
Gandhiji’s blood-pressure this morning was 206/110.
Gandhi ji’s Corres pondence with the Govern ment, pp. 226-7

1
Vide “Letter to Secreatry, Home Department, Government of Bombay”,
31-1-1944; “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of India”,
4-3-1944 and 1-4-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

431

APPENDIX II
LETTER FROM ADDITIONAL SECRETARY, HOME DEPARTMENT,
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA1
NO. III/43-M.S.,
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, H.D.,
NEW DELHI,
March 21, 1944
FROM

THE ADDITIONAL SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
HOME DEPARTMENT
NEW DELHI
TO

M. K. GANDHI,

ESQUIRE

SIR,

In reply to your letter of 4th March regarding Mr. Butler’s reply to a question
in the House of Commons on the 2nd March, 1944, I am directed to say that the
Government of India regret that you should feel that they were unreasonable or
obstructive about the calling in of special medical attendants. The Government of
India were always ready to allow any extra medical aid or consultation which the
Government doctors considered necessary, and they do not think that there was any
delay in summoning outside aid when the Government doctors decided that it was
needed. It was on January 28 that they were first informed that Mrs. Gandhi had asked
for the services of Dr. Dinshaw Mehta, and it was not until January 31 that they were
told that Dr. Gilder had asked for consultation with certain other doctors. On February
1, the Bombay Government were explicitly informed that any extra medical aid or
consultation might be allowed which the Government doctors considered necessary or
useful. If Dr. Dinshaw Mehta was not called in earlier, it was due to the view
originally expressed by both Col. Bhandari and Dr. Gilder that his services could not
be of any use, but he was summoned as soon as the Government doctors revised that
opinion. Your letter of January 27, which did not reach the Government of India until
February 1, made some reference to your wife’s wish to see an Ayurvedic physician,
but no name was mentioned and it was not until February 9 that a definite requestfor
the services of Vaidyaraj Sharma was received. The request was then granted within 24

1

Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 4-3-1944; 1-4-1944 and “Letter to M. G. Bhandari”, 2-4-1944.

432

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

hours and as soon as the Government of India were made aware of the difficulties
resulting from his not being accommodated inside the Palace, the necessary
permission was given for him to reside there. In the circumstances, the Government
of India feel that they did everything possible to ensure that your wife received all the
treatment that you wished during her illness.
2. As to the question of release, the Government of India still feel that the
course they adopted was the best and kindest. It was reported to them on January 25
that your son, Devadas Gandhi, had asked his mother whether she would like to be
released on parole and she had replied that she would not like to leave the Palace
without her husband. Government have made no use of this report, since it was the
record of a private conversation; but it confirmed them in the view expressed above.
The misunderstanding about the statement in America quite wrongly attributed to Sir
Girjashanker Bajpai has been cleared up by answers to questions in the Legislative
Assembly which you have doubtless seen.
3. The arrangements for the funeral were understood here to be in accordance
with your wishes. The Government made enquiries on the point and were informed
that you had no special preference between the first two alternatives mentioned in
your letter.
4. In these circumstances, the Government of India do not think that Mr.
Butler’s reply to the parliamentary question was incorrect in substance.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
R. TOTTENHAM
ADDITLONAL SECRETARY TO
THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

Gandhi ji’s Corres pondence with the Govern ment, pp. 235-7

APPENDIX III
LETTER FROM LORD WAVELL 1
March 28, 1944
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

I have your letter of March 9. You will receive a separate reply from the Home
Secretary on your complaint about Mr. Butler’s answer to a question in the House of
Commons. I can only say that I deeply regret, if you are left with the impressionthat the
1

Vide “Letter to Lord Wavell”, 9-3-1944 and 9-4-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

433

Government of India have been unsympathetic in the matter of Mrs. Gandhi’s illness.
Miss Slade’s case will be examined in the light of what you say about her.
I do not think it profitable that we should enter into lengthy argument, and do
not propose to answer in detail the points you raise in your letter. But I think it best
to give you a clear statement of my views on the future development of India and the
reasons for your present detention.
The draft declaration of His Majesty’s Government which Sir Stafford Cripps
brought to India stated in unmistakable terms the intention of His Majesty’s
Government to give India self-government under a constitution of her own devising,
arrived at by agreement between the principal elements. I need hardly say that I am in
entire accord with that aim, and only seek the best means to implement it without
delivering India to confusion and turmoil. Much wisdom and a spirit of goodwill and
compromise will be required to arrive at the right solution, but with good leadership, I
am sure, a solution can be found.
Meanwhile there is much work to be done, particularly in the economic field,
in preparing India to take her proper place in the modern world. She must be ready to
welcome change and progress in many hitherto-unfamiliar directions and to raise the
standard of living of her population. Such work is primarily non-political; it may
well hasten a political settlement, but cannot await it. It will give rise to many new
and absorbing problems demanding the best abilities that India can bring to bear on
them. India cannot be expected to tackle these problems in isolation from the rest of
the world, or without the aid that Britain can give and the services of an experienced
administration. But it is work in which leaders of all parties can co-operate with the
certainty that they are helping the country towards the goal of freedom.
I regret that I must view the present policy of the Congress party as hindering
and not forwarding Indian progress to self-government and development. During a
war in which the success of the United Nations against the Axis powers is vital both
to India and to the world, as you yourself have recognized, the Working Committee of
Congress declined to co-operate, ordered Congress Ministries to resign, and decided
to take no part in the administration of the country or in the war-effort which India
was making to assist the United Nations. At the greatest crisis of all for India, at a
time when Japanese invasion was possible, the Congress party decided to pass a
resolution calling on the British to leave India, which could not fail to have the most
serious effect on our ability to defined the frontiers of India against the Japanese. I am
quite clear that India’s problems cannot be solved by an immediate and complete
withdrawal of the British.
I do not accuse you or the Congress party of any wish deliberately to aid the
Japanese. But you are much too intelligent a man, Mr. Gandhi, not to have realized
that the effect of your resolution must be to hamper the prosecution of the war; and it

434

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

is clear to me that you had lost confidence in our ability to defend India, and were
prepared to take advantage of our supposed military straits to gain political
advantage. I do not see how those responsible for the safety of India could have acted
otherwise than they did and could have failed to arrest those who sponsored the
resolution. As to general Congress responsibility for the disturbances which
followed, I was, as you know, Commander-in-Chief at the time; my vital lines of
communication to the Burma frontier were cut by Congress supporters, in the name of
Congress, often using the Congress flag. I cannot, therefore, hold Congress guiltless
of what occurred; and I cannot believe that you, with all your acumen and experience,
could have been unaware of what was likely to follow from your policy. I do not
believe that the Congress party’s action in this matter represented the real feeling of
India, nor that the Congress attitude of non-co-operation represents the opinion of
anything like a majority of India.
To sum up, I believe that with general co-operation, we can in the immediate
future do much to solve India’s economic problems, and can make steady and
substantial progress towards Indian self-government.
I believe that the greatest contribution that the Congress party can make
towards India’s welfare is to abandon the policy of non-co-operation and to join
whole-heartedly with the other Indian parties and with the British in helping India
forward in economic and political progress—not by any dramatic or spectacular
stroke, but by hard, steady work towards the end ahead. I think that the greatest
service you could do to India would be to advise unequivocally such co-operation.
In the mean time, I regard it as my task, in the interests of India, of which I am a
sincere friend, to concentrate all my efforts on bringing this war to a victorious
conclusion, and to prepare for India’s advancement after the war. In this task, I feel, I
can count on very considerable co-operation from the majority of Indians.
Yours sincerely,
WAVELL
Correspondence with Mr. Gandhi, pp. 122-3

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

435

APPENDIX IV
LETTER FROM DR. GILDER TO ADDITIONAL SECRETARY, HOME
DEPARTMENT, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA1
DETENTION CAMP,
March 31, 1944
THE ADDITIONAL SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
HOME DEPARTMENT
NEW DELHI
SIR,

Your letter of the 21st March to Mahatma Gandhi contains the statement:
It was on January 28 that they were first informed that Mrs. Gandhi had asked
for the services of Dr. Dinshaw Mehta.... If Dr. Dinshaw was not called in
earlier, it was due to the view originally expressed by both Col. Bhandari and
Dr. Gilder that his services would not be of any use, but he was summoned as
soon as the Government doctors revised that opinion.
Surely coupling of my name with that of Col. Bhandari is a mistake! The
Government doctors in attendance were Col. Bhandari and Col. Shah. As far as I am
concerned, some time in December last, at one of Col. Advani’s evening visits (when
he was officiating for Col. Bhandari) Smt. Kasturba Gandhi asked him to allow Dr.
Dinshaw Mehta to come in and Col. Advani was good enough to ask my opinion on
the advisabiIity of Dr. Dinshaw’s coming. As I had not talked over the matter with my
colleague, Dr. Sushila Nayyar, nor with the patient or her husband, I told Col.
Advani, I would give him a reply later. At his visit the next morning, I told him my
considered opinion that Dr. Dinshaw’s presence would be a great help.
When the whole of January had passed and permission for Dr. Dinshaw had not
come, Dr. Nayyar and myself sent a gentle reminder in our letter of 31st January. A
copy is hereto appended.
I might state that though in that letter we had asked for a consultation with Dr.
B. C. Roy, no notice seems to have been taken of it or of verbal reminders.
You will permit me to draw your attention to another inaccuracy, viz., about
the employment of trained nurses. No trained nurse ever came inside the camp. Before
the arrival of Smt. Jayaprakash Narayan and Shri Kanu Gandhi, when nursing was

1

Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 1-4-1944 and “Letter to M. G. Bhandari”, 2-4-1944.

436

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

becoming difficult, we were given the services of a woman who had acted as a badli
ayah 1 at the mental hospital. She struck work inside of a week and asked the
Superintendent for her discharge.
I have, etc.,
M. D. D. GILDER
Gandhi ji’s Corres pondence with the Govern ment, pp. 240-1

APPENDIX V
DISCUSSION ON UNDERGROUND ACTIVITIES2
WOMAN WORKER : You told us, we should be our own leaders after your arrest. In
the absence of the Working Committee, everyone of us was to think for himself or
herself. We acted according to our light. Your recent utterances make us feel that we
have been let down.
GANDHIJI:
W. W.

I have blamed no one. But, when a thing is wrong, I must say so.

Will it not cause a set-back?
G.

No, we learn from our mistakes. By correcting them we advance.

W. W.

Some say: ‘If this is your narrow interpretation of non-violence, we shall have
none of it. Call it violence or by whatever name you like, we cannot dislodge the
Government without sabotage.’
G. It cannot succeed though for some time it may seem to or even actually
succeed. But I have said that those who do not believe in my way can say so openly,
and courageously try their own method and see if they will succeed better.
W. W

We admit that public opinion has veered round to your view. The public has
come to feel, whether through enlightenment or fear, that sabotage won’t do. But you
cannot expect everyone to become a perfect being, which your method implies.
G. I agree. That is why I launched forth with imperfect men. But whether the
people develop the required non-violence or not, I cannot play fast and loose with my
principles.
W. W.
G.

What is the quickest way to reach our goal?

The straightest way, though it may appear to be long.

W. W.

Then you do not visualize independence in the near future?

1

Substitute nurse
Vide “Discussion with a Friend”, after 6-5-1944; “Letter to R. R. Diwakar”,
18-5-1944; “Letter to Ramanathan”, 5-7-1944 and “Statement to the Press”,
28-7-1944.
2

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

437

G.

I visualize it in the nearest future, if my way is followed.

W. W.

You want us to feel indignant and yet sit quiet.

G.

No, I want you to feel very indignant with yourself. It is no use feeling
angry with a snake, the snake will bite. Follow any way that commends itself to you
if mine does not, but do not sit still.
W. W.

We have not the courage, we can’t get on if we oppose you.

You must develop that courage.. . 1 It is because of this courage to stand
alone that I am supposed to represent India’s urge for freedom....2 Swaraj is not for the
weak. If you say, you follow me, when you really do not, you are weak.
G.

The women worker was nonplussed. Gandhiji noticed her dilemma.
Reassuringly he proceeded:
“However, you can say, ‘We do not follow your reasoning, but we yield to your
experience.’ You can tell your co-workers, ‘We went there. We were not convinced.
But we could not convince him either. Therefore, we will follow him as disciplined
soldiers.’ But if this course does not appeal to them, it is equally open to them to say,
‘The Mahatma has told us to follow our own reason, if we have no faith in his way.’
That will be equally honourable—perhaps more. I shall then defend them.”
Appa Pant, the Rajkumar of Aundh, had been advising and guiding underground
workers. He put before Gandhiji his dilemma: “With me truth and non-violence are
not a policy but my creed. I know of underground workers who would not willingly
hurt a fly. They are patriots to the core. I have to shelter them when they come to me
and seek my advice. I want to wean them from secret methods. But, in doing so, I have
myself to resort to secrecy. I feel puzzled and perplexed.” Gandhiji replied:
“Your attitude is unexceptionable. You cannot jump out of a running train, as
it were. No outside agency can give you effective guidance. It must come from within.
If you dive within yourself and search prayerfully for an answer, a stage will come
when suddenly your eyes will be opened and you will conceive such a disgust for
untruth and secrecy that you will go to the underground workers and tell them that
they will find you useless as a guide if they want to go their way. They will then see it
in your face and understand, and very likely it will be the beginning of a new chapter
in their lives.”
Mahatm a Gandhi —The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book One, pp. 39-40

1
2

438

Omissions as in the source
ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX VI
DISCUSSION WITH UNDERGROUND WORKERS1
As the onslaught of Governmental repression gathered volume and intensity,
more and more workers went underground. . . . Some of these friends wanted to meet
Gandhiji soon after his release. He sent them word that they could come at their risk.
Several of them accordingly came and saw him at Juhu and later at Panchgani. They
included R. R. Diwakar . . . Annada Chowdhury . . . Achyut Patwardhan and Aruna Asaf
Ali . . .
Gandhiji’s advice to them was emphatic. He held all secrecy to be sin. “To the
extent to which secrecy has crept in, it has hurt our cause. We have not to think in
terms of one or two, we have to think in terms of forty crores. Today they feel
lifeless. We cannot revive them by resorting to secret methods. Only by adhering to
Truth and Non-violence can we bring back lustre to their lustreless eyes.”
Looking at their immediate surroundings, he said to them, they might feel that if
some of them had not gone underground, the movement would have suffered. But this
was only apparently so. When you come to bigger issues, “you will find that it is
only by eschewing all secrecy and working openly that you can advance. . . . Today
you may be two, tomorrow you will be twenty, if you come out in open, and so the
struggle will go on gathering momentum from day to day.”
Mahatm a Gandhi —The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book One, pp. 34-5

1
Vide “Letter to R. R. Diwakar”, 18-5-1944; 19-7-1944; “Letter to Aruna Asaf
Ali”, 30-6-1944; “Letter to Ramanathan”, 5-7-1944 and “Statement to the Press”,
28-7-1944. Only excerpts are reproduced here.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

439

APPENDIX VII
LETTER FROM V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI 1
SVAGATAM, M YLAPORE,
MADRAS ,
June 2, 1944
MY DEAR BROTHER,

This letter I mean only for you and your trusted friends. Mr. T. R. Venkatarama
Sastri, now on his way to Srinagar, will deliver it in person.
I must first thank you for your ‘sympathy in abundance’. My philosophy is not so
stoical but it needs the human touch. You know, as only a very few do, how in simple
words to get to a man’s heart. It takes a big heart to do so.
Don’t fear a long political screed from me. I do not see Government arresting
you as soon as you are well for another term in jail. You say in your letter to Jayakar,
they will do so. If you have reasons to think so, I don’t know them.
Listen to my story. It shall be brief. You can fill in the outline.
The greatest event to happen in the remaining days of your life will be the
World Conference of Peace. You must attend it. If they won’t let you go as the
representative of India, you must go still. To the good and true men at the Peace table
your name will be sufficient credential.
Don’t waste your energy on details. Experts will handle them. Concentrate on
the sovereign issues.
I. Disarmament of all nations. I would allow the International Authority to
have some armed forces. But you won’t. Go ahead. You will have valiant support all
over the world. What if you fail? You will have given your evangel to a stricken and
listening world.
II. Equality of economic as well as political opportunities for all peoples of
this principle the implications are too many and too intricate for a single human
brain. The comprehending proposition is all you can safeguard.
III. Elimination of the colour bar in the British Commonwealth and in the
world at large. To fail under this head is to leave a wide door for future wars. Whether
India is within or without the Commonwealth, this issue is supreme. At the Peace
table one is a citizen of the world.
No doubt it would be a giant’s strength to be armed with the Government of

1

440

Vide “Letter to V. S. Srinivasa Sastri”, 10-6-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

India’s authority. Whether they made you the delegation’s leader or not, you would be
looked up to as leader. A necessary condition is the end of Section 93 rule and the
restoration of popular government. To this end I have been for nearly two years now
pleading that:
(i) political prisoners and detenus should be released;
(ii) general elections should be held, and the Central and local legislatures be
put back in power; and
(iii) a national government be formed at the Centre of which the personnel
should be drawn from elected leaders. I wouldn’t make a fetish of parliamentary
legislation during the war or complete control of the country’s defence.
Tall order, you say. A keen eye will also see in the sketch gaping defects and
crudities. There are wise and strong men among us to look after all that.
The Hindu-Muslim rift is there to puzzle, dishearten and paralyse. I despair at
the very thought. You see farther and more clearly than most others. I shall, for
mypart, abide by your decision—always short of Pakistan, mind you.
I am too feeble for active propaganda.
The means suggested to these mighty ends may be tested only by the standards
of Truth and Non-violence. Smaller standards are utterly, utterly out of place—
prestige, consistency, or party prospects.
Don’t miss the wood for the trees.
Always and at the very core,
Your loving brother,
V. S. S RINIVASAN
Letter s of the Right Honour able V. S. Sriniv asa Sastri , pp. 359-60

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

441

APPENDIX VIII
LETTER FROM MIRABEHN TO M. K. GANDHI 1
SUNDER BUN, J UHU,

June 12, 1944
BELOVED BAPU,

I have your letter. I had not realized the position regarding the fund kept in my
name, and that my expenses were being drawn. I had the impression that the whole
sum was being kept intact and that I was receiving food, clothing, travelling
expenses, etc., like some others who gave their whole time to the cause according to
their individual capacity. But this was a misunderstanding. So, I will gladly put the
matter straight at once. I cannot bear any bargaining in such matters. I, therefore, ask
that Rs. 20,000 should be deducted from the total, which should cover the expenses
incurred by the Ashram for me during these 20 years. The remainder can be transferred
to my name.
I had understood that when I had this money, I should be free to do constructive
national work without let or hindrance, so long as I made it clear that the scheme of
work was entirely my own and without your personal approval. I did not realize that
you would feel called upon publicly to express disapproval of my work.
You have given me my freedom with one hand and taken it away with the
other. To give me my money and freedom, and at the same time to say that as soon as
I begin to use them you will publicly disapprove, is to sabotage anything I may try to
do. You at the same time sabotage any chance of my being able to prove to you that
you are wrong.
You have brought up a whole lot of reports and prejudices against Sardarji. I
have avoided discussing these matters with you because I could see that everything I
said excited you. The result is that you have not understood my position. You have
made up your mind that I am completely under his influence. It is you who have tried
to urge me to that position, but as you know, I have protested all along. You said I
should have to join the Communist Party. I said no. You said as a true Hindu wife I
should have to follow him in everything. I said my opinion was the opposite, and
that my whole instinct told me that I must resist him wherever necessary and live my
own life according to the ideals in which I believe, by which means, he would some
day know that I was right. If I had followed his advice, I should not have undertaken
my scheme but I knew that I must resist him and I did. My faith in God is my guide.
1

Vide “Letter to Additional Secretary, Home Department, Government of
India”, 15-7-1943.

442

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

But now you propose to throttle, by the warning of public disapproval, any attempt
on my part to put my ideals into practice. My ideals have not changed in the last few
days. I am the same person that I was when we used to talk happily together.
Believing, as I did, that everything is finally settled I started the ball rolling. I
have put out enquiries regarding co-workers, land, maps and other details. I have
explained the scheme (as my personal idea) to many people. Must I now understand if
I go on with my plans you will feel called upon to disapprove. The fact that there will
be Rs. 20,000 less does not worry me at all. I can start in a smaller way and make up
with donations. But the possibility that you might broadcast public or semi-public
disapproval of my work, which statement I should feel obliged equally publicly to
answer, means that for decency’s sake I must avoid any such catastrophe, and
therefore cancel all my projects of work. I would, in that case, take the balance of the
money after the deduction of Rs. 20,000, invest it somewhere, and go to live in
seclusion until time as you revised your ideas.
Yours ever devoted daughter,
MIRA
From the origin al : Pyarel al Papers . Nehru Memori al Museum and Librar y.
Courte sy : Belade vi Nayyar and Dr. Sushil a Nayyar

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

443

APPENDIX IX
LETTER FROM P. C. JOSHI1
BOMBAY,
June 14, 1944
DEAR GANDHIJI,

Your small chit came as a pleasant surprise that you were so eager to know
more about us. . . .
I am answering your points in a very brief manner. . . .
1. People in people’s war means all peoples the world over without exception.
It, of course, includes India’s millions and also the Negroes wherever they be. . . .
This war has split the world into two camps. On the one side . . . Fascists are fighting
the war for the imperialist domination of the world. . . . On the other side are the
freedom-loving peoples of the world. . . the camp of freedom and democracy. . .
fighting Fascism is the only path of national liberation from imperialist domination
for us today. . . . The more we unite our patriotic parties, the weaker and more isolated
becomes the alien Government and the more irresistible our national and other
demands, the greater our capacity to save and serve our people. The more our patriotic
parties engage themselves in those tasks which any war-time government should
successfully lead, but an alien Government cannot, the more speedily we get the
united intervention of all the peoples of the world behind our national demand for
national government in the common interest of fighting the common enemy.
2. If you desire to examine the accounts personally, they will present
themselves with all the registers where and when you desire. If you decide to appoint a
representative, he should besuch whom we also know to be an honest man and
notalready prejudiced against us. You will not find our accounts as well kept as by a
commercial firm but I am sure you will give us a pass. . . . You will find some
anonymous donors, but I believe that you also accept anonymous donors. But to
dispel any suspicion that “anonymous” may be code for Government cash, I am
prepared to give you (not your representative) the names. . . .
If you have yet any doubts left and in any case, I give you some references. . .
. Iftikharuddin and his Begum, Shaukat Ansari and Zohra, N. M. Joshi. You can ask
Dr. and Mrs. Subbaroyan as to what they think is going to happen to their property
when Mohan and Parvati (their children and our comrades) get it, and in fact what they
know happens to the property of the whole-time workers of the party. . . .
1

Vide “Letter to P. C. Joshi”, 11-6-1944 and 30-7-1944. Only excerpts are
reproduced here.

444

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

3. I know it is easy enough to make such a vile charge but very difficult to
prove it. . . . Firstly, I believe, if you find that we are not paid by the Government,
you will easily believe that we are not likely to hand over labour leaders to the police.
Secondly, our party, except in Ahmedabad and Jamshedpur, is as much the
unquestioned leader of the working class as the great Congress is of the Indian people
as a whole. . . . We gave up our strike policy because we considered it anti-national in
the conditions of today, aiding the Jap aggressors on the one hand and intensifying
the economic crisis for our own people on the other. That we successfully prevented
the Indian working class from resorting to strikes even in a period of their worsening
material conditions is the measure not only of our influence over it but its capacity to
understand national interests as its own.
4. There is no question of our “adopting the policy of infiltrating the
Congress organization”. We have been in the Congress ever since we were born as a
party. . . . Whether our intent is hostile or not, it is for our fellow Congressmen to
judge and for us to prove otherwise through our practice. . . . We are inside the
Congress on our right, as patriotic sons and daughters of the people who join the
common national organization, so that we may be able to fight our hardest and best
in realization of the common goal of national emancipation and no slanders can ever
provoke us to give up this stand and forgo the glorious privilege.
5. The Communist Party decides its own policy as it understands the interests
of its own people and of the peoples of the world. As long as the Communist
International was there, we were dubbed as ‘Moscow Agents’. It is rather surprising
to come across the same insinuation even after its dissolution. . . . The Communist
Party is one great revolutionary brotherhood. It exists in every country of the world.
All have the same ideology and are moved by the common aims of fighting for the
liberation of their own and all peoples. I can send you the journals and documents of the
Communist Parties of Britain, U.S.A., South Africa, Australia, which have nailed down
Amery & Co. as slanderers and provocateurs after August 9 and which have
unfalteringly demanded the release of the Congress leaders and settlement with India
on the basis of a real national government. . . .
P. C. JOSHI
Corres pondence betwee n Mahatm a Gandhi and P. C. Joshi, pp. 3-16

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

445

APPENDIX X
PASSAGES FROM “THE QUINTESSENCE OF GANDHISM”1
Thou shalt fight for the protection of good men and the destruction of
wrong-doers and for the establishment of righteousness.
The side you take up and the weapons you wield are indeed important but the
obligation to fight is perfectly absolute and independent of every other
consideration, and the emphasis is all upon this obligation. It may be that you take
the wrong side in the conflict. But if you are on the wrong side today, you may turn to
the right side tomorrow. But those who sit upon the fence have already qualified for
admission into Dante’s Inferno. . . .

II
Thou shalt fight for the right, for . . . ‘Truth alone prevails, not untruth.’ . . .
You may not take the wrong side or employ questionable means to attain even a
perfectly legitimate end, and still hope to succeed. . . .

III
When you are ready to fight for the right, Gandhiji arms you with the
all-conquering and never-failing weapon, namely . . . suffering cum forgiveness. . . .
. . . Mankind must have recourse to love and non-violence, if they will escape from
the vicious circle of hatred and violence. Two wrongs can never make one right.
Violence in response to violence only provokes more violence and so on ad
infinitum.
For a true theist, the Gandhian is the only position he can take up consistently
with his theism. If God is there ever present—present in a more real sense than you or
I—as Judge and Defender of the right, the theist, imperfect as he is in knowledge as
well as in strength, will think it no business of his to judge his adversary or to punish
him for what he thinks to be the adversary’s wrong-doing. . . .
Young India, 22-1-1925

1

446

Vide “Letter to Valji G. Desai”, 20-6-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX XI
OPINION GANDHIJI‘S RESPONSIBILITY1
February2 6, 1944
We are asked to examine the question whether the authority conferred upon
Mahatma Gandhi by the resolution of the A.I.C.C. dated the 8th of August, 1942, to
“start a mass struggle on non-violent lines” is still subsisting, apart from the
legality or otherwise of the purpose for which the authority was given.
The authority conferred by the said resolution must be construed with reference
to the circumstances under which and the purposes for which it was given. It appears
from the resolution as a whole that the steps to be taken under such authority were
conceived by the framers of the resolution to meet the situation which had then
arisen.
In our opinion, the recitals and the purpose of the said resolution and the
circumstances under which the same was passed limit the authority so as to confine it
to the immediate circumstances and the purpose which the A. I. C. C. had then in
view. The said authority was intended to be exercised for and in the then immediate
situation. Before Gandhiji could exercise such authority, he was arrested on the 9th of
August, 1942, and was prevented from acting on the resolution by reason of his
ceasing to be a free agent. By his being so prevented, the exercise of the authority
was rendered impossible and it came to an end.
The authority conferred upon him was neither permanent nor recurring and
there can be no question of its revival by the recent release of Gandhiji in the present
situation.
BHULABHAI J. DESAI
V. F. TARAPOREWALA
K. M. M UNSHI
Pilgri mage to Freedo m, pp. 433-4

1

Vide “Speech to Congressmen, Poona”, 29-6-1944; “Letter to K. M.
Munshi”, 8-7-1944 and “Letter to M. R. Jayakar”, 14-7-1944.
2
This seems to be an error; according to the source (p. 91), Gandhiji consulted
the lawyers after his release which was on May 6.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

447

APPENDIX XII
STUART GELDER’S CABLE TO “NEWS CHRONICLE”1
Mr. Gandhi is prepared to accept and to advise the Congress to participate in a
war-time national government in full control of the civil administration, leaving the
Viceroy and the Commander-in-Chief in full control of the British and Indian armies.
It would be expected that the establishment of such a government would be
accompanied now by a guarantee of Indian independence after the war.
Mr. Gandhi has also approved the proposals submitted to Mr. Jinnah by
Mr. C. Rajagopalachari, which agree to a solution of the Hindu-Pakistan dispute by a
plebiscite and demarcation of the districts where Muslims are in a majority, if the
Muslim League will endorse the demand for independence and co-operate with the
Congress in the formation of a provisional interim government for the transitional
period.
Despite the fact that he is still far from well and wishes to be relieved as far as
possible from being burdened by dealing with political problems in detail for the
time being, I talked with Mr. Gandhi for more than three hours in Panchgani this
week. If the Muslim League accepts Mr. Rajagopalachari’s proposals and the
Government will now discuss the situation with Mr. Gandhi, the deadlock can be
solved and a new page opened in Indian history. Mr. Gandhi pointed out that he had
no authority to speak in the name of the Congress without consulting the Working
Committee, but there is no doubt whatever that his views and the Hindu-Muslim
proposals as endorsed by him would be accepted by them without hesitation.
I asked Mr. Gandhi whether he would start civil disobedience, if the Working
Committee were released from jail and the Government felt unable to give India what
they wanted. He replied:
“I have no intention of offering civil disobedience today. I cannot take the
country back to 1942. History can never be repeated. Even without the authority of
the Congress, if I wanted to do it, I could start civil disobedience today on the
strength of my supposed influence with the masses, but I would be doing so merely to
embarrass the British Government. This cannot be my object.”

1

Vide “Telegram to S. Sadanand”, 12-7-1944; “Statement to the Press”,
12-7-1944; “Telegram to S. Sadanand”, 13-7-1944; ”Interview to the Press”,
12-7-1944; 14-7-1944; “Letter to Stuart Gelder”, 14-7-1944; “Letter to Lord
Wavell”, 15-7-1944; “Answers to Questions”, 15-7-1944 and “Letter to Mathuradas
Trikumji”, 16-7-1944.

448

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

But Mr. Gandhi pointed out, the Working Committee could not sit still while the
people were suffering. It is his conviction that the food situation cannot beimproved
and suffering ameliorated, unless power and responsibility for civil administration
are transferred from British to Indian hands.
I told Mr. Gandhi that, with things as they are, I could not believe that the
Government would transfer authority now or concede independence during the war. He
replied that there was a difference between what he would ask today and what was
asked in 1942. Today India would be satisfied with a national government in full
control of the civil administration. This was not the position in 1942.
Such a government would be formed of people chosen by the elected members
of the Central Assembly. This would involve a declaration now of Indian
independence after the war.
Such a national government would give the military all railway, port and other
communication facilities they required, although these would be under the national
government’s control. The ordinance rule would give way to a normal civil
administration by the government. The Viceroy would remain and have complete
control with the Commander-in-Chief of the British and Indian armies. In other
affairs he would be like the King of England guided by responsible Ministers. Popular
government would be automatically restored in all provinces, so that both the
Provincial and Central governments would be responsible to the people of India.
The national government would be in the position of offering advice and
criticism on military affairs, and the portfolio of Defence would be in the hands of the
national government which would be genuinely interested in the defence of the
country and would be in the position of being able to give valuable help in shaping
policies. Mr. Gandhi realizes that the Allies cannot defeat Japan without carrying on
operations on the Indian soil and, therefore, they would continue to do so, but the
expenses of these operations should not be borne by India.
When I asked Mr. Gandhi, if he would advise the Congress to participate in
such a government formed under such conditions and with such stipulations, he
replied “Yes”. In view of Mr. Gandhi’s uncompromising pacifism, readers will ask
what his position would be under such a government. After independence had been
assured by the formation of a provisional government and the declaration of Indian
independence after the war, he would probably cease to function as adviser to the
Congress.
As a teacher and exponent of non-violence, he would have to stand aside, but
he would certainly not offer any resistance to the government or to the Congress
party participating in such a government. His co-operation would take the form of
abstention from interfering with the even tenor of life in India. He would continue to
work in the hope that his influence would always be felt to keep India peace-minded
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

449

and to affect world policy in the direction of real peace and brotherhood among all
without distinction of race or colour.
I am not in a position at present to write an account of all the details of my
conversation with Mr. Gandhi. Last week I visited Delhi to give the Viceroy a
complete account of my talk with him in Poona. I am now laying before him a
complete report of my recent conversation with Mr. Gandhi.
This week, after Lord Wavell had declined to see him in the immediate future, I
asked Mr. Gandhi what he would say to the Viceroy if he met him. He replied:
“I would tell him that I sought the interview with a view to helping, and not to
hindering, the Allied effort. But I can do nothing without seeing the members of the
Working Committee, for I believe that my authority under the August resolution
ended with my imprisonment. It was not revived by my release.”
I pointed out that, before the Viceroy would permit a meeting with the
Working Committee, he would want to know how Mr. Gandhi would influence the
members. To this, Mr. Gandhi replied that history did not repeat itself. “The whole
situation has to be reviewed anew,” he said. “The point, therefore, for me to discuss
with the Working Committee is to know how they react to the knowledge I have
gained since my release. I have to take up the thread that was broken by the
Government in 1942. I was first to negotiate and, on failure, to offer civil resistance,
if I thought it necessary. I want to plead with the Viceroy. I can only do so when I
know the Working Committee’s mind.
“But I tell you that the common talk among us is that, whatever the Viceroy
may wish personally, he has no authority in the political sphere. Mr. Churchill does
not want a settlement. He wants to crush me, if he has been correctly reported—he has
never denied the report. The beauty of it for me, the pity of it for him, is that no one
can crush a satyagrahi, for he offers his body as a willing sacrifice, thus making the
spirit free.”
There was deep disappointment, but no bitterness, in Mr. Gandhi’s voice when
he expressed this fear.
Mr. Gandhi feels that, if the British Government has good intentions, there
would be no difficulty about an agreement. But there is an uneasy feeling among
Indians of both extreme and moderate views that whatever the Viceroy may wish
personally, Mr. Churchill does not wish a settlement now. It may be ill-founded, but
it is of vital importance that Indian opinion should be officially reassured on this
point.
It was expressed to me in friendly conversation with Mr. Rajagopalachari
which was not intended to be an interview. His view that the Congress should have
accepted the Cripps offer and co-operated in the war is well-known, and he has been a
sincere and outspoken critic of the policy of the Congress and of Mr. Gandhi, while

450

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

remaining a firm advocate of independence. It seemed to me, therefore, that his
appealand warning was of such importance and significance that I asked his
permission to quote it for publication in the News Chronicle, and he gave his
consent.
He said: “It seems that the British Government is not now interested in a
settlement. They have come to feel that power is the only real thing. Ideals have been
put aside and so they are content to drift. They are not planning for the future. They do
not know what shape things will take after the war, and so they are not thinking of
Indo-British relationship. But, if the war ends on this note, relations between India
and Britain will be permanently embittered. It would be a miserable ending for the
war, so far as Asia is concerned.”
It is quite possible for the British Government to make a friend of Gandhiji.
Those who know him intimately would confirm this opinion of mine. It may not be
necessary for the British war effort to go out of the way to befriend him; but for the
future of Indo-British relationship, which is not unimportant, such befriending is
necessary and the present is the psychological moment for it. A victorious Britain
would lose nothing by such a gesture, but gain a great deal of permanent value. His
mind today leans towards seeing a national government installed in India before the
end of the war and advantage should be taken of this.
With Mr. Gandhi’s consent, I have discussed my talks with him with some
people influential in Indian affairs. They have included staunch supporters of the
Congress, some strong critics of its policy and a member of the Viceroy’s Council.
Despite their difference in political outlook they all expressed the hope that a
meeting between the Viceroy and Mr. Gandhi would be arranged. One of them said to
me: “There is no doubt that he is not only ready but anxious to be friendly and they
would do well to take his hand now. We are all suffering from a sense of frustration. If
a national government is formed and the Muslims will come in under the proposals
for a settlement of differences, it will make a tremendous difference to the Indian war
effort.”
I do not wish to place myself in the position of a political commentator but
only a journalist who has discussed the situation fully and intimately with Mr. Gandhi
and for what it is worth. I would record my impression that the Government now has a
better opportunity than at any time since Sir Stafford Cripps landed in India to put an
end to the deadlock and create an India which, instead of being half-hearted or sullenly
indifferent, is enthusiastically on the side of Britain. It will not depend entirely on
the British Government. The Congress is faced with a great responsibility to make a
provisional government work.
At least it cannot now be argued that there are no new grounds for a resumption
of relations.
The Bombay Chronicle, 12-7-1944

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

451

APPENDIX VIII
TALK WITH C. RAJAGOPALACHARI 1
RAJAJI :
GANDHIJI:

I am afraid, your letter will be misunderstood; it is a naughty letter.

I don’t think so. I meant it seriously.

R . You have touched him on the raw by rubbing in a past utterance of his, of
which he is probably not very proud.
G. I have taken out the sting by appropriating his remark as an unintended
compliment.
R.

I hope you are right.

G.

I am sorry, but I think you are wrong!

Mahatm a Gandhi —The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book One, pp. 31-2

APPENDIX XIV
LORD MUNSTER’S SPEECH 2
July 25, 1944
Mr. Gandhi had advanced the following views: Firstly, Mr. Gandhi said, he
would never use the weapon of civil disobedience during the war unless for a very
grave reason, such as the thwarting of India’s right to freedom. Secondly, he would be
satisfied with a national government during the war with full control of the civil
administration, composed of persons chosen by the elected members of the
Legislative Assembly. Thirdly, the Viceroy would be, like the King of England,
guided by responsible Ministers. Fourthly, popular government would be
automatically restored in all provinces, that is, provinces at the moment under
Section 93. Fifthly, while under national government, the Viceroy and the
Commander-in-Chief would have complete control of military operations, there
would be a portfolio of Defence in the hands of the national government, which would
be genuinely interested in the defence of the country and may render great assistance
in the shaping of policies. Sixthly, the Allied forces would be allowed to carry on
operations on Indian soil, but the expense of such operations would not be borne by
Indians. Seventhly, Mr. Gandhi would advise Congress participation in the national
government, if formed.
The procedure followed is a little complicated and a little difficult to
1

Vide “Letter to Winston Churchill”, 17-7-1944.
Vide “Interview to the Press”, 26-7-1944 and “Letter to Lord Wavell”, 26/277-1944. Only excerpts are reproduced here.
2

452

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

understand. A few days after Mr. Gandhi published these seven suggestions through
the intermediary of the Press, he gave further explanations to Press correspondents,
in which he emphasized that his statements constituted his personal effort to end the
deadlock, but that if his suggestions are not acceptable to Mr. Jinnah or the powers
that be, he would consider it a most unfortunate incident. In clarification—if indeed it
be clarification—of his offer to Mr. Jinnah, he stated that his proposals were wholly
different from the Cripps offer which, he insisted, contemplated almost perpetual
vivisection of India. Frankly, it is difficult to understand if these statements by
Mr. Gandhi have, in point of fact, definitely improved the chances of an
inter-communal settlement.
The main point, so far as His Majesty’s Government are concerned, is that he
(Mr. Gandhi) is still clinging to precisely that claim which wrecked the Cripps
Mission and put an end to negotiations in April 1942, for he is no more prepared
today than he was then, to accept the formation of an interim government with the
Viceroy maintaining his existing reserve powers. He demands a so-called ‘interim’
government in full control of the civil administration, with the Viceroy occupying
the position of a constitutional monarch as we understand it in this country. Let it not
be forgotten that, if an agreement is set up under the present existing constitution,
there are still a number of very important questions, not the least of which is the
protection of the minorities, to be resolved. All these matters must be settled before
the final constitution can be evolved. In this, it will seem that Government have not
departed one iota from the pledge they gave some time ago, and which I will repeat
now, that the proposals which were taken to India by Sir Stafford Cripps still stand in
their entirety.
Referring, in conclusion, to the question by Lord Strabolgi, who asked
whether the Viceroy was prepared to allow Mr. Gandhi to see the members of the
Working Committee, Lord Munster said: “I would refer Lord Strabolgi to the letter
which the Viceroy sent to Mr. Gandhi on June 22 last. He said that another meeting
between himself and Mr. Gandhi could only raise false hopes. He said that
Mr. Gandhi had publicly stated that he adhered to the ‘Quit India’ resolution which he
(Mr. Gandhi) regarded as innocuous. The Viceroy did see that as soon as Mr. Gandhi
had any definite or constructive policy to put up, he would be very glad to consider it
at that time.”
The Indian Annual Regist er, 1944, Vol. II, pp. 293-4

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

453

APPENDIX XV
LETTER FROM LORD WAVELL 1
NEW DELHI,
August 15, 1944
DRAR MR. GANDHI,

Thank you for your letter of 27th July. Your proposals are:
1. That you should undertake to advise the Working Committee:
(a) that, in view of changed conditions, mass civil disobedience envisaged by
the resolution of August 1942 cannot be offered, and
(b) that full co-operation in the war effort should be given by Congress,
provided that His Majesty’s Government (a) declare immediate Indian independence,
and (b) form a ‘national government’ responsible to the Central Assembly, ‘subject
to the proviso that, during the pendency of the war, the military operations should
continue as at present but without involving any financial burden on India.’
2. His Majesty’s Government remain most anxious that a settlement of the
Indian problem should be reached. But proposals such as those put forward by you are
quite unacceptable to His Majesty’s Government as a basis for discussion, and you
must realize this, if you have read Mr. Amery’s statement in the House of Commons
on July 28 last. They are indeed very similar to the proposals made by Maulana
AbulKalam Azad to Sir Stafford Cripps in April 1942, and His Majesty’s

1

Vide “Letter to Lord Wavell”, 26/27-7-1944. According to The Transfer of
Power, Vol. IV, pp. 1138 and 1191, this reply from the Viceroy was an outcome of
hectic correspondence between Delhi and London, and led almost to a direct collision
between Churchill and Wavell. The draft reply proposed by the Viceroy contained,
among other conciliatory sentiments, the following sentence: “You and Mr. Jinnah
have my good wishes for your approaching discussion.” The War Cabinet pruned the
original draft and, after considerable give and take, Wavell dispatched the final draft.
At one stage, during this heated debate, Churchill telegraphed to the War Cabinet: “I
hope the Cabinet will stand firm and not be disturbed by the attitude of the Viceroy.
He thinks that because Gandhi wrote a letter to him, he is entitled to reply in terms
which do not commend themselves to the War Cabinet. As a matter of fact, he has no
right to negotiate with Gandhi at all, considering he was responsible for passing to
us the medical opinion on which we were told that he would never be able to take part
in politics again. The root of the matter is that, after what Wavell said about Gandhi’s
state of health, he has no right to enter upon correspondence with him which cannot
fail to wear the aspect of a great parley between the Viceroy and newly released
invalid.” Vide also “Letter to Secretary, Home Department, Government of Bombay”,
3-5-1944.

454

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Government’s reasons for rejecting them are the same as they were then.
3. Without recapitulating all these reasons in detail, I should remind you that
His Majesty’s Government at that time made it clear:
(a) that their offer of unqualified freedom after the cessation of hostilities was
made conditional upon the framing of a constitution agreed by the main elements of
India’s national life and the negotiation of the necessary treaty arrangements with
His Majesty’s Government;
(b) that it is impossible during the period of hostilities to bring about any
change in the constitution, by which means alone a “national government”, such as
you suggest, could be made responsible to the Central Assembly.
The object of these conditions was to ensure the fulfilment of their duty to safeguard
the interests of the racial and religious minorities and of the Depressed Classes, and
their treaty obligations to the Indian States.
4. It was upon the above conditions that His Majesty’s Government invited
Indian leaders to take part in an interim government which would operate under the
existing constitution. I must make it quite clear that until the war is over,
responsibility for defence and military operations cannot be divided from the other
responsibilities of Government, and that until hostilities cease and the new
constitution is in operation, His Majesty’s Government and the Governor-General
must retain their responsibility over the entire field. So far as the question of India’s
share of the cost of the war is concerned, this is essentially a matter for settlement
between His Majesty’s Government on the one hand and the Government of India on
the other, and existing financial arrangements can only be re-opened at the instance
of one or the other.
5. It is clear, in these circumstances, that no purpose would be served by
discussion on the basis which you suggest. If, however, the leaders of the Hindus, the
Muslims and the important minorities were willing to co-operate in a transitional
government established and working within the present constitution, I believe good
progress might be made. For such a transitional government to succeed, there must,
before it is formed, be agreement in principle between Hindus and Muslims and all
important elements as to the method by which the new constitution should be framed.
This agreement is a matter for Indians themselves. Until Indian leaders have come
closer together than they are now, I doubt if I myself can do anything to help. Let me
remind you too that minority problems are not easy. They are real and can be solved
only by mutual compromise and tolerance.
6. The period, after the termination of hostilities, for which the transitional
government would last, would depend on the speed with which the new constitution
could be framed. I see no reason why preliminary work on that constitution should
not begin as soon as the Indian leaders are prepared to co-operate to that end. If they
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

455

can arrive at a genuine agreement as to the method of framing the constitution,
nounnecessary time need be spent after the war in reaching final conclusions and in
agreeing on treaty arrangements with His Majesty’s Government. There again, the
primary responsibility rests on the Indian leaders.
Yours sincerely,
WAVELL
The Hindu, 19-8-1944

APPENDIX XVI
DRAFT LETTER TO THE COMMISSIONER OF POLICE, BOMBAY 1
For many of us 9th of August, 1942, is a Red Letter Day. Of the resolution of
the 8th August we are proud. It is a declaration of India’s hope. Though roughly
national, it is international in outlook. Thus it has sanction clause which too the
Congress has nothing to be ashamed of. It replaces for its sanction armed force by
normal force of self-suffering in the shape of mass civil disobedience. If some
Congressmen and others went astray during the days following the 8th of August,
1942, they did so contrary to the resolution. Mahatma Gandhi, the authority
appointed by the A. I. C. C. to enforce the sanction, never got the chance of
enforcing it. He says, the authority lapsed with his imprisonment and was not revived
by his release. He says further that, even if it has not lapsed, he thinks that under the
altered circumstances it would be improper to revive the sanction clause. I confess
that none of us has a knowledge of the technique of mass civil disobedience.
Therefore there is no question of enforcing the sanction. Hence any act my
fellow-workers may wish to do on the 9th of August next must not be confused with
the sanction clause. This letter would be unnecessary but for the extraordinary powers
given to you. Under the ordinance rule, no procession or public meeting can be held
without your previous permission. This is an encroachment upon an ordinary civil
right. Now on the 9th, as a symbol and token, I propose to organize five parties of
five persons each with tricolour flags. They will march, in order to avoid crowds
gathering, without notice towards Chowpatty Sands, reach the Lokamanya statue at
5.30 a.m. and stand for five minutes in silent prayer, then recite the resolution in
Hindustani and sing the jhandavandan 2 song and disperse. I sincerely hope that you
have no objection to this simple ceremony. I shall thank you to let me have your
permission.

1
2

456

Vide “Talk to Bombay Congress Leaders”, 29/30-7-1944.
Flag salutation
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

NOTE: Gandhi is expected to issue a detailed circular of instructions to all
Congressmen by the 5th. On the 9th, 25 persons are starting in procession, in
batches of five from quarters of Bombay, and converging at 5.30 a.m. (time dictated
by Gandhi) at Chowpatty Sands and carry out the day’s programme.
Police Commissioner’s Office, Bombay, File No. 3001/H. Courtesy:
Government of Maharashtra

APPENDIX XVII
A RESOLUTION1
The Working Committee have given their full and earnest consideration to the
proposals made by the British War Cabinet in regard to India and the elucidation
thereof by Sir Stafford Cripps. These proposals, which have been made at the very
last hour because of the compulsion of events, have to be considered not only in
relation to India’s demand for independence, but more especially in the present grave
war crisis, with a view to meeting effectively the perils and dangers that confront
India and envelop the world.
The Congress has repeatedly stated, ever since the commencement of the War
in September 1939, that the people of India would line themselves with the
progressive forces of the world and assume full responsibility to face the new
problems and shoulder the new burdens that had arisen, and it asked for the necessary
conditions to enable them to do so to be created. An essential condition was the
freedom of India, for only the realization of present freedom could light the flame
which would illumine millions of hearts and move them to action. At the last meeting
of the All-India Congress Committee, after the commencement of the War in the
Pacific, it was stated that: “Only a free and independent India can be in a position to
undertake the defence of the country on a national basis and be of help in the
furtherance of the larger causes that are emerging from the storm of war.”
The British War Cabinet’s new proposals relate principally to the future upon
the cessation of hostilities. The Committee, while recognizing that
self-determination for the people of India is accepted in principle in that uncertain
future, regret that this is fettered and circumscribed and certain provisions have been
introduced which gravely imperil the development of a free and united nation and the
establishment of a democratic State. Even the constitution-making body is so
constituted that the people’s right to self-determination is vitiated by the
1

A copy of the resolution, passed by the Congress Working Committee, was
handed over to Sir Stafford-Cripps on April 2, 1942. The Resolution however was
released to the Press on April 11 after the negotiations failed. Vide “interview to
Shyama Prasad Mookerjee”, 5-8-1944.
VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

457

introduction of non-representative elements. The people of India have as a whole
clearly demanded full independence and the Congress has repeatedly declared that no
other status except that of independence for the whole of India could be agreed to or
could meet the essential requirements of the present situation. The Committee
recognize that future independence may be implicit in the proposals but the
accompanying provisions and restrictions are such that real freedom may well
become an illusion. The complete ignoring of the ninety millions of the people of
the Indian States and their treatment as commodities at the disposal of their rulers is a
negation of both democracy and self-determination. While the representation of an
Indian State in the constitution-making body is fixed on a population basis, the
people of the States have no voice in choosing those representatives, nor are they to
be consulted at any stage, while decisions vitally affecting them are being taken.
Such States may in many way become barriers to the growth of Indian freedom,
enclaves where foreign authority still prevails and where the possibility of
maintaining foreign armed forces has been stated to be a likely contingency, and a
perpetual menace to the freedom of the people of the State as well as of the rest of
India.
The acceptance beforehand of the novel principle of non-accession for a
province is also a severe blow to the conception of Indian unity and an apple of
discord likely to generate growing trouble in the provinces, and which may well lead
to further difficulties in the way of the Indian States merging themselves in the Indian
Union. The Congress has been wedded to Indian freedom and unity and any break in
that unity, especially in the modern world when people’s minds inevitably think in
terms of ever larger federations, would be injurious to all concerned and exceedingly
painful to contemplate. Nevertheless the Committee cannot think in terms of
compelling the people in any territorial unit to remain in an Indian Union against
their declared and established will. While recognizing this principle, the Committee
feel that every effort should be made to create conditions which would help the
different units in developing a common and co-operative national life. The
acceptance of the principle inevitably involves that no changes should be made
which result in fresh problems being created and compulsion being exercised on other
substantial groups within that area. Each territorial unit should have the fullest
possible autonomy within the Union, consistently with a strong national State. The
proposal now made on the part of the British War Cabinet encourages and will lead to
attempts at separation at the very inception of a Union and thus create friction just
when the utmost co-operation and goodwill are most needed. This proposal has been
presumably made to meet a communal demand, but it will have other consequences
also and lead politically reactionary and obscurantist groups among different
communities to create trouble and divert public attention from the vital issues before
the country.

458

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Any proposal concerning the future of India must demand attention and
scrutiny, but in today’s grave crisis, it is the present that counts, and even proposals
for the future are important in so far as they affect the present. The Committee have
necessarily attached the greatest importance to this aspect of the question, and on
this ultimately depends what advice they should give to those who look to them for
guidance. For the present the British War Cabinet’s proposals are vague and
altogether incomplete and it would appear that no vital changes in the present
structure are contemplated. It has been made clear that the Defence of India will in any
event remain under British control. At any time defence is a vital subject; during war
time it is all-important and covers almost every sphere of life and administration. To
take away defence from the sphere of responsibility at this stage is to reduce that
responsibility to a farce and a nullity, and to make it perfectly clear that India is not
going to be free in any way and her Government is not going to function as a free and
independent government during the pendency of the War. The Committee would
repeat that an essential and fundamental prerequisite for the assumption of
responsibility by the Indian people in the present is their realization as a fact that
they are free and are in charge of maintaining and defending their freedom. What is
most wanted is the enthusiastic response of the people which cannot be evoked
without the fullest trust in them and the devolution of responsibility on them in the
matter of defence. It is only thus that even at this grave eleventh hour it may be
possible to galvanize the people of India to rise to the height of the occasion. It is
manifest that the present Government of India, as well as its provincial agencies, are
lacking in competence, and are incapable of shouldering the burden of India’s
defence. It is only the people of India, through their popular representatives, who
may shoulder this burden worthily. But that can only be done by present freedom, and
full responsibility being cast upon them.
The Committee, therefore, are unable to accept the proposals put forward on
behalf of the British War Cabinet.
The Indian Annual Regist er: 1942, Vol. I, pp. 224-5

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

459

APPENDIX XVIII
LETTER FROM K. M. MUNSHI 1
BOMBAY,
August 9, 1944
RESPECTED BAPU,

I had been to Lahore in connection with a case and returned today.
1. Khizr’s man had contacted me. He himself was out of town. He wishes that
no commitments be made with Jinnah regarding the Punjab. He is not concerned with
whatever else you may do. He will oppose the partition. He is not a man of daring.
Glaney2 , Sir Zafrulla 3 , Sultan Ahmed 4 , are on his side. He will send a messenger to you
in a few days.
2. Chhoturam5 and his party are greatly upset. They are preparing against the
partition of the Punjab and are against Pakistan.
3. The Hindu leaders too are very much enraged. Your message was conveyed to
Sir Tek Chand Bakshi6 by telephone at Dalhousie. He is keeping indifferent health,
otherwise he would have come to see you. It is naturally difficult to comprehend from
your statements how the Rajaji Formula and Akhand Hindustan can be reconciled.
4. Dr. Gopichand 7 met me here. They will not violate discipline; but their
minds are greatly perturbed. They are not satisfied with the written consolation you
gave them at Juhu.
5. The Sikhs who were the protagonists of Azad Punjab have now become
supporters of Akhand Hindustan, at least for the present. Master Tara Singh sent a
message that he would meet me; but did not turn up. He is anxious to meet you. He is
possibly nursing a grievance that he was not accorded a proper reception during one
of his visits to Wardha.
6. I had talks with Sant Singh and other Nationalist Sikhs also. They do not
mind if some final settlement is arrived at.
7. Jinnah had held several secret negotiations and part of their trend has come

1

Vide “Letter to K. M. Munshi”, 12-8-1944.
Sir Bertrand Glaney, Governor of the Punjab
3
Sir Muhammad Zafrulla Khan
4
Sir Sultan Ahmed, Member of the Viceroy’s Executive Council
5
Sir Chhoturam, Minister in the Punjab Cabinet
6
Ex-Chief Justice of the Punjab
7
Dr. Gopichand Bhargava, leader of the Congress Party in the Punjab
Assembly
2

460

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to be known: (1) He would start by demanding 50% in the National Government; but
would accept 42% in the end. (2) He had discussed five plans for plebiscite, though it
is not known what those plans were.
8. As far as possible, I am keeping quiet about the Rajaji Formula. But (my)
mind remains perturbed. Friends press me and in most cases misunderstandings arise.
My Congress friends hint that I am thus staging a come-back to the Congress. Others
say that I am betraying the cause of Akhand Hindustan on your account. Should I say
something explicitly or should I maintain silence?
According to my humble opinion, (1) Akhand Hindustan is a fundamental
principle for me. I am unable to change anything in it. (2) Whatever the
Constitution, only the areas having Muslim majority in India should constitute
separate units. We cannot reconcile ourselves till the Punjab and Bengal are not
partitioned. (3) It does not seem probable that the policy of Hindu-Muslim unity
which has been a failure for the (past) 25 years will now succeed. (4) Today, none but
the Muslims are honestly welcoming the Rajaji Formula. You are of course powerful.
There would be many who, for several reasons, would accept whatever you say. But
what is rankling in their hearts would no doubt continue to do so. (5) By supporting
the Rajaji Formula you have been able to prove your readiness to arrive at a communal
settlement. (6) Jinnah’s ambition of 25 years to determine the future of India in
partnership with you is fulfilled. He is now convinced that the British are out to hit at
him in the Punjab, and so he is eager to arrive at some settlement. If the settlement
arrived at is such that it could be misused or if there is a deadlock, the situation is
likely to be worse than it was. I am so disturbed about this thing that I am relieving
my burden by expressing myself to you. If, in your opinion, I should publish my
viewpoint in the proper form, do kindly let me know. I shall prepare it and send it for
your prior approval.
Yours respectfully,
KANU MUNSHI
Pilgri mage to Freedo m, Vol. I, pp. 437-8

APPENDIX XIX
LETTER FROM M. A. JINNAH 1
September 10, 1944
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

With reference to our talk yesterday, September 9th, I understood from you
that you had come to discuss the Hindu-Muslim settlement with me in your individual
capacity, and not in any representative character or capacity on behalf of the Hindus
or the Congress, nor had you any authority to do so. I naturally pointed out to you
1

Vide “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 11-9-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

461

that there must be someone on the other side with authority holding a representative
status with whom I can negotiate and, if possible, come to a settlement of the
Hindu-Muslim question, and that for the position you had adopted there was no
precedent, and that this raises great difficulties in my way. As you know, I can only
speak on behalf of Muslim India and the All-India Muslim League, as the President of
the organization which I represent, and as such I am subject to and governed by its
constitution, rules and regulations. I think you realize and will admit that the
settlement of the Hindu-Muslim question is the foremost and the major hurdle, and
unless the representatives of these two nations put their heads together, how is one to
make any headway with it?
Nevertheless, I explained to you the Lahore Resolution of March 1940, and
tried to persuade you to accept the basic and fundamental principles embodied in that
resolution, but you not only refused to consider it but emphasized your opposition to
the basic position indicated in the resolution, and remarked that there was “an ocean
between you and me”, and when I asked you what is then the alternative you suggest,
you put forward a formula of Mr. Rajagopalachari, approved of by you. We discussed
it, and as the various matters were vague and nebulous, and some required
clarification, I wanted to have a clear idea of what it really meant, and what were its
implications, and asked you for explanation and clarification regarding the proposals
embodied in that Formula. After some discussion, you requested me to formulate in
writing my points that I thought required or called for explanation and clarification,
and to communicate with you and that you would reply in writing before our next
meeting on Monday, September 11th, at 5.30 p.m. I am, therefore, submitting to you
the following points which required clarification:
1. With regard to the preamble: in what capacity will you be a consenting
party if any agreement is reached between you and me?
2. Clause 1: With regard to “the constitution for free India” referred to in this
clause, I would like to know first, what constitution do you refer to, who will frame it,
and when will it come into being?
Next, it is stated in the Formula that “the Muslim League endorses the Indian
demand for independence.” Does it mean the Congress demand for Independence as
formulated in the August Resolution of 1942 by the All-India Congress Committee in
Bombay or, if not, what is the significance of this term, for you know the Muslim
League has made it clear not only by its resolutions but also by its creed, which is
embodied in its constitution, that we stand for the freedom and independence of the
whole of this subcontinent, and that applies to Pakistan and Hindustan.
Next, it is stated that the Muslim League “will co-operate with the Congress in
the formulation of a Provisional Interim Government for the transitional period”. I
would like to know the basis or the lines on which such a Government is to be set up

462

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

or constituted. If you have a complete and definite scheme, please let me have it.
3. Clause 2: Who will appoint the Commission referred to in this clause and
who will give effect to their findings? What is the meaning of “absolute majority”
referred to in it? Will the contemplated plebiscite be taken district-wise, or, if not, on
what basis? Who will determine and decide whether such a plebiscite should be based
on adult franchise or other practicable franchise? Who will give effect to the decision
or verdict of the above mentioned plebiscite? Would only the districts on the border
which are taken out from the boundaries of the present provinces by delimitation be
entitled to choose to join either State or also those outside the present boundaries
would have the right to choose to join either State?
4. Clause 3: Who are meant by “all parties” in this clause?
5. Clause 4: I would like to know between whom and through what machinery
and agency will the “mutual agreements” referred to in this clause be entered into?
What is meant by “safeguarding defence and commerce, communi-cations and for
other essential purposes”? Safeguarding against whom?
6. Clause 6: “These terms shall be binding only in case of transfer by Britain
of full power and responsibility for the Government of India.” I would like to know to
whom is this power to be transferred, through what machinery and agency, and when?
These are some of the important points that occur to me for the moment,
which require explanation and clarification, and hope that you will let me have full
details with regard to the various points that I have raised, in order that I may be
better able to understand and judge your proposals before I can deal with them
satisfactorily.
Yours sincerely,
J INNAH
The Hindu, 29-9-1944

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

463

APPENDIX XX
LETTER FROM M. A. JINNAH 1
September 10, 1944
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

I received your letter of September 11 at 5 p.m. today. I note that you have
approached me as an individual, and I have already expressed my views about it.
Please do not take it that I acquiesce in the position that you have adopted, for which
there is no precedent. Nevertheless, I proceeded to discuss matters with you naturally
because I am anxious to convert you to my point of view, if possible. I urged you that
the only solution of India’s problem is to accept the division of India as Pakistan and
Hindustan, as briefly laid down in the Lahore Resolution of March 1940, and proceed
to settle the details forthwith. You say the Lahore Resolution is indefinite. You never
asked me for any clarification or explanation of the terms of the Resolution, but you
really indicated your emphatic opposition to the very basis and the fundamental
principles embodied in it. I would, therefore, like to know in what way or respect the
Lahore Resolution is indefinite. I cannot agree that Rajaji has taken from it its
substance and given it shape. On the contrary, he has not only put it out of shape but
mutilated it, as I explained in my speech which I delivered at the meeting of the
Council of the All-India Muslim League at Lahore on the 30th of July, 1944.
2. You say the “first condition of the exercise of the right of selfdetermination is achieving independence by the joint action of all the parties and
groups composing India. If such joint action is unfortunately impossible, then, too, I
must fight with the assistance of such elements as can be brought together”. This in
my opinion is, as I have repeatedly said, putting the cart before the horse, and is
generally opposed to the policy and declarations of the All-India Muslim League, and
you are only holding on firmly to the August Resolution of 1942. In order to achieve
the freedom and independence of the peoples of India, it is essential, in the first
instance, that there should be a Hindu-Muslim settlement. Of course, I am thankful to
you when you say that you are pledged to use all the influence that you have with the
Congress to ratify your agreement with me, but that is not enough in my judgement,
although it will be a very valuable help to me. I once more ask you, please, to let me
know what is your conception of the basis for the formation of a Provisional Interim
Government. No doubt it will be subject to agreement between the League and the
Congress, but I think in fairness you should at least give me some rough idea of the
lines of your conception, for you must have thought it out by now, and I would like to

1

464

Vide “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 11-9-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

know what are your proposals or scheme for the formation of a Provisional Interim
Government, which can give me some clear picture to understand it.
3. You have omitted to answer my question as to who will give effect to the
findings of the Commission, and also it is not clear to me what you mean by absolute
majority, when you say it means “a clear majority over non-Muslim elements as in
Sind, Baluchistan or the Frontier Province”. You have not even replied to my
question as to who will decide the form of the plebiscite and the franchise
contemplated by the Formula.
4. The answer does not carry any clear idea when you say “all parties means
parties interested”.
5. You say “mutual agreement means agreement between contracting parties”,
who are the contracting parties once a Provisional Interim Government is established
of your conception? Who will appoint the Central or Joint Board of Control, which
will safeguard defence, etc., and on what principle, through what machinery and
agency, and subject to whose control and orders will such a Central or Joint Board be?
6. You say “the power is to be transferred to the nation, that is, to the
Provisional Government”. That is all the greater reason why I would like to know full
details of the Provisional Government as contemplated by you and of your
conception.
Yours sincerely,
J INNAH
The Hindu. 29-9-1944

APPENDIX XXI
LETTER FROM M. A. JINNAH 1
September 11, 1944
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

I received your letter of September 14 at 4.45 p.m. today in reply to my letter
of September 11 (and not of September 13 as you state, which seems to be a mistake)
and I thank you for it.
1. Please let me have as soon as you can your promised letter indicating in
what way or respect the Lahore Resolution is “indefinite”.
2. With regard to the provision in the Gandhi-Rajaji Formula that “the Muslim
League endorses the Indian demand for Independence”, I asked you in my letter dated
September 10, “does it mean the Congress demand for independence, as formulated in
1

Vide “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 14-9-1944and 15-9-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

465

the August 1942 Resolution by the All India Congress Committee in Bombay or, if
not, what is the significance of this term?”, to which you replied by your letter of
September 11, “The Independence contemplated is of the whole of India as it stands.”
Hence I again ask, does it mean on the basis of a United India? I find that you have not
clarified the point satisfactorily.
As regards the next part of the clause, the Formula proceeds to lay down that
“the Muslim League will co-operate with the Congress in the formation of the
Provisional Interim Government for the transitional period”. I requested you by my
letter of September 10 to let me know “the basis or the lines on which such a
Government is to be set up or constituted. If you have a complete and definite scheme,
please let me have it” to which you replied by your letter of September 11 under reply
that “the basis for the formation of the Provisional Interim Government will have to
be agreed to between the League and the Congress.” But that is not meeting my
request for clarification, or giving me at least the outlines of such a Government. And
that is what I have been asking for. I hope that you do appreciate my point when I am
requesting you to let me have rough outlines of the proposed Provisional Interim
Government according to the Formula, so that I may have some idea. Of course, I can
quite understand that such a Provisional Interim Government will represent all the
parties and would be of a character that will inspire confidence at the present moment
of all the parties. I can quite understand that when the moment arrives, certain things
may follow but before we can deal with this Formula in a satisfactory manner, I repeat
again that as it is your Formula, you should give me a rough idea of the Provisional
Interim Government that you contemplate and of your conception. What I would like
to know would be, what will be the powers of such a Provisional Interim Government,
how it will be formed, to whom it will be responsible, and what will be its
composition, etc. You, being the sponsor of this Gandhi-Rajaji Formula, should give
me some rough idea and picture of it, so that I may understand what this part of the
Formula means.
In your letter of September 14 in reply to my letter of September 11, you
inform me that you would have told me if you had any scheme in mind. “I imagine that
if we two can agree it would be for us to consult the other parties”, but that is just the
point. Unless I have some outlines or scheme, however rough, from you, what are we
to discuss in order to reach any agreement?
As regards the other matters which you have further explained, I have noted the
explanation, and I do not think I need press you further, although some of them are
not quite satisfactory.
Yours sincerely,
J INNAH
The Hindu, 29-9-1944

466

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX XXII
LETTER FROM M. A. JINNAH 1
September 17, 1944
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

I have your letter of September 15, and I thank you for it. I note that you have
for the moment shunted the Rajaji Formula and are applying your mind very seriously
to the Lahore Resolution of the Muslim League. It is my duty to explain the Lahore
Resolution to you today and persuade you to accept it, even though you are talking to
me, as you have often made it clear, in your individual capacity. I have successfully
converted non-Muslim Indians in no small number and also a large body of
foreigners, and if I can convert you, exercising as you do tremendous influence over
Hindu India, it will be no small assistance to me, although we are not proceeding on
the footing that you are carrying on these talks in your representative character or
capacity, and my difficulties remain until you are vested with a representative status
and authority in order to negotiate and reach an agreement with you.
You have stated in your letter dated September 11 that the Lahore Resolution is
“indefinite”. I, therefore, naturally asked you to please let me know in what way or
respect the Lahore Resolution is indefinite, and now I have received your letter of
September 15 under reply.
The third paragraph of your letter is not seeking clarification, but a
disquisition and expression of your views on the point, whether the Mussalmans are a
nation. This matter can hardly be discussed by means of correspondence. There is a
great deal of discussion and literature on this point which is available, and it is for
you to judge finally, when you have studied this question thoroughly, whether the
Mussalmans and Hindus are not two major nations in this sub-continent. For the
moment, I would refer you to two publications, although there are many more—Dr.
Ambedkar’s book and “M. R. T.’s” Nationalism in Conflict in India. We maintain and
hold that Muslims and Hindus are two major nations by any definition or test of a
nation. We are a nation of hundred million, and what is more, we are a nation with our
own distinctive culture and civilization, language and literature, art and architecture,
names and nomenclature, sense of value and proportion, legal laws and moral codes,
customs and calendar, history and traditions, aptitudes and ambitions; in short, we
have our own distinctive outlook on life and of life. By all canons of international
law we are a nation. Now I shall reply to your various points:
1. Yes, the word “Pakistan” is not mentioned in the Resolution and it does not
1

Vide “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 19-9-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

467

bear the original meaning. The word has now become synonymous with the Lahore
Resolution.
2. This point does not arise, but still I reply that the question is a mere bogey.
3. This point is covered by my answer that the Mussalmans of India are a
nation. As to the last part of your query, it is hardly relevant to the matter of
clarification of the Resolution.
4. Surely, you know what the word “Muslims” means.
5. This point does not arise by way of clarification of the text of the Lahore
Resolution.
6. No. They will form units of Pakistan.
7. As soon as the basis and the principles embodied in the Lahore Resolution
are accepted, the question of demarcation will have to be taken up immediately.
8. In view of my reply to (7), your question (8) has been answered.
9. Does not relate to clarification.
10. My answer to (9) covers this point.
11. Does not arise out of the clarification of the Resolution. Surely, this is not
asking for clarification of the Resolution. I have in numerous speeches of mine and
the Muslim League in its resolutions have pointed out that this is the only solution of
India’s problem and the road to achieve freedom and independence of the peoples of
India.
12. “Muslims under the Princes”: The Lahore Resolution is only confined to
British India. This question does not arise out of clarification of the Resolution.
13. The definition of “minorities”: You yourself have often said minorities
mean “accepted minorities”.
14. The adequate, effective and mandatory safeguards for minorities referred to
in the Resolution are a matter for negotiation and settlement with the minorities in
the respective States, viz., Pakistan and Hindustan.
15. It does give basic principles and when they are accepted, then the details
will have to be worked out by the contracting parties. (a & b). Does not arise by way
of clarification; (c) The Muslim League is the only authoritative and representative
organization of Muslim India; (d) No. See answer (C).
As regards your final paragraph, before receiving clarifications from me you
have already passed your judgment and condemned the Lahore Resolution, when you
say, “As I write the letter and imagine the working of the Resolution in practice I see
nothing but ruin for the whole of India.” I understand that you have made clear to me
that you represent nobody but yourself, and I am trying to persuade you and to convert
you that this is the road which will lead us all to the achievement of freedom and

468

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

independence, not only of the two major nations, Hindus and Muslims, but of the rest
of the peoples of India, but when you proceed to say that you aspire to represent all
the inhabitants of India, I regret I cannot accept that statement of yours. It is quite
clear that you represent nobody else but the Hindus, and as long as you do not realize
your true position and the realities, it is very difficult for me to argue with you, and it
becomes still more difficult to persuade you, and hope to convert you to the realities
and the actual conditions prevailing in India today. I am pleading before you in the
hope of converting you, as I have done with many others successfully. As I have said
before, you are a great man and you exercise enormous influence over the Hindus,
particularly the masses, and by accepting the road that I am pointing out to you, you
are not prejudicing or harming the interests of the Hindus or of the minorities. On the
contrary, Hindus will be the greater gainers. I am convinced that true welfare not only
of the Muslim but the rest of India lies in the division of India as proposed by the
Lahore Resolution. It is for you to consider whether it is not your policy and
programme, in which you have persisted, which has been the principal factor of ‘ruin
of the whole of India’ and of misery and degradation of the people to which you refer
and which I deplore no less than anyone else. And it is for that very reason I am
pleading before you all these days, although you insist that you are having talks with
me only in your individual capacity, in the hope that you may yet revise your policy
and programme.
Yours sincerely,
J INNAH
The Hindu, 29-9-1944

APPENDIX XXIII
LETTER FROM M. A. JINNAH 1
September 21, 1944
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

I am in receipt of your letter of September 19, and I have already given you my
answers to all your questions relating to clarification of the Lahore Resolution or any
part of it, and I am glad that you admit when you say it may be that “all my questions
do not arise from the view of mere clarification of the Lahore Resolution”, but you
particularly emphasize your points 15 (a) and 15 (b).
I regret to say it has no relation to the context of the Resolution or any part
thereof. You have brought so many matters into our correspondence, which are
entirely outside the matter requiring clarification, so I have perforce to deal with
1

Vide “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 19-9-1944 and 22-9-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

469

them. Let me first deal with your letter of September 11.
1. You say, “My life mission has been Hindu-Muslim unity, which I want for
its own sake but which is not to be achieved without the foreign ruling power being
ousted. Hence the first condition of the exercise of the right of self-determination is
achieving independence by the joint action of all the parties and groups composing
India. If such joint action is unfortunately impossible, then too I must fight with the
assistance of such elements as can be brought together.”
2. The gist of your letters up to date is that you are wedded to this policy and
will pursue it. In your next letter of September 14, while you were good enough to
furnish me with the clarification of the Gandhi-Rajaji Formula, you were pleased to
observe: “I have, at any rate for the moment, put it out of my mind and I am now
concentrating on the Lahore Resolution in the hope of finding a ground for mutual
agreement.” In your letter of September 15, you say “Independence does mean as
envisaged in the A.I.C.C. Resolution of 1942.” It is, therefore, clear that you are not
prepared to revise your policy and that you adhere firmly to your policy and
programme, which you have persisted in and which culminated in your demand, final
policy, programme and the method and sanction for enforcing it by resorting to mass
civil disobedience in terms of the August 8, 1942, Resolution, and you have made it
more clear again by stating in your letter of September 19 as follows: “As to your
verdict on my policy and programme, we must agree to differ. For, I am
whollyunrepentant.” You know that the August 1942 Resolution is inimical to the
ideals and demands of Muslim India. Then again, in the course of our discussion when
I asked you for clarification of the Gandhi-Rajaji Formula, you were pleased to say, by
your letter of September 15 as follows: “For the moment I have shunted the Rajaji
Formula and with your assistance am applying my mind very seriously to the famous
Lahore Resolution of the Muslim League.” We discussed it in its various aspects, as
you told me you were open to be persuaded and converted to our point of view. I
discussed the Resolution at great length with you, and explained everything you
wanted to understand, even though you have emphasized more than once that you are
having these talks with me in your personal capacity, and in your letter of September
15 you assured me in the following words with regard to the Lahore Resolution:
“Believe me, I approach you as a seeker, though I represent nobody but myself,” and
that you were open to conviction and conversion. You had informed me by your letter
of September 11 as follows: “It is true that I said an ocean separated you and me in
outlook. But that had no reference to the Lahore Resolution of the League. The League
Resolution is indefinite.” I naturally, therefore, proceeded in reply to ask you by my
letter of September 11 as follows: “You say the Lahore Resolution is indefinite. You
never asked me for any clarification or explanation of the terms of the Resolution,
but you really indicated your emphatic opposition to the very basis and the
fundamental principles embodied in it. I would, therefore, like to know in what way or
respect the Lahore Resolution is indefinite,” and I sent you a reminder on September
13, to which you replied by your letter of September 15, not confining yourself really

470

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to matters of clarification, but introducing other extraneous matters, with some of
which I had already dealt, in reply to this letter of yours of September 15, by my letter
of September 17 and furnished you with all the clarifications, informing you that you
had introduced several matters which could hardly be discussed in a satisfactory
manner by means of correspondence. I have already given you all the clarifications
you require so far as the Lahore Resolution goes and its text is concerned. You again
raise further arguments, reasons and grounds and continue to persist in a disquisition
on the point, amongst others, whether Muslims of India are a nation, and then you
proceed further to say: “Can we not agree to differ on the question of two nations and
yet solve the problem on the basis of self-determination?” It seems to me that you are
labouring under some misconception of the real meaning of the word
“self-determination’. Apart from the inconsistencies and contradictions of the
various positions that you have adopted in the course of our correspondence, as
indicated above, can you not appreciate our point of view that we claim the right of
self-determination as a nation and not as a territorial unit, and that we are entitled to
exercise our inherent right as a Muslim nation, which is our birth-right? Whereas you
are labouring under the wrong idea that “self-determination” means only that of “a
territorial unit” which, by the way, is neither demarcated nor defined yet; and there is
no Union or Federal Constitution of India in being, functioning as a sovereign
Central Government. Ours is a case of division and carving out two independent
sovereign States by way of settlement between two major nations, Hindus and
Muslims, and not of severance or secession from any existing union, which is
non-existent in India. The right of self-determination which we claim postulates that
we are a nation, and as such it would be the self-determination of the Mussalmans, and
they alone are entitled to exercise that right.
I hope you will now understand that your question 15(a) does not arise out of
the Lahore Resolution or of any part thereof. As to 15(b), again it does not arise as a
matter of clarification, for it will be a matter for the constitution-making body
chosen by Pakistan to deal with and decide all matters as a sovereign body
representing Pakistan vis-a-vis the constitution-making body of Hindustan or any
other party concerned. There cannot be Defence and similar matters of “common
concern” when it is accepted that Pakistan and Hindustan will be two separate
independent sovereign States. I hope I have now given all satisfactory explanations,
over and above the matter of clarification of the Lahore Resolution, in the hope of
converting you as an individual “seeker”.
Yours sincerely,
J INNAH
The Hindu, 29-9-1944

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

471

APPENDIX XXIV
LETTER FROM M. A. JINNAH 1
September 23, 1944
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

I am in receipt of your letter of September 22 and thank you for it. I am sorry
that you think I have summarily rejected the idea of common interest between two
arms, and now you put it somewhat differently from 15(a), when you say there will be
no feeling of security by the people of India without a recognition of the natural and
mutual obligations arising out of physical contiguity. My answer, already given, is
that it will be for the constitution-making body of Pakistan and that of Hindustan, or
any other party concerned, to deal with such matters on the footing of their being two
independent States.
I am really surprised when you say there is no proof of what you characterize as
a sweeping statement of mine, that the August 1942 Resolution is inimical to the
ideals and demands of Muslim India. The Resolution in its essence is as follows:
(a) Immediate grant of Complete Independence [and] setting up immediately of
a Federal Central Government on the basis of a united, democratic Government of
India with federated units or Provinces, which means establishing a Hindu Raj.
(b) That this National Government so set up will evolve a scheme for a
Constituent Assembly, which will be chosen by adult franchise, which will prepare a
constitution for the Government of India, which means that the Constituent
Assembly chosen will be composed of an overwhelming majority of the Hindus,
nearly 75 per cent.
(c) To enforce this demand of the Congress the August Resolution decides on
and sanctions a resort to mass civil disobedience at your command and when ordered
by you as the sole Dictator of the Congress.
This demand is basically and fundamentally opposed to the ideals and demands
of Muslim India of Pakistan, as embodied in the Lahore Resolution, and to enforce
such a demand by means of resort to mass civil disobedience is inimical to the ideals
and demands of Muslim India, and if you succeed in realizing this demand it would be a
death-blow to Muslim India. I see from the correspondence and talks between you and
me that you are still holding fast to this fateful resolution.
From the very first day of our talks, you made it clear to me, and you have
repeatedly said in the course of our correspondence and talks that you have approached
me in your individual capacity, and you assured me that you were a seeker of light and
1

472

Vide “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 22-9-1944 and 24-9-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

knowledge and that you seriously and earnestly wanted to understand the Lahore
Resolution and were open to conviction and conversion. Therefore, in deference to your
wishes I made every effort all these days and in the course of our prolonged talks and
correspondence to convert you, but unfortunately it seems I have failed. And now you
have made new suggestions and proposals by your letter under reply.
1. You say, “I have, therefore, suggested a way out. Let it be a partition as
between two brothers, if a division there must be”. I really do not know what this
means, and I would like you to elaborate this proposal and give me some rough
outlines of this new idea of yours, as to how and when, the division is to take place,
and in what way it is different from the division envisaged by the Lahore Resolution.
2. You say, “Let us call in a third party or parties to guide or even arbitrate
between us”. May I point out that you have repeatedly made clear to me that you are
having these talks as an individual seeker? How can any question of a third party or
parties to guide or arbitrate between us arise?
Yours sincerely,
J INNAH
The Hindu, 29-9-1944

APPENDIX XXV
LETTER FROM M. A. JINNAH 1
September 25, 1944
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

I am in receipt of your letter of September 24, and I thank you for it. You have
already rejected the basic and fundamental principles of the Lahore Resolution.
1. You do not accept that the Mussalmans of India are a nation.
2. You do not accept that the Mussalmans have an inherent right of
self-determination.
3. You do not accept that they alone are entitled to exercise this right of theirs
for self-determination.
4. You do not accept that Pakistan is composed of two zones, north-west and
north-east, comprising six Provinces, namely, Sind, Baluchistan, North-West
Frontier Provinces, Punjab, Bengal and Assam, subject to territorial adjustments that
may be agreed upon, as indicated in the Lahore Resolution. The matter of demarcating
and defining the territories can be taken up after the fundamentals above mentioned
are accepted, and for that purpose, machinery may be set up by agreement.
1

Vide “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 24-9-1944. Only extracts are reproduced here.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

473

You do not accept the provisions embodied in the Lahore Resolution for
safeguarding the minorities. . . .
. . . I asked you . . . to give me rough outlines of this new idea of yours as to
how and when the division is to take place and in what way it is different from the
division envisaged in the Lahore Resolution, and now you have been good enough to
give me your amplification, in your letter of September 24 under reply. . . .
The terms clearly indicate that your basis is in vital conflict with and is
opposed to the fundamental basis and principles of the Lahore Resolution. Now let
me take your main terms:
(a) “I proceed on the assumption that India is not to be regarded as two or more
nations, but as one family consisting of many members, of whom the Muslims living
in the north-west zones, i e., Baluchistan, Sind, North-West Frontier Province and
that part of the Punjab where they are in absolute majority over all the other elements
and in parts of Bengal and Assam where they are in absolute majority, desire to live in
separation from the rest of India.” If this term were accepted and given effect to, the
present boundaries of these Provinces would be maimed and mutilated beyond
redemption and leave us only with the husk, and it is opposed to the Lahore
Resolution.
(b) That even in these mutilated areas so defined, the right of
self-determination will not be exercised by the Muslims but by the inhabitants of
these areas so demarcated. This again is opposed to the fundamentals of the Lahore
Resolution.
(c) That if the vote is in favour of separation, they shall be followed to “form a
separate State as soon as possible after India is free from foreign domination”,
whereas we propose that we should come to a complete settlement of our own
immediately and by our united front and efforts do everything in our power to secure
the freedom and independence of the peoples of India on the basis of Pakistan and
Hindustan.
(d) Next you say, “There shall be a treaty of separation which should also
provide for the efficient and satisfactory administration of Foreign Affairs, Defence,
Internal Communications, Customs, Commerce, and the like, which must necessarily
continue to be matters of common interest between the contracting parties.” If these
vital matters are to be administered by some central authority, you do not indicate
what sort of authority or machinery will be set up to administer these matters, and
how and to whom again that authority will be responsible. According to the Lahore
Resolution, as I have already explained to you, all these matters, which are the
life-blood of any State, cannot be delegated to any central authority or government.
The matter of security of the two States and the natural and mutual obligations that
may arise out of physical contiguity will be for the constitution-making body of

474

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Pakistan and that of Hindustan, or [any] other party concerned, to deal with on the
footing of their being two independent States. As regards the safeguarding of the
rights of minorities, I have already explained that this question of safeguarding the
minorities is fully stated in the Lahore Resolution.
You will, therefore, see that the entire basis of your new proposal is
fundamentally opposed to the Lahore Resolution, and as I have already pointed out to
you both in the correspondence and in our discussions, it is very difficult for me to
entertain counter-proposals and negotiate . . . unless they come from you in your
representative capacity. That was the same difficulty with regard to the Gandhi-Rajaji
Formula, and I made it clear to you, at the very outset, but the Formula was discussed
as you asserted that it had met the Lahore Resolution in substance. But while you were
furnishing me with the clarification of this Formula, you shunted it and we confined
ourselves to the Lahore Resolution, and hence the question of your representative
capacity did not arise regarding this Formula. But now you have, in your letter of
September 24, made a new proposal of your own on your own basis, and the same
difficulties present themselves to me as before, and it is difficult to deal with it any
further unless it comes from you in your representative capacity.
I cannot agree with you when you finally wind up by saying: “In your letter of
23rd September, you refer to ‘the basic and fundamental principles embodied in the
Lahore Resolution’ and ask me to accept them. Surely, this is unnecessary when as I
feel I have accepted the concrete consequence that should follow from such
acceptance.” This is obviously far from correct. Why not then accept the
fundamentals of the Lahore Resolution and proceed to settle the details?
Yours sincerely,
M. A. J INNAH
The Hindu, 29-9-1944

APPENDIX XXVI
LETTER FROM M. A. JINNAH 1
September 26, 1944

DEAR MR. GANDHI,

I am in receipt of your letter of September 25. It is entirely incorrect and
has no foundation in fact, for you to say that our conversations have come about as a
result of my correspondence with Rajaji in July last over his Formula. It is equally
baseless to say “and your consultations with the League Working Committee thereon”.
1

Vide “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 26-9-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

475

It was entirely in response to your letter of July 17, 1944, which I received while I was
at Srinagar, with a fervent request on your part to meet you, and you ended that letter by
saying, “Do not disappoint me.” In my reply, again from Srinagar, dated July 24, 1944,
I intimated to you that I would be glad to receive you at my house in Bombay on my
return, which would probably be about the middle of August. This was long before the
meeting of the Working Committee or that of the Council of the All-India Muslim
League, and long before I reached Lahore, and when you arrived here and told me that
you were approaching me in your individual capacity, I at once made it clear to you and
informed you, both in our talks and by my letter, that the position you had taken up had
no precedent for it, and further that it was not possible to negotiate and reach an
agreement unless both the parties were fully represented. For, it is one-sided business,
as it will not be binding upon any organization in any sense whatever, but you would as
an individual only recommend it, if any agreement is reached, to the Congress and the
country, whereas it would be binding upon me as the President of the Muslim League. I
cannot accept this position. I hope you do see the unfairness and the great disadvantage
to me, and it is so simple and elementary for anyone to understand.
As regards your proposal of yesterday, which you have simplified in your
letter of September 24, I have already sent you my reply.
With regard to your suggestion to be allowed to address the meeting of the
Council, and if they feel like rejecting your “offer” the matter should be put before the
open session, let me inform you that only a member or delegate is entitled to
participate in the deliberations of the meetings of the Council or in the open session
respectively. Besides, it is a most extraordinary and unprecedented suggestion to
make. However, I thank you for your advice.
As regards your proposal for arbitration and outside guidance, I have already
replied to you, and it is not merely technical but a matter of substance. I fully
reciprocate your desire for securing a Congress-League settlement.
However, I regret I have failed to convince you and convert you, as I was
hopeful of doing.
Yours sincerely,
M. A. J INNAH
The Hindu, 29-9-1944

476

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX XXVII
LETTER FROM M. A. JINNAH 1
September 26, 1944
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

I have received your letter of September 26, and I note that you have written it
with Rajaji’s advice. Of course, it is for you to follow such advice as you may choose
to do, but I am only concerned for the moment with you. I note that at the last
moment you have resurrected the Gandhi Rajaji Formula, although it was shunted all
this time and you proceed to say that this Formula gives me virtually what is
embodied in the Lahore Resolution. You further say that on the same plan you have
tried to formulate your latest proposals, as mentioned in your letter of September 24
and you maintain that either gives me the substance of the Lahore Resolution. In your
previous letter you asserted that your Formula gives me the “essence” of the Lahore
Resolution. I see a very close family resemblance between the two, and the substance
of one or the other is practically the same, only it is put in different language, and I
have already expressed my opinion, that in my judgment they neither meet the
substance nor the essence of the Lahore Resolution. On the contrary, both are
calculated to completely torpedo the Pakistan demand of Muslim India. I have never
asked you to accept certain theses nor have I introduced any theories in the Lahore
Resolution. Theses and theories are matters for scholars to indulge in.
I am very sorry I have to repeat, but I am compelled to do so, that I cannot
agree with you that my references to your not being clothed with representative
authority are really irrelevant. On the contrary, they have an important bearing, as I
have already explained to you more than once. You again repeat that if you and I can
agree upon a common course of action, you may use what influence you possess for
its acceptance by the Congress and the country. I have already stated from the very
beginning that that is not enough, for the reasons I have already given. Your
representative capacity comes into play when you are making counter-proposals, and
I cannot understand how you can say that it is irrelevant. No responsible organization
can entertain any proposal from any individual, however great he may be, unless it is
backed up with the authority of a recognized organization, and comes from its fully
accredited representative. However, I need not labour this point any more, as I have
already explained it in our previous correspondence.
If a break comes, it will be because you have not satisfied me in regard to the
essence of the claim embodied in the Lahore Resolution. It is not a question of your
1

Vide “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 26-9-1944.

VOL. 84 : 27 JANUARY, 1944 - 1 OCTOBER, 1944

477

being unwilling, but in fact, it is so. If a break comes it will be most unfortunate. If
one does not agree with you or differs from you, you are always right and the other
party is always wrong, and the next thing is that many are waiting prepared, in your
circle, to pillory me when the word goes, but I must face all threats and consequences,
and I can only act according to my judgment and conscience.
Yours sincerely,
M. A. J INNAH
The Hindu, 29-9-1944

APPENDIX XXVIII
M. A. JINNAH’S STATEMENT 1
September 27, 1944
Mr. Gandhi from the very commencement of our talks made it clear that he had
approached me in his individual capacity and that he represented no one but himself.
However, he assured me that he was really open to conviction and conversion to the
Muslim League Lahore Resolution of March 1940.
Without prejudice to my objection that in order to reach any settlement,
negotiations can only be carried on properly when the other side is also fully
represented and vested with authority, in deference to Mr. Gandhi’s wishes I agreed to
the task of persuading and converting him to the fundamentals of the Lahore
Resolution.
I have placed before him everything and every aspect of the Muslim point of
view in the course of our prolonged talks and correspondence, and we discussed all the
pros and cons generally, and I regret to say that I have failed in my task of converting
Mr. Gandhi.
We have, therefore, decided to release to the Press the correspondence that has
passed between us.
Nevertheless, we hope that the public will not feel embittered, and we trust
that this is not the final end of our effort.
Gandhi -Jinnah Talks, p. 40

1

478

Vide “Speech at Prayer Meeting”, 27-9-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

