1. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
February 21, 1938
You may settle down there if Vidya keeps well and you have
good work. Father you should forget. Not to do so is to irritate the
boil.1
Ask Jeramdas to do it today.
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T. Hingorani

2. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS 2
February 23, 1938
I have read the Governor-General’s statement3 with the respect
and attention it deserves. I had hoped that it would give some satisfaction, as was given at least to me and, if I may say so, a large number
of Congressmen when he made a pronouncement upon the Congress
demand for certain assurances as a condition precedent to the acceptance of ministerial responsibility by Congress members of the provincial Legislatures. It reads like a special pleading unworthy of a
personage possessing unheard-of powers.
No one has questioned the propriety of examining the cases of
prisoners to be discharged; but what I have questioned, and the Congress most emphatically questions, is the propriety of such examination by provincial Governors in provinces said to be enjoying complete provincial autonomy. That duty and the right of examination
belong solely to responsible Ministers as I understand the Government
of India Act and the convention in responsibly governed Colonies.
The Governors’ duty and right are to advise their Ministers on the
question of broad policy and warn them of danger in their exercise of
certain powers, but having done so to leave their Ministers free to
exercise their unfettered judgment. If such were not the case, the
responsibility would become a perfectly meaningless term, and the
Ministers responsible to their electors would have as their share
1

The addressee had consulted Gandhiji in connection with his stay at Nainital
and his relations with his father.
2
This appeared under the title “How Crisis Can Be Avoided”.
3
Dated February 22
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

1

nothing but odium and disgrace, if their responsibility had to be
shared with Governors in the daily administration of affairs by law
entrusted to them. It is hardly graceful for His Excellency to quote
against the poor Ministers their non-exercise of their undoubted
powers to prevent Governors from examining individual cases. The
Congress Resolution1 describes their forbearance as exemplary
patience. I would venture to add that probably it was also the inexperience of the Ministers who were totally new to their task. I am afraid,
therefore, that unless this crucial question is decided in favour of the
Ministers, it will be difficult for them to shoulder the grave responsibility that the Congress has permitted them to take over.
I am glad that His Excellency has drawn public attention to the
method I adopted in Bengal. He might have noted also the difference
between Bengal on the one hand and the U.P. and Bihar on the other.
In Bengal I was dealing with a Government which was not bound by
the Congress manifesto in any shape or form. The Ministers there
rightly or wrongly would not listen to a wholesale discharge of convicted prisoners. I was treading upon very delicate ground in pursuance
of my promise to the prisoners. My motive was purely humanitarian,
and the only weapon that I had at my disposal was an appeal to the
human in the Bengal Ministers. And I am glad to be able to testify
that I was not speaking to hearts of stone. The situation in the U. P.
and Bihar is totally different. The Ministers there are bound by the
manifesto which gave them victory at the polls. They had not only
examined the cases of all prisoners whose release they were seeking
but, being fully aware of their responsibility for the due preservation
of peace in their provinces, had personally secured assurances from
the prisoners in question that they no longer believed in the cult of
violence.
One thing in His Excellency’s statement gives me hope that the
impending crisis might be prevented. He has still left the door open
for negotiations between the Governors and the Ministers. I recognize
that the notices were sudden, because in the nature of things they had
to be so.2 All the parties have now had ample time for considering the
1

Vide “Resolution on Ministerial Resignations”, 18-2-1938
The Viceregal statement read: “In the case of Bihar the demand was received
by the Governor at 1 p. m. and cabled for action by the Chief Secretary by 4 p. m. the
same day. In the case of the United Provinces the time limit set for compliance was
also brief to a degree.”
2

2

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

situation.
In my opinion the crisis can be avoided if the Governors are left
free to give an assurance that their examination of cases was not
intended to be usurpation of the powers of the Ministers, and that
since they had armed themselves with assurances from prisoners they
were free to release them on their own responsibility. And I hope that
the Working Committee will leave the Ministers free, if they are summoned by the Governors; to judge for themselves whether they are
satisfied by the assurances they may receive.
One thing I must say in connection with the exercise by His
Excellency of his powers under Section 126 (5) in the light of his
argument justifying the use of sub-section 5 of Section 126. I have
read the whole of it. It is entitled “Control of the Federation over
Provinces in Certain Cases”. Unless the sub-sections have no connection with one another and they are to be read independently of one
another, my reading is that in the present case the exercise of powers
under sub-section 5 of Section 126 is a manifest misapplication. But
here I am treading on dangerous ground. Let lawyers decide the
point. My purpose in making this long statement is to assist a peaceful
solution of the crisis that has suddenly appeared.
Harijan, 26-2-1938, and The Hindu, 24-2-1938

3. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
February 23, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

Your intention was not honest, nor was it correct. All the same, it
is good that you did not come, since you also needed sleep.
Send the following telegram to Gosibehn.
“Health good. Hope Jalbhai makes steady progress. Love.
Bapu.” 1
Who sent the wire to A. P. saying that I had not seen the statement? But it does not matter now.
The rest when you come in the evening.
Blessings from

BAPU
1

The text of the telegram is in English.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

3

[PS.]
Suslhila brought a car when I had walked a little distance beyond
the level crossing, and I got in.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11591

4. LETTER TO N. S. HARDIKAR
WARDHA , S EGAON,

February 24, 1938
DEAR DR. HARDIKAR,

I retain the same view that I held in 1920 as to volunteers. You
know that at Ahmedabad the Congress had passed a resolution1
embodying a pledge for volunteers and certain instructions to be
followed by them. Experience has proved for me the correctness of
the position I then took. It is true that there has not been the response
that I wanted. The causes of the inadequacy of response I need not go
into at the present moment. Our volunteers for me are, and should be,
our non-violent army, irresistible and invincible. Therefore I would
expect every adult person to undergo a practical volunteer training for
at least three months. I would expect them to give at least one month
every year to practical service. Now that in seven provinces the
Congress runs the Government the thing should be easy. The first
thing, therefore, is to prepare a textbook, giving in minute detail the
course of instructions to be imparted to candidate volunteers and then
begin the work of instruction not in cities but in villages. I would
concentrate all effort on villiages. Whilst I note the marvellous mass
awakening that has taken place, I am painfully conscious of the fact
that a far greater and a far more solid awakening has to take place
before we can confidently say that swaraj is ours for the asking. Any
extraneous event may put power into our hands. I would not call that
swaraj of the people.
If what I have said appeals to your head and to your heart, you
should show this letter to Jawaharlal and if he approves, and only if he
approves, you should take the next step. I say this with deliberation. I
do not want to take a new step in life of a political nature unless I can
secure his approval and co-operation. Secondly, there is not that
meeting of our hearts which is necessary for me to give guidance. You
1

4

Vide “Speech at Congress Session, Ahmedaad-I”, 28-12-1921
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

know the reason why. I know that there is no such barrier between
you and Jawaharlal. Therefore even though I may say something
which appeals to your head and heart, in my opinion I should have
Jawaharlal’s hearty endorsement before you take any step on the
strength of what I say.
I hope you are now keeping perfect health.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a facsimile: Mahatma, Vol. IV, between pp. 272 and 273

5. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
S EGAON, WARDHA,
February 24, 1938
DEAR MR. JINNAH,

I thank you for your letter. I have read your letter to Jawaharlal
also. I observe that both the letters invite, not written replies but a
personal discussion. I do not know whether it will take place in the
first instance between you and Jawaharlal or, now that Subhas Bose
succeeds him, between you and the latter. If you desire that before this
there should be a talk between you and me, I would be delighted to
see you in Segaon any time which is convenient to you before the
10th of March after which, if health permits, I might have to go to
Bengal. So far as I am concerned, just as on the Hindu- Muslim
question I was guided by Dr. Ansari, now that he is no more in our
midst, I have accepted Maulana Abul Kalam Azad as my guide. My
suggestion, therefore, to you is that conversation should be opened in
the first instance as between you and Maulana Saheb. But in every
case regard me as at your disposal.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Bombay Chronicle, 16-6-1938

1

For the addressee’s reply, vide “Letter From M. A. Jinnah”, 3-3-1938

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

5

6. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
February 25, 1938
CHI. SHARDA,

I had your letter. Do stay there if you can remain peaceful. You
have my permission to come over. Saraswatibehn is very keen that
you should stay on for three months. You should definitely stay on if
your health can really improve. I am likely to go that side in April. I
have talked to Devdas about your music. He will get in touch with
you. When you return you can surely come via Ahmedabad. I have
already written1 to you that I had a long chat with Shakaribehn. The
whole of last night I dreamt about you. With great impatience and
restlessness you said: ‘Now please do get me married.’ You even
showed me the man. I did not know him, nor his name. You did not
want to act against my wish but your insistence was tremendous. How
is that?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9989. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokha-wala

7. LETTER TO ZAKIR HUSAIN
S EGAON, WARDHA,
February 27, 1938
MY DEAR ZAKIR,

I opened at Haripura the conversation about Hindu-Muslim
unity. You were to have talked to me about it the next day if we could
meet again. Unfortunately, I was unable to spare the time. I would like
you, if you will, to put down your thoughts in writing and let me hear
from you.
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

6

On February 16; vide “Letter to Sharda C. Shah”, 16-2-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

8. TELEGRAM TO SHAM LAL
[On or before March 4, 1938] 1
PLEASE
THANK
AND
CONGRATULATE
THE
PRISONERS
ON
THEIR
DECISION
IN
RESPONSE
TO
MY
APPEAL2 .
I
SHALL
LEAVE NO STONE UNTURNED ON THEIR BEHALF.

The Bombay Chronicle, 5-3-1938

9. INTERVIEW TO REPRESENTATIVES OF SCINDIA
STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY3
[March 4, 1938] 4
Three representatives of the Scindia Steam Navigation Company had an
interview with Gandhiji at Segaon.... They seemed to be worried by the following
among a number of things:
(1)
The discrimination clauses.5 They cited from Gandhiji’s article in
Young India entitled “The Giant and the Dwarf”6 the following statements:
“To talk of no discrimination between Indian interests and English or
European is to perpetuate Indian helotage. What is equality of rights between a giant
and a dwarf? . . .” And again: “In almost every walk of life the Englishman by reason
of his belonging to the ruling class occupies a privileged position.... The cottage
industries of India had to perish in order that Lancashire might flourish. The Indian
shipping had to perish, so that British shipping might flourish.”
Is the shipping not to revive and rise to its full height in a free India?
(2) What are Indian or swadeshi companies? It has become a fashion nowadays
to bamboozle the unwary public by adding “(India) Limited” to full-blooded British
concerns. Lever Brothers “(India) Limited” have their factories here now. They claim
to produce swadeshi soap, and have already ruined several large and small soap
factories in Bengal. Then there is the Imperial Chemicals (India) Ltd. which has
received valuable concessions. This is dumping foreign industries instead of foreign
1

The report is date-lined “New Delhi, March 4,” 1938.
Vide “Telegram to Secretary, Prisoners’ Relief Society, Lahore”, 11-1-1938
“Statement to the Press”, 14-1-1938, and letter to the addressee, “Leter to Sham Lal”,
20-2-1938
3
This is reproduced from Mahadev Desai’s article “Swadeshi Industries and
Discrimination”.
4
According to Gandhi—1915—1948: A Detailed Chronology, Shantikumar
Morarjee and Gaganvihari Mehta met Gandhiji at Segaon on this date.
5
In the new constitution under the Government of India Act of 1935
6
Vide “The Giant and the Dwarf”
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

7

goods on us!
(3) Then there are companies with Indian Directorate with British Managing
Agents who direct the Directorate. Would you call a company with a large percentage
of Indian capital and a large number of Indian Directors on the Board, but with a
non-Indian Managing Director or non-lndian firm as Managing Agents, a swadeshi
concern?
Gandhiji dealt with these points fairly exhaustively in his reply which may be
summarized below in his own words:

(1) On this point I am glad you have reminded me of my article
written in 1931. I still hold the same views, and have no doubt that a
free India will have the right to discriminate—if that word must be
used—against foreign interests, wherever Indian interests need it.
(2) As regards the definition of a swadeshi company I would say
that only those concerns can be regarded as swadeshi whose control,
direction and management either by a Managing Director or by
Managing Agents are in Indian hands. I should have no objection to
the use of foreign capital, or to the employment of foreign talent,
when such are not available in India, or when we need them, but only
on condition that such capital and such talents are exclusively under
the control, direction and management of Indians and are used in the
interests of India.
But the use of foreign capital or talent is one thing, and the
dumping of foreign industrial concerns is totally another thing. The
concerns you have named cannot in the remotest sense of the term be
called swadeshi. Rather than countenance these ventures, I would
prefer the development of the industries in question to be delayed by
a few years in order to permit national capital and enterprise to grow
up and build such industries in future under the actual control, direction and management of Indians themselves.
(3) Answer to this is contained in my answer on the second
point.
Harijan, 26-3-1938

8

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

10. TALK WITH A FRIEND 1
[Before March 5, 1938]
[ GANDHIJI:] The States resolution is a call to the States people
not to go to sleep but to start work in right earnest. The Congress is
deeply concerned about the welfare of Indian States, as the Congress
resolution3 on the Federation should clearly show. We want the States
people to carry on ceaseless work in the States, but not in the name of
the Congress. The use of the name of the Congress may expose the
Congress to insult. If insult could result in good to the States people, I
would court it. But it is far from being so. The Congress cannot in the
nature of things step into each and every Indian State and protect
those who agitate there. It is better able to protect them by not allowing them to use its name. If the States people have begun to
understand and respect the Congress it is a good thing, but then let
them work with the moral support of the Congress but avoid the
Congress name. Whenever the Congress can effectively help the States
people it would do so not by actively meddling with their affairs but
by acting as an intermediary. Co-operation from within the States is
an impossible proposition, and therefore I have been deliberately
advising the States people to refrain from having Congress
Committees within the States. Some say: ‘We would end the States.’
Now this cry does neither these friends nor the Indian States any
harm. But it would harm them if they were actively interesting themselves in States affairs and trying to work there in the Congress name.
The prestige of the Congress would suffer and not gain by the use of
the Congress name. Mysore is a case in point. It had a bona fide
Congress organization but it could not prevent the Congress flag from
being insulted.
2

“But,” said the friend from the States, “all these things have happened in
British India?”
1

Reproduced from Mahadev Desai’s “Notes”
Passed at the Congress session at Haripura
3
Which inter alia read: “The Indian States participating in the Federation
should approximate to the Provinces in the establishment of representative
institutions and responsible government, civil liberties and method of election to the
Federal Houses. Otherwise the Federation as it is now contemplated will, instead of
building up Indian unity, encourage separatist tendencies and involve the States in
internal and external conflicts.”
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

9

They have, and the Congress has always stood up to the insult.
That is because in British India we can adopt civil disobedience for
any good cause, but in the States it is impossible. The Congress
Committees will have always to be at the mercy of the States and
would be in no better case than, for instance, a Committee in Afghanistan, which would entirely exist on the mercy of the Government of
Afghanistan. But of course this is my personal view and interpretation.
When I came to India, I had an offer from three Indian States to
settle and carry on my work from there. I had to decline the offer.
But we do not ask for active help from the Congress. We want to organize
under the aegis of the Congress. The onus of helping us would be upon the Congress,
but we do not ask for the help.

There it is, whether you ask for it or not, the onus would be
upon the Congress, and it is not able to discharge it. Without being
able to render any active support, the aegis of the Congress would be a
superfluous affair. A big organization like the Congress cannot allow
itself to be stultified. This is all as plain as a pikestaff to me. I do not
know how the States people fail to understand this. The best help that
the Congress can render today is to destroy the delusion that it can
actively help the Indian States. That will automatically mean that the
States people must learn to rely on themselves for all internal reforms.
I understand this very well. But look at the resolution as finally passed. The
new rider that has been added is absurd. We are allowed to have Committees in States
but they will be allowed to do nothing. The position is anomalous.

It is, I am afraid. It was a concession to the States people, but a
useless concession in terms of my interpretation.
Then, what shall be our position? Shall we stop enrolling Congress members
and begin to organize a separate national organization which will join the Congress
under the present restrictions?

The real job is to build up your own organization. But you may
continue to be members of the Congress, attend it and keep in touch
with it. But your real work will lie in the States. The resolution is
permissive. You need not set up a Congress Committee in the States.
But my advice is of no value. You must seek authoritative instructions
from the Working Committee
Harijan, 5-3-1938

10

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

11. TELEGRAM TO MRS. GEORGE JOSEPH
[On or after March 5, 1938] 1
STAGGERING
NEWS.
WANT
YOU
TO
GOD’S
LOVE
IN
EVERYTHING.
SEND
FROM US ALL.

BE
BRAVE
AND
FULL
PARTICULARS.

TRUST
LOVE

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarclal

12. DISCUSSION WITH SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
March 6, [1938] 2
SUBHAS BOSE :

Bapu, may I ask you a question? What is the future programme

of the Board?3

[ GANDHIJI:] The most immediate piece of work before the
Board is the preparation of textbooks for teachers.
Next, the Board must approach the different Congress ministers
and chalk out the plan of work for each province, with due consideration for the present limitations and capacity of work.
Thirdly, the Board must itself conduct an experimental centre to
test the syllabus it has drawn up, and must revise its own recommendations at every step in the light of the experience thus gained.
Fourthly, the Board must organize and conduct as many training schools as possible. Every training school serves a double purpose. It may not only train future teachers, but every training school
also means a demonstration school of basic education.
SUBHAS BOSE :

What about the expenses of the Board?

[ G.] We shall have to beg for it. I do not think it right to expect
any financial contributions from the Congress governments, because
that would provide an opportunity for the criticisms of the opposition
party.
SUBHAS BOSE : Bapu, this is as regards the problem of rural basic education.
What is your suggestion as regards the problem of basic education in urban areas?

1

The addressee’s telegram to Mahadev Desai, to which this telegram is a reply,
is dated March 5, 1938. It read “,Joseph sinking. Inform Bapu.”
2
The source has these notes placed along with the letters of 1938.
3
All-India Education Board
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

11

Some municipalities, e. g., the municipalities of Calcutta and Bombay, are doing
some work in this direction and would like to extend their work in progressive
primary education. What is your suggestion as regards the problem of primary
education in cities?

[ G.] According to my educational philosophy, there is no
fundamental difference between the basic education in a rural and an
urban area. The aim in both is the same—the development of the
intelligence through a vocation. The system of training that is evolved
for rural areas will also be applicable to urban areas.
I know from personal experience that the products of primary
education in urban areas are good-for-nothing, but, for the present, I
do not wish to divide the energies of the Board. If it succeeds in
solving the problem of rural education, the other problem will also be
solved. If ten years of work are devoted to rural education, you may
consider that the whole problem of primary education whether rural
or urban has been grappled with.
Subhas Bose next asked whether a representative of a city municipality with
some experience of municipal education could not be a member of the Board, so that
he could attempt, if he liked, to adapt the findings of the A. I. E. B. for the purpose of
urban basic education.

[ G.] Certainly. The Board will be a representative body. All the
members of the Board are representatives of the city. Where shall I
find real villagers as members?
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

13. TELEGRAM TO GLADYS OWEN
[March 7, 1938] 1
GLADYS OWEN
VINONA BUNGALOW
S HOLAPUR
COME ANY DAY BEFORE TWELFTH. LOVE.

BAPU
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 194

1

The draft of the telegram was enclosed with the note to Jamnalal Bajaj, dated
March 7, 1938; vide the following item.

12

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

14. NOTE TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
March 7, 1938
Subhas Babu can come tomorrow at or any time after 1 o’clock
as it suits him. Despatch the enclosed telegram1 , the cost to be paid by
Mahadev.
BAPU2

[From Hindi]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 194

15. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
March 7, 1938
CHI, MAHADEV,

I am sending all the matter with this. I hope there will be no
difficulty in deciphering my revisions. I shall give some time to
Manilal. In any case, the time given by you I consider as given by me.
Gole’s letter was rather amusing. Do you know that Bhansali has
resumed eating? Vijava has had several letters from Nanavati. He is
very much hurt. He may perhaps come some time next week.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11592

16. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

March 8, 1938
DEAR MR. JINNAH,

I thank you for your letter 3 . I hope you have completely got
over your indisposition.
Your letter revives painful memories. I will not discuss at this
stage, at any rate, the various debatable points raised in your letter.
1

Vide the preceding item.
This is in the Gujarati script.
3
Vide “Letter From M. A. Jinnah”,3-3-1938
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

13

Suffice it to say that I am at your disposal. If you cannot come to
Segaon and my health permits, I will gladly go to Bombay to meet
you when you are there. At present I have to go to Bengal and then
for a while to Orissa. This will take me through the whole of this
month. The earliest, therefore, that we can meet will be in April.
Two questions arising from your letter demand a reply. You ask
me whether I have now seen the light. Much to my regret I have to say
“no”. If I had, I would proclaim the news from the housetops. But
that limitation does not debar me from taking advantage of the
slightest opportunity of finding a way out of the present difficulty.
You expect me to be able to speak on behalf of ‘the Congress
and other Hindus throughout the country’. I am afraid I cannot fulfil
the test. I cannot represent either the Congress or the Hindus in the
sense you mean. But I would exert to the utmost all the moral influence I could have with them in order to secure an honourable
settlement.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Bombay Chronicle, 16-6-1938

17. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
March 8, 1938
CHI. SHARDA,

I intended writing to you earlier but could not. You must stay
cheerfully in any place where you have got to stay. That is the meaning of a fusion of shreya, what is good, and preya, what is pleasant.
You have the power of attaining such a fusion. Develop it still further.
Now you must not come unless Saraswatidevi permits you or when
you fear that your health is likely to suffer. Did you do anything
about the sitar [lessons]?
I am bound to think about your marriage. Should I not worry
about you since you have passed the worry on to me? How can it be
that neither you nor I shall worry? And you do not have to worry at
all. I mentioned the thing only in jest and to prove that I was not
forgetting you.
1

The addressee in his reply dated March 17, 1938, agreed to meet Gandhiji in
Bombay some time in April.

14

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You were to tell me about your talk with Hakimji. Why have you
not written about it? Do not be lax about your work.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9990. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokha-wala

18. LETTER TO LAKSHMI NARAIAN GADODIA
March 8, 1938
BHAI LAKSHMI NARAYANJI,

I have your letter. I shall recall Sharda only when you two
relieve her. I certainly have faith in nature cure but it is not always that
we come by the proper cures. I have not yet full faith in Hakimji’s
knowledge. Of course, I am keeping well.
How is the dairy going on?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5626

19. TALK WITH A PACIFIST 1
[Before March 12, 1938]
[ GANDHIJI:] For non-violence to permeate as we should have a
living faith in God. Non-violence comes to us through doing good
continually without the slightest expectation of return. It simply
spends itself and it is its own reward, and done in that spirit it is done
not merely for friends but certainly for adversaries. That is the
indispensable lesson in non-violence. It was thrown my way by God in
South Africa in an atmosphere which was as adverse as it well could be.
I was in a country where I knew no European or Indian. I had gone
there to make a career as a lawyer. But I succeeded in learning the
eternal law of suffering as the only remedy for undoing wrong and
injustice. It means positively the law of non-violence. You have to be
prepared to suffer cheerfully at the hands of all and sundry, and you
will wish ill to no one, not even to those who may have wronged you.
Just now a good many people are talking of world peace,
1

This is reproduced from Mabadev Desai’s “Notes”.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

15

promoting peace societies and passing resolutions. This is good as far
as it goes. But it may not be non-violence. An army of non-violence
exposes itself to all the risks that an army of violence does. Only the
latter expects to retaliate even when it is not the aggressor. An army of
non-violence runs risks without the wish to retaliate.
[THE PACIFIST :] But the war spirit is creeping slowly over us. How are we to
combat it?

I know how difficult it is for you to combat it in England. You
have to approach the problem with faith and determination even
though you may be very few. I would recommend the study of
Richard Gregg’s book 1 on the practice of non-violence. A true
pacifist refuses to use the fruit of arms—peace and order. So long as
we eat a single grain of wheat grown under the protection of arms we
participate in violence. When one realizes this one has to be an exile in
one’s own country and a rebel. But everything has to be done according to the measure of one’s strength. A few people with the courage
of their convictions can become perfect nuisances to the whole State.
How far it is possible to reduce the whole thing to practice is for each
individual to judge.
Our English movement for peace is growing. But shall we simply go on
enrolling more and more members?

I am not enamoured of numbers. A peace army does not rely
upon numbers unless they understand the implications of non-violence. I would, therefore, concentrate on a few becoming saturated
with the spirit of non-violence and disciplining themselves for the
utmost suffering.
How exactly to act in particular situations is a matter of waiting
on God. The answer comes straight in response to prayer from the
heart. Such prayer carries with it the anguish of the soul.
Harijan, 12-3-1938

20. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

March 13, 1938
CHI. KANTI,

I have practically stopped writing these days. I sometimes write a
couple of lines to someone like you. I have since long been meaning
1

16

The Power of Non-violence
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to write to you and I satisfy that desire today. As regards A. S., you
have swung from one extreme to the other. This is violence. I can
understand your unwillingness to keep up your relations with her. But
why should it be that you cannot go to any place where she is? Why
this cowardice? I do not see in her the faults that you see. She gives
me no trouble. She has a number of good qualities. How can I send
her away? When asked, Ramachandran told me that he could not see
any defect in her. You should cultivate patience and generosity. She
cannot ask me anything about you. Nor do I tell her anything. That
does not mean that she doesn’t keep thinking of you. Saraswati also
seems to live in fear. Trust me, be calm and give up your unnaturalness. Do come to Orissa.
Prabha cannot go there. I will explain when we meet. The rest
you will hear from Mahadev.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7333. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

21. LETTER TO SHIVABHAI G. PATEL
S EGAON,
March 13, 1938
CHI. SHIVABHAI,

I hope you do not expect the customary words of condolence
from me. Hira has departed after repaying her debt and receiving her
due. What is there for grief in this? Your duty is clear. You should
bring up the child and not harbour even the thought of marrying
again. If you find this beyond your strength, do what is possible for
you. Do not deceive yourself.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9518. Also C.W. 434. Courtesy:
Shivabhai G. Patel

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

17

22. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
March 14, 1938
MY DEAR C. R.,

Read this1 . I hardly think you can any longer refuse to release
the prisoners. How are you? Going to Calcutta tomorrow.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 2068

23. LETTER TO N. R. MALKANI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

March 14, 1938
MY DEAR MALKANI,

Here is what you want.2 Return soon, bringing with you what is
best for you and the country.
I shall send your official letter to Mahavir Prasad.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 928

1

In his letter to Gandhiji Sham Lal had written: “I am glad to inform you that
all the terrorists have lost faith in violence. I had a talk with them. It is not a pretence
on their part. I would request you to write to the Madras Premier about Madras
political prisoners confined in the Punjab jail. He should have no hesitation in
releasing them at once.”
2
Vide the following item.

18

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

24. TESTIMONIAL TO N. R. MALKANI
S EGAON, W ARDHA ,

March 14, 1938
Professor Malkani had been teaching in the National College of
the Gujarat National University. He is now in charge of the Delhi
Industrial Home for the so-called untouchables of India. He is
voyaging to travel in Europe for a time. Any assistance rendered to
him by friends will be appreciated by the undersigned.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 929

25. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAL
March 14, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

I have added but little to your article. Is it all right? I had gone
through yesterday’s articles yesterday itself. I have made practically
no changes this time in the writings.
We felt no tremors here. The reason may be that our floor is on
level with the ground and the walls are of mud. However, such tremors
are sometimes wholly local.
Blessings from

BAPU

P.S.
Pyarelal and others had felt the tremors.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11593

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

19

26. A DISCUSSION 1
[On or before March 15, 1938] 2
Gandhiji was discussing with a friend and co-worker his reactions to the
Haripura Congress. He said he would make these views known as early as possible for
the information and benefit of those who would be responsible for the session in
Mahakoshal.

The Congress is a striking testimony to the great organizing
ability of the Sardar and his lieutenants as also his ability to command
financial help from moneyed friends. But the scale cannot be, must
not be, repeated. It is wrong to make lavish use of money even when it
is plentiful. I am partly responsible for the use of electricity and
motors and motor lorries. For Dev and Dastane’s 3 importunity had
weakened me at Faizpur. Sardar’s thoroughness showed me the
glaring absurdity of the use of these things for a village Congress.
They made the Congress camp look like a bit of Bombay instead of
the multiplied village it should have looked and was intended to look
like.
Classes were retained at Faizpur. At Haripura the classification
was intensified. There were the leaders, ministers, delegates visitors and
the villagers. The division was not horizontal but vertical. The
Congress is our political Mecca. The annual function is not a tamasha
or a fair, but a Haj, a pilgrimage, at which all distinctions as between
rich and poor, learned and illiterate, city-dweller and villager disappear. Why should Working Committee members have more conveniences than others? Why should they have food other than the villagers? Should a villager eat different food and be differently housed
when he becomes a member of the Working Committee? Or why
should a delegate who happens to be a Minister have a much multiplied hut? It is a wholly different thing when one is ill or is used to
special food. Such persons should make their own arrangements or
have them made by the Reception Committee by previous appointment. Indeed those who have frail bodies should abstainfrom attendance, unless their presence is urgently required in the interest of the
1

Reproduced from Mahadev Desai’s “Haripura Notes-V”, 19-3-1938. Apparently this discussion took place before Gandhiji left Segaon for Calcutta on March
15.
2
Ibid
3
Vitthal V. Dastane

20

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Congress. Vertical division of the camps into different classes sets a
pernicious example to the vast number of villagers who attend the
Con-gress. The Congress management has to go out of its way to
show the villagers that before it there is no prince and no pauper and
that all are equal. If these artificial differences disappear next year,
much expense will be saved.
Electric lights are in no way necessary. Visitors should be expected to bring their own lanterns. The Reception Committee will
confine itself to the lighting that may be required for the despatch of
Congress work and for the safety of the camp. Much work must not
be expected to be done after dark.
Motors and motor lorries are a nuisance, bad education for the
villagers, disturbing of peace, a hindrance to the proper despatch of
work, and conducive to the raising of dust. The distance of ten miles
or less from a railway station must be negotiated on foot or in
bullock-carts. None but pedestrian traffic should be permitted inside
the camp.
The site selected for the Congress should be a solid square block
as far as possible. This will ensure a compact camp avoiding long
distance between one end of the camp and the other. The layout can
be round the quadrangle where the open session is to take place.
There should be one common kitchen from where food should
be served at stated prices per course, not to be eaten on the spot but to
be taken to the place of residence of the diner.
If these precautions are not observed, the whole idea of
villagers’ Congress for their education and for establishing a living
and national contact between the city-dweller and the villager is likely
to be frustrated.
Harijan, 19-3-1938

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

21

27. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
C ALCUTTA ,

March 16, 1938
CHI. SHARDA,

We arrived in Calcutta today. Your work must be going on in
full swing. Is your pain any better? What food do you take? What do
you read? What about sitar?
I am quite well. There was much disturbance from the crowds
on the way.
My address here is: Care Subhas Babu, Congress President,
Woodburn Park, Calcutta.
We shall start from here on the 24th to go to Delang, Orissa, for
[the convention of] the Gandhi Seva Sangh there. We shall have to
stay there till the 31st. Pyarelal, Mahadev, Kanu and Sushila are with
me.
One letter from you should reach me here and two or three at
Delang.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9991. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokha-wala

28. TALK WITH HARIJANS1
C ALCUTTA ,

March 18, 1938
The Congress which is in a minority today must come to power
tomorrow or the day after in Bengal, as its programme is so broadbased as to attract all groups to its fold.
The Bombay Chronicle, 19-3-1938

1
Following Gandhiji’s appeal to join the Congress, some members of the
Scheduled Castes had asked him how their political and economic interests could be
safeguarded if they joined the Congress which was not in power in the Province.

22

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

29. DISCUSSION WITH KRISHAK PROJA PARTY
MEMBERS1
C ALCUTTA ,
March 19, 1938
In the course of the discussion the members of the Krishak Party are reported
to have intimated to Mahatmaji their desire to see the political situation in Bengal
changed and their readiness to work in co-operation with the Congress Party in the
Legislature if the administration of the Province was run on purely national lines and
on an economic basis.
Mahatma Gandhi wanted it to be realized that the main object of his visit to
Bengal was the release of political prisoners and he would rather not be drawn into
local politics. He, however, informed them that he intended returning to Calcutta by
the 1st April next from Delang where he would have to attend the annual meeting of
the Gandhi Seva Sangh. He proposed to concentrate all his attention during his
present trip to Calcutta on tackling the problem of the release of detenus and political
prisoners. But on return from Delang he would be free to devote his time and energy to
the political problems peculiar to Bengal to which his attention had already been
drawn.

Amrita Bazar Patrika, 20-3-1938

30. OUR FAILURE
[Before March 22, 1938] 2
The communal riots in Allahabad—the headquarters of the
Congress—and the necessity of summoning the assistance of the
police and even the military show that the Congress has not yet
become fit to substitute the British authority. It is best to face this
naked truth, however unpleasant it may be.
The Congress claims to represent the whole of India, not merely
those few who are on the Congress register. It should represent even
those who are hostile to it and who will even crush it, if they could.
Not until we make good that claim, shall we be in a position to
1

Twenty members of the Bengal Legislative Assembly and two members
of the Legislative Council had about an hour’s discussion with Gandhiji in the
afternoon.
2
From the reference to this article in “Talk with Co-workers”, 22-3-1938
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

23

displace the British Government and function as an independent
nation.
This proposition holds good whether we seek to displace British
rule by violent action or non-violent.
Most probably by the time these lines appear in print, peace
would have been established in Allahabad and the other parts. That,
however, will not take us further in our examination of the fitness of
the Congress as an organization ready to displace British authority in
its entirety.
No Congressman will seriously doubt that the Congress is not at
the present moment capable of delivering the goods if it was called
upon to do so. If it was capable, it would not wait for the call. But
every Congressman believes that the Congress is fast becoming such a
body. The brilliant success at Haripura will be cited as the most
conclusive proof of the fact.
The riots and certain other things I can mention should make us
pause and ask ourselves whether the Congress is really growing from
strength to strength. I must own that I have been guilty of laying that
claim. Have I been overhasty in doing so?
It is my conviction that the phenomenal growth of the Congress
is due to its ‘acceptance and enforcement, however imperfect, of the
policy of non-violence. Time has arrived to consider the nature of
Congress non-violence. Is it non-violence of the weak and the helpless
or of the strong and the powerful? If it is the former, it will never take
us to our goal and, if long practised, may even render us for ever unfit
for self-government. The weak and helpless are non-violent in action
because they must be. But in reality they harbour violence in their
breasts and simply await opportunity for its display. It is necessary for
Congressmen individually and collectively to examine the quality of
their non-violence. If it does not come out of real strength, it would be
best and honest for the Congress to make such a declaration and make
the necessary changes in its behaviour.
By this time, i. e., after seventeen years’ practice of nonviolence, the Congress should be able to put forth a non-violent army
of volunteers numbering not a few thousands but lacs who would be
equal to every occasion where the police and the military are required.
Thus, instead of one brave Pashupatinath Gupta who died1 in the
1

Mahadev Desai, however, reported in Harijan, 2-4-1938, that Pashupatinath
Gupta, though seriously stabbed, was making satisfactory progress.

24

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

attempt to secure peace, we should be able to produce hundreds. And
a non-violent army acts unlike armed men, as well in times of peace as
of disturbances. They would be constantly engaged in constructive
activities that make riots impossible. Theirs will be the duty of seeking
occasions for bringing warring communities together, carrying on
peace propaganda, engaging in activities that would bring and keep
them in touch with every single person, male and female, adult and
child, in their parish or division. Such an army should be ready to
cope with any emergency, and in order to still the frenzy of mobs,
should risk their lives in numbers sufficient for the purpose. A few
hundred, maybe a few thousand, such spotless deaths will once for all
put an end to the riots. Surely a few hundred young men and women
giving themselves deliberately to mob fury will be any day a cheap
and braver method of dealing with such madness than the display and
use of the police and the military.
It has been suggested that when we have our independence riots
and the like will not occur. This seems to me to be an empty hope, if
in the course of the struggle for freedom we do not understand and
use the technique of non-violent action in every conceivable
circumstance. To the extent that the Congress Ministers have been
obliged to make use of the police and the military, to that extent, in
my opinion, we must admit our failure. That the Ministers could not
have done otherwise is unfortunately only too true. I should like every
Congressman, I should like the Working Committee, to ask themselves
why we have failed, if they think with me that we have.
Harijan, 26-3-1938

31. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
WOODBURN P ARK, C ALCUTTA ,
[On or before March 22, 1938]1
CHI. SHARDA,

In my stupidity I did not bring ink and now I have to write with
pencil. I hope you will be able to read my handwriting.
Stay there without bothering yourself. You are not going to lose
1
Gandhiji left for Delang on March 24, 1938. And since he refers to the day of
his departure by the date and not as ‘tomorrow’ it could not have been written on
March 23.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

25

my company now. Are you willing ever to leave my protecting wing?
Are you going to abandon me when you get married? Chimanlal has
of course put you in my charge. Shakaribehn too handed you over to
me at Haripura. Moreover, I am constantly on the move at present,
hence you cannot [always] be near me. And I have no occasion to
take you round with me.
I am writing to Brijkrishna and Devdas that you have received
the books. I can understand your hesitation. It is good that you are
able to have some music [lessons].
There is nothing very alarming in your having had [too many]
motions. The greatest art about eating consists in eating only what one
can digest. Hence even if some unwholesome food is taken it should
not do much harm. I am doubtful about uncooked gram. But it would
do no harm if taken in quantities you can digest. The same is true
about berries.
Does Maulvi Saheb come there? I have not heard from him at
all. I am going to Delang, Orissa, on the 24th. I shall be back here on
the 1st of April. I am all right.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
In the absence of my. . .1 , do you use the same one
daily?
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9976. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokha-wala

32. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
C ALCUTTA ,
March 22, 1938
CHI. MIRA,

I stupidly did not bring the ink-pot and Kanu is not quite
as thoughtful and solicitous as you. So I can only give you a pencil
letter.
1

26

One word is illegible.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The bath 1 has been most useful. That it might not have been
with me but for your watchfulness was due to Kanu’s thoughtlessness.
He is still shaping.
I am really keeping extraordinarily well. I have hazarded an
experiment for the love of a good man. That has disturbed the b. p.
but I hope that it will come under control today. Sushila must describe
the experiment if she will.
I am afraid the stay out of Segaon will be prolonged perhaps by
a week. I must come back to C[alcutta] for the Working Committee.
You must not feel disturbed. Resign yourself to God. When I can usefully take you with me you shall come. And of course you accompany me if I go away anywhere for months. I hope you are keeping
well. How about salad greens?
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6397. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9992

33. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
C ALCUTTA ,

March 22, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

Either I write with a pencil or not at all. Kanu did not bring the
ink-pot and I stupidly refrained. There is no fountain-pen by and
there is no ordinary pen or ink in this household. This is a mere business letter, no time for more.
There is no likelihood of a vacancy in C. P. But what I suggest is
that you may send in a general letter to the President and respective
Premiers the names of those women who, in your opinion, are capable
of holding responsible offices. There your function as President
should end.
As to Delhi, Brijkrishna is worth his weight in gold, so far as
honesty is concerned. But I discount his estimates of facts and events.
But everything will be fixed up now that the Sardar and Shankerlal are
there.
1
In Bapu’s Letters to Mira the addressee says: “A tin bath which used to be
taken on journeys when no big bath was likely to be available for Bapu. To lie in hot
water was part of the blood-pressure treatment.”

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

27

My health is good. I have spoiled it a little by an experiment. I
must describe it to you. As for my work here, I can report nothing
conclusive.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3849, Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7005

34. TALK WITH CO-WORKERS1
[March 22, 1938] 2
I could not help writing that article3 . I want you to read it. I feel
ashamed that our Ministers had to call to their aid the police and the
military. I am ashamed that they had to use the language that they did
in reply to the Opposition speeches. I feel as if the Congress had lost
and the British had won. Why does our non-violence fail on such
occasions? Is it the non-violence of the weak? Even the goondas
should not move us from our faith and make us say: ‘We will send
them to the gallows or shoot them down if necessary.’ They too are
our countrymen. If they will kill us, we must allow them to do so. You
cannot pit against organized violence the non-violence of the weak,
but the non-violence which the bravest alone can exercise. . . . 4 We
have, you will say, been sufficiently non-violent. We were non-violent
during the civil disobedience campaign, we received lathi blows and
worse. My reply is this: We did, but not sufficiently. We could not get
independence at the end of the Dandi March 5 , as ours was not the
unadulterated non-violence of the bravest. We did take many a step
forward as a result of the sufferings we went through, but there was
lurking in us violence. That was why I had to make that statement6 in
Patna in 1934, and I am sure that if I had not advised the calling
off of the civil disobedience campaign, we should have been
1

Reproduced from Mahadev Desai’s article “Need for Self-examination”
According to Mahadev Desai the talk took place three days before the annual
session of the Gandhi Seva Sangh which began on March 25.
3
Vide “Our Failure”, 22-3-1938
4
Omission as in the source
5
In 1930
6
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 2-4-1934
2

28

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

thoroughly demoralized. We have been moving, since then, further
forward step by step. . . .1 But the time for searching self-examination
has come.
Harijan, 2-4-1938

35. FOREWORD2
C ALCUTTA ,
March 24, 1938
I have read Sir Abdullah Suhrawardy’s collection of the sayings
of the Prophet with much interest and profit. They are among the
treasures of mankind, not merely Muslims.
I am a believer in the truth of all the great religions of the world.
There will be no lasting peace on earth unless we learn not merely to
tolerate but even to respect the other faiths as our own. A reverent
study of the sayings of the different teachers of mankind is a step in
the direction of such mutual respect!
M. K. GANDHI
The Sayings of Muhammad

36. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
[A S AT] S EGAON, W ARDHA ,
March 24, 1938
DEAR MR. JINNAH,

Many thanks for your note. As soon as I reach Segaon I shall
see the first opportunity of waiting on you in Bombay.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Bombay Chronicle, 16-6-1938

1
2

Omission as in the source
To The Sayings of Muhammad

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

29

37. AN APPEAL1
C ALCUTTA ,

March 24, 1938
I am sorry to have to interrupt the negotiations for the release of
detenus and political prisoners as I must keep an appointment in
Delang. I hope to return on April l, and resume the negotiations. I
would urge workers and the public not to hold demonstrations, meetings and the like while the negotiations are going on. I would also
urge the prisoners and detenus to be patient and feel sure that I shall
leave no stone unturned to redeem the promise I have made for bringing about the desired relief.
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 25-3-1938

38. TELEGRAM TO AMTUSSALAAM
BIRBOI,

March 25, 1938
AMTUL S ALAAM
MAGANWADI, W ARDHA
YOU

CAN

CERTAINLY

GO

BOMBAY.

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 407

39. SPEECH AT VILLAGE INDUSTRIES EXHIBITION2
BIRBOI,

March 25, 1938
Can my voice reach where you are? If it does, please raise your
hands. Can those standing over there hear me? (Many hands are
raised.) Good. Now please be silent for a few minutes. I do not have
1

Gandhiji issued the appeal before leaving Calcutta at 8 p.m. for

Delang.
2

Held under the auspices of the Gandhi Seva Sangh the Exhibition was declared
open by Gandhiji at 8.15 a. m. after a prayer by Gopabandhu Chowdhary and
flag-hoisting and the opening address by Vallabhbhai Patel. Some 50,000 people
were present. The Hindi report has been collated with the version in Mahadev Desai’s
“Weekly Letter”.

30

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the strength to speak to you at any great length. You know that in the
whole of our country the land of Orissa is the dearest to me. As soon
as I returned to India I began to hear of Orissa’s poverty and famine.
We raised an amount and sent over Thakkar Bapa in the capacity of a
servant of this afflicted province and organized famine relief. I also
realized that if I could serve Orissa somewhat I would by so doing
serve India. Thus Orissa became for me a place of pilgrimage—not
because the temple of Lord Jagannath was there—for it was not open
to me, as it was not open to the Harijans—but because I thought of a
novel way of touring the country for the sacred mission of the
abolition of untouchability. I had heard that the so-called sanatanists
were enraged at my mission of removing untouchability and would
even try to frustrate it with violence. If they were really so minded, I
said to myself, I should make their work easy by discarding the railway train and motor-car and trekking through the country. Moreover,
people don’t go on a pilgrimage in cars and trains. They walk to the
sacred place, with the name of God on their lips. Meditating on Him;
they proceed along their way, forgetful of the fitful fever of the world,
and mindful only of offering their homage to the Lord— the homage
of service. At least for me it is not possible to be so engrossed in
meditation while on a rail journey. And if there was trouble in Puri
because of the anger of the sanatanists, we could not flee from their
wrath. It does not behove a satyagrahi to run away. We must face it. I
could not do all this in a car or a railway train, and so I decided to
perform the rest of the Harijan pilgrimage on foot. 1 The temple of
Lord Jagannath has the reputation of being the most famous in India,
for there all human distinctions are supposed to vanish, and all sorts of
people, Brahmin and pariah, brush shoulders with one another vying
for the darshan of the Lord and even eat His prasad out of one
another’s hands. But evidently it had outlived that reputation and the
description had become a fiction, for the priests would not admit
Harijans, but throw them out of the doors of the Lord of the World. I
said to myself that so long as these distinctions of high and low
endured before the very eyes of the Lord of the World, that Lord was
not my Lord, that He was the Lord of the Brahmins and the Kshatriyas
who exploited his name and kept Harijans out, but certainly not the
Lord of the World. My ambition of restoring its old reputation to the
temple is yet unfulfilled, and you have to help me in fulfilling it. So
1

In May 1934; vide “Statement to the Press”, 8-5-1934

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

31

long as the doors of the Jagannath temple are closed to the Harijans,
they are closed to me as well. Ever since my tour along with the local
workers and Thakkar Bapa, my contact with the province has been
very close.
The people of Orissa have the doubtful reputation of being
opium addicts, even learned men not being free from the vice, as I
found ten years ago. They are also indolent and lethargic. I know you
will not mind my using this language, for you know the spirit in which
it is being used. You know what great love I have for you. The people
of Orissa are responsible for its poverty. Orissa is the land of poverty
because of its opium, indolence and bigotry. The Exhibition gives me
the hope that Orissa can rid itself of all these evils and be once again a
land of happiness and plenty. After a round of the Exhibition the
predominant thought in my mind is that if Oriyas can throw off their
indolence they can get rid of poverty. The Exhibition is bound to be a
revelation to the villagers attending it of the great capacities and
potentialities of the province. All those who have come here should
see the Exhibition not once but several times. When it was decided to
hold the Exhibition in this place, no one had any idea that the
Government might offer help. The workers’ co-operation was taken
for granted, for after all they are our own people. But the local
Government is also ours. There is nothing surprising if they extended
their co-operation. Yes, thanks certainly are due to them. The workers
with the co-operation of the Government have been able to bring into
being an exhibition which is well worth a close study by men and
women, young and old. There are so many young people around
who, if they chose to pick up a thing and make a study of it so as to
learn how it was done, could earn their livelihood without great effort.
Man differs from the beast in several ways. As the late
Madhusudan Das used to say, one of the distinctions is the differing
anatomy of both. Man has feet and hands with fingers that he can use
intelligently and artistically. If man therefore depended wholly and
solely on agriculture, he would not be using the fingers that God has
specially endowed him with. We will be worthy of being called human
beings if we utilize our fingers. Moreover, mere agriculture cannot
support us, unless it is supplemented by the work of the hands and the
fingers. We see in the Exhibition what man’s hands and fingers can
produce and how they can supplement the income of the land. I
would therefore ask every one of you to go to the Exhibition over and
32

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

over again, pick up a handicraft of your choice and help in casting off
the poverty of the land.
The A. I. V. I. A. has come into being to turn every home into a
workshop. You should visit the Exhibition with the aim of acquiring
knowledge and, having learnt one or the other thing that serves your
own purpose, serve the province at large.
[From Hindi]
Gandhi Seva Sanghke Chaturth Varshik Adhiveshan (Delang-Orissa) Ka
Vivaran, pp. 2-3, and Harijan, 2-4-1938

40. SPEECH AT GANDHI SEVA SANGH MEETING1
DELANG ,
March 25, 1938
Does my voice reach you there where you are all sitting? Please
let me know if you cannot hear me. People have been thinking that I
am unwell and that is why I speak in a low voice. It is not so. This is a
habit with me. Hence, I would ask you, if you find me inaudible, not
to put up with it in order to be kind to me. Even when I was well, I
seldom concluded in the same pitch in which I began. While speaking,
I often forget that I am speaking to others. Then my voice drops and
when I realize the fact I raise it again. When I was physically fit, I did
not have to make use of a microphone. Today also, if you cannot hear
me because my voice is too low, let me say that it is not my fault but
that of the microphone. I have been told that the microphone has such
power that the lower the voice the greater the number of people it
reaches. Hence one should speak in a low voice into a microphone.
The people who operate it are also our own people. They do this work
in order to earn their livelihood. Please inform me if my voice is not
audible to you.
Today, I am in a pitiable position. Although I have come here, I
can take part neither in the Executive Committee nor in the convention. I have become a dharmadhyaksha2 and am delivering a speech.
This is contrary to my nature. I do not regard myself as a religious
head. I am a votary of truth and I seek after truth. In this, you are my
1
Gandhiji arrived at 4 p. m. and addressed the opening session. This is the gist
of his speech.
2
Religious head

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

33

fellow-seekers. The proper thing is to compare notes. If, after deliberations, we can arrive at a conclusion, well and good, if not, it matters
little. Although today I have become crippled, so long as God keeps
me on the earth I do learn something. And I do long to pass on to
you what I possess, whatever knowledge I have acquired. I would like
to pass it on to you first of all. But sometimes I become impatient.
You will find in Harijan what I wanted to say in this regard.1 There is
nothing new in it, but it has been presented in a new form. There is
not a trace of arrogance in what I am saying to you—I am impatient
to pass on to you whatever occurs to me but does not occur to you. I
am a worshipper of non-violence and so are you. Many amongst you
have faith in it. I have been a worshipper and ser-vant of non-violence
for fifty years. There is no exaggeration here. I shall complete seventy
soon. My faith in non-violence and my conscious effort to achieve it
has been there since I was fourteen or fifteen. Since then I have had
my faith in non-violence, based on reason. And my worship of truth
dates even further back. For more than fifty years I have, in all my
dealings, been relying on truth alone. Only such dedicated conduct
results in knowledge and wisdom. If a person who has always acted in
accordance with truth and non-violence for more than fifty years
makes the claim that he has this one thing, it cannot be called arrogance. Under this belief I also wrote out a brief article.
Although the doctors have forbidden me, I could not restrain
myself because of what happened in Bihar and the U. P. This time,
too, I wish to tell you many things, but only if I get an opportunity
and, if the blood-pressure does not rise. Today I wish to put before
you only that which is weighing heavily on me. You should give deep
thought to it.
Before that I wish to tell you something about what Kishorelal2
is going to read out to you. I have gone through his speech. Although
weak in body, he has produced a hundred and twenty-three pages. It
is in four parts. His idea is to deliver the speech in four instalments on
four evenings. In one of these he has generally described our shortcomings and failings. I told him to deliver three of these. At my
request, the fourth has been omitted. I shall put before you that which
has touched my heart.
Truth and non-violence are the objectives of the Gandhi Seva
1
2

34

Vide “Our Failure” 22-3-1938
Kishorelal Mashruwala, President, Gandhi Seva Sangh
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Sangh. But if we practise these only in our struggle against the
Government and not in our private dealings or in inter-provincial
relationships, what would we gain? This would imply that even
members of the Gandhi Seva Sangh are not consciously truthful and
non-violent in their dealings with one another. I am giving you a
summary of his speech. He says that there are but a few persons in the
Gandhi Seva Sangh, and yet there are differences of opinion resulting
in mutual bickering. Quarrels as such are to be found throughout the
world. But we should be careful about their consequences. Our duty is
to keep up our efforts. If anyone says that formerly Mahadev was
bad-tempered and arrogant but now he is not what he was a year ago,
that now he is changed, has become somewhat humble, and if it is
something which not only Mahadev but Durga and their son also feel,
then it means the influence of non-violence is growing. But if he
thinks that he has now attained perfection, and if he no longer has the
thoughtfulness and vigilance which he formerly had, he would be
making a grave error. A unique feature of truth and non-violence
is that one must daily take some spiritual food. Have not the
Upanishads said that this is like walking on the edge of a sword? I
claimed that my spiritual striving extended beyond fifty years. If from
this I conclude that there is no further need for me to be on my guard,
it must be said that my downfall has started from that very moment. If
I am lecturing to you, I am also doing it to myself. I do not say this
only to impress you. I do not deliver speeches merely for the pleasure
of it. I do what the atman bids me do. What I am saying to you will
have its effect on me too. If that were not so, I would become as
insignificant as a blade of grass. Nor should you conclude that I am
using these words only to get my work done while sitting with friends.
If in our dealings with friends we are not on our guard and do not
practise truth and non-violence, but make use of them only in politics,
it would amount to practising diplomacy. Truth can also be uttered
diplomatically. I do not approve of the English saying “Honesty
is the best policy”. I do not wish to use truth and non-violence for
diplomatic purposes. I am talking of ultimate values. If I am truthful
and non-violent in my worldly dealings and if the world responds to
me with contempt and if as a result I lose my faith in them, my
non-violence is worthless. Then it is merely the best form of diplomacy. You should not take it for an ultimate value. If it is not such a
worthless thing, there ought to be love between friends.
Kishorelal and I are sitting side by side. Should Kishorelal have
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

35

affection for me only if love is returned with love? I have become old,
I lose my temper, I am not prepared to listen to anything; should he
then forsake me? On the contrary, he should not be displeased, he
should remain non-violent, he should have compassion for me.
Non-violence, by increasing one’s forbearance and love, teaches one
truth. Love is not a matter of bargain or conditions. One who remains
non-violent towards a non-violent person can hardly be called nonviolent ! In this case, man follows his own nature. The world will call
me courageous if I die in an encounter with a murderer. But I should
not take this course in order to get such acclamation.
Kishorelal has also given some instances in his speech. But I
have omitted them. What use have we for names? I was afraid that the
mention of names and personalities might even have an adverse effect.
Hence I have left these out. Now understand this. We should also put
an end to provincialism. If the Andhras claimed that Andhra is for
them alone, if the people of Orissa claimed that Orissa is only theirs, it
will give rise to provincialism. The right thing for both Andhra and
Orissa is to be prepared to sacrifice themselves for the country and
the world. And India must offer herself at the altar of the world. That
will be her true test. I am not advancing a new idea, I am only
reminding you of it on a suitable occasion. The recent incidents in
Kanpur and Allahabad have deeply affected me. Such incidents are
not going to bring us swaraj. I have discussed the matter with Subhas
Babu, Maulana Azad and others. The conclusion I have arrived at
after Haripura is that if matters are as we saw them there, despite all
our failings we may be able to see purna swaraj within my lifetime. If
we can accomplish our task intelligently, the British will have to admit
defeat at our hands. There will be only one power in India with whom
they can discuss matters, and that power will be the Congress. There
will be nothing left for them to do. They will be prepared to help if
the people so desire. They will ask us what we expect from them. This
strength can be generated within us through truth and non-violence
alone. If we can develop this strength within us in a year, the Viceroy
will have to invite Subhas Babu and ask him what the latter wanted
from him. Even the British Government may send for Subhas Babu
because the British are losing in power and prestige in Europe. But
that is not what I have in mind. A non-violent person has no enemies.
But if one who calls himself an enemy loses his strength, a non-violent
person feels compassion for him. He does not wish to take advantage
of the former’s predicament to mount on his back. He resumes his
36

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

fight only when the former is out of his troubles. This is how I worked
in South Africa. I found that it happened not only in the U. P. and in
Allahabad, but in the Central Provinces and in other places also. Police
and even military assistance had to be sought to put down the riots. I
do not wish to say that the Ministers were to blame. What could poor
Govind Ballabh Pant do? I am not criticizing him. He had to act in his
capacity as a Minister. Whatever he did was correct. The fault lies with
me. The conclusion which I drew from what I saw in Haripura was
erroneous. I felt that we could accomplish whatever we wanted
within a year and that we had developed the strength for it. But I now
realize that I had made a mistake. I believe that if today the Viceroy
sent for Subhas Babu, or Jawaharlal or me and asked us what we
wanted, I would reply that I was not equal to the task. Today, we do
not have the strength to respond. If we tell the Viceroy that we do not
need the police or the army and that we can defend ourselves, that we
have the weapon of non-violence, that the Muslims are our friends and
so are the Pathans, that we shall ourselves tackle the Princes, that we
shall bear with the Sikhs, he would conclude that I was out of my wits.
This was not the state of affairs in 1920. When we are ready, we shall
have within us the strength to come to a reasonable understanding
with the Muslims, the Princes and the zamindars. Today, we have
power neither over the Princes nor over the zamindars, neither over
the Muslims nor over the Sikhs. Leaving aside others, do we have control even over those who are within the Congress? Not at all. I have
seen that there were internal fights to acquire control over the Congress office. I find in the Congress names of persons who were not in
the organization at all. But let it be.
I only wanted to say that if this state of affairs continued, we
would not win swaraj in thirty years, let alone one. I feel that we cannot truthfully say that we can come to an understanding with all these
people. And then again, if we have true non-violence in us we should
have the strength to say these things and to act accordingly.
Hence I ask you, is our non-violence the non-violence of the
coward, the weak, the helpless, the timid? In that case, it is of no value.
A weakling is a born saint. A weak person is obliged to become a
saint. But we are soldiers of non-violence, who, if the occasion
demands, will lay down their lives for it. Our non-violence is not a
mere policy of the coward. But I doubt this. I am afraid that the
non-violence we boast of might really be only a policy. It is true that,
to some extent, non-violence works even in the hands of the weak.
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

37

And, in this manner, this weapon has been useful to us. But, if one
makes use of non-violence in order to disguise one’s weakness or
through helplessness, it makes a coward of one. Such a person is
defeated on both the fronts. Such a one cannot live like a man and the
Devil he surely cannot become. It is a thousand times better that we
die trying to acquire the strength of the arm. Using physical force
with courage is far superior to cowardice. At least we would have
attempted to act like men. That was the way of our forefathers. That is
because some people hold the view that the ancestors of the human
race were animals. I do not wish to enter into the controversy whether
Darwin’s theory is tenable or not. However, from one standpoint we
must all have originally been animals. And I am ready to believe that
we are evolved from the animal into the human state. That is why
physical strength is called brute force. We are born with such strength,
hence if we used it we could be, to say the least, courageous. But we
are born as human beings in order that we may realize God who
dwells within our hearts. This is the basic distinction between us and
the beasts. It is not that the serpent crawls on its belly, whereas we walk
on our legs. The bullock has four legs, I have two. We have attained
the human form. We are evolved gradually from such species as the
serpent, etc., to the human state. Along with the human form, we also
have human power—that is the power of non-violence. We can have
an insight into the mystery of soul-force. In that consists our humanity. Man is by nature non-violent. But he does not owe his origin to
non-violence. We fulfil our human life when we see the atman, and
when we do so we pass the test. Now is the time for our test.
God-realization means seeing Him in all beings. Or, in other words, we
should learn to become one with every creature. This is man’s
privilege and that distinguishes him from the beasts. This can happen
only when we voluntarily give up the use of physical force and when
we develop the non-violence which lies dormant in our hearts. It can
be awakened only through real strength. Do we really have this
non-violence of the strong? If not, we are in the sorry plight of
Trishanku1 . The better thing would be to admit that ahimsadharma is
an impracticable ideal and then to give it up and adopt violence. But
now we are unable to advance even a step farther than the non-violence of the weak. Now we have no alternative but to choose between
the two. If you do not decide this issue, who will? If you regard
1

38

Who remained suspended in-mid-space between heaven and earth
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

non-violence as a principle and not a policy and if you live for it, it
becomes your responsibility, although your number may be small, to
give proof of true non-violence in your own lives. If your non-violence is genuine and not assumed just to disguise your weakness, the
faults pointed out by Kishorelal will not arise at all. I have been saying
this since 1920.
You will ask me—what then should we do? You should understand well what I tell you. There are several things you can do. I wish
to take up one of these. That is the misunderstanding or hostility
between Hindus and Muslims. Our mutual ill will is on the increase.
What happened in Allahabad, what took place in the U. P. today, may
happen tomorrow in Bombay and Calcutta. In Calcutta, it may even be
worse than in Allahabad. This is not something new in our country. If
this is solved, other issues will soon be resolved. In this lies our test.
You, can ask me what you should have done in Allahabad had you
been true followers of non-violence. I would say that Govind Ballabh
Pant was not needed there. That issue should have been tackled by the
Allahabad Congress Committee. It could have mustered ten thousand
volunteers. I had presented a draft of their pledge in 1921 1 I had
prepared it myself. The Congress approved of it and I had also put it
before the Khilafat Committee. Hakim Saheb was in the chair. Hasrat
Mohani opposed the motion. He said that I wanted to make slaves of
the Muslims. They may well remain non-violent in word and deed but
Islam does not ordain them to remain non-violent in thought. He
accused me of wanting to dominate Muslim minds as well. The
ulemas 2 who were present there understood what I wanted to convey.
Maulana Azad is a very intelliigent person. He had understood me
right at the beginning I told them that I did not wish to make myself
or any other person the master. But I wished to give this status to
non-violence. Finally, they adopted the draft pledge. This pledge is
seventeen years old. Despite this, even today we have not formed such
a band of volunteers. The pledge has not been annulled by the
Congress. Our resolution is in the records of the Congress office. It
must be lying with Kripalani. But it lies buried in files. In my opinion,
not a word from it needs to be eliminated. If we had such bands of
volunteers at Allahabad or the other places, Hindu-Muslim riots would
not take place. If we had a batch of a thousand volunteers, they could
1
2

Vide “Speech at Congress Session, Ahmedabad”, 28-12-1921
Muslim divines

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

39

go over to a thousand such localities. They would carry the sword of
truth and the shield of non-violence. If there are a thousand goondas
and if we are alone or only ten, we would go there and die, get killed.
We are pledged to non-violence, Hitler’s soldiers go to kill, we go to
get killed, as Gupta 1 did. I would have preferred him to have died
alone. Why did he go to find out a Muslim comrade? This is not to
criticize him. This is just a point I am putting before you. This is
because I claim to be an artist working with non-violence. I say that
Gupta had no need to take along a Muslim with him. But then there
was only one Gupta. The picture that I am painting before you is
something far grander. Imagine that Sarup moves up in the Allahabad
riots and I come to hear that she gets killed while trying to restore
peace and that she gets killed without a trace of anger against the
people—I would then dance with joy. I would say people have lost
their sanity, Sarup has fulfilled her life. She got killed. If we had ten
or twenty thousand such persons, would they not do anything? And
what if we do not have ten or twenty thousand? Even if there is a
single person, he should get killed. Even if there is only one person
who has the faith, he should allow himself to be killed, but should not
bow down to the fanatics, the goondas. Take the example of Sparta.
Though they were an armed people and also few, they laid down their
lives but would not leave their places. We should have much more
courage than they had. If we think that we cannot accomplish this task
without a thousand men, our non-violence is not worth the name. If
we do not have such courage, let us not talk of non-violence; let us not
defile it. Non-violence is a weapon against which neither the sword
nor any other power can avail. Even if there are a crore of people on
one side and a single votary of non-violence on the other, even then
the latter would not say that he would surrender to the might of arms.
He will demonstrate the fact that poisonous gases and other weapons
are futile against non-violence. He will not bend as did Austria against
Hitler. It is for this reason that I wish to place before you this
[principle]. It is of primary importance. You should understand it and
also discuss it here. If we put this non-violence into practice, Kishorelal’s task would be lightened. First we shall examine our conduct
towards one another and see whether we are indeed followers of such
non-violence. And, on the strength of this non-violence, we shall also
win over the Muslims.
1

40

Pashupatinath Gupta; vide “Our Failure”, 22-3-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

This is one point I have mentioned to you. I have many more in
my mind. This programme has been with us for the past seventeen
years, and we have been sleeping over it with total indifference. I have
reminded you of it. If I am as strong as I am today, I shall appear
before you and you can ask questions about it. For me this is a very
grave matter; my heart is full of it. I have direct experience of this
kind of non-violence. If we have been unable to fulfil it during these
seventeen long years, the fault lies with me. It is my belief that even in
politics non-violence can work. In 1920 I had stated that through
non-violence we could win swaraj within a year. I repeat that had it
been an experiment with unadulterated truth and non-violence, I am
sure a year would have been more than enough. If the country and
the Congress feel that swaraj cannot be won through non-violence,
they may well give me up. This does not imply that they are ready for
violence right now. They will make use of truth or untruth, violence or
non-violence, whatever is possible under the circumstances. That,
however, will not be my programme. If there is truthfulness in you,
and if we come to the conclusion that non-violence is a weapon of the
weak, we ought to throw it away. If you are of the opinion that putting
down riots by a non-violent army is an empty dream, you must also
come to the conclusion that swaraj cannot be won through non-violence.
[From Hindi]
Gandhi Seva Sanghke Chaturth Varshik

Adhiveshan(Delang-Orissa)Ka

Vivaran, pp. 5-12

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

41

41. DISCUSSION AT GANDHI SEVA SANGH
DELANG ,

March 26, 1938
BAPU: I have not come to tell you anything. If anyone of you
wants to raise any questions about the point that was made yesterday
or about anything else, he may do so. Hence I shall not begin a
discussion.
PRESIDENT : Kripalaniji wants to say something about what was discussed
yesterday. I call upon him to start.
KRIPALANI : I would like to say something about the riots in Allahabad where
two groups were engaged in a clash. Together with the police, the Congressmen also
rushed to the scene. How could the Congressmen or the satyagrahis go where one man
was blindly stabbing another? How would they know in advance who was going to
pull out a knife and at which moment? In former days the Hindus at any rate used to
listen to the Congress workers. As for the Muslims, their hatred of Congressmen
exceeds their hatred of Hindus. Now when the Congressmen, impelled by sentiments,
are risking their lives and getting killed, even the Hindus have started abusing them.
What I want to know is: have we weighed our policy at all? We want to give our lives
for the sake of Hindu-Muslim unity. But, if the Muslims slay our great leaders, will
the Hindus have more hatred for them or less? If a great man sacrifices his life, will
the consequences not be exactly the opposite? Supposing Bapu sacrifices his life
tomorrow, I am sure the Hindus will never forgive the Muslims for the ghastly murder.
And there will be no Hindu-Muslim unity for the next two thousand years. What
happened to the Jews? Even today Christians all over the world despise them for
crucifying Christ and persecute them. I urge Bapu to consider whether or not one
should have a sense of proportion in sacrificing one’s life. We shall never fulfil our
purpose if we act without any thought of the Congressmen.

BAPU: Kripalani has raised very good points and they deserve
your best consideration. If we do not or cannot have satisfactory
answers to his questions, we must give up non-violence as I said
yesterday. There certainly are solutions to Kripalani’s problems even
if he or you may not be satisfied with them. There is nothing new
about the methods adopted in these riots. The same thing has been
going on for years. What is new is that people are stabbed in the
streets or under cover of darkness. I do not know how the riots started
in Allahabad. But if they began with two groups of fifty men facing
each other, we can certainly do something. We can go and stand

42

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

between them and allow ourselves to be killed. But when the riots give
rise to widespread fear in the city, people confine themselves to their
own localities. This is as good as an invitation to those so inclined to
indulge in secret assaults. What can we do in the face of such secret
assaults? This is Kripalani’s problem. When this method of secret
killing is adopted, shops are closed and people do not stir out. They
avoid going into each other’s localities. Will the poor creatures go
there to be killed? It is a different thing if one goes out for some very
urgent work or inadvertently, or if a Muslim disguises himself to go
into a Hindu locality. In this case they may get killed. But no one
goes out in order to get killed. No one wants to die. My conscience
tells me that every Congressman should be trained to go into localities
where people run away after stabbing. In countries like France and
Germany, everyone is required to join the army. In these countries the
law ordains that people should be prepared to die. If we too have such
a band [of volunteers] who would be ready to sacrifice their lives
during such riots, something could be done about these stabbings,
although secret.
KRIPALANI : Bapuji, it may be so. The Congress workers should go into both
the localities, and they do go. They have done it in Allahabad also. But they are not
as safe as a Christian can be. The question is whether the Congress has developed
such strength. We have got the courage to die. We are not cowards. But we are few in
number. Did not the people who went to the Muslim localities in Allahabad die? The
goondas did not spare them out of any consideration for the Congress. My question is
whether the Hindus’ hatred of Muslims will increase or decrease if Congress workers
are killed in this manner.

BAPU: I merely wanted to show that we have a solution to the
problem. If a few of our men or many of them are killed that way, it
will ultimately serve the purpose. My opinion is not baseless. I am well
aware of the difficulties involved. But we must know whether or not
we have any solution. What do the British, German, French, Italian
peoples do? They prepare for war in the same manner. They keep
themselves well equipped to face any new power that may emerge.
Should we be less alert than these countries? Should we not prepare
ourselves fully for our non-violent struggle? Should we sit back and
say that we are not strong enough? This is not a matter about which
we can remain silent. It is a new experiment. Non-violence has not
been tried in politics so far. Non-violence was practised in the olden
days too. But it always remained a matter of individual pursuit. Such

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

43

people, later on, either fled into the mountains or lived in solitude in
the villages. They took no interest in the public weal. I have started a
new trend. Non-violence, if confined to an individual, cannot be the
supreme dharma. I at any rate shall not worship a man who practises
non-violence in a cave. Such non-violence has no use for me. I
believe in that non-violence which can be practised in the world of
practical realities. I am not interested in the liberation a man may get
by practising non-violence after renouncing the world. I do not care
for individual liberation which would leave others out. One can find
liberation by serving others. That is why I have to come here and
explain things to you. Now let us have a full understanding of our
policy. Let us put ourselves to a test. We may describe our policy by
any other name, but let us at least know what it is. If we have come to
the conclusion that non-violence was useful to us at one time but that
it is no longer so, we must make a public declaration of it. Let us at
any rate not exhibit our inertia and ignorance. If we do not decide our
policy in all seriousness we would be only betraying ignorance and
fear. For, in such a situation we would not increase our strength even
if we had an army of millions. And here, too, what really troubles me
is that we would be doing harm to our millions. When the real time
comes, the people will flee to their villages instead of fighting the
danger. What worse can happen to our millions?
Those others who have no faith in non-violence will accuse me.
They accuse me even today. They are blaming non-violence; they are
blaming you. They exaggerate so much and say such things as I
could not have thought of even in my dreams. They say that I have
formed a sect. They think that the training I am giving in non-violence has proved very harmful for India. And some of them even go
to the extent of saying that our real strength does not lie in
non-violence. They say that this passive policy of non-violence has
ruined us. In their view, the man who has done so much harm is as
good as a thorn. And it would not at all be inconsistent with their
policy to remove this thorn. I may be exaggerating, but is this not the
gist of what they say? It is not that I am paying them a compliment.
My thoughts are the same in public and in private. In their place, I
would be probably more fiery than they are. But I never for a
moment think that I am going along the wrong path. On the contrary,
my faith is confirmed day by day. This is no small matter. We have a
solution for this [problem]. We have not tried it in full measure. The
solution is no doubt correct. But we have tried it on a very small scale.
44

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

We are not practising non-violence with conscious understanding.
Right now, it is our duty to give it a fair trial once again. But we at any
rate must be confident of our success. The test of our success is that
no trouble should start from our camp. If it does we must admit that
we cannot attain swaraj through non-violence. For us, the freedom
struggle consists in the confrontation between the non-violent and the
violent camps. This does not mean that the people on the other side
are taking up arms right now. They too are brave and are willing to
adopt non-violent means, as the Communists are. They are no less
ready to get beaten up by the police. But our paths are not the same.
They might say that they can remain peaceful while fighting with the
Government but not in mutual quarrels. There are others who may say
that they can adopt peaceful methods in the field of politics but not in
Hindu-Muslim clashes. But we cannot talk in such terms. For us this
problem is as important as the problem of achieving swaraj. If
non-violence can serve no purpose during such riots, we must put it
completely out of our minds. But I am certain that it can definitely
work. We are unable to solve the problem because of the third power
in the country. Hence, [it is said], let us first defeat the third power.
Let us come to terms till then. After that the Hindus and the Muslims
will confront each other and decide the issue. I have been hearing this
since the year 1920. From that time on I have been thinking over the
problem. I will never accept such a situation. It is true that the
presence of the third power is one reason for the Hindu-Muslim
differences. But I do not believe that these differences would be
resolved merely by eliminating the third power. If we have not been
able to extinguish [that fire] so far, it is time we searched some new
way of doing it. I have only one way of attaining independence as
well as Hindu-Muslim unity, and that is satyagraha. We adopted the
path of satyagraha against the Government for the attainment of
swaraj. And we did succeed to some extent. We offered the Salt
Satyagraha1 and refused to pay taxes to the Government. But we have
done almost nothing with regard to this (Hindu-Muslim question).
Whatever we have done is not particularly non-violent. We have had
the Unity Conference. We had parleys with Mr. Jinnah. We had talks
with the Ali Brothers. We arrived at a couple of agreements. But all
these do not go to make the path of non-violence. All these are
political methods. And then, they did not even make much headway.
1

In 1930

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

45

For they were not backed by any real strength. We had the Lucknow
Pact of 1916. But there has been no agreement of any consequence
after that. I wrote to Jinnah that I would even go and meet him. 1 But
what should I do even if I did so? Both the Hindus and the Muslims
have in their hearts scant respect for the Congress. Under the
circumstances, how can the agreement be successful? If in the event of
a riot the goondas on both the sides declare that they would not attack
those with white caps, if we ourselves have confidence that the
Congress workers would not be attacked, then we may say that we
have achieved something. This task would be accomplished if we can
have a band of one or two thousand workers wedded to non-violence.
And what if we cannot? Our success is not solely dependent on
numbers.
Let us now come to the practical side. I never do anything
without practical considerations, for I am a practical visionary. True,
there is something in laying down one’s life out of sheer devotion to
duty. But that can be done even by a soldier pledged to violence. The
reason why I think in practical terms is different. It is quite likely that
if I go there, or Kishorelal and Kripalani go, or if I am killed, the
goondas might get converted. I may not even go where this is not
likely to happen. But those who lay store by faith will say that I am
thinking in practical terms, and that I lack faith. But one practical
consideration is always before us. For instance, Vallabhbhai is doing
so much work that l would certainly not allow him to go and get
killed. If I send Manilal, the poor chap will be killed. But I will not
send Vallabhbhai as long as I can help it. I would send others. Let us
thus carry on work while bearing in mind the practical aspect of it. I
have some such practical consideration before me. If some two
thousand outstanding Congress workers have to sacrifice their lives, I
shall not think that we were not practical. History will not say that we
had indulged in madness. I would only feel that we had fulfilled our
vow. I am sure history will testify that non-violence is a weapon of the
strong, and that we laid down our lives for our cherished principles.
Such is my undying faith. We have been somewhat slack and off our
guard. That is why we did not recognize the power of non-violence.
For we have not had enough faith in it.
MATHURA BABU :

What will you say in reply to the remark about Jesus

Christ?
1

46

Vide “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 8-3-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

BAPU:
SWAMI :

Kripalani has put it upside-down.
What measures can we take

to put a stop to secret

as-

saults?
BAPU: I agree this is a very complex problem. Since we cannot
save others from such assaults, we should get ourselves killed in such
cases. These assaults do not stop when some people are killed because
those people do not deliberately go there to get killed. And it is
mostly the poor people who are killed. How is it that rich and
respectable people do not go and get killed? It is a different matter if
some of them are killed that way without their knowledge. We must
visit the Muslim localities in the event of such secret assaults and
killings. We must make it a point particularly to visit the houses of the
suspects. We may go to Shaukat Ali. If he puts the blame on the
goondas, we should ask him to accompany us and take out posters
against the goondas. In the same way I had approached Chhotani 1 .
The leaders of these goondas are supposed to be powerful, are they
not? From this point of view, mass contact with the Muslim community acquires a new meaning altogether. The real way of making mass
contact with the Muslims is that we should seek opportunities to know
them and serve them. Serving the Muslim masses without any expectations is the only honourable and effective way of winning their
hearts. I would like to give it priority even if I have to suspend
political work. But it is not necessary to stop political work. We find
easy opportunities of serving and knowing the Muslims. For instance,
Mahadev and I often travel by trains. Often there are Muslim passengers in the compartment. But our people do not talk to them spontaneously. We do not offer them our food and other things. This is just
one instance. There are so many other things. After hearing this some
even amongst you might say that I am talking utter nonsense. Those
who talk in this manner consider the Muslims as people of a different
community. But I want to accept them as our own people. This is a
question of a change of heart on our part. How can we express the
love and respect that fill our hearts? I know there are quite a few
Muslims who regard the Hindus as infidels and do not wish to associate with them. But all Muslims do not harbour such hatred in their
hearts. There are enough Muslims who consider the Hindus as their
compatriots and believe that it is only by living in amity that both
these communities can look after their interests and make progress.
1

Mian Mohammad Haji Jan Mohammad Chhotani

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

47

But we should not be frightened even by those Muslims whose hands
hold knives and whose hearts are filled with hatred. We must win their
hearts too, so that even they find it impossible to kill us. After all, is it
that we alone are human beings and they are not? Even they are
bound to appreciate human qualities some time. They are sure to
understand our way some day or the other. This is a question of union
of hearts. Communal trouble may be halted temporarily by means of
some political compromise, but that will not bring about unity of
hearts. I would like to tell each one of you that if there is any such
trouble in the villages where you have settled down, you must sacrifice
your lives there. There is this great difference between me and the
socialists. They believe in first converting the whole world to their
view and then taking up these things. Individual action is not part of
their programme. This is not the way of non-violence. It can begin
with individual action. I do not say that my work can start only when I
have an army of a thousand workers. I live in Segaon. Should any
such incident happen there, I must plunge into it. Wardha is at a
distance of five miles from Segaon and quite a large number of
Muslims live there. If something happens there and suppose Jamnalalji is unmoved, I must go there and jump into it. Now, if Kripalani
asks me if I have given any practical thought to the matter, I would
say that this was my practical consideration. Under these circumstances it would be my duty to die even if I were all alone. Similarly,
this would be the duty of each individual. He has to be prepared to
die. We should not ask whether we shall achieve swaraj by thus
allowing ourselves to be killed in communal clashes. For us, there is
no other way of achieving freedom except through non-violence. And
it is my hope that we are developing that power, unless whatever has
been done during these twenty years has been in vain.
KRIPALANI : To you, non-violence may be a matter of individual action and may
bring liberation to your own self. But you are not content merely with that. You
consider non-violence a means of social service as well. Not only this, you consider
it also a social force. Under such circumstances, you have no right to miscalculate.
You must understand that you may not do anything from which society cannot
benefit. You say you should go and allow yourself to be killed. But you must
remember that if the Muslims so completely lose their heads that they kill you, the
Hindus will not forget this thing for the next two thousand years. They will regard the
Muslims as the enemies of all mankind. They may forget this thing after two
thousand years and unite, but as far as you are concerned, it cannot be gainsaid that
from the point of view of society, you will have done a wrong calculation in thus

48

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

throwing away your life. Thus, in all matters we shall have to think out what is going
to be our gain or loss.
KAKASAHEB : When there was trouble in Bombay during the visit of the Prince
of Wales 1 , you did take a practical view. You did not go to persuade the Parsis because
you thought that your action would not produce any good results.

BAPU: I agree that I took a practical view. And, like that, I do
make such calculations. But my calculations too can sometimes go
wrong. Do I not have a right to commit blunders?
KRIPALANI : It is not only your right, it is your nature. You want to go against
nature. You have no patience. I know that many people will hide their cowardice
behind my argument. But, for that reason, why should we be foolish enough to
sacrifice needlessly so many gallant lives? We must think about it from the national
point of view.
KAKASAHEB :
JAMNALAL :

But who will decide this matter—you, society or Bapu?

Neither we nor Bapu. The nation, that is, the Working Committee

will do it.
KRIPALANL : What I wish to say is that you have written to Jinnah that you do
not find the atmosphere [favourable]. Under such circumstances, if you find yourself
alone in the midst of a riot and if it becomes your duty to plunge into it, my only
request is that you should not sacrifice your life.

BAPU:

This consideration is irrelevant. Please forget me and
Jawaharlal. You think of your own self and of the country. We claim
to represent the entire country. Millions of Congressmen are ready to
die for the country. What is their duty? The leaders will look after
themselves. But I am talking to you about the duty of Congressmen in
general. The instance of Jesus Christ will not be applicable in this case.
The death of Jesus had no untoward effect on the world. Yet another
difference is that Jesus did not go to die on his own. He was crucified.
Yet, by his death, his teaching spread far and wide. Leave aside all
these things. Think of it from the individual point of view. Social
force is something that follows it. I have given my example only from
that point of view. I have not done so with the idea that I am a leader
or a general. When the occasion arose, I demonstrated my quality of
leadership too. What I then did was but calculations. People were
shouting why I was not coming out. They were probably calling me a
coward too. I listened to everything in silence. The leader does not
think of what other people may be saying. I was shouldering at that
time the responsibility of leading a movement. But now we have to
1

In November 1921

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

49

experiment in sacrificing our lives on a larger scale. I have not tried
such an experiment so far. Whatever happens, cowardice must be
discarded. Non-violence is not for the helpless and the timid. That was
the reason why I wrote to an Andhra friend that if he could not
remain non-violent and would die a gallant death, he should fight with
physical force. Running away is cowardice. Even today I feel that I
had suggested the correct way to him. I have still not tried and seen
the result of sacrificing lives on a large scale. I wanted to tell him that
it was quite plain that battles in the past were fought with the sword.
What I mean is that I have not tried and tested remedy to prevent
this. My understanding and my experiences in other fields suggest a
remedy which I think will be successful. I am not ashamed to acknowledge my imperfections. But I am not so shameless that I would stop
with mere acknowledgement. I make constant efforts to do away with
my imperfections. What I am placing before you today is the result of
this very effort. If your conscience does not accept what I am saying,
just forget it. You need not hesitate out of respectfor me. In the matter
of the Hindu-Muslim problem, our love will not be proved by
argument or physical force. If our love proceeds from the heart, ours
cannot be the way of the sword. We cannot answer abuse with abuse
and fists with fists. The real test of love lies in sacrificing ourselves and
thus answering the lack of love in others. The time has now come to
try this experiment. I have given1 you a call through Harijan and now
personally. Consider this from the individual point of view. You can
discuss it with me if you want and then present it in your own words.
It is not as if I had tried this experiment and was now presenting it as
an infallible remedy.
JAMNALAL : We must have more discussion on this point. The thing is not as
simple as Bapuji thinks it to be. It must be considered from various points of view.
Every man cannot be used everywhere. We have to have a certain sense of proportion
here also. Take me, for instance. I was present at Banaras when communal violence
raged there. I had to go into a troubled area for some personal work. But my friends
prevented me and held me back. I was convinced by their arguments. And I did not go.
Now you and I will have to decide whether what I did was right or wrong.

[From Hindi]
Gandhi Seva Sangh ke Chaturth Varshik Adhiveshan(Delang-Orissa)Ka
Vivaran pp. 18-26
1

50

Vide “our Failure”, 22-3-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

42. SPEECH AT GANDHI SEVA SANGH MEETING
DELANG ,

March 27, 1938
You have just heard the resolution . I suppose no one will have
any objection to it. My task is to caution you on this issue and to
explain its implications. Am I audible to all of you? If you ask me to
interpret the resolution, I shall do so.
This resolution is not for the whole of India. It is also not meant
for the Working Committee. It is meant only for those who have come
here. And to them I wish to say that wherever they happen to be when
a riot breaks out, whether they happen to be alone or in a group,
whether they find a co-worker or not, they should be prepared to lay
down their lives in order to put down the riots wherever they might
have started. This does not mean that they should simply go and get
killed. No doubt they should lay down their lives. But they must also
think whether they are doing so in anger or out of love. If they do not
have love in their hearts, their laying down their lives is pointless. You
should try to understand this well. I would like to admit before you in
all humility that what I say to you is meant also to myself. This is
because I also keep thinking about what I say to others, what I have
done, what its possible implications are, what my duty in the matter is.
Even while having my meals, while discussing other matters, this issue
weighs on my mind. Only yesterday, such matters came up before me,
which I cannot mention now; and this is not the occasion for it. I shall
speak of them on some other occasion. Today, I cannot even say what
we should do in any given situation. We should of course be prepared
to lay down our lives. But our task is not complete with that. Our
desires and our actions should be based on understanding. What is it
that inspires us to act? What will be its outcome? Is this the best
1

1

The resolution on the methods to counteract communal riots is not available.
It was decided not to pass such a resolution. The members, however, were urged . . . to
take note of the following statement. “After considering pujya Bapuji’s views and the
members’ discussions during the last four days on the subject of communal discord, a
consensus was reached that the experience with regard to such strifes was not such as
could enable the conference to formulate in the form of a resolution any opinion or
scheme. However, in the interest of the country, it was imperative to remove
communal differences and encourage friendship among the different communities.
Members of the Sangh should make efforts in this direction following the guidance
given by pujya Gandhiji.”
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

51

possible path? Or can there be an even better path? That should be
our line of thinking. It is thus that we can find the right path. We
should engage ourselves in our work intelligently. As I was thinking
along these lines, I found that there were many hurdles in our way. If
you ask me how we can overcome all of these, I can give neither you
nor myself a satisfactory answer. I would only say that if you believed
in these principles you too should experiment with me. In that case,
we shall certainly find the way. This resolution is before you. You
should give much thought to it and then be prepared to discuss it.
Because, if we do not wish to give up our tenet of non-violence, we
should think over what we should do in such a situation and start
preparing for it now. You do not have merely to pass this resolution,
you have also to implement it. You have also to create a favourable
climate for it. You should find a Muslim locality within your field of
service and there create such an atmosphere. If anything untoward
happens in this locality, you should accept the responsibility. Every
individual cannot make the entire country his field of work. After all
we have to know our limitations. In a city like Bombay you cannot
take the responsibility even for the whole city. You should find out
how many Muslims live in the locality where you happen to reside, get
yourself acquainted with them, serve them, and do whatever you can.
There should not be a single Muslim child whom you do not know.
We should take each individual Muslim in our locality and build in his
mind trust for us. If we resolved this issue fully, we shall develop the
strength to solve other problems as well, for this is the biggest hurdle
in our way. A satyagrahi alone can render such service. He should
specially keep himself in the forefront of such service. You may ask
what special service he can render. If you render sincere service there
will be no such incidents in your locality. And if such a situation does
arise in another locality and if you prepare to go there alone to
resolve the dispute, the Muslim’s in your locality will co-operate with
you. At least they will take care of their own locality. You will be able
to go to the other localities, and that too with greater courage and
confidence. Today, I myself do not know how I am going to do all
this work. I have explained the resolution all right but whom shall I
invite to implement it? Those whose help is to be sought in this work
will have to be trained in self-confidence. And that by itself will, again,
not be sufficient. We shall also have to prepare them for the time when
they will be tested.
It is for this reason that I explained to you how we could put this
52

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

resolution into practice. The second part of my speech deals with a
question of the greatest magnitude. Let me caution you. Think well
before you answer. I shall put the question to you in brief.
The question is whether your non-violence is that of the brave
or of the coward? Is it the result of your weakness? If it is the result of
your lack of strength, I insist you discard it. It will cripple and weaken
us. That certainly is not the aim of non-violence. This does not mean
that I am asking you to take up the sword right now. There is a place
for non-violence in the war strategy of the weak also. But such
unarmed opposition is not my non-violence. You may adopt even
that. But before doing so you will have to renounce the non-violence
in which I believe. Today, you and I bear the burden of this nonviolence [of the strong]. If we openly renounce it, we shall relieve
ourselves of that burden.
It is not because we are unarmed that we have adopted this
non-violence. Ours is the non-violence of the brave. Although I have
been experimenting with it for fifty years, I have no cut-and-dry
answers to all the questions. When I start thinking what I would have
done if I had been in Spain now or in China or Austria, and if Hitler
had attacked these countries and I found men and money being
drained away, my head starts reeling. You may well argue how much
the non-violence that has made only this much progress even after
fifty years’ experience can help us in our struggle. If you think like
this, you may give it up. For me, there is no question of giving it up.
My faith in it is unwavering. I shall however ever regret that the Lord
has not favoured me with such clarity of expression that I could
explain my ideas to others.
I mean ours should not be the non-violence of the cowards who
are afraid of war, of bloodshed, whose hearts ‘tremble at the shouts of
killers. Our non-violence should be the non-violence of the Pathans. I
have lived with them. They are not afraid of killing or getting killed. I
have cited this example so that I may compare myself to a Pathan
boy. A Pathan boy is fearless. If there is bloodshed he does not hide
himself in his house. He finds pleasure in fighting. He does not stop
to think that he might be injured or even killed. He is never afraid of
being hurt. I have seen one standing unmoved in the midst of blood
gushing from his many wounds. I do not mean to say that all Pathans
are like this. But I have seen such Pathans with my own eyes. What I
wish to say is that experimenting with non-violence is the work of
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

53

such brave persons. I myself have not yet reached this stage. There is
lot of cowardice in me. I talk of satyagraha, no doubt. But in the face
of killings I cannot have the fearlessness of the Pathans. If I have to
go and face such a situation, my heart’s one wish would be to escape
alive. If per force I do go, my heartbeats would quicken. And, in my
heart of hearts I would be afraid lest a bullet or a stone should hit me.
I reached Bombay (in 1921) when the riots were raging. Stones were
being hurled. I wanted to save myself from the melee, but what could
I do? I was the leader of the non-co-operation movement. I went in
most unwillingly. At heart, I wished someone asked me to stay at
home; that would have indeed been welcome. When I reached there
the people were in a frenzy. Anasuyabehn was with me. She is a brave
woman. Who was I to protect her? People had lost their heads. I saw
mounted policemen advancing towards us. At the most, there must
have been forty of them, but they were advancing with such unconcern as though there was not a man on the road. They were followed
by officers in their cars. My heart trembled. We wanted to go to the
Fort area. We reached Abdul Rehman Street via Pydhonie. There was
heavy fighting in the area. My heart was thumping. I do not know
how high the blood-pressure rose. As soon as the mounted police and
army officers arrived the people who were till now in a riotous mood
ran helter-skelter. I do not wish to take up your time narrating the
whole incident. My idea is to tell you that you should give some
thought to this. I have spoken of my own cowardice. But those who
were brandishing knives and sticks turned out to be no braver. I have
compared my own courage with a Pathan’s. Non-violence is the
weapon of such fearless persons full of courage.
This will show clearly how I should experiment. If there is real
love in my heart and a feeling of oneness, why should I feel nervous
to go there? Why did my heart thump so? This clearly implies that
even in me the feeling of non-violence has not grown to the extent
that would make me fearless and free of doubts. Fearlessness born of
love is the general characteristic of non-violence. If it is not yet born
in our hearts, this experiment is for that very purpose. While carrying
on this experiment, we shall acquire the strength to face death
smilingly. But we have fallen into complacency. When there is peace
on all fronts we do not prepare ourselves for such eventualities. And
when the occasion arises we do not know what to do. If we do not wish
to try this experiment whole-heartedly and in all seriousness, I humbly
request you to give it up. I also wish to point out to you that mere
54

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

debating will not resolve the issue. Open discussions do clear up our
reasoning to some extent. It is true that on the question of
non-violence also we shall have to exercise our reasoning till the last.
But I must tell you that non-violence is not a matter solely of the
intellect. It is a matter of faith and devotion. If you have no faith in
the atman or in God and prayer, non-violence is not going to prove
useful to you. If it is in fact the supreme dharma, as we believe it is,
then it must work on every occasion and at every place. It has so
much potentiality. If we cannot recognize it the fault lies with us.
Realizing the whole range of the power of non-violence or having a
vision of its whole power depends on our spiritual effort. If you are
convinced of it and, after striving for 17 years, if you have developed
this faith that whether or not we win swaraj, that irrespective of what
happens to the world, we have achieved this one thing, you should try
it intelligently. Your knowledge will grow with your sadhana. But you
will not become omniscient. God alone is omniscient. He is not so
stupid as to let all become omniscient and omnipotent. Thanks to our
imperfections we can still aspire to it. God has assured us that when we
realize our weakness and take refuge in Him, He is with us. The
bhajan “Rama is the strength of the weak’, is not a versification of
some music teacher; it is a factual statement by someone who had
experienced it.
If you have any doubts or hesitation you should not pass this
resolution. Take at least one night to think over it. Pray to God to
enlighten your intellect. This is not a resolution to be passed by a
majority. Even if a single member amongst you stands up and says
that he does not have this faith, he still has the right to tread the path
of non-violence. You should certainly not pass it by a majority.
Now let us come to Jamnalalji’s question. If we, who are members of the Gandhi Seva Sangh, accept ministerships, can we order
firing? Today, in Allahabad Govind Ballabh Pant is a Minister. He is
not a member of our Sangh. But is he for that reason less non-violent
than we? I know him very well. But what could the poor man do? I
want to tell you that had I been in his place I would have acted
similarly. When I accept ministership, I take the responsibility for
peace and honest administration. Of course, I could think this matter
over before accepting the ministership. But I cannot ask any member
of the Gandhi Seva Sangh not to accept ministership solely on this
account. I am aware that this would mean lowering of my standard.
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

55

But after all my non-violence cannot deviate from what is practical. I
wish to work through non-violence while yet solving the problems of
everyday life. If while I am a Minister Hindus and Muslims start
fighting amongst themselves, and if I realize that I can stop this violence and bloodshed by calling in the army and having a handful of
men shot, I would have to resort to this course for the sake of
restoring order. I will have to give orders to stop the massacre with the
least violence.
I am opening my heart to you in order to explain all this to you.
If outsiders hear what I am saying, I cannot say what interpretations
they will put on it. There must be journalists present here, but they do
not know their profession. They should not be cross with me, I too
have been a journalist, and I too have experience of reporting. But
these people do not wait to discriminate between fact and fiction since
they must fill up a page and create a sensation. Hence I wish to state
rather plainly that not a word from what I say shall go out.
Well, this was a digression. Now visualize Pant’s position. The
Hindus and Muslims of his city have lost their heads. They are
butchering each other. Life and property are not safe. What then shall
he say? Should he say to himself that although he is a votary of
non-violence he sees no non-violent way of facing this situation? He
examines the doctrine of non-violence, but finds it silent over the
point—but he does have in his hands brute force; hence he should
take recourse to it. He does not lack manliness, so he will not remain
passive. He would again seek the help of non-violence and not use
brute force. But if such an occasion arises again and he does not find
a non-violent way, he should again act in the same manner. Pant
should publicly declare that non-violence did not avail; the people did
not help him and all the same they have made him a Minister. He
should therefore do whatever suggests itself to him. You must have
understood my point. It is now needless to discuss the issue any
further. If you wish to ask any other questions please do so.1
Seven minutes are left. Let me answer Rajendra Babu’s question
in the mean time.
His point, as far as I can understand, is this: I now know all of
you. Knowing you as you are, I should put something before you
1
Rajendra Prasad then asked how the problem could be solved in the prevailing atmosphere of violence, while even members of the Sangh were no strong
enough to try non-violence even though they might be convinced of its efficacy.

56

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

which you can do. Even if you thought for the whole night or, for that
matter, for ten nights, you cannot know yourselves better than I know
you. Hence I should put before you the minimum that I want. This is
his question.
I have already shown the remedy. Rajendra Babu has said that
even if we thought for ten nights we shall make no progress. Yet I
would again ask you to think all night. Tell me tomorrow if you can.
For this I may start my silence earlier today and break it earlier
tomorrow, so that after thinking it over all night you can discuss it
tomorrow. My point about cautioning you is to be found in the
second part of my speech. In the first part I mentioned the minimum
that you can do. I have said that we should increase our contacts with
the Muslims in our village or locality in a spirit of service. We should
widen our circle of Muslim friends. We should serve them with
sincerity and not by flattering them. If they ask us to get this or that
for them we should refuse to do so. We should apply our reasoning,
cast off our fears and without flattering them go on doing what we
regard as our duty. For instance, we should gather Muslim boys and
give them milk; even if their parents have suspicions, I should like to
prove through my conduct that I was not doing this in order to
convert them to Hinduism. Gradually their suspicion will be removed.
At least we shall come to know the boys. Now suppose a riot breaks
out in the mean time. In that case after this experience we can go into
that locality without fear. I have in this matter less experience but
more faith. And now I have also lost my strength. Had it not been for
this reason I would not be sitting like a fool doing nothing. Take up
one locality and try the experiment. Nevertheless I must say one
thing. If you carry out this experiment your self-confidence will grow
a hundred fold. You will know your strength. We have only one
weapon and that is non-violence. It. will be applied extensively and in
many ways you will think of putting this remedy to many other uses.
As you tread the path of non-violence, new weapons will come into
your hands of which I am not aware.
[From Hindi]
Gandhi Seva Sangh ke Chaturth Varshik Adhiveshan(Delang-Orissa)ka
Vivaran, pp. 36-42

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

57

43. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
DELANG ,
March 28, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

I have your two letters. Of course you shall, have all the guidance about the Mirza correspondence. Anasuya’s1 letter is typical of
her. She seemed at one time to be satisfied with what had happened.
Shariff2 has certainly put up a good defence.
It is very hot here. Melting.
Ba and some of the party have gone to Puri. They return
tonight.
You would have liked the Exhibition here. It is very well
arranged. Over 12,000 people visited it yesterday.
Lilavati is here. So is Kanti.
You will have to be strict with Vijayasingh. It won’t do to
pamper him. I am hoping that your judgment about him would prove
true. Your previous letter disturbed me a bit. You will neither be hasty
nor dejected over the result of your efforts in the villages. It is an
uphill task especially when it has to be done through paid agency.
Nothing yet from Sikander Hayat3 . I have to see Jinnah in April
in Bombay.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3850. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7006

1
2
3

58

Anasuya Kale
Minister of Law and Justice in the Central Provinces
Sir Sikandar Hayat Khan, Premier of the Punjab
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

44. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
DELANG ,

March 28, 1938
CHI. MIRA,

I have a moment to spare. We are all melting. I suppose it is
good for me for the b. p. is 160-96. Ba and some of the party have
gone to Puri.
I am glad you are able to help Vijaya and Munnalal. It is good
that M. himself wanted you to help him.
We return to Calcutta on 1st but may even on 31st. I shall know
then when we may expect to leave for Segaon.
It is as well that Amtussalaam has gone to Bombay. Her
brother’s company will be some compensation and the humidity of
Bombay may suit her. Let us hope.
They are giving me as much rest as they can here.
Tulsi Maher is here and so is Kanti. He has very long vacation.
Frydman1 and Uma Devi2 too are here.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6398. Courtesy. Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9993

45. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
March 28, 1938
CHI. PRABHA,

I have your letter. You have no reason to be unhappy. Who can
be as happy as you? We have to do certain things as a matter of duty.
Why feel unhappy over this? I certainly didn’t like that you had to
rush off all of a sudden. But in life we have to do a good many things
like that. Let me know what special work you have to do there now. I
shall be in Calcutta for three days if not more. I shall know after some
decision is taken about the detenus. Write to me there. The address is:
1 Woodburn Park, Calcutta. Couldn’t you have come with Jayaprakash?
1

Maurice Frydman, a Polish engineer, and his wife who had adopted this
Indian name
2
Ibid
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

59

I am keeping good health. The blood-pressure rises sometimes,
but comes down again.
Kanti must have given you the rest of the news.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3510

46. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
March 28, 1938
CHI. VIJAYA

You might think I had completely forgotten you. But it is only
today that I have some time to write a few brief notes. You seem to be
progressing well. Get completely all right by the time I return. Don’t
give up hip-baths and friction-baths. Go over to a diet of fruit juice as
soon as you feel the slightest trouble.
I am keeping well enough. It is very hot here. But it does not
trouble me. I hope you have not decided not to write to me if I do not
write to you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7078. Also C.W. 4570. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

47. LETTER TO J. P. BHANSALI
March 28, 1938
CHI. BHANSALI,

I hope you are doing well. You will be glad to learn that these
days while I do my sacrificial spinning the yarn rarely snaps. Of
course, it does surprise me. You also should try to spin even, strong
and unbroken yarn, though the quantity may be less, instead of spinning much and for many hours. It is good that you are taking the
injections. Let us hope that will put you right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8354

60

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

48. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
March 28, 1938
CHI. AMRITLAL,

I have already sent the answers to your questions. Try to
discover why you keep good health in Bombay without any effort
while you barely manage to do so in Segaon. Is the cause psychological or external? If it is external, is it the food and water or the
climate, or both? If it is food, you can eat the same food in Segaon as
you do in Bombay. If the reason is psychological, [the cure] is in
your own hands. If it is the climate and water, we are helpless. But I
don’t think that they count so much.
The date of my return will be decided in Calcutta.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10745

49. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
DELANG ,
March 28, 1938
CHI. SHARDA,

Today is my Silence Day. And I also have some time. It is pretty
hot here. We are a goodly company. Ba, Lilavati, Manilal and his wife
Sushila are with me. Kanti has come from Bangalore. Your letter
should have arrived here. It has not yet arrived. It may come
tomorrow. We shall reach Calcutta on the 1st or maybe on the 31st.
My health has been good so far. I have cut down my intake of food.
Now the blood-pressure has come to 160-96.
Prabhavati has gone to Patna, Amtul Salaam to Bombay.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9992. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

61

50. SPEECH AT GANDHI SEVA SANGH MEETING
DELANG ,

March 28, 1938
Having heard the discussion we have had now and Kishorelal’s
brief report of the discussion in the afternoon—having heard it all I
have come to the conclusion that this proposal should not be put
before you. You should not conclude that this is a result of the
argument advanced by a few friends. The discussion I heard here has
also left the same impression on me. This does not mean that those
who have faith in this may not act upon it. It only means that in this
matter I do not wish to force anyone. But I certainly insist upon the
principle underlying this proposal. It is not something unnatural. If
you have understood my point it will gain weight when you act upon
it and carry it out according to your capacity. [Passing] a resolution
will not by itself suffice. Take [for instance] Jamnalalji’s suggestion.
He says that so long as Muslims do not become members of our
Gandhi Seva Sangh, it will be futile to make efforts in this direction.
What he says is true but we shall find the correct remedy after we have
served them and our action has borne fruit in the form of a closer
contact with the Muslims. Of what good will it be if one or two
persons become members reluctantly? We shall achieve something
only when our relationship with the Muslims becomes that of the
servant and those whom he serves. So far the Congress has been doing
what Jamnalalji suggests. What it did was good, no doubt. They got
many Muslims enrolled as members. But they had to be coaxed into
becoming members. This is a kind of flattery, or you may call it a
politically motivated policy. What I have said today is not for political
reasons, although it may well have a welcome political outcome.
Today I place it before you solely from the standpoint of non-violence. If we are really experimenting with the non-violence of the
strong, we ought to make an effort to bring about friendship between
Hindus and Muslims. So far there has been no friendship. It was only
an attempt to win them over through flattery. There was a policy
behind all that. We maintained friendly relations merely from a
practical point of view; it was like a businessman’s practical policy. So
far we have not put our non-violence to the test in regard to this issue.
If today we can take this test in non-violence and pass it, we shall
move a thousand steps forward on the path of winning freedom
62

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

through non-violent means. If you really believe that swaraj cannot be
won without non-violence, you will also have to admit that our
non-violent means will not be effective without Hindu-Muslim unity.
As I delve deeper into this question many things come up before me.
After all I am being guided by my intellect, am I not? Nowadays, I am
relying solely on my intellect. But mere intellect makes one insane or
unmanly. That is its function. In such a situation Rama is the strength
of the weak. My innermost urge is for pure non-violence. My
weakness is that I do not know how to make it work. I use my intellect
to overcome that weakness. If this intellectual cleverness loses the
support of truth, it will blur my vision of non-violence, for is not nonviolence the same as truth? Mere practical sense is but a covering for
truth. “The face of truth is hidden by a golden lid.” 1 The reasoning
faculty will raise a thousand issues. Only one thing will save us from
these and that is faith. Hence Gangadharrao said that he did not feel
weak. For him, the argument of weakness is hollow. But others have
doubts whether non-violence can accomplish this. Kripalani had
raised the doubt about what policy we could adopt where there are
secret attacks on individuals. This is a kind of guerilla warfare as
Prabhudas called it. There was in Banaras nothing but peace. In
Sarnath however four Hindus were done to death. Now how can our
non-violence help in such a situation? I say, think a little deeper. This
is but a part of our war strategy. You despair that no friendship will
help there. I tell you it certainly will. It is not that a handful of persons
have lost their sanity. Its root lies in the fact that the atmosphere is
vitiated. But then I cannot say right now how far it can be purified
through our service. You must not reduce your service to a bargain.
Non-violence cannot work in this way. In the case of non-violence we
on our part start acting without any doubts. Take the instance of April
6, 19192 Where were the Congress Committees then? We announced a
proposal. Millions responded to our call. Tell me how this could have
happened. Everyone felt as if a miracle had occurred. People thought
that at the bottom of all this there must have been a mighty scheme,
but there had been no such thing. However, it was certainly supported
by a lot of prayer. The same thing happened in the case of the Dandi
March. Who had organized and planned it? I myself was not aware of
1
2

Ishopanishad, 15
“Directions to Demostrations”, 5-4-1919

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

63

anything. There was faith and nothing else. I too did not know what
God would do. I had only the faith that it would all turn out as it did.
You have evidence that I had no clear idea of it. I do not know how it
all really happened. This is how non-violence works. Today, we think
of our weakness. Actually, it is not our weakness. The fact is that we
have no faith in non-violence. This lack of faith makes us doubt
whether non-violence can solve the problem. Millions have this faith
in the matter of swaraj. But with regard to Hindu-Muslim unity we
find not even a thousand such persons. What we need is that we should
have faith in non-violence not merely as a means to swaraj, but
independently as well. Whether we win swaraj through non-violence or
not, we must achieve Hindu-Muslim unity. For us, it is not a means to
swaraj. I have not been able even to create the climate for it. Not even
a thousand persons share my views on this question. Just as I say that I
do not want swaraj if it is to be won through untruth and violence,
today I would also say that I do not want swaraj without HinduMuslim unity. I say this because I want that in independent India
Hindus should not suppress Muslims, nor Muslims Hindus. I want to
see that all are equal. You may perhaps find this aspect of the problem
rather new. If this is something new for you, so is it for me. I can see
no straight way in front of me. There is total darkness ahead. Despite
this, I have. the confidence that if I go forward with faith, I shall
certainly reach my destination. If you realize this, you should start
working on this even without a resolution. In a way this problem is
even more difficult than that of swaraj. Millions of people today
aspire for swaraj. Not even a handful of people care for HinduMuslim unity. We will have to solve this problem independently.
There are many difficulties because we seek the welfare of the
Muslims while serving them. We do not want to encourage their
selfishness by pampering them. Take for instance the incident cited
by Prabhudas. I totally disapprove of what he did. If a Muslim
zamindar insists that the Hindus should not celebrate Holi, should I
ask the Hindus to agree to it simply because these poor people listen
to me? I will certainly not do it. You may say that to celebrate Holi
would be suicidal. I would tell the Hindus that they should not give up
their religious practice on this account. I would myself ask the
zamindar to come forward and kill me, for I would light the Holi fire
right in front of him. I would ask the Hindus not to break the heads of
Muslims, but rather to sacrifice their own. We shall give up nothing
through fear. I shall certainly do what I have a right to do and what I
64

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

may. If I have to fight for this, I shall do so in a non-violent manner. I
went to make friends with Jinnah Saheb. But if for this reason I allow
myself to be suppressed and do not fulfil my duty, it is no friendship.
This is not a new approach. The important thing is that service should
be the basis of friendship, and no other motive or self-interest as was
the case with my childhood friendship. The friendship which I had
then formed with the Muslim boy1 was for the sake of meat-eating and
ended with it. But today, I am asking you —you who make friends
with the idea of service and who with your mature intellect believe in
atman and Paramatman—to serve them. Such friendship will result in
unity.
Now the question of girls. What should they do? Should they be
scared at the sight of Muslims? That ought not to be. But it does not
follow that they should enter the fray at the time of riots or become
the victims of secret attacks as a matter of dharma. Of course, if there
is a girl like Mridula it is another matter. She is not afraid of anyone.
She does not care even if the Muslims kill her. Girls who are
self-confident should go in. But those who are afraid, who lack this
self-confidence, who do not have a strong heart should not go there.
“But the man of doubt is lost.” 2 If I am overcome by doubt I will
hardly touch a serpent. Women who have doubts must never come out
before Muslims. I know of many such instances. I tried to tell you
about this in a way you would understand. You should not feel that
the whole discussion has been futile. My mind too has become clear.
You have drawn my attention to several difficulties. In spite of them,
after this discussion, I am even more strongly convinced that this is
what we should do and shall have to do. Let us not form any
committee and so on. Each one is a committee by himself. Each is his
own leader and his own soldier. The servant is himself the master.
Where the climate does not exist, what is the use of forming
committees? When the time comes we will lose our heads. The real
thing is to keep our heads—our reasoning—clear. There is no
question of any confrontation. Dastane asks me to appoint someone
for the task. This is not a matter to be dealt with in this way. In the
same matter what may be dharma for one person may be its opposite
for another. Let us not betray our souls. Let us not corrupt our
1
Sheikh Mehtab; vide “London Diary”, 12-11-1888, and “An Autobiography”
sub-title “A Tragedy”
2
Bhagavad Gita, IV. 40

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

65

intellect. If we wish to strive for non-violence we should follow the
yamas and niyamas1 . This advice of our forefathers is absolutely
correct. I am not placing anything new before you. I shall show what
strength underlies our forefathers’ advice. I have derived this from
their own books. We cannot observe ahimsa without fulfilling the
vows. This does not mean that whoever is morally depraved and given
to drinking commits violence. But then it is certain that he does not
sincerely observe non-violence. We must examine everything from
this standpoint, viz., whether it helps or hinders non-violence. I too
can drink alcohol but as medicine, provided a vaidya prescribes it for
me. If this movement of ours is conducive to non-violence, let us at
least demonstrate unity amongst all Hindus.
Why did I stretch this point? Because the other point that I wish
to make follows from this. You must never forget one more fact
regarding Hindu-Muslim unity. It is a test for every religion. Even if
there be nothing special about Hinduism it must have something
distinct about it. Otherwise how could it come to have the name
Hindu? [Now] does this distinctiveness consist in playing Holi? Does
the distinctiveness of Islam consist in hit-and-run tactics? Does Hinduism teach animality? And did the Prophet’s religion teach lawlessness?
My point is that you should first become a true Hindu and then go to
the Muslims. Till then no unity is possible. I know there are many
Muslims who believe that so long as Hindus do not recite the kalmah
they will not be saved. But if we prove through purity in our life and
perfection of conduct that one can be saved even without reciting the
kalmah, the Muslims too will be impelled to have respect for the
Hindus. Such true unity will not be achieved through any political
agreement. Such business pacts are futile. What is needed is an
understanding based on dharma, where there is no question of a bargain. For this, friendship between brave people and the non-violence
of the strong are required. Even if a frightening smashan2 interposes—such non-violence will fearlessly make its way through it. I do
not claim that I have attained such non-violence. I am afraid of every
[little] thing. Perhaps I am the weakest and the most cowardly of all.
But I am all the same a devotee of true non-violence. I tell you that so
long as we do not attain the non-violence of the strong and our
conduct is not truly religious, the Muslims will have no respect for our
1
2

66

The rules and regulations prescribed for the attainment of spiritual progress
Literally, cremation ground; here death and desolation
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

religion and love for us.
GANGADHARRAO :

If the resolution is withdrawn the consequence will not be

good.
BAPU:

I don’t agree.

JAMNALAL :

I had a special reason when I said that we should have Muslim

members. Only a Muslim can persuade another Muslim if the latter misbehaves, and
the same applies to Hindus. But I find that even the most respectable Muslim seldom
raises his voice against the misdeeds of his community. On the other hand one can
keep them in good humour only by justifying their every action, good or bad. I
cannot tolerate this state of affairs. I cannot uphold what Prabhudas did. Must we stop
our music for fear of losing the Muslims’ friendship? Friendship does not imply that
we give up resistance to injustice. But this, more or less, has till now been the policy
of the Congress as well as the Gandhi Seva Sangh. In my opinion appeasement
cannot bring about unity or love.
BAPU:

If we have formed the notion that we should suffer the
atrocities of the Muslims in mute submissiveness it is absolutely
wrong. If until today I have not said that we must also resist injustice
inflicted by them, here I say it now. We should now tell the Muslims
also that they have been unjust and, if they beat us up for saying it, we
should get beaten up. As for the resolution, we should have it after
making some efforts and gaining experience in the matter. It is likely
that experimenting on these lines someone may get some new inspiration. In that case we can call a special session of the Sangh before
the end of the year.
DASTANE : If not this resolution, let us have another commensurate with our
faith and strength.

BAPU: Yes, we can do it if you like. But in my opinion, it would
be proper to do so only after making an experiment and gaining
experience.

[From Hindi]
Gandhi Seva Sangh ke Chaturth Varshik Adhiveshan(Delang-Orissa)ka
Vivaran, pp. 50-5

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

67

51. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
[After March 28, 1938] 1
I can say you are now doing my work. It was a great relief to me
that you were looking after Amtul Salaam and that you saw her off.
You won’t worry about me. I shall try to be there as early as I
can.
Be patient with Lilavati.
Love.
From the original: C.W. 6423. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 10018

52. SPEECH AT A. I. S. A. WORKERS’ MEETING
BIRBOI,
March 29, 1938
Gandhiji proposed that efforts should be made to give eight annas as minimum
wages to spinners working for eight hours a day, thus allowing at least fifteen rupees
per month. Mahatmaji also said that the price of khadi should be so fixed as to bring
more money from the rich and less from the poor. Gandhiji asked members seriously
to ponder over his proposals.

The Bombay Chronicle, 30-3-1938

53. SPEECH AT GANDHI SEVA SANGH MEETING
DELANG ,
March 30, 1938
This is the last day of the present session. I myself was not aware
that I was going to speak today. Kishorelal told me that I was expected
to speak. Later I also felt like it. Before I say what I wish to, I shall
answer a question.
It has been asked whether every member of the Working
Committee is not expected to put in 1500 hours of work in the
Gandhi Seva Sangh every year. The question has been posed by
Jethalal. Although the idea is very good it cannot be put into practice.
Today, we must give up our insistence on this. Everyone should put in
as much physical labour—not mental or intellectual—as possible.
1

68

Vide letter to the addressee, “Letter to Mirabehn”, 28-3-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

However, we cannot go so far as to expect daily four or five hours’
work from the members. This is not an association of labourers. If it
can become one, well and good. But today it is an association of
educated people. If we wish to take five hours work daily from the
Working Committee, we should ourselves do it first. How can those
people find the time for all this at present? In this country the trouble
is that those who are supposed to be big men get very little time.
Where can Vallabhbhai find so much time? In that case we should ask
him to quit. But then we cannot do without him. We ought to realize
our limitations.
Yesterday I had decided to remain silent on what I am now
going to say. But I changed my mind this morning. I am glad that
Mahadev has told you something about what has happened, and now
that he has said something I feel like speaking out all that is in me.
The various items of constructive activity that you are doing are only
outward expressions of truth and ahimsa. They only reveal how far
they can carry you on the road of ahimsa and truth, and ultimately to
freedom. The removal of untouchability is one of the highest expressions of ahimsa. It is my daily prayer, as it should be the prayer of
you all, that if untouchability does not perish it were far better
that Hinduism perished. This prayer found its most poignant expression during my Harijan tour of which the principal objective was the
opening of the temples to Harijans. They tell me that the untouchables
do not wish to enter the temples. Even if this is true, the reason behind
this is that we have made such monsters of them that they no longer
have any need for temples. Even if they do not care to go into the
temples it should be our concern to permit their entry. And I have
declared day in and day out that whoever believed in the removal of
untouchability should shun temples which were not open to Harijans.
Now, how could I bear the thought of my wife or my daughters
having gone to such temples? I would plead with them, would go on
bended knees to dissuade them from going to these temples, and
might have to deny myself personal ties with them if my entreaties
failed. I have tried to live up to this principle all these years, and I felt
humbled and humiliated when I knew that my wife and two ashram
inmates 1 whom I regard as my daughters had gone into the Puri
temple. The agony was enough to precipitate a collapse. The machine
recorded an alarmingly high blood-pressure, but I knew better than
1

Durga and Velanbehn; vide “Letter to Mahadev Desai”, 31-3-1938

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

69

the machine. I was in a worse condition than the machine could show.
The Gita teaches us the lesson of detachment, but that detachment
does not mean indifference to shocks of this kind—failure in duty on
the part of one’s dearest ones. The three who went were the least to
blame. They went in ignorance. But I was to blame, and Mahadev was
more to blame in that he did not tell them what their dharma was and
how any breach would shake me. He ought to have thought also of its
social repercussions. We should understand our individual as well as
our social dharma. How did it affect me? I turned pale. My grandson
says that the Amrita Bazar Patrika reports that Kasutrbai did not go in
but waited outside. If that was so I would have leapt high. But how
could she at all go there after having lived with me for fifty years?
And why did the two other women go? Are they not my daughters?
That too is my fault. This act of theirs has depleted our soul force. We
ought to be more vigilant. By looking upon women as [mere] women
we overlook such matters. That is not the way of non-violence. This is
a matter of awakening. It was Mahadev’s task to have reasoned with
them. And, if they were not convinced, he should have brought them
to me. I would have told them that I was their spiritual father and not
opposed to their religion. I could be their spiritual father only if they
and I belonged to one faith. If their faith could be identified with
mine I could reason also with the people: “What is the use of [going
to] such temples?” They were ignorant, I know, but we are responsible for their ignorance, and it is the reverse of ahimsa not to dispel
their ignorance. I sent them to Puri not to go into the temple, but to
stand just where the Harijans were allowed to go and refuse in protest
to go beyond that limit. That would have been the right kind of
propaganda, and they would that way have done Harijan service. To
do scavenging work or to eat with Harijans or to feed them is not
enough, if we do not deny ourselves the going to temples and the like
so long as our kith and kin, the Harijans, are denied their use.
If we do not go even to the temples which have been regarded as
sacred for hundreds and thousands of years, where such great men as
Chaitanya1 have gone in to offer worship, where we long to go, simply
because our Harijan brothers are not allowed, it would be a great act
of dharma and, if God really is in the temples, as we believe, it will
1

Krishna Chaitanya Goswami, also known as Gauranga Mahaprabhu, founder
of the Vaishnava sect in Bengal

70

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

certainly have its effect. The pandas 1 had come there and said that the
Harijans could go along with us. Quite correct. For a panda the silver
coin is God. I therefore prevented Rajendra Babu’s sister from going
in. Some may say that I exercised undue pressure. I would say I saved
her from adharma. If I intruded it was in the name of religion. Like
these three women many others must have gone and must be intending to go. I have expressed my feelings for the sake of these people.
What can I say to those who cannot restrain themselves even after this?
There is another aspect of the case. The sanatanists believe that
untouchability is part of Hinduism, and so do the Mussalmans and the
Christians who think that Hinduism is nothing if not don’t touchism.
But the virus of untouchability has infected them too. They shun the
Bhangis. You cannot finally solve the Hindu-Muslim problem until
you have removed the stain of untouchability by non-violent means.
The Muslims will then cease to regard us as unbelievers.
They will then say that we might be idolators but God is in the
idols too. Hence, I have asked the idol-worshippers to befriend the
Muslims. That is the path of courageous non-violence. Perhaps Maulana Saheb also believes that Gandhi is what he says he is, but the
other Hindus are steeped in untouchability. It is our responsibility to
change his opinion of us.
Then there are the Harijans themselves. How are we to carry to
them the conviction that we are with them through thick and thin, that
we are completely identifying ourselves with them, unless we can carry
our families—our wives, our children, brothers, sisters, relatives—with
us in our programme of the removal of untouchability?
Is it possible that a member of the Gandhi Seva Sangh might
claim that his dharma is different from his wife’s and sister’s? This is
neither religious tolerance nor is it non-violence. People will think we
are hypocrites. Intense faith is what is called dharma. The essence of
dharma is non-violence; it is another name for it. Its power is such that
the sword would drop from the Englishman’s hand. The Muslim’s
lawlessness would be held back. Patanjali has said that violence
becomes ineffective when confronted by non-violence. If this has not
happened till this day it is because our non-violence has been that of
the weak and timid.
[From Hindi]
Gandhi Seva Sangh ke Chaturth Varshik Adhiveshan(Delang-Orissa)ka
Vivaran, pp. 65-7
1

Priests

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

71

54. NOTE TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
[Before March 31, 1938] 1
I did not mean to say that you should not stay with me or
accompany me. I cannot take every member of my family to other
people’s houses.
My health will not permit me to do much work in Calcutta. Even
if Birlaji consults me I shall not give him much time;2 it all depends on
my health. Do only what Shankerlal asks you to do. I shall regain my
health, if at all, only on my return to Segaon
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2470

55. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
DELANG ,

[On or before March 31, 1938] 3
Gandhiji was asked in Delang what the Ministers’ attitude should be over the
appointment of Acting Governors in the Provinces. . . . He said that acting
appointments should not be made from among the services in the Provinces.

Ministers will not relish the idea of a subordinate official
suddenly becoming Governor to whom they have often to refer for
guidance and who may even preside over their deliberations. Such a
Governor cannot act with detachment nor can he command the respect and confidence of the Ministers. I should think that the Viceroy
or the Secretary of State would think twice before making such
appointments. Ministers would be right, indeed it might be their duty,
to protest against such an appointment. I do not know that such an
appointment might not be, casus belli. In the Colonies generally I
have known the practice of Chief Justices of Supreme Courts acting as
Governors in the absence of permanent ones.
Harijan, 2-4-1938

1

From the addressee’s letter to Gandhiji, as also from the contents of this
letter, it appears that this was written from Delang which Gandhiji left on March 31,
1938.
2
The addressee wanted to discuss with Gandhiji the Birla Mills labour
problem.
3
Gandhiji was in Delang till March 31.

72

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

56. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
March 31, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

What a gift so early in the morning! But if even one mistake is
not corrected immediately, it will lead to a succession of others. All
the same I will tolerate thousands of mistakes, but I can never part with
you. Even death at the hands of a bhakta is preferable to salvation at
the hands of those who have no love for one. There is, therefore, no
question of your leaving.
Now I will list your mistakes.
I don’t blame Durga or Velanbehn at all. Ba has already made
atonement; not by fasting but by confessing her lapse to me with utter
simplicity. She thus made holier yesterday our holy relationship of
over fifty-five years.
But what did you do? Either your negligence or your blind love
for Durga let her do a wrong thing. And afterwards when you came to
know of my pain, you started a fast without thinking. Fasting is no
remedy for thoughtlessness or wrong-thinking. The remedy lies in
right-thinking. When I came to know about your fast, I tried to dissuade you, but to no avail. I advised you to think carefully instead of
fasting. You did not do that. You did not even try to understand my
point of view. Yesterday I asked you very tenderly whether you had
understood what I said. The reply you gave then was not proper. Your
behaviour was still worse. Instead of attending Maulana’s speech,
which it was your duty to do, you went away to cry. And as a result
you threw a silly poem at me. Last night also you should have. given
some time to Maulana, which you did not do. You did not, thus, fully
avail yourself of the opportunity of serving a Mussalman. Had my
words yesterday had their intended effect, you would have gone today
to Puri with a band of workers and would have shaken up Puri. But
perhaps I myself was not sufficiently serious, otherwise I should have
thought of this right in the beginning. If your duty is as clear to you
as daylight, I would even grant a day’s leave and also let you take
along with you anybody who might be ready to go. This may be done
even today if it is possible.
You say that you ‘interpret’ me, but may I ask to whom? Is it
not to Velanbehn?

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

73

Your poetic imagination sometimes blinds you to reality. There
is nothing but cowardice in your letter. If you decide to leave me, will
Pyarelal stay on? And if Pyarelal leaves, will Sushila stay? Of what use
to me is her extraordinary intelligence? She has such intelligence that
it sometimes pains me to think that it will rust if she stays with me.
Why does it not occur to you that I could let all of them go if I let you
go? They will all run away. Lilavati will simply go mad. I will suffer
even that, if such be my lot. But I will never send away you or anybody else. And yet how can I prevent anybody from running away?
Let this incident inspire poetry in your heart. Correct your error if
you see hat you have made one. If you cannot see it, ask me to
explain it to you. If you think that I have committed any error,
correct me. This is no time for crying or fasting. You should read less,
but think more. Study carefully all that has been done here. You
yourself should utilize Sushila’s and Pyarelal’s talents and thus
lighten the burden on you. Take work from Lilavati too. This incident
shows me that being crushed under the weight of external activities,
you think less. Thereby you will be able to do much less by way of
‘interpreting’ me.
How much more shall I go on writing?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I am not revising. I have finished the letter just now.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11594

57. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
March 31, 1938
CHI. LILA,

I am sorry that I will not be able to speak today. But it is as well
that it is so. I have already written to Ba and made my suggestion
regarding Kanam. If she permits you to take charge of him, do so. If
you do, you should give up the kitchen work. You may give some
help if necessary. Mix well with Nanavati. Talk less. Don’t speak
thoughtlessly. Never shout at anybody. Our servants are not mere
servants. Treat them as your own little brothers and sisters. Cultivate
74

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

cordial relations with Mirabehn. She is doing very good work at
present.
Continue to write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9370. Also C.W. 6645. Courtesy: Lilavati Asar

58. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
March 31, 1938
CHI. AMTULSALAAM,

How are you? Would you not regard Sushila’s letter as coming
from me? You yourself wrote that I should not write [myself], that a
letter from Sushila or anyone else would suffice. If you steadied your
mind you must soon get well. I am all right. The rest from Sushila’s
letter. You did well to have your tonsils removed.
Keep on writing to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 398

59. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
March 31, 1938
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

I got your letter. You will not receive any salary but I shall let
you have time to read books on spirituality and so on. You will be
posted nowhere but in Segaon. I see no inconvenience in your visiting
your home once a year. I might send you to Wardha if any work
comes up there. If you find these conditions acceptable, you may
come over on the 15th April or even earlier depending on my
reaching there. Remember, moreover, that my stay in Segaon is rather
uncertain, although I shall certainly spend there the four months of
the rainy season. Anyway, in Segaon you shall have ample satsang1 .
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4290
1

Literally, company of good men

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

75

60. LETTER TO SARASWATI
March 31, 1938
CHI. SARASWATI,

Ba and I were very sorry that you could not come, but what
could be done? We have to live as God disposes, shouldn’t we? I hope
to send for you soon enough. Can you stand the heat? Will you keep
up your studies? Reply promptly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N 6166. Also C.W. 3439. Courtesy: Kantilal
Gandhi

61. INTERVIEW TO RAJA OF PARLAKIMEDI
BIRBOI,
March 31, 1938
The Raja Saheb1 requested Gandhiji to enlighten him on the policy of the
Congress with regard to the zamindari system.
Gandhiji who is observing silence owing to ill-health wrote the following on
a slip of paper:

I am glad you have come. I wish I were speaking and well
enough for a fairly long discussion. You are quite right in saying that
I do not wish the extinction of old zamindaris. All Congressmen do
not think so. The remedy lies in the hands of zamindar friends. How it
is so, I have shown through the articles I have written. Nevertheless, if
you so desire, I will gladly set apart some time to meet your friends.
That cannot be in Calcutta. I am hardly in a fit state to cope with the
work I have there. I can, therefore, only see you at Segaon when I
reach there unless there is a breakdown in my health.
The Bombay Chronicle, 1-4-1938

1

76

Ex-Premier of Orissa
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

62. TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
C ALCUTTA,

April 1, 1938
R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
JULLUNDUR C ITY
WIRE

HEALTH

TEMPERATURE

BAPU
From the original: C. W. 3851. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 7007

63. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
[April 1, 1938] 1
CHI. AMTUSSALAAM,

You must not be in a hurry to leave the hospital. Leave only
when the doctor permits. Restrain your eagerness to come to me.
I am quite well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 715

64. TELEGRAM TO AMTUSSALAAM
C ALCUTTA,

April 1, 1938
AMTUSSALAAM
EASTERVILLA
S ANTACRUZ
GLAD

YOUR

DISCHARGE.

HEALTH

ALL

RIGHT.

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 408

1

Vide, “Letter to Amtussalaam” , 31-3-1938 in which Gandhiji enquires after
her health following an operation for tonsillitis.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

77

65. TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
C ALCUTTA,

April 2, 1938
R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
JULLUNDUR C ITY
HEALTH

ALL

RIGHT.

WRITING.

LOVE.

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3852. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7008

66. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
C ALCUTTA,

April 2, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

I sent you a wire 1 yesterday and no reply as yet !!! I hope it is
well with you. I do not like these frequent attacks. I know that earth
and water are the two cures. Of course light and air are there; you
have a fair dose of them. But not of the other two. You must take the
hip, friction and sitz-baths and have abdominal and local earth bandages.
There is no set-back in my health. But Ba foolishly entered the
Puri temple and it upset me terribly.2 I must not give you the whole
history. I have not yet got over the shock. The pressure therefore has
just now steadied round 175-80 and 108-104. The mental fatigue I
had lost has returned. I have lost perhaps 5 1b. in weight. As soon as I
am free from the Calcutta business I shall make up for the losses. I
impose long silences on myself and hope to continue them for the
time being. This is being written during silence.
Prabhavati is with me. Jayaprakash was with me at Delang. He
brought Prabhavati with [him].3 He has gone to Dacca and will pick
her up on his return. Probably there will be a note from her with this.
1

Vide “Letter to amtussalaam”, 1-4-1938
This temple had not been thrown open to the Harijans.
3
The source has: “He brought P. with me.” ln Letters to Rajkumari Amrit Kaur,
however, this has been changed to: “I brought P. with me.”
2

78

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I often thought of you in Delang and wished you were
there. There was much to see and learn.
Love.
R OBBER

[PS.]
Wire just received.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3853. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7009

67. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
April 3, 1938
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

I do not understand why you abandoned your work among the
stone-breakers and the tongawalas. I stopped you from coming to
Segaon for a short visit but it is different if you want to come for
good for the sake of service. I am a little afraid that you will get tired
quite soon; what will you do in Segaon? Take it that coming over
merely to serve me is nothing but false attachment. I am weary of the
overwhelming service I receive. I fear it may make a cripple of me.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I shall accommodate Deka somewhere if he comes only to serve.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2469

68. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1
April 3, 1938
My attention has been drawn to the press report purporting to
give the gist of the conversations that took place between Sir Nazimuddin 2 and me on April 2. The conversations were strictly confidential and, therefore, the report can only come from a fertile
journalistic brain. Ever since I have entered upon this self -imposed
mission on behalf of political prisoners and detenus, I have made
1
2

Published under the title “ No Assurances Given”
Khwaja Nazimuddin, Muslim League Home Minister of Bengal

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

79

known the terms upon which I have intervened. But the giving of
assurances by prisoners or detenus as a price of freedom has never
crossed my mind. As a civil resister, I would not be guilty of inducing
any political prisoner to give such assurances. And I can also add that
during my talks with the prisoners at Alipore and Howrah jails and the
Regulation III prisoners at Hijli, they made it absolutely clear to me
that they would give no assurance to anyone for the purpose of
purchasing their freedom. I wish for the sake of the cause that the
news papers will not anticipate events. Every unauthentic report adds
to my difficulties which are already formidable.
Harijan, 9-4-1938

69. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
April 4, 1938
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

This is not a final draft1 . I want you to read it sympathetically.
I feel that unless we do some such thing, the tension must continue.
Anyway at one o’ clock I won’t take all of you by surprise. I have
discussed the subject with the Maulana at some length.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru papers, 1938. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

70. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
C ALCUTTA,

April 4, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

This is a strictly business letter. You want a p.c. when. I am ill, I
send you a letter to say I am really well. The breakdown was mental,
not physical, due also to mental causes as you will learn from
Harijan.2 It is Mahadev’s version of as he saw me and felt me. If he
1

Presumably of the resolution on the C. P. crisis, which the Working
Committee passed later at Calcutta
2
Mahadev Desai’s article “A Tragedy”, published in Harijan, 9–4–1938,
described Gandhiji’s anguish at Kasturba’s and Durga Desai’s visit to the Puri Temple
which was not open to the Harijans. For the text of Mahadev Desai’s article, vide
Appendix I.

80

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

missed my love in all I did, it was missing. Love to be love must be felt
by the loved one at some stage or another.
I am taking the strain really well. I have done a lot of writing
and I am none the worse for it. I may have to go to Delhi in a few
days’ time. You will hear if I have to.
Did I say anything about your offer to do some of my work in
the Punjab? I fancy not. But how can I ask you to face the Lahore
heat? How can I bear your separation from Shummy 1 whilst he is in
Simla? And to what end? It may prove an utterly fruitless and thankless errand. I have not the courage to exploit you for the Punjab
muddle. And where is the time? Your hands are already more than
full.
My work here is not prospering. Only I do not lose hope.
If I go to Delhi it will be only for a few hours.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C. W. 3625. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6434

71. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
C ALCUTTA,

April 4, 1938
CHI. MIRA,

I am distressed that my return is being unduly prolonged. The
suspense must be terrible for you. But if you have found your bottom,
you won’t be upset. In spite of what you may see from the papers or
other sources, believe me I am quite well. Deep down in me there is
the feeling that I shall stand the strain I have still to go through. The
people spare me generously. The weather is not trying. I shall feel
happy if I know that you are not worrying over the delay in returning
or over my health. After [all] we are in God’s hands for everything.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6399. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9994

1

Col. Shumshere Singh, addressee’s brother

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

81

72. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
1 WOODBURN P ARK,
C ALCUTTA,

April 4, 1938
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,

I have to thank for your letter1 . I have delayed writing for a day.
I did not know what to say, nor do I know now. My movement is so
uncertain. I am in the hands of the Bengal Government. I should
come as early as I can before the 18th instant. May I simply send by
wire to P. S. V. the day of my arrival in Delhi without giving therein
the sender’s name? I may be able to leave even in a day or two.
Now about secrecy, I am bound to tell some of my friends what
I am doing. I am anticipating such permission. I shall of course see to
it that nothing goes to the Press. The fewest possible persons will be
told.
I assume too that you refer to secrecy before we meet. Isn’t
secrecy impossible after we have met ?
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm: Linlithgow Papers. Courtesy: National Archives of India

73. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
[ Before April 5, 1938]2
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

Yes, you may stay on while I am in Calcutta. What do you gain
by placing so much faith in me? I am not perfect, nor am I free from
passion. Only last night I had a dirty dream. This is not a good thing.
What can you hope to gain by living with such a person? Know me as
I am. A Bapu who exists only in your imagination will not be of
1

Dated March 31, in which the addressee had expressed a desire to meet
Gandhiji once again and have a general talk with him, preferably before April 18,
when the addressee was to leave Delhi on tour.
2
The letter is entered in Mahadev Desai’s Diary under the date April 5, 1938;
vide however the following item which appears to refer to this.

82

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

any use to you. Whatever I have in me is known to the world. You can
draw from it a good deal wherever you may be. You know my definition of freedom from passion, don’t you? Such a man, even though
virile, does not become sexually roused in thought word or deed,
whether waking or asleep. I am striving to become such in this very
life. If I succeed you will benefit by being with me. Let us see what
God wills.
Blessings from

B APU

[PS.]
You can show this to anyone. Do show it to Mahadev and
others.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 2467

74. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
April 5, 1938
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

I described myself as I saw myself.
Yes, you may go to Segaon whenever you wish.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 2468

75. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
April 6, 1938
CHI. MIRA,

Today is the fasting day1 and I think of you all. I have decided
provisionally that even though I may not finish my work, I shall leave
here not later than 12th. May leave earlier. I shall hope to reach you
not later than 16th. This is all unconscionably long but I have become
perfectly helpless. A day out of Segaon is a day lost. But there it is
and here I am. God will have His way.
1
Since 1919, April 6 had been observed as Satyagraha Day—a day of fasting
and prayer—to protest against the Rowlatt Act; vide” Telegram to Satyagraha Sabha,
Bombay and “An Autobiography”, sub-title “That Wonderful Spectacle”

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

83

I am well. Details from Sushila in so far as she gives them.
I hope Balkrishna is keeping well. If he feels the heat, he should
have the tattis 1 to keep him cool. He must sit in water hip-bath. In the
afternoon he may take abdominal bandage.
I hope you are not feeling the heat overmuch.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6400. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G. N. 9995.

76. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
C ALCUTTA,

April 7, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

You won’t be disturbed over the news that S. 2 may give you
today. Blood-pressure may help doctors. It is no help to patients.
When they feel bad, they are bad. Such was my case last night. The
same kind of pain in the back of the head. But gentle massage by S.
brought me round in a few minutes and there is no return. B. P. was
154/98 at 12 noon. It rose again later to 170/98 or something like
that. So you are not to worry. When the real alarm comes, you will
hear after the event and then there must be no idle sorrow but greater
dedication to service.
Love.
R OBBER

[PS.]
Did you observe 6th April ?
From the original: C. W. 3626. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6435

1
2

84

Screens made of khas.
Sushila Nayyar
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

77. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
[After April 7, 1938] 1
CHI. SUSHILA,

What shall I write? You will have received my letter of yesterday.
After I wrote it, I saw Pyarelal’s letter. May God grant you courage
and peace. If you cannot find peace there, you have always got my
bosom such as it is.
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar

78. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
April 8, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

You must excuse the pencil hand. You should tell Paul that you
are not interested in the tours he suggests, your time being solely
occupied with your own affairs. You should send Rs. 100 telling him
that you had not expected your donation to be treated as a yearly call.
The present one should therefore be treated as final. Future calls will
be treated on their own merits and your then commitments.
I like George. I have not yet read his pamphlet.
Sir Mirza’s2 herewith with correction.
Poor Prabha ! She had to go to Patna.
I am well in spite of the work. I may leave even tomorrow or on
Monday.
Papers herewith.
Love. In haste.
TYRANT

[PS.]
George’s pamphlet is all right. He may go on with the movement.
From the original: C. W. 3854. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 7010

1

This letter is written below a letter from Mirabehn to Gandhiji, dated April 7,

2

Mirza Ismail, Dewan of Mysore.

1938.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

85

79. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS
C ALCUTTA,

April 8, 1938
With a smiling face Mahatma Gandhi came out of the Presidency Jail at
5 p. m. after having been closeted with 14 state and four women political prisoners
for about three hours. While leaving the jail gate, Mahatmaji was approached by the
Associated Press. He said he had a long talk with the prisoners, but that was all he
could say at this stage. Asked if he was going to see the prisoners again, Mahatmaji
said:

I may, but not this time.
Further questioned, he said he might have one or two more meetings with Sir
Nazimuddin, the Home Minister, to complete his negotiations, but there is no
possibility of his meeting the Governor again now.

The Bombay Chronicle, 9-4-1938

80. THE CHOICE
My remarks arising out of the recent riots in U.P.1 have attracted
much attention. Friends have sent me cuttings from the Press. This is
some of the criticism printed or spoken :
(1) My writing betrayed hysteria.
(2) I wrote without sufficient data.
(3) I had recanted my views on non-co-operation and
civil resistance.
(4) I had been driven to the policy of the Liberals.
(5) Congressmen had never adopted non-violence as
between themselves.
(6) I was expecting the impossible from human nature.
(7) If my position was accepted swaraj would never be
obtained, for all India could never become non-violent.
There is much more I could cull from the criticism. I have only
taken the relevant parts.
1. If my article betrayed hysteria, the symptoms still
persist, for in spite of the criticism which I have studied with the care it
demanded, I see nothing to change the position I have taken up. The
1

86

Vide “Our Failure”, 22-3-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

critics should remember that my proposition was specific and narrow.
Swaraj could not be obtained through non-violent means unless our
non-violence was of the brave and such as to be able to deal effectively with violence. I have not maintained that it could not be
obtained by other means. But if it could be so obtained we were not
ready to deliver the goods, for we were not ready for matching our
force against the British.
2. All the data required were that there were riots, no matter on
how small a scale, that Congressmen were not able to deal with them
non-violently, and that the aid of the police and the military had to be
summoned. There was no dispute about these three broad facts. They
were enough to enable me to draw the conclusion I did. In this there
was no reflection on the Ministers. I have admitted that they could not
have acted otherwise. The fact, however, remains that the Congress
non-violence was not able to cope with the emergency.
3. There is nothing in my article to warrant the infe-rence that I
had lost my faith in non-co-operation and civil resistance. All I need
say is that it is brighter than ever. The two are quite enough to bring
swaraj, provided that non-violence practised is of the bravest.
4. I wish I could be drawn towards the policy of the Liberals. I
have many personal friends among them. But they have no sanction. I
claim that I have an infallible sanction. My article was written to show
that during the riots it was not the sanction that had failed, the failure
was of the organization which had accepted the sanction, namely,
active, constructive non-violence.
5. I can only refer the critics to the many resolutions of the
Congress which do not confine the use of non-violence only towards
Englishmen. Indeed I remember having many discusions at the
Working Committee meetings at which the necessity of non-vio-lence
among ourselves was emphasized.
6. Well, human nature has hitherto responded nobly to the call
of non-violence. But I am concerned with the Congress nature.
Congressmen have to sign a pledge which commits them to nonviolence. 1 My question was and is—have they non-violence in them?
If they have, is it of the brave? My thesis is that if it is of the brave, it
should be enough for dealing with the riots and for delivering the
goods.
1

The practice was started in 1919 at the time of the satyagraha against the
Rowlatt Act; vide “Instructions to Volunteers”, 26-2-1919

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

87

7. This is answered in the foregoing.
But I have the fear that our non-violence is not of the kind
required. Congressmen may not treat my warning lightly. After all I
am supposed to be the Congress expert, however inefficient, on nonviolence. I have confidence in my readings and my remedies. I cite
Ahmedabad and Viramgam violences 1 , Bombay violence during the
Prince’s visit,2 and Chauri Chaura 3 on the eve of Bardoli. The results
have amply justified the remedies applied at my instance, though on
these occassions critics were not wanting who had expressed their
strong disapproval of the suspensions. I have no doubt about my
present diagnosis [or] about the remedies. The remedies are not
beyond our ability if we have a living conviction about non-violence
and its nature. Here are some of the remedies :
1. We must discover a solution for the Hindu-Muslim tension. I
use that expression deliberately instead of ‘communal’—for if we
find this, the other will follow as a matter of course.
2. There must be a purging of the Congress registers so as to
make them proof against bogus voters. From all accounts I receive,
our registers contain too many bogus names to be called at all
accurate.
3. Congressmen must not be afraid to find themselves in a
minority.
4. Without delay every Provincial Congress Committee should
raise a proper corps of volunteers pledged to non-violence in thought,
word and deed. And there should be a manual of instructions as to
training, etc., prepared for universal use.
There is nothing heroic or impracticable in these suggestions.
But they are impracticable if those who lead have no living faith in
non-violence. If they have not, the sooner non-violence is removed
from the Congress vocabulary the better it is for the Congress and the
nation. The alternative is certainly not unadulterated violence. The
Congress is the only political organization in the world which has, at
my instance, adopted unadulterated non-violence for the attainment of
swaraj. It is its only sanction. I dare say that if its quality is not what it
1

In April 1919 during demonstrations against Rowlatt Act ; vide “Press
Statement on Suspension of Civil Disobedience”, 18-4-1919
2
On November 17, 1921; vide”A Deep Stain”, 18-11-1921
3
In February 1922; vide “The Crime of chauri Chaura”

88

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

should be, it will do great harm to the nation. In the last heat we may
be found to be cowards instead of brave men and women. And there
is no disgrace greater than cowardice for fighters for freedom. Surely
there is nothing to be ashamed of in retracing our steps. If we feel that
we shall not be able to displace the British power without a violent
struggle, the Congress must say so to the nation and prepare
accordingly. We must do what is being done all the world over—
‘forbear when we can, hit when we must’. If that is to be our creed or
policy, we have lost precious seventeen years. But it is never too late to
learn and mend. Seventeen years in the life of a nation is nothing. It
will go hard with Congressmen if having received the warning they do
not make the choice.
Harijan, 9-4-1938

81. TELEGRAM TO M. A. JINNAH
April 9, 1938
I

AM

IF

AT

YOU
TO

LIKELY

TO

ALL
THERE
SAVE

MAULANA

BE

POSSIBLE
INSTEAD
TIME

WILL

IN
I

OF

DELHI

SHOULD
IN

AND ENERGY.

ACCOMPANY

ABOUT

19TH.

TO

MEET

LIKE

BOMBAY

IN

IF

ORDER

AGREEABLE

ME.

The Bombay Chronicle, 2-7-1938

82. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
April 9, 1938
CHI. VIJAYA,

If you can, stay on till I return. If you think it is your duty to
leave, do so. If this is still not clear, ask Amritlal and do as he advises.
I hope to return in a few days.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujrati: G. N. 7079. Also C. W. 4571. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

89

83. SPEECH AT KHADI PRATISHTHAN, SODEPUR
April 10, 1938
Gandhiji said that he would like to spend at least a day in the Ashram, but he
was unable to do so this time owing to his preoccupations in Calcutta. He found it
difficult to express in words his love for the Ashram and the Ashramites, and urged
them to carry on their mission of spreading the use of khadi amongst the masses.
Through Sodepur, he added, they were serving the entire Hindustan. Mahatma
Gandhi hoped that their services would be more and more appreciated all over the
country. 1

The Bombay Chronicle, 11-4-1938

84. INTERVIEW TO P. R. THAKUR 2
C ALCUTTA,

April 10, 1938
Mahatmaji intimated his good wishes to Mr. Thakur and desired that he should
follow in the footsteps of his noble grandfather, Sree Guru Chand Thakur, who
devoted his life to the cause of the Scheduled Castes. He further added that the
Congress would try its level best to stamp out the sin of untouchability from the soil
of Bengal. He asked Mr. Thakur to visit the different Congress Provinces and study
for himself the Congress work and activities for the uplift of the Scheduled Castes and
make a propaganda in Bengal so that the Bengal Scheduled Castes might respond to
the clarion call of the Congress for achieving India’s political end.

Amrita Bazar Patrika, 12-4-1938

85. MESSAGE TO PEOPLE OF MIDNAPUR
[Before April 11, 1938] 3
I hope that Midnapore will show that it stands for unadulterated non-violence. In my opinion that is our greatest need.
The Hindu, 12-4-1938
1

Gandhiji’s Hindi speech was translated into Bengali by Hemprabha Devi Das

Gupta.
2

P. R. thankur, M. L. A., had told Gandhiji that the Scheduled Castes in
Bengal would willingly co-operate with the Congress if Harijan uplift programmes
undertaken by the Congress Ministries were followed in Bengal as early as possible.
3
The message was sent through Subhas Chandra Bose who visited Midnapur
on April 11.

90

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

86. LETTER TO DR. SYED MAHMUD
C ALCUTTA,

April 11, 1938
DEAR DR. MAHMUD,

Please forgive the pencil hand.
I wish I could be with you to witness the enthusiastic response of
the young men to your call. But that cannot be. I hope the enthusiasm
will last and that soon illiteracy will be banished from Bihar.
Tell Begum Mahmud with my love that she has no right to invite
me till she has given up the purdah. Has not the Prophet said that the
real purdah lies in the woman’s chasity?
I hope you are keeping well.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G ANDHI
MR. S YED MAHMUD
MINISTER OF EDUCATION
P ATNA, B IHAR
From the original: Dr. Syed Mahmud Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library. Also G. N. 5083

87. TALK WITH PRISONERS 1
[On or before April 12, 1938] 2
I am at the end of my resources and although I am ready to
return to Bengal if the Government of Bengal wants me, very much, I
am afraid, will depend on my health.
Harijan, 23-4-1938

1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
According to Amrita Bazar Patrika, 13–4–1938, Gandhiji paid his last visit
to the political prisoners on April 12.
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

91

88. MESSAGE TO GURUKUL KANGRI
C ALCUTTA

April 12, 1938
A serious problem faces the teachers and students of the Gurukul: How can the country and dharma be protected—by truth and
non-violence or by untruth and violence? How nice it would be if the
Gurukul could provide the answer to this question with its head as well
as its heart.
[From Hindi]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

89. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
April 12, 1938
1

Approached by waiting Pressmen as he came out, Gandhiji said that he would
be issuing a statement on the subject of their discussion either that evening or on the
following day. 2 Pressed further as to whether any settlement was arrived at,
Mahatmaji pointed out to Sir Nazimuddin and told the journalists to approach him.
Sir Nazimuddin, however, expressed his inability to state whether any
agreement had been reached or not.
As he came out with Gandhiji, Sir Nazimuddin introduced Maulana Abdul
Rashid Tarkabagish of Bogra as a leader of the Proja Party. At that Gandhiji
humorously remarked that in that case he had got to please the Maulana.

Amrita Bazar Patrika, 13-4-1938

90. TALK WITH CONGRESSMEN3
C ALCUTTA,

[On or before April 13, 1938] 4
I have found my task here Herculean and I am sure any other
person would have slunk away from it. I have the patience of a Job,
but even that was on the point of being exhausted. But now I have a
1

After the interview with Khwaja Nazimuddin.
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 13-4-1938
3
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Notes”
4
Gandhiji left Calcutta on April 13.
2

92

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

ray of hope bright enough to light my path to Wardha. I now want
your hearty approval, not mechanical consent to my suggestion to
stop all demonstrations and receptions and addresses, in order that the
ray of hope may be multiplied a hundredfold.
Harijan, 23-4-1938

91. TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
C ALCUTTA,

April 13, 1938
R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
MANORVILLE
SIMLA
REACHING
DELHI
TOMORROW
AFTER.
QUITE
WELL.

NIGHT.

LEAVING

DAY

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3856. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7012

92. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
April 13, 1938
CHI. PRABHA

I had your letter. You must have received mine. I do not like
your worrying all the time. You must regain perfect health.
I hope Jayaprakash is well. Write to me fully. Don’t postpone
writing till I write to you. I am going to Delhi for a day. I will leave
there on the 15th and reach Wardha on the 16th. I am fairly well. The
blood-pressure at present is 154/100. I observed a fast today1 ,but
didn’t feel it.
The work here has remained unfinished. Perhaps I shall have to
come back. I do hope that everything will be all right. But why need
we concern ourselves with the result? Write to me regularly. Write to
Ba also. And don’t forget A. S.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3511

1

It being Jallianwala Bagh Day

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

93

93. LETTER TO ANANDI BUCH
April 13, 1938
CHI. ANANDI1 ,

Haven’t you still got over the fatigue of nursing me? How is
your home life? Have you set up house on your own? The amount of
service which you two together render should be not twice but four
times as much. There should be multiplication and not addition in
such matters.
I had Puratan’s 2 and Lalitji’s letters. I am not writing to them
separately. Won’t this letter suffice ?
Both of you should daily read Chapter XII3 [of the Gita] and
ponder over it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9163

94. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS4
C ALCUTTA,

April 13, 1938
I regret to inform the public that the negotiations that I have
been conducting with the Government of Bengal through Sir Nazimuddin have not yet been concluded. I must confess that my arrival in
Calcutta was ill-timed, as the Ministers were all busy with the assembly
work and as it was known that I should come back before the end of
March, I felt it was unnecessary to ascertain Sir Nazimuddin’s wishes
about the time of my arrival. Had I taken the precaution of writing to
him, I would not have found myself in Calcutta at an inauspicious
moment. I have now to write a letter5 to Sir Nazimuddin, summarizing
my suggestions which, I am assured, will be considered by the
Government as speedily as possible and definite decisions taken—a
process which, it is expected, will be completed within one month. It is
1

Daughter of Lakshmidas P. Asar
Puratan Buch, addressee’s husband
3
Which describes the characteristics of a bhakta
4
This was published in the Harijan under the title “Negotiations Not
Concluded”.
5
Vide the following item.
2

94

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

hoped, however, that the decisions may be taken much earlier, and if it
becomes necessary for me to return to Calcutta, I shall do so without
hesitation, provided, of course, that my health permits it.
Meanwhile I must repeat that all agitation for the release of
detenus and prisoners should be suspended while negotiations continue. I must also state that it is not conducive to the success of the
negotiations if public demonstrations are held in honour of those who
may be discharged. In my opinion, it is more dignified for Congressmen to exercise restraint. I have seen extracts of speeches and
addresses as reported in the papers which do not betray any spirit of
non-violence.
I may add that whilst I have been seeing the convicted
prisoners and discussing with them their attitude to non-violence
for my own guidance, the Government have made it plain to me that
whatever the prisoners might state to me will not be allowed to
determine their policy. They think that it will be improper for them to
base their action on such assurances as I may issue. I fully appreciate
the Government view. My talks with political prisoners therefore are
purely for my own personal satisfaction.
In so far as the 14 Regulation prisoners are concerned, they gave me at
the interview I had with them the following letter :
During your last visit you expressed your desire to be acquainted with
our definite views on certain things. After giving full consideration to the
matter we can only reaffirm what we said then. As long as we are in detention
we are unable to discuss our past and future and our political opinion.
Particularly when the talk of release is in the air it affects our sense of selfrespect to say anything that may have some bearing on the question of our
own release. We hope you will appreciate our standpoint and readily concede
that we mean no personal disrespect.

It was signed by nine. Four other prisoners had not signed the
letter but they associated themselves with the sentiments expressed
therein, and the fifth gave a letter very similar to the foregoing.
Harijan, 16-4-1938

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

95

95. LETTER TO KHWAJA NAZIMUDDIN
[April 13, 1938] 1
DEAR SIR NAZIMUDDIN,

In accordance with the understanding of yesterday, I submit
herewith my suggestions :
(1) I understand that the detenus, including the Regulation III
prisoners, will be discharged and all restrictions upon their liberty will
be removed inside of one month from this date.
I can only hope that I shall not have to return to Calcutta in that
connection. Should my presence, however, be required, I shall gladly
come whenever wanted.
(2) With regard to the convicted political prisoners I suggest
that—
(A) the ailing prisoners should be discharged forthwith
irrespective of their terms of imprisonment;
(B) those who have less than 6 months to serve should be
discharged forthwith;
(C) those who have 18 months or less, but over 6 months
to serve, should be discharged within 3 months;
(D) those who have longer terms than 18 months to serve
should be discharged within one year at the most.
(3) Those releases should be contingent upon a public
understanding between the Government and the Opposition, that is,
the Congress Party, to the effect that—
(A) there shall be no public demonstrations or
processions in honour of those detenus or prisoners who may be
discharged;
(B) there should be no agitation, directly or indirectly,
initiated or countenanced by the Congress Party to depart from or
improve upon the settlement that may be arrived at. In other words, so
far as Bengal at any rate is concerned, the question of the release of
detenus and political prisoners shall cease to be a Party question or a
1
Although the addressee in his letter of April 17 to Gandhiji acknowledges
this as of the 12th, this was obviously written after the “Statement to the Press”,
13–4–1938; vide the preceding item.

96

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

matter of public controversy.
I have purposely refrained from entering into any argument in
favour of the suggestions made herein. I have discussed them
threadbare with you and you have very patiently listened to me.
Whatever the fate of the negotiations and suggestions, it is
agreed between us that a final decision will be taken by the Bengal
Government within a few days, certainly within one month from
today.
You have told me that any assurances the prisoners or detenus
may give me about non-violence could not or would not be allowed
by the Government to influence their decision. But, as you know, I
have interested myself in their cases on the strength of their disavowal
of violence for the attainment of India’s freedom. Therefore, for my
own satisfaction, I discussed the question with them and whilst they
did not want to make any statement for the sake of furthering their
release, they assured me that they had no faith in violence for securing
India’s freedom. I believe in their assurance and it would be a pity if
such men could not be discharged.
I forgot to mention one thing during our conversations of
yesterday. The prisoners at Dum Dum asked me whether I had
received the many messages they had sent me through the usual
channels. I cannot recall having received any, except the messages
from the Midnapur girl prisoners. Whatever may have happened in
the past, I trust that in future you will kindly issue instructions so as to
ensure the delivery of their messages to me, assuming, of course, that
they are not objectionable.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G ANDHI
The Hindustan Times, 4-10-1938; also C. W. 9919
1
In his reply dated April 17, the addressee wrote: “In view of the wording of
the paragraph (1) of your letter which refers to detenus, I think it desirable, in order
that there may be no misunderstanding, to repeat what I stated at the commencement
of our interviews that proposals made by me personally as a basis of settlement in the
course of negotiations were, and are, subject to, and, basis of settlement in the course
of negotiations were, and are, subject to, and, conditional upon, the approval of the
Government of Bengal as a whole.
“Secondly, what I endeavoured to convey at our last interview was simply
this—that, subject to an agreed solution of the problem of convicted prisoners being
arrived at, I felt sure you would not be dissatisfied with the action that the
Government would in that event take regarding State prisoners and detenus.”

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

97

96. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
C ALCUTTA,

April 13, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

A wire has gone to you telling you I am well and going to Delhi
and thence at once to Wardha. Of Delhi you will know from the
papers and later from me or Mahadev after the work is finished.1
I am really well and have stood the strain in a wonderful
manner.
The negotiations2 have been difficult but I have hope of their
being successful. Everything will depend upon the result of my
appeal3 for restraint. I might have to come again.
One of these days Mahadev or I must tell you all about the
interview with the girls 4 but not before we meet.
It will be good if you can go to Ooty and pass a day with me on
your way.
Mind I am likely to have to go to Bombay on 25th to see
Jinnah.
So, Mrs. Subbaroyan is in the Assembly. I suppose you meet
her often.
Of course there is no chance whatsoever of my arbitrating over
the Shahidganj issue. It almost defies a reasonable solution.
This U. P. dacoity5 is a disturbing affair. Heaven knows what is
in store for this country.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C. W. 3627. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6436

1

Gandhiji was going to meet the Viceroy on April 15.
With the Government of Bengal
3
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 13-4-1938
4
Presumably Bina Das and Ujjala Majumdar who were sentenced to nine and
ten years’ imprisonment respectively and whom Gandhiji met at Presidency Jail,
Calcutta, on April 12.
5
Staged by terrorists on April 11 at Pipribih, on the North Eastern Railway
between Allahabad and Kanpur.
2

98

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

97. DISCUSSION WITH BENGAL CONGRESSMEN1
C ALCUTTA,

[April 13, 1938] 2
The difference between your view and mine is based on the
question whether the Zemindari system is to be mended or ended. I
say it should be mended, and if it cannot be mended, it would end
itself. You say that it is incapable of being mended.
In these words Gandhiji summed up the difference between the Socialist school
and what may be called the Satyagrahi school, before an informal meeting of Calcutta
Congressmen.
Q. The zemindars and mahajans are the instruments of the bureaucracy. They
have always sided with it and are an obstacle to our progress and freedom. Why should
not the obstacle be removed ?
A. They are indeed part and parcel of the bureaucracy. But they
are its helpless tools. Must they for ever remain so? We may do
nothing to put them away from us. If they change their mentality,
their services can be utilized for the nation. If they will not change,
they will die a natural death. If we have non-violence in us, we will not
frighten them. We have to be doubly careful when the Congress has
power.
Q. But can’t we say the system of zemindari is an anachronism and should go,
by non-violent means of course?
A. Of

course we can. The question is: ‘must we ?’ Why can we
not say to the zemindars, ‘These are the evils which we ask you to
remove yourselves’? I admit that this presumes trust in human nature.
Q. Would you say that the Permanent Settlement3 should remain ?
A. No, it has to go. The way to make the kisans happy and
prosperous is to educate them to know the reason of their present
condition and how to mend it. We may show them the non-violent
way or the violent. The latter may look tempting, but it is the way to
perdition in the long run.
1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s article “Kisans and Zemindars”. Among
others who attended this informal meeting were Subhas Chandra Bose and Maulana
Abul Kalam Azad.
2
From The Hindu, 14–4–1938.
3
Introduced by Lord Cornwallis in 1793.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

99

Q. But don’t you agree that the land belongs to him who tills it ?
A. I do. But that need not mean that the zemindar should be
wiped out. The man who supplies brains and metal is as much a tiller
as the one who labours with his hands. What we aim at, or should, is to
remove the present terrible inequality between them.
Q. But the mending process may be very long.
A. Seemingly

the longest process is often the shortest.

Q. But why not parcel out the land among the tillers ?
A. That is a hasty thought. The land is today in their hands. But
they know neither their rights nor how to exercise them. Supposing
they were told neither to move out of the land nor to pay the dues to
the zemindars, do you think their misery would be over? Surely much
will still remain to be done. I suggest that that should be undertaken
now and the rest will follow as day follows night.
That led up to the question of the Kisan Sabhas, their relations with the
Congress, their scope and their function.

My opinion is clear-cut, having worked among the kisans and
labour all my life. There is nothing constitutionally wrong in the
Congress allowing the Kisan Sabhas to work independently nor in
allowing the office-bearers of the Kisan Sabhas to be office-bearers of
the Congress, for they will come in the usual way. But my study of
separate kisan organizations has led me definitely to the conclusion
that they are not working for the interests of the kisans but are
organized only with a view to capturing the Congress organization.
They can do even this by leading the kisans along the right channels,
but I am afraid they are misleading them. If the kisans and their
leaders will capture the Congress by doing nothing but authorized
Congress work, there is no harm. But if they do so by making false
registers, storming meetings and so on, it would be something like
Fascism.
But the main question is whether you want the Kisan Sabhas to
strengthen the Congress or to weaken it, to use the kisan organization
to capture the Congress or to serve the kisans, whether the Sabha is to
be a rival organization working apparently in the name of the
Congress or one carrying out the Congress programme and policy. If
it is really a rival organization and Congress organization only in
name, its strength and energy will be utilized in resisting the Congress
and those of the Congress will be utilized in resiting the Kisan Sabha,
100

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

with the result that the poor kisans will be ground between the two
mill-stones.
Harijan, 23-4-1938

98. FOREWORD TO “THE PERSIAN MYSTICS”
April 14, 1938
Sir Jogendra Singh is to be congratulated on having given us his
rendering into English of the “Sayings of the Mystic’’ by Abdullah
Ansari 1 . Islam has given the world mystics no less than Hinduism or
Christianity. In these days when irreligion masquerades as religion, it
is well to reminds ourselves of what the best minds of all the religions
of the world have thought and said. We must not, like the frog in the
well who imagines that the universe ends with the wall surrounding his
well, think that our religion alone represents the whole Truth and all
the others are false. A reverent study of the other religions of the
world would show that they are equally true as our own, though all are
necessarily imperfect.
M. K. G ANDHI
The Persian Mystics

99. LETTER TO RATILAL MEHTA
April 14, 1938
BHAI RATUBHAI

2

,

Maganlal3 writes that Chhaganlal’s4 condition is pitiable. He has
incurred debts and has suffered losses. Do you know about his real
condition? Does he listen to you? I have written to him, but I don’t
expect a reply. I hope you are keeping well.
I write this in a moving train.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 7176. Also C. W. 4672. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi.
1
2
3
4

Sheikh Abdullah Ansari of Herat, 1005 A. D.-1090 A. D.
Father-in-law of Chhaganlal Mehta
Sons of Dr. Pranjivandas Mehta
Ibid

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

101

100. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 14, 1938
CHI. NARANDAS,

Give the enclosed1 to Ratubhai.
Kanaiyo is quite happy. I do feel unhappy that I am not able to
pay the attention that I ought to pay him. If I could but manage it, I
could take much work from him. I am fairly well. I am writing this in
a moving train.
I hope everything is well with you. Are you quite satisfied
with Kamala? I return to Wardha the day after tomorrow.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./III. Also C.W. 8543. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi.

101. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
ON THE TRAIN TO DELHI,

April 14, 1938
CHI. KANTI,

You have done something really excellent.2 Act in the
manner in future also. And now the answers to your questions3 .
1. It has not been my experience that in daily life
untruth and dishonesty that always triumph. We of course
across instances of these sometimes winning, but if we look
into the matter we shall see that the real triumph goes to

same
it is
come
deep
truth.

1

Vide the preceding item.
The addressee had helped an old Mussalman fellow-passenger on the train
who had lost his ticket (Harijan, 14-5-1938).
3
These, briefly, were:
(I) Would it not have been proper for the ticketless passenger to evade the
ticket-examiner? Didn’t dishonesty often pay ?
(ii) How far was it proper for the addressee to advise him to be honest ?
(iii) What right had the ticket-examiner to let the passenger off ?
(iv) Not himself having any money to pay, how could the addressee have
appealed to other passengers to pay the ticketless passenger’s fare ?
(v) If the passenger could complete his journey to Madras, would it have been
right for the addressee to see him out of the platform on a platform ticket ?
2

102

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

If, however, the victory of truth was always self-evident, what would
be its value, and what would be the merit of adhering to it? Is not this
the reason why the Ishopanishad, which is regarded as authoritative as
the Vedas has this mantra, that the face of truth is covered with a
golden lid? We are dazzled by the splendour of that lid.
2. Now the second question. It may not be our lot always to
suffer, but that doesn’t mean that we should’t advise other people to
follow the seemingly strait and narrow path of truth. Even if the old
man had been able to hide himself and reach Madras, what would it
have availed? Where was the guarantee that he would not have got
caught somewhere? And why should we assume that he had to suffer
because finally he had to get down? We don’t always know what is
for our good. We should, there-fore, proceed blindly on the asumption that the path of truth cannot but lead to our good.
3. It was certainly within the right of the ticket-examiner
to let that man go. If, however, he did not think he had such a
right, he could not have neglected his duty out of false pity. But even
in that case he could have issued the man a ticket and paid for it from
his own pocket or could have collected the money from other passengers.
4. Supposing the examiner did not let the man travel,
nor issued him a ticket with his own money, and the old man
had therefore to miss the train or go to jail, why should he have
minded that? If he was a lover of truth, he should have faced that
cheerfully. And we are thinking here about the duty of a lover of
truth. Even though you are not maintaining yourself with money
earned by yourself, on an occasion like this, which arises only once in
a while, you could have paid something yourself and collected the
balance from the other passengers. If the latter had paid anything, so
far so good; but even if they hadn’t, you would have done your duty.
But I didn’t feel, either, that even the little you did was not enough.
5. Had the examiner let the man travel to Madras, he
could have informed the ticket collector there that he had used his
discretion in letting him go. But supposing he had refused to do
that, it would not have been right for the old man to get out of the
station with the help of a platform ticket. However, the way out of that
situation would have been easy. You yourself could have explained
his condition to the ticket collector and if the latter had not been convinced he could have kept the man in custody. These days, however,

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

103

they don’t follow that practice since it puts the railway company to a
loss; the ticket collector merely shouts angrily at such persons and
lets them go.
If you have any doubts even after reading these answers to
your questions, ask me again.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7334. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

102. LETTER TO BAL KALELKAR
April 14, 1938
CHI. BAL,

I am writing this on a train to Delhi. I will leave Delhi
tomorrow and reach Wardha the day after. You will have read
about the visit before you get this.
I am writing this just to tell you that I have not forgotten
you. I always wish that you should progress spiritually and in
health even as you are cultivating the intellect. Progress in all the
three spheres necessarily includes progress in each.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7969

103. INTERVIEW TO “PRATAP”1
KANPUR,

[April 14, 1938] 2
Q. Do you approve of the decision of the Congress Working Committee
regarding the C. P. Ministerial crisis ?
A. I cannot say anything in this matter. I cannot describe

the working Committee’s decision as wrong.
Q. Do you think you have succeeded in your mission regarding the
release of the Bengal political prisoners ?
A. Let us hope so.
Q. Have you been invited by the Viceroy to Delhi ?
1
2

104

A Hindi daily of Kanpur
Gandhiji passed through Kanpur on April 14 en route to Delhi.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

A.

It appears that the public knows more about it than I do.

Q. Are you expected to discuss the question of political prisoners at
Delhi ?
A.

I do not know what I shall do at Delhi.

Q. What is your purpose in going to Delhi ?
A. I am afraid I cannot say anything

about it.

Q. Do you think that the Congress will accept the Federation, if
certain changes were introduced in it ?
A. How can I say what the congress will do in this

matter ?1
Q. What will you recommend to the Congress in case modifications
are made ?
A. Let us see what these are.

The Bombay Chronicle, 21-4-1938, and The Statesman,
15-4-1938

104. LETTER TO REGINALD REYNOLDS
April 14, 1938
2

MY DEAR ANGAD ,

My heart goes out to you. What does it matter that on some
things we do not see eye to eye? I must however ask one question. Did
you think it lawful to sexually love the married lady or do you say
that although it was wrong you could not help yourselves, and having
fallen, the only honourable course for you was to marry ? 3 I need to
know this, if I may, to see how far we have drifted from each other
and what philosophy guides us. The fact that you are a seeker of
Truth is enough to sustain the bond between us.
I hope you are completely cured.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

1

What follows is from the correspondent of The Statesman.
The monkey-prince sent as a messenger by Rama to Ravana. Gandhiji gave
the addressee this name as he had carried his letter of March 2, 1930, to the then
Viceroy, Lord Irwin; vide “Letter to Lord Irwin”, 2-3-1930
3
The addressee had married Ethel Mannin, a divorcee.
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

105

105. TELEGRAM TO M. A. JINNAH
DELHI,

April 15, 1938
IF
ON
RETURN
BOMBAY
YOU
CAN
BREAK
JOURNEY
AT
WARDHA FOR ONE DAY YOU WILL SPARE
ME
THE
STRAIN
OF
UNDERTAKING
THE
JOURNEY
TO BOMBAY.
I
NEED
SOME
UNINTERRUPTED
PHYSICAL
REST
IF
POSSIBLE.
IN
ANY EVENT
COULD
MAULANA
AZAD
ACCOMPANY
ME
AT
THE
INTERVIEW?
PLEASE
WIRE
WARDHA
WHICH
REACHING
TOMORROW. 1

The Bombay Chronicle, 16-6-1938

106. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
ON THE TRAIN,

April 16, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

We are moving towards Wardha. I am in a fit condition. I have
started the day with 160-4/98—an unusual thing nowadays. And mark
you, up to Gwalior the crowds won’t let me rest. They would shout in
my ears, as it were.
Mahadev I have sent to the Frontier to see things for himself. He should be there three or four days.
It was a nice chat with the Viceroy. Quite inconclusive. It was
not meant to be conclusive. It was an exchange of ideas. More when
we meet.
You must make yourself fit in Simla. You must take the hipbaths and exercise. It is criminal to tie yourself to the desk. Play tennis
daily, if it suits you.
Sushila has remained in Delhi. She must have written to you.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3628. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6437
1
In his reply the addressee telegraphed: “Extremely sorry unable change programme now. Will receive you at Bombay on 25th or thereafter as arranged. Would
prefer to see you alone.”

106

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

107. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
ON THE TRAIN,

April 16, 1938
CHI. SUSHILA,

Lately you have been figuring in my dreams. Shall I call it
attachment or love? Be that as it may, you have become a big
question-mark for me. “You have already taken one; you want to
take the other one too ?” These words of Mother still echo in my
ears. Her concern was justified. My duty is clear. At least today your
place is not with me. If Pyarelal finds his moorings, it will be well. But
if that does not happen I shall consider myself worthless. And what
can a girl like you do by living with a worthless person? There is no
strong reason for you to leave your mother’s lap. I failed in my duty
when I let you ignore the letter from Delhi. You should have accepted
one of the jobs offered. Even now if the posts have not been filled,
you may still write, ‘It so happens that I can now entertain one of the
pro-positions, if the posts or any of them be still open.’1 Your duty is
to be near Mother and earn. And even while you earn, increase your
know-ledge as much as you wish. This is my considered view.
Mahadev will say the same. I shall convey this to Pyarelal. If he has
anything else to say, I shall write again.
Stop worrying about me. The night passed well. In the morning
the blood-pressure was 164/102. Even otherwise I am feeling fine.
How can I forget the service I had from you? How can I reward
it? How and why should a father reward a daughter? God will reward
you. It will be reward enough if Pyarelal’s mind becomes quiet. If
that does not happen, what good will be a reward? You did your duty.
Why should you be concerned with the fruits of it?
You must go on writing to me. God will show you the right
path.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

In English in the source

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

107

108. LETTER TO PYARELAL
April 16, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

Now you may know the reason why I feel light at heart. If I
want to act on your letter, who is there to stop me? But you should
know my decision. Sushila’s pure love has showed me the way. For
your sake she is starving herself. I was overawed when I learnt about
it. There is no pretence, no outward show. I was terribly perturbed. If
Sushila has to starve herself as she is doing, is my love so only in
name or does it serve any purpose? Mother’s tears made me resolve
that if Pyarelal’s life could be put on the rails then I would be
qualified to keep Sushila. If that does not happen, I would stand
disqualified in my own eyes. If my non-violence is not capable of
melting your heart, how would it help in winning swaraj? You have
become part of me. If I cannot keep you, I am worthless. Mother’s
words were not the words of an ignorant woman. Her candid words
emanated from her great anguish. They went direct to my heart, and
she was fully entitled to tell me all she did. When others hear such
words of truth, it will only benefit them. Hence, at that time I lightened
my heart by taking the decision that if Pyarelal cannot convince me of
the justice of the step he wishes to take, he should give up his fast,
whether complete or partial. If in his innermost heart he cannot be
persuaded, he can by all means abide by his decision and then I will
eat when he eats and starve when he starves. When he fasts I will fast
too. If he should leave, my fast will commence from that very
moment. This thought occurred to me after I heard about Sushila. I
made my resolve after seeing Mother’s anguish. She will tell you
everything on reaching home. God has willed otherwise. If you go
from here, you will be breaking your vow. I cannot quietly sit at
Segaon till the visit to the Frontier Province materializes. And (at
Segaon), you should start nothing until I am settled there (Segaon).
But this is making a mountain out of a mole-hill. A new
phase has begun for me. My love for you will be as much asfor
swaraj. If the spark that Sushila has kindled is enough, God will grant
me the strength to quietly adhere to my resolve.
If you have become part of me, then your duty is clear. You
must do as I say. By doing so, you will benefit yourself, me, Sushila
and Mother, who is like a cow. Then all of us will strive together for
108

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

swaraj. The happiness and peace of many others like Mahadev, for
instance depend on your peace of mind. If you can believe it, do this
much in good faith. Nothing should be given up for fear that I may
resort to fasting. Duty should never be forgotten. If you think that it is
clearly your duty to go, who am I to stand in the way? If there is any
room for the slightest doubt, give the benefit of it to me whom you
have accepted as father.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

109. LETTER TO PYARELAL
Second letter

[On or after April 16, 1938] 1

CHI. PYARELAL,

I had finished writing the enclosed2 when Sushila gave me your
letter. You did not quite understand. What I had decided is mentioned
in the enclosed letter. Even if deep down Sushila has any misgivings
as to what may be good for her, she must submit to Mother’s love.
But if she feels that it is to her good to be here she must remain firm
and put up with Mother’s lamentations. I wanted to take back the
letter today. In my opinion, from all points of view, Sushila’s good
lies in being here. But even you may not agree on that point. I am not
enamoured of medical degrees nor for that matter [education] in
England. Those who learn do so after getting their degrees. But this is
my position. I have written this to show how myviews about
someone’s good can appear distorted and short-sighted. Hence if
there is any need for thinking, it has to be done only by Sushila.
Blessings form

BAPU

[PS.]
It is true that Mahadev should have informed me. But now that
is over. Here we have a situation where Ba worships Sushila. What does
anything else matter?
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1
From the contents it would appear that this was written after the letter to the
addressee dated April 16, 1938; vide the preceding item.
2
Presumably the foregoing letter

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

109

110. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
[AFTER APRIL 17, 1938 ]1
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

What you say is correct from the economic point of view; but I
look at it, and I ought to look at it, as a purely political issue. 2 We
cannot enter into any agreement with Lancashire which will bind us to
buy their cloth. The argument that Lancashire cloth is bound to come
here anyway is irrelevant. There has been no change in the Congress
position, as it has always been explained to the people, as regards
Lancashire cloth. I think, therefore, that we cannot enter into the sort
of agreement you suggest.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Purushottamdas Thakurdas Papers, Courtesy:
Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

111. TELEGRAM TO M. A. JINNAH
WARDHA,

April 18, 1938
THANKS.
BOMBAY

25TH
28TH

HAPPENS
IF

TO

NOT

BE

MONDAY.

WILL

REACH

INCONVENIENT.

The Bombay Chronicle, 16-6-1938

1

The addressee in his letter dated April 17 had written: “I thought I might clear
the point again as regards the Indo-British Trade Pact. The period of protection
expires next March and in any case the amount of protection will be revised. I believe
that Lancashire would in any case get a 5% reduction in the tariff. The question
therefore is: should we give Lancashire a grant of 5% under the recommendations of
the Tariff Board without asking for any quid pro quo or should we insist on a pact
based on 5% reduction and a definite guarantee by Lancashire to purchase a large
amount of Indian cotton? …Purely from the economic point of view, we would not
think of giving a free gift of 5%. But from the political point of view there may be
reasons for taking up such an attitude. I should like you therefore to send me, at your
leisure, your arguments in favour of such a position which, you will agree, would
appear to be anomalous from the economic point of view. Because under this position
Lancashire will get what she wants without having to pay anything for it.”
2
Ibid

110

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

112. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
April 18, 1938
MY DEAR KU,

3 p.m. on 21st if that will suit the members. I know it is a hot
time but I am helpless. Will you prefer 6.30 to 7.30 a. m., or have I to
go to Wardha on 21st morning ?
You will talk to me about finances when we meet.
Yes, there must be a joint committee for the Museum.
Rajkumari comes on 22nd by the Calcutta Mail at 7 a.m.
(is it?). Look up the time-table. Will you receive her and pack her
off here? I may not be able to send anyone from here.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 10134

113. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
S EGAON,

April 18, 1938
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

Pyarelal wrote to you yesterday. If you can come, we shall
discuss a few things. But if you cannot it doesn’t matter. I have had a
talk about the land in Gujarat. I think it impossible to do anything
more about Nagpur now. Let things take their own course. The entire
policy requires careful consideration. In any case, I have to be there
on the 28th to meet Jinnah. I intend to return the same day. Did you
call on Jalbhai? Do you write to him. ?
I request you not to take me to the sea coast. And on May
6-7 your committee is meeting at Wardha. I am really keeping

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

111

fine health. Mahadev is expected back on the 20th or the 21st.
Blessings from

BAPU
S ARDAR VALLABHBHAI P ATEL
P URUSHOTTAM BUILDING
OPP. O PERA HOUSE, B OMBAY 4

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro–2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 219

114. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
S EGAON,

Silence day, April 18, 1938
CHI. SUSHILA,

Pyarelal told me that you had cried and my heart wept. A
wicked person sees everyone as wicked. Do I also belong to the same
category? How very perverted I must be to imagine even for a
moment perversity in a pure-hearted girl like you? Why should you
serve me? Where do I have the right to take service from you? Your
duty is clear. Stay with Mother and do whatever work of service you
can from there. It is too true that I have ruined the life of a saintly
man like Pyarelal. Is that not enough? Am I a godfather to you or the
opposite of one?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar

112

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

115. LETTER TO SUMITRA GANDHI
S EGAON,

April 18, 1938
CHI. SUMI,

You write to me only rarely. Are you trying to pay me back in
the same coin? Write to me a long letter in Hindi. Kanam is fine. He
thinks of you sometimes.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mis. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

116. TELEGRAM TO M. A. JINNAH
WARDHA,

April 20, 1938
IF

NOT

HOUSE

INCONVENIENT

AT

WOULD

LIKE

TO

REACH

YOUR

11·30 A. M.

The Bombay Chronicle, 16-6-1938

117. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM GANDHI
S EGAON,

April 20, 1938
CHI. PURUSHOTTAM,

You are by . . . 1 doing credit to your birthday . . . 2 The policy
of neglecting your health . . . 3 and carrying on somehow or other is
immoral. Have no doubt about it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

1
2
3

Some words are illegible here.
Ibid
Ibid

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

113

118. LETTER TO KHWAJA NAZIMUDDIN
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

April 21, 1938
DEAR SIR NAZIMUDDIN,

I thank you for your letter. 1 Of course, I understand that
everything has to go to the Cabinet before the final decision is taken.
My suggestions were, therefore, intended to be independent and for
examination on their merits. Only, I had felt that the policy so far as
the detenus are concerned was a reiteration of that adopted by the
Cabinet. I am anxiously awaiting your final decision. But before it is
taken, if my presence is considered necessary you are only to send me
a line—even a wire if necessary.2
Yours sincerely,
M. K. G ANDHI

The Hindustan Times, 4-10-1938; also C.W. 9921

119. LETTER TO HARIBHAU UPADHYAY
S EGAON,

April 21, 1938
DEAR HARIBHAU,

Bapuji has received both of your letters. He says he had a talk with Jamnalalji
about sending Ba. He will certainly send her if she can be sent. There is no objection
from Bapuji’s side.
About the prisoners he says that we have to await the decision regarding the
Bengal prisoners. Only after that shall we know what can be done about the prisoners
of the other provinces. About the prisoners there we shall discuss when there is an
occasion for you to write about them.
Yours,
P YARELAL
From the Hindi original: Haribhau Upadhyay Papers, Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
1

Vide footnote 1, “Letter to Khwaja Nazimuddin”, 13-4-1938
The addressee on May 6 replied: “The Muslim League Conferences made it
impossible for the Assembly to meet in Darjeeling until April 20. The Cabinet at
once took the matter into consideration and definite conclusions have been reached. I
am afraid that, in any circumstances, a short delay may be inevitable before we are in
a position to communicate with you further. This delay will not, I anticipate, be
much, and you can rest assured that I and my colleagues have taken and are taking
every possible step to expedite the matter.”
2

114

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

120. SPEECH AT VIDYAMANDIR TRAINING SCHOOL,
WARDHA 1
April 21, 1938
Today the students of the Vidyamandir have taken a solemn
pledge. It is a momentous pledge. Its fulfilment would seem well-nigh
impossible. This pledge binds one to serve without a break for twentyfive years on a monthly salary of Rs. 15. The fact that more than five
thousand applications2 were received is proof that unemploment in
our country has reached the extreme limit. Some persons, while
working for high ideals cannot get even dal and rice; many persons
cannot obtain work to fill their bellies.3 It is also proof of the glamour
that surrounds Government employment. I know that people apply
for constableships or teacherships in the hope of adding to their legal
pay in illegal ways. I hope that no one of you entertains any such
hope. I do not know that with all my patriotism I could bind myself to
serve as a teacher for Rs. 15 per month. You must dismiss from your
minds the thought that there may be profits left over in your schools
to be divided amongst you. If, therefore, there is anyone among you
who repents of the contract, you will ask the Minister to relieve you. I
promise to plead for you. Having said this, I tender my congratulations to those who hold to their contract. I hope that God will give
you strength to abide by your pledge.
Yours is a self-sacrificing pledge. If you prove true to your
pledge you will set a noble example before the world. If you do not
succeed, both Ravishankar Shukla and I will be condemed by the
world. So the weaklings had better withdraw now.
This scheme is wholly Indian. Its ideal was born in Segaon. Real
India is enshrined in the seven lakhs of villages, whose plight is even
worse than Segaon’s. I want you to drive away illiteracy from these
villages, find out means whereby villagers can obtain food and clothing, and take the message of winning swaraj through truth and nonviolence to the villages. This responsibility rests on you. It is your
1

The school, a combination of the Wardha Scheme and Ravishankar Shukla’s
Vidya Mandir Scheme, was to be conducted under the supervision of the
Hindustani Talimi Sangh.
2
Out of these 166 candidates were selected.
3
The remaining part of the paragraph is from Harijan.
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

115

dharma to work with this ideal in view. I have presented my scheme
after mature deliberation. If it fails, the teachers would be to blame. It
is through handicrafts that instruction in geometry, history, geography
and arithmetic will be given and an attempt will be made to meet the
expenses of the school through the students’ manual labour.1
You know that the scheme of this education has been drawn up
in pursuance of the Congress programme. Now the Congress is
pledged to win swaraj by non-violent and truthful means. Therefore
the cultivation of these cardinal virtues is the foundation of the
scheme. And if you do not show these in your daily contact with
yourpupils and a character in keeping with them, you will fail and so
will your school. You know what Hitler is doing in Germany. His
creed is violence, of which he makes no secret. The other day we were
told that the sword was their soul. The boys and girls there are taught
the science of violence from the beginning. They are taught to hate
the enemy even in their arithmetic, and you will find that the examples
have been chosen with a view to inculcate the military spirit. If we
endorse their creed, we must recognize the necessity of inculcating the
spirit of violence from infancy. The same thing is happening in Italy.
We must be honest even as they are honest. I have no doubt that if the
scheme is worked with all its implications and becomes popular
throughout India, a silent revolution will have taken place and swaraj
will be a certainty.
Herr Hitler is achieving his goal through the sword, I through
soul. Cast off the cloak of foreign thoughts and ideals, identify
yourselves with the villagers. The Western world is giving us destructive knowledge; we want to impart constructive education through
non-violence. May God give you the strength to reach your cherished
goal and to fulfil the pledge which you have taken today.
[From Hindi]
Harijan Sevak, 30-4-1938, and Harijan, 30-4-1938

1

116

The following paragraph is from Harijan.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

121. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
April 22, 1938
I observe that the forthcoming interview between Shri Jinnah
and myself is not only attracting very wide attention, but is also
inducing high hopes in some. Then there are friends who gravely
warn me against this visit and against building any hope on the
interview. It is better, therefore, for me to take the public into my
confidence and tell them why and how I am waiting upon Shri Jinnah
on April 28.
He has himself published my first letter 1 to him, showing my
attitude on the question of communal unity, which is as dear to me as
life itself. In that letter I clearly stated that all before me was darkness
and that I was praying for light. If anything, the darkness has
deepened and the prayer become more intense. Add to this the fact
that for causes some of which I know and some of which I do not, for
the first time in my public and private life I seem to have lost selfconfidence. I seem to have detected a flaw in me which is unworthy of
a votary of truth and ahimsa. I am going through a process of selfintrospection, the results of which I cannot foresee. I find myself for
the first time during the past 50 years in a Slough of Despond. I do
not consider myself fit for negotiations or any such thing for the
moment.
There is no need for any speculation as to the cause of my
despondency. It is purely internal. It comes from within. It must be
now clear that, if I regarded the forthcoming interview as between two
politicians, I should not entertain it in my present depression. But I
approach it in no political spirit. I approach it in a prayerful and
religious spirit, using the adjective in its broadest sense.
My Hinduism is not sectarian. It includes all that I know to be
best in Islam, Christianity, Buddhism and Zoroastrianism. I approach
politics as everything else in a religious spirit. Truth is my religion
and ahimsa is the only way of its realization. I have rejected once and
for all the doctrine of the sword. The secret stabbings of innocent
persons and the speeches I read in the papers are hardly the thing
leading to peace or an honourable settlement.
1

Vide “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 22-5-1937

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

117

Again, I am not approaching the forthcoming interview in any
representative capacity. I have purposely divested myself of any such.
It there are to be any formal negotiations, they will be between the
President of the Congress and the President of the Muslim League. I
go as a lifelong worker in the cause of Hindu-Muslim unity. It has
been my passion from early youth. I count some of the noblest of
Muslims as my friends. I have a devout daughter of Islam as more
than a daughter to me. She lives for that unity and would cheerfully
die for it. I had the son 1 of the late Muazzin of the Juma Masjid of
Bombay as a staunch inmate of the Ashram. I have not met a nobler
man. His morning azan2 in the Ashram rings in my ears as I write
these lines during midnight. It is for such reasons that I wait on
Shri Jinnah.
I may not leave a single stone unturned to achieve HinduMuslim unity. God fulfils himself in strange ways. He may, in
a manner least known to us, both fulfil himself through the interview
and open a way to an honourable understanding between the two
communities. It is in that hope that I am looking forward to the
forthcoming talk. We are friends, not strangers. It does not matter to
me that we see things from different angles of vision. I ask the public
not to attach any exaggerated importance to the interview. But I ask
all lovers of communal peace to pray that the God of truth and love
may give us both the right spirit and the right word and use us for the
good of the dumb millions of India.
Harijan, 30-4-1938

122. MESSAGE TO JAIPUR RAJYA PRAJA MANDAL3
[Before April 23, 1938] 4
Everyone who cares to study what is happening at the present
moment in our country can see that what we want can be attained if we
will but achieve the mantra of peace, the creed of non-violence. You
cannot breed peace out of no-peace. The attempt is like gathering
1

Abdul Kadir Bawazeer
Call to prayer
3
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly letter”. The message was sent
throught Jamnalal Bajaj who presided over the Conference.
4
Although the message was read out at the Conference by Jamnalal Bajaj on
April 30, this was obviously drafted before April 23; vide “Letter to Jamnalal Bajaj”,
23-4-1938
2

118

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

grapes of thorns or figs of thistles. The more I go into the question,
the more forcibly the conclusion is borne in upon me that our first
duty is to grasp this fundamental fact. There was a day when I used to
flatter myself with the belief that I had mastered the key to learning
that lesson. Today I am filled with doubt. I do not know that I have in
me purification enough to realize true peace or non-violence. In that
frame of mind I cannot think of any other thing, talk of any other
thing. But whatever may be my condition, I have no doubt in my
mind that there is no swaraj without non-violence, nothing that goes
by the name of constructive work. Constructive work is a mild aspect
of non-violence, but the true test of non-violence lies in acquiring the
capacity to meet an innocent and unflinching death in the service of
our cause. How to achieve it is the question. I want you to apply your
minds to it.
Harijan, 4-6-1938

123. MARTIAL V. MORAL
It is often forgotten that the Congress has only moral authority
to back it. The ruling power has the martial, though it often dilutes the
martial with the moral. This vital difference has come to the fore since
the assumption of office by the Congress in seven provinces. This
office-holding is either a step towards greater prestige or its total loss.
If it is not to be a total loss, the ministers and the legislators have to be
watchful of their own personal and public conduct. They have to be,
like Caesar’s wife, above suspicion in everything. They may not
make private gains either for themselves or for their relatives or
friends. If the relatives or friends get any appointment, it must be only
because they are the best among the candidates, and their market
value is always greater than what they get under the Government. The
ministers and the legislators of the Congress ticket have to be fearless
in the performance of their duty. They must always be ready to risk
the loss of their seats or offices. Offices and seats in the legislatures
have no merit outside their ability to raise the prestige and power of
the Congress. And since both depend wholly upon the possession of
morals, both public and private, any moral lapse means a blow to the
Congress. This is the necessary implication of non-violence. If the
Congress non-violence is merely confined to abstention from causing
physical hurt to the British officials and their dependants, such nonviolence can never bring us independence. It is bound to be worsted
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

119

in the final heat. Indeed we shall find it to be worthless, if not
positively harmful, long before the final heat is reached.
There is considerable force in the argument of those who have
conceived Congress non-violence in that narrow light when they say
that it is a broken reed.
If on the other hand non-violence, with all the implications, is
the Congress policy, let every Congressman examine himself and
reconstruct himself accordingly. Let him not wait for instructions
from the Working Committee. After all the Working Committee can
act only in so far as it interprets the public mind. And non-violence is
not a quality to be evolved or expressed to order. It is an inward
growth depending for sustenance upon intense individual effort.
I have received several letters offering the writers’ names for
enrolment as volunteers ready to immolate themselves at times of
rioting and the like. To these writers I would suggest that they enlist
co-workers themselves, form local corps, and begin training in accordance with the suggestion I have made. Let them not confine
themselves merely to preparedness for emergencies, but for the daily
walk of like in all its departments, personal, domestic, social, economic, political, religious. Only thus will they find themselves more than
ready for dealing with emergencies in their own localities or beats.
They may not aim, except indirectly, at influencing events happening
hundreds of miles away from their scene of activity. That ability will
come, if the right beginning is made in the first instance.
Harijan, 23-4-1938

124. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
S EGAON,

Apirl 23, 1938
CHI, JAMNALAL,

I have written to Lilavati Munshi and said “ No”. Wait for me
on the 28th morning. You must have seen the wire I have sent to Khan
Saheb. A letter1 for Vallabhbhai is enclosed. Read it and pass it on to
him. If he is not there, post it to him wherever he is. Calm yourself.
1

120

Vide the following item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You may make any changes you like in the draft of the speech1 I have
sent to you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati:G.N. 2990

125. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
S EGAON,
April 23, 1938
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

I got your letter. Mahadev should be back here this evening. I
hope to be there on the morning of the 28th. I may also meet the
Governor informally on the same day. I can see him at 9 or 9.30.
I had a long talk with the Viceroy about Orissa, the land in
Kheda, the detenus, etc. Orissa’s case deserves consideration.2 It will
be possible to arrange a few days’ stay in Gujarat at any time. Maybe
I shall have to go to the frontier Province in May. I have sent a wire to
Khan Saheb today. I shall know more when Mahadev arrives.
My health is good enough just now.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Read my statement3 regarding Jinnah. If I don’t meet him, it is
bound to be misunderstood.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 220

1

Which Gandhiji had drafted for the addressee who was to preside over the
Jaipur Rajya Praja Mandal; vide “Message to Jaipur Rajya Praja Mandal
2
In Orissa, Dain, a civilian, was appointed to act as Governor during the
period of leave of Sir John Habback. Vide “Statement to the press”, 29-4-1938
3
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 22-4-1938
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

121

126. LETTER TO MANUBEHN S. MASHRUWALA
S EGAON,
April 23, 1938

,
I get no time at all to write to you. But I do get news of you
from time to time. I hope you will not stop writing to me because I do
not write to you. Kanti and Saraswati have arrived today. They will
stay for a month.
On the 28th I am leaving for Bombay for a day’s stay. I shall
probably return on the same evening. Come and see me. Bring
Surendra2 with you. I am keeping fairly well.
CHI, MANUDI1

Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1569. Courtesy: Manubehn S.
Mashruwala

127. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
S EGAON,

April 23, 1938
CHI, SHARDA,

It seems you are being sensible. I had really thought that after
my letter you had abandoned the idea of going to Ahmedabad, in
which case you should have told me. You had my permission, but I
would want to know. Now stay with Shakaribehn 3 to your heart’s
content. Also tell her from me that there is a lot of difference between
what she told me and what she had in mind. She must talk to me
without reserve. She must let me know through you what she wants. I
do not intend doing anything against her wish. Stay there as long as
necessary on condition that you maintain your health. Give me
regular account of how you spend your time. You should not be too
sure of a letter from me.
I shall write to Saraswatibehn when I have the time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9993. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala
1
2
3

122

Daughter of Harilal Gandhi
Addressee’s husband
Addressee’s mother
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

128. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
S EGAON,

April 23, 1938
1
I have your letter. Riots appear to be our fate. At such a time
there is special need for us to meet.2 What is important is the urge that
impels us to meet. I have today sent to the press a statement 3 which
might have been drafted precisely to answer your questions. Read it
and think over it.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 167

129. LETTER TO PRESIDENT, MYSORE STATE CONGRESS
April [24,]4 1938
DEAR FRIEND ,

B. Chandrasekhara, D. Chandrasekharayya, B. Ramachandran
have seen me with reference to the recent unfortunate arrests that have
taken place in Mysore. I am sorry that Siddhalingaiya and seven other
friends are in jail over what has been called the flag satyagraha. I had
hoped that after the full talks I had with friends including Siddhalingaiya at Delang there would be no friction between the state and the
Congress. With the concurrence of these friends and their hearty
approval I had given Sir Mirza a fairly full summary of the conversation they had with me. Sir Mirza had been writing to me about
developments, but I was loath to intervene unless I had heard from the
State Congress.
I must also admit that my preoccupation in Bengal would
have most probably prevented my doing anything even if you or any
member had written to me. Today I had a full discussion with the
friends above named. I feel that there has been some misunderstand1

The reference is to Hindu-Muslim riots in Allahabad.
Gandhiji is here referring to his proposed meeting with Jinnah.
3
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 22-4-1938
4
The source has “14”. But on April 14, Gandhiji was on way to Delhi from
Calcutta. Presumably it is a slip for “24’. The representatives from Mysore met
Gandhiji at Wardha and they were in Bombay on the 26th on their way back to
Mysore.
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

123

ing or some haste on the part of overzealous workers. Thus I had
clearly advised at Delang that the confining of membership of the
Mysore State Congress only to primary members of the Indian
National Congress was wholly wrong and that in effect it made the
State Congress an Indian National Congress organization even though
it might be unaffiliated. In my opinion that is contrary to the spirit of
the Haripura resolution1 on the subject and, what is more, calculated
to defeat the end you have in view. And as Sir Mirza was in possession
of my opinion, the action of the State Congress in spite of my advice
was evidently the first cause of misunderstanding and the hoisting of
the flag was evidently interpreted as a challenge to the State and the
State Flag. I am quite clear in my mind that such was not the intention
of the authors of the demonstration but we may not expect the State
authorities to go behind our action and interpret it in terms of our
intention expressed or implied. On the contrary they would infer
intention from action. I, therefore, suggest that necessary change is
immediately made in the State Congress constitution and an
unequivocal declaration is made to the effect that the hoisting of the
National Congress flag is in no way intended as a hostile demonstration or insult to the State flag. If Mysore is an integral part of India,
as it is, it should be equally proud of the All-India national flag as it
must be of its own.
It will also be necessary for you to make it clear that you will
not hoist the national flag on ceremonial occasions where persons
other than registered Congress members are admitted, unless you also
at the same time hoist the Mysore flag. Remember, you are not in a
state of rebellion against the Maharaja. So far as I understand you do
not aim at the destruction of the Principality of Mysore. You aim at
1.

The relevant part of the resolution read:
“In view of the different conditions prevailing in the States and the rest of
India, the general policy of the Congress is often unsuited to the States and may result
in preventing or hampering the natural growth of a freedom movement in a State.
Such movements are likely to develop more rapidly and to have a broader basis, if
they draw their strength from the people of the State, produce self-reliance in them,
and are in tune with the conditions prevailing there, and do not rely on extraneous
help and assistance or on the prestige of the Congress name. The Congress welcomes
such movements, but, in the nature of things and under present conditions, the burden
of carrying on the struggle for freedom must fall on the people of the States. The
Congress will always extend its goodwill and support to such struggles carried on in a
peaceful and legitimate manner, but that organizational help will inevitably be, under
existing conditions, moral support and sympathy.”

124

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

radical reforms. If such is the case, you may not ignore the Mysore
flag on ceremonial occasions, if you have also the all-India flag.
If, therefore, you could see your way to adopt my advice I
should think that the State authorities will release the prisoners as they
should. When the operating cause ceases there is no meaning in
keeping political prisoners in jail. Please remember that satyagraha
has to be full in thought, word and deed. If I have understood the
situation correctly, I must confess that albeit entirely unconscious,
from both truth and non-violence. Truth demanded the carrying out
of what I had understood would be done and I had conveyed to Sir
Mirza. I know it was open to the State Congress to reject my advice.
But in that case I should have been told so that I would have
informed Sir Mirza accordingly. There was a flavour of violence
because any hasty or thoughtless action is a breach of non-violence. I
am well aware that such meticulous observance of non-violence and
truth is not to be expected from the rank and file. But then satyagraha
cannot be launched by the rank and file. It has to be launched by
responsible persons who are versed in the law of satyagraha.
I understand there is to be a black-flag demonstration. It savours
of violence. I hope if there has been any such idea, it will be
abandoned.
I need hardly say that my letter carries no authority save what it
may possess on account of my supposed expert knowledge of satyagraha. You are at perfect liberty to reject the whole of my advice if it
does not commend itself to you and other members of the State
Congress.
If you can get permission, you should see Siddhalingaiya and
other prisoners and if it is at all possible arrive at a unanimous
decision.1
The Hindu, 7-5-1938

1

According to the source the letter was cancelled on receipt of news of the
Mysore firing.
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

125

130. SPEECH AT HINDUSTANI TALIMI SANGH1
WARDHA,

April 24, 1938 2
We have to make of this training school a school for winning
freedom and for the solution of all our ills, of which the chief one is
our communal troubles. For this purpose we shall have to concentrate
on non-violence. Hitler’s and Mussolini’s schools accept as their
fundamental principle violence. Ours is non-violence according to the
Congress. All our problems have therefore to be solved non-violently.
Our arithmetic, our science, our history will have a non-violent
approach, and the problems in these subjects will be coloured by nonviolence. When Madame Halide Edib Hanum delivered her address to
the Jamia Millia Islamia on Turkey I remarked that whereas generally
history is a chronicle of kings and their wars, the future history will be
the history of man.3 That can be or is only non-violent. Then we shall
have to concentrate not on city industries but on rural industries, that
is to say, if we want to keep all the 700,000 of villages alive,and not
only a fraction of them, we have to revive our village handicrafts. And
you may be sure that if we can impart scholastic training through
those crafts we can bring about a revolution. Our text-books will have
also to be prepared with the same end.
I want you to give your close consideration to what I am saying
and reject what does not appeal to you. If what I say does not appeal
to our Mussalman brethren, they may reject it summarily. The nonviolence I want is not non-violence limited to the fight with the British
but is to be applied to all our internal affairs and problems—true
active non-violence from which will issue live Hindu-Muslim unity
and not a unity based on mutual fear like the pact, for instance,
between Hitler and Mussolini.
When the New Education Scheme was launched I was full of
self-confidence in which I now feel I am lacking. My words had
power of which they seem to be bereft today. This lack of confidence
is due not to things without but to things within. It is not that my
senses are paralysed. My intellect gives me good work for my age.
1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
From The Hindu, 25-4-1938
3
Vide “Prisoners Condition”, 10-10-1908
2

126

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Nor is it that I have lost faith in non-violence. That faith is burning
brighter than ever. But I have for the moment lost self-confidence. I
would therefore ask you not to accept anything from me implicitly.
Accept only what carries conviction to you. But I am sure that if we
could conduct even two schools on the right lines I should dance with
joy.
Harijan, 7-5-1938

131. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
S EGAON,

April 25, 1938
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

Here is a copy of Mahadev’s notes on his Frontier Province
visit. As I could not go and as we had disturbing news1 , I felt that he
should be sent. I am not circulating the notes among all the members.
I am sending copies to the Maulana and Subhas. The notes have made
me disconsolate. Mahadev has more to say. I am sending a copy, of
course, to the Brothers 2 . I hope you will feel impelled to use your
great influence over the Brothers. I am of course in telegraphic
communication. I may even visit the Province for a few days, if Khan
Saheb wants me to go, in spite of the shock I have received. We seem
to be weakening from within. It hurts me that, at this very critical
juncture in our history, we do not seem to see eye to eye in important
matters. I can’t tell you how positively lonely I feel to know that
nowadays I can’t carry you with me. I know that you would do much
for affection. But in matters of state, there can be no surrender to
affection, when the intellect rebels. My regard for you is deeper for
your revolt. But that only intensifies the grief of loneliness. But I must
stop.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1938.
Library

Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and

1

Presumably this is a reference to the tragedy at Mayar; vide “Speech at
Mardan”, 7-5-1938.
2
Khan Brothers
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

127

132. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
S EGAON,

April 25, 1938
CHI. PRABHA,

You have become lazy in writing letters. Nowadays I eagerly
await your letter. I couldn’t bear the news that you had a fainting fit.
Moreover, is it not my unworthiness that you couldn’t remain calm
this time although you were with me? I am not joking. These days I
often feel my unworthiness. That hinders my work, too. You have to
rely on your own efforts to attain peace of mind. Why do you want
me to tear up your letters? Is there anything confidential in them?
Since you wish, however, I do tear them up. But you should shake off
this shyness. Write to me freely and let me know all your thoughts. I
hope Father is keeping good health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3512

133. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
April 25, 1938
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I understand your point.1 It is also correct. Do give your
approval, looking at it purely from the economic point of view. My
point was that in case you wanted Congress approval later on, you
would not get it. After all, economic and political interests should not
be at variance. There is no difference between them. The rulers have
taught us the difference.
I shall be needing Rs. 50,000 for rural education and maybe an
equal amount for the A.I.V.I.A. The burden of the Harijan Sevak
Sangh is already there. This needs to be discussed further. I hope
Brijmohan is well and so is Krishna.
Blessings from
BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 7992. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
1

With reference to Gandhiji’s letter (p. 31), the addressee had inter alia
written: “I fear it will be very difficult for the Congress to justify its position if it
took up the attitude suggested by you. I can understand refusing to conclude an
agreement on econnomic grounds. But your grounds being purely political, it would
look rather odd if after having kept silent for eighteen months, the Congress now
comes out to denounce the resolutions which were taken up at their request.”

128

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

134 . LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
April 25, 1938
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

Do whatever you want after due deliberation. I shall certainly
like it. May God give you peace.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the HIndi: G.N. 4300

135. MESSAGE FOR MYSORE
[April 27, 1938] 1
Do everything possible to keep the movement absolutely nonviolent. 2 The death of a large number of pilgrims, if true, is too high a
price to pay. If necessary, I am prepared personally to lead the
movement in Mysore, wherever I happen to be in India.
The Bombay Chronicle, 30-4-1938

136. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
WARDHAGANJ,

April 27, 1938
I approach the Frontier visit in fear and trembling. I dread the
crowds that gather at stations. I have only limited physical energy. I
would, therefore, urge all Congress Committees en route to prevent
crowds from coming to platforms, making noisy demonstrations and
even insisting on my getting up at all hours of night.
3

The Bombay Chronicle, 28-4-1938

1
Mahadev Desai’s telegram to the Press dated April 27 stated that Bhupal
Chandrasekharayya, representative of the State people was leaving that evening for
Mysore with Gandhiji’s message.
2
On April 26 at Viduraswatham village in Kolar District, when the people
defied the order banning the hoisting of the national flag and prohibiting meetings,
the police opened fire and as a result 32 persons were killed and 48 seriously injured.
3
Gandhiji left for the Frontier province on April 29.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

129

137. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
[Before April 28, 1938]
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

On receipt of your letter I sent you a wire advising postponement of publication.1 See what Nawab M. I. Khan says. He feels hurt
that you want publication. In the circumstances, it is best not to insist
on publication till after my meeting with Jinnah. His reference to me
also has the same meaning. It is no use publishing the correspondence
if it increases bad blood. Don’t you think it is wise to wait?
Love.
BAPU
From a copy: Gandhi-Nehru Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

138. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
[Before April 28, 1938] 2
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I am getting restive about the talks with J. Are you hastening the
matter? I am holding up some of my actions for that purpose.
I hope good news continue to come about Indu3 .
Love.
BAPU
From a copy: Gandhi-Nehru Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

1

Presumably of the correspondence between Jawaharalal Nehru and Nawab
Muhamed Ismail Khan from November 10, 1937 to February 5, 1938 and between
Jawaharlal Nehru and Jinnah from January 18, 1937 to April 16, 1938; vide Selected
Works of Jawaharlal Nehru, Vol. 8, p. 245.
2
From the reference to talks with Jinnah, presumably on the Hindu-Muslim
question which took place in Bombay on April 28, 1938; vide “Telegram to Amrit
Kaur”, 28-4-1938
3
Indira Gandhi

130

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

139. TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
BOMBAY,
April 28, 1938
R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
C/ O YWCA
ANANDAGIRI
OOTACAMUND
TALKS1

NOT

UNHOPEFUL.

AM2

WELL.

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3857. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7013

140. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS3
April 28, 1938
We had three hours’ friendly conversation over the HinduMuslim question and the matter will be pursued further. The public
will be informed in due course of its developments.
The Bombay Chronicle, 29-4-1938

141. LETTER TO MANGALDAS PAKVASA
JUHU,

April 29, 1938
BHAI PAKVASA,

I only knew from a newspaper yesterday, as we were nearing
Kalyan Junction, of the wrath that has descended on you. However,
God’s wrath is in fact an expression of His kindness. He takes back
what He had given. I don’t wish, therefore, to offer you any
condolences. On the contrary, I want a promise from you that you will
not lose fortitude. May this loss increase your devotion to service.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati:C. W. 4679. Courtesy:Mangaldas Pakvasa

1
2
3

With M. A. Jinnah.
The source has “and”.
This was issued jointly by Gandhiji and M. A. Jinnah.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

131

142. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1
April 29, 1938
The appointment of Mr. Dain, a subordinate of the Orissa
Government, to be the acting Governor threatens to precipitate a crisis
of the first magnitude. The matter looked small on the surface. The
fact that he is to retire after the termination of the acting appointment
has been regarded as sufficient atonement for an admitted mistake. In
my opinion it is no atonement. If he is reverted to his original
permanent post, not only would there not be anything wrong but if
the Ministers wanted to be churlish, they might take a secret delight in
their quondam acting Governor becoming their subordinate. The
whole of the sting lies in a subordinate official becoming an acting
Governor of his Province with whom the Ministers are expected to
work and almost daily submit documents for his signature and have
him to preside at their meetings.
It is incongruous and unbecoming and reduces autonomy to a
farce. If this autonomy is real, and is to blossom forth into full
freedom, nothing should be done by superior powers after the
previous style. Every one of their acts must conform to a rule or
convention. It must not depend upon the caprice of the GovernorGeneral or even the Secretary of state for India. Wherever the prestige
of autocracy depended upon its exacting obedience, willing or
unwilling, from the ruled, the prestige of the superior authority that
has voluntarily divested itself of autocracy and conferred autonomy
should consist in always carrying the majority party with it. There is
no other way that I can think of for the healthy growth of autonomy
and the avoidance of friction.
The Viceroy and the Governors have bestowed unstinted praise
upon all the Ministers of India. They have given no cause for the
exercise of the more than ample powers reserved under the Government of India Act. The prestige of the majority party depends upon
never sleeping over the rights of the people, never allowing a single
error on the part of the superior authority to escape their vigilant eyes.
Looked at in this light, the Congress, it seems to me, cannot allow the
appointment to pass unchallenged.
I hear that the Orissa Ministry has threatened to resign as soon
1

132

This was published under the title “Acting Governorship of Orissa”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

as Mr. Dain occupies the gubernatorial chair. I understand too that an
interim Ministry will be appointed to carry on the Government. I
suppose that as soon as the acting appointment is over and the Governor returns from leave, by some arrangement the present Ministry will
be reinstated. That won’t be fair play. The Congress will stultify itself
to submit to any such arrangement. The governance of a province is
not like a play of children. The Congress is discovering what a
thankless task it is, how serious it is. The real Ministers, who represent
the real majority of the Orissa legislators, cannot look unconcerned on
the administration of their province passing into the hands of new
irresponsible persons appointed at the will of the Governor or acting
Governor as the case may be. I do hope, therefore, that the mistake
will be undone before it is too late. There are many ways of doing it
gracefully. But there must be a will before a graceful way is found. I
hope it will be.1
Harijan, 7-5-1938

143. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS2
April 29, 1938
I enjoy the privilege of friendship with Sir Mirza Ismail. I know
that he is anxious to liberalize the administration of Mysore. I have
found him to be willing to listen to the advice and suggestions of
friends. And I know that the tragedy3 which has been enacted in
Mysore has filled him with distress.
I have read the communique issued by the Mysore Government.
It does not read convincing to me. But for the advice that I am about
to tender, I do not need an accurate knowledge of all the facts
surrounding the tragedy. Seeing that I receive pressing letters, deputations and wires from representative people of Mysore for guidance,
and seeing that I know so many workers of Mysore who look to me
1

In response to this the Secretary to the Governor of Orissa issued the
following communique on May 4, 1938: “In view of the instability of the political
situation which he would be bound to leave to his successor, His Excellency the
Governor of Orissa does not feel justified in proceeding with his original plan, and
considers that he has in the interests of the province no option but to ask for the
cancellation of the leave granted to him. The secretary of State has acceded to his
request with the concurrence of the Governor-general.”
2
This was published under the title “Price for Gaining Liberty”.
3
Vide footnote 2, “Message for Mysore”, 27-4-1938
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

133

for a solution of their difficulties, it would be wrong on my part at this
critical juncture to content myself merely with sending letters or even
telegrams of advice.
One or two facts stand out prominently. There has been firing
upon an unarmed crowd, resulting in several deaths and many more
being injured. I will assume, though the information received by me
on behalf of the public is to the contrary, that there was some provocation. We can never know with absolute certainty whether the firing
was justified. There is no code which can give an exact definition of
justification. It must always be a matter of opinion, and opinions
always have a knack of varying.
What I, therefore, venture to suggest to the Mysore Government
is that they should not be satisfied with making an inquiry, however
impartial it may be. The demonstration that is going on in Mysore
about the national flag is a symptom of the time.
I must confess that I was not aware of a popular awakening in
Mysore on a wide scale, as there undoubtedly is. It gladdens me, as I
hope it gladdens the Mysore authorities. I suggest, therefore, that the
best and only remedy for the Maharaja and his Adviser, Sir Mirza
Ismail, is to divest the Government of its autocracy and to make
popular representatives responsible for the administration of Mysore.
The responsibility must be on the broadest scale possible if it is to
ensure peace in Mysore. It has been suggested that the state being
backward, responsibility can only be a plant of slow growth. I have
never subscribed to that doctrine. It is not a compliment to the States.
One would expect them, with all the natural advantages in their favour,
to show much greater progress than in unwieldy British India.
To the leaders of the people of Mysore I will say:These tragic
deaths and injuries inflicted upon innocent persons would be a small
price paid for the liberty of the people. They may make an enquiry
and the injured and the heirs to the deceased may receive compensation. But if I were a Mysorean, I would not lay stress on personal
gains; I would use these sacrifices for gaining the liberty for which
they had been made voluntarily or involuntarily. They should also
remember that one condition of success is the retention of a truly
non-violent spirit and atmosphere under every conceivable circumstance. I have been told that the people have been behaving with
exemplary non-violence and that the crowd bravely suffered the
134

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

firing. If that is proved to be the case, I for one will rejoice over the
loss of life. It is the necessary price paid for gaining liberty.
Harijan, 7-5-1938

144. DISCUSSION WITH VALLABHBHAI PATEL1
April 29, 1938
Sardar Vallabhbhai raised the question of the Lancashire Delegation coming
out and asked Mahatmaji as to the lines on which the Congress is likely to approve of
an agreement with U.K. Mahatmaji said that he could not see under what
circumstances the Congress could be a party to agreeing to take cloth from Lancashire
in return for cotton from India. He said that would be definitely against the whole
creed of the Congress.
Sardar Vallabhbhai pointed out that the Advisory Committee was appointed on
a recommendation of the Assembly and the report of the Advisory Committee and the
recommendation of the Government of India thereon were, without division,
demanded by the Assembly to be put before them. He, therefore, inferred that the
Congress party in the Assembly were committed to negotiations with Lancashire, and
he said that it would not be right for the Congress to go back on it. Mahatmaji said
that he was not a party to these requests and demands, but he said that as far as the
Advisory Committee were concerned, he would say to them as under :
1. The Advisory Committee may examine the trade pact from a purely
economic point of view.
2. That if, on that examination, they could honestly recommend an
agreement with U.K., including an arrangement with Lancashire, he saw no
objection to their making such recommendation.
3. Per contra, if, on such examination, the Advisory Committee felt that
they could not recommend such an agreement, he would not be sorry.
4. That any such recommendation made by the Advisory Committee, as
constituted, would command his best attention, but he would advise the
Advisory Committee to put in a paragraph at the end of their recommendation
saying that they had examined the whole question only from an economic
point of view and no other. Other points of view, viz., political, etc., were for
the Government of India to consider and the Assembly to express an opinion
on.
5. Mahatmaji, however, made it clear in unambiguous language that if
the Advisory Committee felt that they could not put in any such observation
out of what he calls self-respect, they may not do so. He said that, in that case,
the Congress was quite capable of raising its own points. As I was leaving, he
said:
1

As reported by Purushottamdas Thakurdas

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

135

Do your best acording to your lights and leave us to do our best
according to the political light.1
He added that both these expressions of opinion from different points of view
would be equally valuable and consistent.
From Purushottamdas Thakurdas Papers. Courtesy:Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library.

145. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
ON THE TRAIN TO P ESHAWAR,

April 30, 1938
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

Here, is a copy of the brief notes I have jotted down of the 312
hours’ talks with Jinnah. It may be that you and the other members
may not like the basis. Personally I see no escape from it. My handicap today is that I do not move about the country, as you do, and a
still more serious handicap is the inner despondency that has
overtaken me. I am carrying on, but it is galling to me to think that I
have lost the self-confidence that I possessed only a month ago. I
hope that this is but a temporary phase in my life. I have mentioned
this to help you to examine the proposals on their merits. I do not
suppose the first will present any difficulty. The second is novel, with
all its implications. You will not hesitate summarily to reject it if it
does not commend itself to you. In this matter you will have to give
the lead.
I expect to return on the 11th. Subhas in reply to my telegram
suggesting that he should open formal negotiations with Jinnah
telegraphs that he will be in Bombay on the 10th. I wish that you
could also go there early. I am writing to Maulana Saheb in the same
strain sending him a copy of this letter.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1938. Courtesy:Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.

1

136

Vide also “Letter to G. D. Birla”, 25-4-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

146. NOTE TO MAHADEV DESAI
[April, 1938] 1
I had a fairly long talk with Pyarelal last evening. He has agreed
to shoulder the responsibility for dealing with all the letters that you
may entrust to him. What I said was that Pyarelal and Kanu should
open the letters, arrange them, pass on to you those that are for you
alone to deal with and advise you as to the disposal of the rest. He
should not take upon himself the responsibility of tearing up the
letters; he should just write on them ‘may be torn up’, ‘may be kept’,
etc. Only when something like this is done can your burden be made
lighter, enabling you to work the way I want you to work. I do not
know to what extent you have been able to assimilate the idea of
non-violence. I am anxious to know this because it is necessary. That
will be only when you have a variety of problems to tackle. More and
more occasions present themselves each day. What can be done about
the case of fanatical Muslims? How can we cope with it? I do not have
a ready answer. But it is a thing to which you should give thought. In
regard to N. W. F. P. your responsibility is of course great.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

147. NOTE TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
[April, 1938] 2
Now, what is to be done. Mataji says you cannot go. Yes, it is
indeed a matter of health. Everbody must agree to that. Nobody will
let you die here. Of course, I have been a little careless. Lost in my
own worries, I have neglected your eating and drinking. To an extent,
I also trusted you. Mirabehn’s reason is altogether different. I have
written her a letter saying that she spreads poison by talking to others
about you and me. And so, she should not talk about you and me to
1

From the contents, it appears that the letter belongs to April, 1938, when
Mahadev Desai visited the Frontier Province.
2
Inferred from the contents; vide Suppl. “ Letter to Stretcher-Bearers”,
24-4-1900
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

137

anyone. She has found this a hard condition. That is why she is silent.
No doubt that is a good thing to happen.
From the Hindi original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Dr. Sushila Nayyar

148. TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
May 2, 1938
R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
C ARE YWCA
ANANDAGIRI
OOTACAMUND
HEALTH
TENTH.

GOOD.
LOVE.

WEATHER

PERFECT.

LEAVING

FOR

BOMBAY

BAPU
From the original:C. W. 7858. Courtesy:Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 7014

149. TELEGRAM TO AMTUSSALAAM
P ESHAWAR,

[May 2, 1938] 1
AMTUSSALAAM
C ARE ABDUL WAHEED KHAN
MANSA
HEALTH GOOD.

WEATHER

PERFECT.

LEAVING

TENTH MORNING. LOVE.

From a photostat: G. N. 372

150. NOTE TO MAHADEV DESAI
May 2, 1938
Tell Khan Saheb that my health will not permit such a heavy
tour programme. This time we should undertake only what can be
done by staying at Peshawar. We may certainly go to Utmanzai for a
day. We may leave out Khyber if necessary. Those who want to meet
me should be given appointments in Peshawar. A women’s meeting
must be arranged. The programme for September or October can be
1

A similar telegram was sent to Amrit Kaur on this date; vide “ Telegram to
Amrit Kaur”, 2-5-1938

138

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

arranged right now. It may be a one-month programme if they want
it. Impatience may damage my health and may prevent our finishing
all the work that we propose to do. Even after considering this, if you
wish to go ahead with the programme as shown to me, it may be done.
The will of God shall prevail. The programme for Peshawar may be
arranged for tomorrow, if possible.
[From Gujarati]
From the

manuscript

of

Mahadev

Desai’s

Diary.

Courtesy:Narayan

Desai

151. LETTER TO AMRITAL T. NANAVATI
May 2, 1938
CHI. AMRITLAL,

May you always remain a youth of eighteen or twenty-two. How
could that be my condition? You don’t know passion, but I was a
slave of passion for thirty years and tried to satisfy it. Moreover, I
recently discovered that I have not been able to subdue it at all. I
don’t remember having had an emission while awake at any time
during the last fifty years. I am not referring here to the emission in
dreams or those brought on by desire. But I was in such a wretched
and pitiable condition that in spite of my utmost efforts I could not
stop the discharge though I was fully awake.1 I feel now that the
despondency that I had been feeling deep down in me only foresh
adowed this occurrence. After the event, restlessness has become acute
beyond words. Where am I, where is my place, and how can a person
subject to passion represent non-violence and truth? This turmoil goes
on in my heart. I keep asking myself:am I worthy of you all who
follow me, am I fit to lead you all? God will answer the question when
He pleases. Is it not said that Rama is the strength of the weak?
There must be some place where you can settle down. We will
think over the matter when I return. Think over what you would like
to suggest.
A wire was sent to Vijaya. Now let us await her reply.
Mahadev will write about Surat.
1

Vide also “Letter to Mirabehn”, 3-5-1938

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

139

If you have in mind an indigenous machine, you needn’t ask
anybody.
What you write about the weaving shed seems all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati:G. N. 10747

152. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
P ESHAWAR,

May 2, 1938
CHI. SHARDA,

I have your letter. Stay there in peace. I shall reach Segaon by
the beginning of June. May be a couple of days earlier. Do not let
your health suffer. The Jains who visit the common temples follow
Hinduism. Jain philosophy is not distinct from Hindu philosophy. A
temple-goer should certainly keep away from any temple which the
untouchables cannot enter, shouldn’t he?
Are you studying anything there? I expect to leave the Frontier
province on the 9th. I shall have to go to Bombay again. Your reply
to this letter may be sent to Bombay. I shall be staying at Juhu. Let me
know whatever talk you have with Shakaribehn. I am of course
keeping well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original:C. W. 9994. Courtesy:Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

153. TELEGRAM TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
P ESHAWAR,

May 3, 1938
S ETH J AMNALAL BAJAJ
JAIPUR
FORGOT
TELL
YOU
VALLABHBHAI
CANNOT
GO
JAIPUR.1
HE
HAS
TO
GO
MYSORE.
HEALTH
WELL
CLIMATE
EXCELLENT
BUT
TOUR
PROGRAMME
CANCELLED
AS
TOO
HEAVY.

Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 195
1

140

For the Jaipur Rajya Praja Mandal Conference.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

154. TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
P ESHAWAR,

May 3, 1938
R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
OOTACAMUND
YOU
CAN
GO. 1
CLUSION WITH ME.

TAKE
KEEPING

CAREFUL
NOTES.
WELL.
LOVE.

FRAME

CON-

BAPU
From the original: C. W. 3859. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 7015.

155. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 3, 1938
I like your letter for its transparent love. It tells me nothing new,
but it comes at a moment when I am most receptive. The problem
however is not so simple as you have put it. If complete brahmacharya under the conditions I am trying is like an attempt to climb the
craters in the moon. What is the value of the species that requires the
nine fortifications?2 You are quite right in describing my experiment
as new. So is my experiment in ahimsa. The two hang together.
Remember that my experiment has natural limitations. I may neither
tempt God nor the Devil. I have not the time to prolong the argument.
In your next letter you must tell me in concrete terms what
definite changes I should make so as to fit in with your idea.
Should I deny myself the service rendered by Sushila? Should I
refuse to have malish 3 by Lilavati or Amtul Salaam for instance? Or
do you want to say that I should never lean on girls’ shoulders? Needless to say you won’t pain me at all by telling me frankly whatever
you think I should do to get out of the terrible despond-ency. Just
now I am most in need of support from those who surround me with
service and affection, undeserved as it seems to me, for the time being.
In guiding me remember that what I am doing I have done all my life
you may say. And my brahmacharya has become firmer and more
1

To Mysore; vide letter to the addressee dated May 16, 1938.
The reference is to the nine rules of behaviour known as “the nine-fold hedge
or wall” for the protection of brahmacharya.
3
Massage.
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

141

enlightened. Of course I have been far away from perfection. But I
felt I was progressing. That degrading, dirty, torturing expe-rience of
14th April shook me to bits and made me feel as if I was hurled by
God from an imaginary paradise where I had no right to be in my
uncleanliness.
Well, I shall feel pride in my being parent to so many children,
if any of them will give a lifting hand and pull me out of the well of
despair. My faith in myself and my experiment will revive and will
burn all the brighter.
Love.
BAPU
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy:Narayan Desai

156. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
[ AS AT] S EGAON,
May 4, 1938
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

I am replying today; but this should not become a practice.
Whenever there is an opportunity you should ask orally as it is easier
for me to give oral answers. It saves time.
Your interpreting it as ‘natural’ is correct. All vikaras 1 need not
be rejected. Even pitying a man is a vikara. Our distaste for something
bad is also a vikara but not to be rejected. If it is desirable to carry on
the business of the world, then the vikara needed for this is not only in
order but is necessary. Of course vital fluid is discharged also when
man and wife come together to procreate; but then it does not go
waste. It may be a fall. The fall leads to new creation as a rise often
does. It cannot be said that procreation is always harmful. Saying this
would amount to finding fault with God. Those couples who come
together only for the sake of a felt need for offspring and otherwise
remain like brother and sister—can remain so without any vikara—
deserve a million salutations; they are perfect brahmacharis.
What you have written about expenses is all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi:G. N. 4291
1

142

Mutations of the mind.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

157. SPEECH AT ISLAMIA COLLEGE,PESHAWAR1
May 4, 1938
I have become a member of the Khyber Union without reading
its constitution. It is the Pathan’s trick. Our people tremble at the
mention of the Pathan’s name.
Continuing, Mahatma Gandhi said that he had been unable to
participate in active discussion for the last two or three years.
I cannot speak standing. Even when I talk at length sitting, I get
dizzy in the head. It is the Khan Brothers’ love of me that has brought
me here.2
It is well that you referred to the problem of Hindu-Muslim
unity, and I would ask you to consider what you can do in furtherance
of that great cause. There is no doubt that the work belongs essentially
to you of the younger generation. We are now getting old and will
soon be gathered to our fathers. You have therefore to shoulder the
burden. How you can help in achieving the great object, you have
yourselves shown in your address by your appreciative preference to
non-violence and to Khan Saheb’s work. I do not know if your
reference was deliberate and if you knew the full implication of what
you were saying. I do hope you knew what you were saying and that
you fully weighed your words. If you have, then I should like to take
you a step further.
After explaining the circumstances which had delayed his
visiting the Frontier, Mahatma Gandhi said that when it was first
known that he was to visit the Frontier people said that this man
(Mahatma Gandhi) was going to make the people cowards. If nonviolence means that, you should despise it.3
An Urdu newspaper has said that my mission in the Frontier
Province is the emasculation of the Pathans, Whereas Khan Saheb
has invited me here in order that the Pathans might hear the message
of non-violence from my own lips and in order that I might see the
Khudai Khidmatgars at close quarters and find out to what extent
1
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Frontier Notes-III”. However, this has been
collated with the report published in The Hindustan Times.
2
This and the preceding paragraphs are from The Hindustan Times.
3
This paragraph is from The Hindustan Times.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

143

non-violence has permeated them.1 That means that the Khan Saheb
at any rate has no such fear as has been expressed by that Urdu paper.
For he knows that true non-violence is mightier than the mightiest
violence. If therefore you really know the essential nature of nonviolence and appreciate Khan Saheb’s work, you will have to pledge
yourselves to non-violence, and that in spite of the fact that violence is
so much in the air and we are talking day in and day out of military
manoeuvres and aerial action, armaments and naval strength. You
have to realize that the power of unarmed non-violence is any day far
superior to that of armed force. With me acceptance of non-violence
was instinctive, it was part of my training and home influence in
childhood. I have been preaching the creed of non-violence for 50
years.2 Its superior strength I came to realize in South Africa where I
had to pit it against organized violence and racial prejudice. I
practised it in South Africa, where everybody, like the Pathans, is
armed and the Government has introduced conscription.3 The people
said how a handful of Indians could fight the African Government
with that weapon. I returned from South Africa with a clear conviction
of the superiority of the method of non-violence to that of violence.
In India also, we have used it for gaining our rights and we have
achieved some measure of success.4
If the method of violence takes plenty of training, the method of
non-violence takes even more training, and that training is much
more difficult than the training for violence. The first essential of that
training is a living faith in God. He who has a living faith in God will
not do evil deeds with the name of God on his lips. He will not rely on
the sword but will rely solely on God. Lakhs of Muslims commit
sins in the name of God and lakhs of Hindus who say “Rama” do
likewise.5 A genuine believer in God need not have a stick in his hand.
One who repeats God’s name and recites the kalmah may not be
Allah’s devotee. He alone is a man of God who sees God in every
soul. Such a man would not be prepared to kill another. But you may
say that a coward may also pass off as a believer in God saying he
1

The Hindustan Times adds here: “There is no other reason. There are other
small things, but they could not have brought me here. If you really understand nonviolence, you will have to be non-violent throughout.”
2
This sentence is from The Hindustan Times.
3
This and the following sentence are from The Hindustan Times.
4
This sentence is from The Hindustan Times.
5
This and the following four sentences are from The Hindustan Times.

144

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

does not use the sword. Cowardice is no sign of belief in God. The
true man of God has the strength to use the sword, but will not use it
knowing that every man is the image of God.
Islam, it is said, believes in the brotherhood of man. But you will
permit me to point out that it is not the brotherhood of Mussalmans
only but it is universal brotherhood, and that brings me to the second
essential of the training for non-violence. We must not believe in nonviolence as a policy, but as an article of faith.1 The Allah of Islam is
the same as the God of Christians and the Ishwara of Hindus. Even as
there are numerous names of God in Hinduism there are as many
names of God in Islam. The names do not indicate individuality but
attributes, and little man has tried in his humble way to describe the
mighty God by giving Him attributes, though He is above all
attributes, Indescribable, inconceivable, Immeasurable. Living faith in
this God means acceptance of the brotherhood of mankind. It also
means equal respect for all religions. If Islam is dear to you, Hindusim
is dear to me and Christianity is dear to the Christians. It would be the
height of intolerance—and intolerance is a species of violence—to
believe that your religion is superior to other religions and that you
would be justified in wanting others to change over to your faith.
The third essential is the acceptance of truth and purity, for one
claiming to have an active faith in God cannot but be pure and truthful.
Now let me tell you that your appreciation of Khan Saheb’s
services and of non-violence carries all these implications if the
appreciation is genuine.
If you want to preach non-violence in India and the world at
large, you must accept my advice in the matter based on long experience. If you forsake non-violence, you will have to forsake Khan
Abdul Ghaffar Khan. He cannot go a step without your assistance.
God also helps through people by moving their hearts. I have
travelled throughout the world and seen that people do not realize and
appreciate the full implications of the non-violence creed. We have to
defend India’s wealth with non-violence. Millions of our people will
have to fully realize the implications of this creed. Non-violence is
meant for all irrespective of faith.2
1
2

This sentence is from The Hindustan Times.
This and the following paragraph are from The Hindustan Times.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

145

As votaries of non-violence we will forget violence. If Islam is
dear to you and Hindusim is dear to me, sheer logic will force you to
the conclusion that we must have equal respect for each other’s
religion.
Those who claim to lead have to live up to all the implications
and express them in their daily life. Now, you will not be the rank and
file, but you will be leaders of your people. As generals of nonviolence you need special training than ordinary people, who can at
best be soldiers.1 Your non-violence will not be of the lunatic or the
coward. It will be stronger than of one with the sword. If you can live
up to the ideal, you may be sure that no one will have any excuse for
saying that non-violence is going to emasculate you. Yours will be the
non-violence of the bravest.
Harijan, 14-5-1938, and The Hindustan Times, 5-5-1938

158. DISCUSSION WITH CONGRESS SOCIALISTS2
P ESHAWAR,

May 4, 1938
Mahatma Gandhi replied that the Socialists believing in the Congress creed
could not be excluded from the Congress on account of their socialistic ideas.
Gandhiji is reported to have pointed out that Pandit Nehru and Mr. Subhas Chandra
Bose were Socialists. So long as the Socialists accepted the Congress creed and
carried out the Congress programme he could not see there was any objection to their
being admitted into the Congress organization. This, however, was his interpretation
of the existing Congress practice. Whether different courses were warranted under
particular local conditions in the Frontier Province, he was unable to say.

The Bombay Chronicle, 6-5-1938

1

This and the following two sentences are from The Hindustan Times.
A deputation of the local Congress Socialists, consisting of 11 persons,
drew Gandhiji’s attention to a Press report that the Frontier Congress leaders intended
to exclude Congress Socialists from the Congress in view of the special
circumstances obtaining in the Frontier.
2

146

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

159. SPEECH AT EDWARD’S MISSION COLLEGE,
PESHAWAR1
May 5, 1938
Replying to the address in Hindustani, Mahama Gandhi said that his heart
rebelled against speaking in English for the sake of a few Englishmen in the audience. He took strong exception to addresses being presented in English when he
could well read Urdu and, if he felt any difficulty anywhere, he could consult Khan
Abdul Ghaffar Khan. Continuing, Gandhiji said:2

Your address is one paean of praise of me. Well, I have
never found it easy to appropriate such praise, but let me tell you
that there was no time in my life when I was less able to appropriate
such praise than I am today. For a curious sense of despondency has
possessed me and I cannot yet get over it. Well, I came here not to
make a speech, and I was told that I need not give more than five
minutes. But a sentence in your address3 compels me to devote a few
minutes more than I had anticipated. The sentence about non-violent
passive resistance at once took my memory back to Germiston in
South Africa in 19074 . A meeting of European friends was convened
to hear me speak on passive resistance, as the movement was then
known. The Chairman of the meeting there expressed practically the
same statement as you have made in the address, viz., that passive
resistance was a weapon of the weak. The reference jarred on me
and I immediately corrected the speaker. It is curious, if not
also surprising, that you should have made the same mistake after
all these years of satyagraha in India. We may be weak and
oppressed, but non-violence in not a weapon of the weak.5 It is a weapon of strongest and the bravest. Non-violence has greaterpower than
Hitler’s or Mussolini’s force.6 Violence may well be the weapon of
1
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Frontier Notes-III”. This version has been
collated with the report published in The Hindustan Times.
2
This paragraph is from The Hindustan Times.
3
Which read: “Born in a land where ahimsa was preached thousands of years
ago it was left to you, Sir, to enunciate in your own remarkble way the doctrine of
non-violent passive resistance as the most irresistible weapon in the hands of the
weak and the oppressed.”
4
This should be ‘1909’; “ Sprrvh sy Germistion”, 7-6-1909
5
The Hindustan Times reports here: “Non-violence is not a weapon of the
weak because, when a weak man uses it, love does not come into the picture.”
6
This sentence is from The Hindustan Times.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

147

the weak and the oppressed. Being strangers to non-violence nothing
else is open to them. It is, however, true that passive resistance has
been regarded as a weapon of the weak. That was why the name
‘satyagraha’ was coined in South Africa to distinguish the movement
there from passive resistance.
Passive resistance is a negative thing, and has nothing to do with
the active principle of Love. Satyagraha proceeds on the active
principle of Love which says, ‘Love those that despitefully use you. It
is easy for you to love your friends. But I say unto you, love your
enemies.’1 If satyagraha was a weapon of the weak, I should be
deceiving Khan Saheb, for no Pathan has yet confessed his weakness.
It was Khan Saheb who told me that he never felt so strong and brave
as when he, out of a free will, renounced the lathi and the rifle. If it
was not the Supreme weapon of the brave, I should certainly have
hesitated to place it before a brave community like the Pathans. It is
with that weapon that Khan Saheb can bid fair to befriend and convert
the brave Afridis and the other tribesmen. You know the Afridi does
not fear death.2 I have to make him braver, not a weakling. Otherwise
Khan Saheb will despise me.
I am glad to have had this opportunity of correcting you. For
the moment you realize it, you will enlist yourself as workers in the
cause for which Khan Saheb and I are working. That it is difficult to
carry conviction I agree. I find it difficult in spite of my conscious
practice of it for the last 50 years. But it presupposes purity of the
highest type. Infinite patience is required—even the patience of
emptying the ocean with a blade of grass. If we want complete
independence for India, it can be through non-violence alone.3
Harijan, 14-5-1938, and The Hindustan Times, 6-5-1938

160. SPEECH AT CHARSADDA4
May 6, 1938 5
I really wanted to make the acquaintance of those of whom I
had heard so much. I wanted to see with my own eyes how the Khudai
1

St. Luke, 6. 28
This and the following two sentences are from The Hindustan Times.
3
This sentence is from The Hindustan Times.
4
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Frontier Notes-IV”. The meeting was held
at 10 O’clock at night and was attended by over ten thousand people.
5
From The Hindu
2

148

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Khidmatgars live, move and work. The Khan Saheb was also keen that
I must see all these and testify to what extent they had assimilated
non-violence. That examination I am afraid cannot be carried on
during this brief tour. But let me tell you that my desire to live in your
midst has increased. To-night I am thankful that I have been able even
to come to Utmanzai and Charsadda and to see you all. Khan Saheb
and Dr. Khan Saheb I had seen much of even in Wardha, but I wanted
to see you and make your acquaintance. A great responsibility rests on
your and Khan Saheb’s shoulders. You have deliberately chosen a
name that carries mighty implications. You might have called
yourselves Servants of the people, or of the Pathans, or of Islam; but
you chose instead the name Khudai Khidmatgars—Servants of God,
i.e., Servants of humanity which includes, Hindus, Mussalmans, Christians [of the] Punjab, Gujarat and other parts of India, and also other
parts of the world. This very ambitious title implies the acceptance of
non-violence. How can a man in the name of God serve humanity by
means of the sword? It can be only done by means of a force that
God has given us and which is superior to any other force that we can
think of. If you do not understand this, you may be sure that the
world will laugh at the Khan Saheb and me as vain hypocrites. Whilst
therefore I am delighted at the sight of the Khudai Khidmatgars, I am
also seized with a kind of fright. Many people have warned me against
you, but that warning does not matter if you are true to your creed.
Remember that you outnumber volunteers in the whole of India, and
that you are more disciplined than volunteers in other parts of India.
But unless the discipline is rooted in non-violence the discipline might
prove a source of infinite mischief. I have rarely in my tours seen
more orderly and quieter meetings. I congratulate you and expressmy
gratefulness for all the affection you have showered on me. I shall
conclude with the prayer that the Frontier Pathans may make not only
India free, but teach the world, through an India made non-violently
free, the priceless lesson of non-violence.1
Harijan, 21-5-1938, and The Hindu, 7-5-1938

1

Gandhiji’s speech was translated into Pushto by Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

149

161. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
MARDAN,

May 7, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

Sushila has been keeping you informed about me. I have not
therefore worried to write to you. It has been an anxious time here.
Your analysis is good. Of course the experience was due to my
“weakness, lack of faith”.1
Let us all hope that I shall come out of the well of despair
stronger and purer. There is as yet no sign of the end of the crisis.
Darkness is still there. There is still an unaccountable dissatisfaction
with myself. Moodiness is wholly unnatural to me. it creeps over me
now and again. I suppress it by constant work. But the body does not
respond to it as readily as I want it to. But I have not lost faith. There
are signs that I shall get out of the slough. I may be deceived. I have
patience. I do not fret over the delay. If it is to be a new birth, a
regeneration all round, it must be preceded by adequate travail.
You are not to worry over my present condition. The sexual
sense is the hardest to over come in my case. It has been an incessant
struggle. It is for me a miracle how I have survived it. The one I am
engaged in may be, ought to be, the final struggle.
Love.
R OBBER
From the original: C.W. 3860. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7016

162 LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
May 7, 1938
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

What is it in the new orientation of the Gandhi Seva Sangh that
has disturbed you? I must own that I am responsible for it. I should
like you to tell me unhesitatingly what has disturbed you. If I have
erred, you know that I shall retrace my steps as soon as I discover the
error.
1

150

Vide also “Letter to Mirabehn”, 3-5-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

As to the general deterioration, I agree with you, though we may
differ as to the weak spots.
More when we meet.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1938. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

163. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
MARDAN,

May 7, 1938
CHI. AMRITLAL,

You must have got my reply. I think it would be best to use
Gokuldas’s1 money for purchasing books.
I hope Chakraiyya will not lose the weight which he has gained.
It is sad that Vijaya is not improving. If she has not come there,
write to her to come and see me in Bombay. I am also writing to her.
Please inquire about the letter which got lost.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10746

164. SPEECH AT MARDAN2
May 7, 1938 3
If what you have told me is a solemn promise, and if you can
keep it, you may be sure that we will win not only the freedom of
India but something more. When we can be ready to sacrifice any
number of men in the cause of non-violence, we can easily bid fair to
be spared the ghastly spectre of war that is now threatening Europe.
We talk of doing everything in the name of God. We call ourselves
Khudai Khidmatgars, we profess to have given up the sword, and yet if
we have not put the sword and the dagger out of our hearts, we are
sure to be disgraced and the name ‘Khudai Khidmatgar’ will be a
term of reproach.
1
2
3

Gokuldas Khimji of Mandvi, Kutch
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Frontier Notes-IV”
From The Hindu, 9-5-1938

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

151

I have not yet recovered from the shock of the story 1 I heard
this afternoon. The Sikhs from Mayar told me of the tragedy that
happened there in broad daylight. So far as I know the victims had
done nothing to provoke the ire of the assassins. The assassins did the
deed in broad daylight and bolted away without anyone trying to
apprehend them. It is worth pondering over how such a thing could
happen when we are all talking of non-violence. There were in the
village Khudai Khidmatgars and others believing in the creed of nonviolence. It was their duty to catch the culprits. It is their duty to
prevent the recurrence of the deed. It is also your duty to befriend the
bereaved and to assure the fear-stricken of your sympathy and
succour. So long as things of this kind countinue to happen in our
midst, our non-violence must be in doubt.
Harijan, 21-51938

165. SPEECH AT KALUKHAN 2
May 7, 1938 3
Your address is made up of two parts—one devoted to my praise
and the other to non-violence. The first part may be ignored for I am
sure that that is going to do good to nobody. In fact I am quite sure
that if someone offered to sing my praises for twenty-four hours, he
would get tired and I should fall fast asleep. What God may have
enabled me to do is but a repayment of debt, and he who repays a
debt deserves no praise. In fact if he fails to do so, he may be liable to
prosecution.
What interests me more is what you have said about nonviolence. Let me tell you that I should not have been able to sum up
better the characteristics of a non-violent man. But let me tell you
what you have not said in your address, and that is the implications of
non-violence. You must have heard of the riots3 I n Allahabad and
1

At Mayar, a village about three kilometres from Mardan, three Sikhs—a boy
of 11, an old man of 80 and a young man of 25—were murdered by three Pathans.
2
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Frontier Notes-IV”
3
During March 1938

152

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Lucknow. These would be impossible if there was really non-violence
amongst us. There are thousands of members on the Congress
register. If they were really non-violent, these riots would not have
occurred. But we not only failed to prevent them, but even sought the
aid of the military and the police to quell them. Some of our Congressmen argued with me that our non-violence was limited to our
dealings with the Englishmen. Then I say that non-violence was not
the weapon of the strong, but of the weak. Active non-violence of the
brave puts to flight thieves, dacoits, murderers, and prepares an army
of volunteers ready to sacrifice themselves in quelling riots, in extinguishing fires and feuds, and so on. you have said that non- violence
automatically solves unemployment. You are right, for it rules out
exploitation. The non-violent man automatically becomes a servant of
God. He should be ready to render account to God of every minute of
his time. May you all be true servants of God and true practisers of
non-violence.
Harijan, 21-5-1938

166. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
P ESHAWAR,

May 8, 1938
I hope you got my letter 1 in reply to yours on my bitter
experience. My search still continues. It gives me joy. I rejoice in the
pain that sometimes accompanies the labour. God who has never forsaken me is not going to do so now. I am therefore indifferent what
comes out of the search. But you must continue to warn me so long as
you think that I go astray in action.
Your brother-in-law’s letter is very fine. Evidently your sister
was a very superior woman—a rare type. I can understand your grief
over such a loss. But such losses are a test of our faith. Nothing but a
fixed faith that death for the good is a translation to a better state, and
for the evil a beneficent escape, can reconcile us to the mystery of
death.
Love.
BAPU
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
1

Dated May 3, 1938; vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 3-5-1938

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

153

167. SPEECH AT POLITICAL CONFERENCE, PESHAWAR1
May 8, 1938
In all your three addresses you have told me that you made a
triumphant and unique demonstration of non-violence during the
C. D. campaign, but I have to find out whether you have assimilated
non-violence with all its implications. The principal purpose of my
visit was to find out whether all that I had heard from the Khan Saheb
about the Khudai Khidmatgars was true, and I am very sorry that I
could not give all the time that was needed in order to find out the
truth. One conviction I am carrying back with me, viz., the wonderful
and affectionate allegiance of the people to the Khan Saheb as their
general. Not only the Khudai Khidmatgars but I noticed wherever I
went that every man, woman and child knew him and loved him. They
greeted him most familiarly. His touch seemed to soothe them. And
Khan Saheb was most gentle to whoever approached him. The
obedience of the Khudai Khidmatgars was unquestioned. All this has
filled me with boundless joy.
A general merits such obedience. Khan Saheb has it by right of
love unlike the ordinary general who exacts obedience through fear.
The question now is what use will Khan Saheb make of the tremendous power of which he finds himself in possession? I cannot answer
the question now. Nor can the Khan Saheb. Hence it is that, if God
wills it, I should like to revisit this wonderful Province about October,
make a prolonged stay and study in detail the working of nonviolence.
2

Harijan, 21-5-1938

168. INTERVIEW TO A PROFESSOR 3
PESHAWAR,
[Before May 9, 1938] 4
A professor of Islamia College came with a question that was troubling him
and is troubling many of the present generation—belief in God. What was the basis
1
2
3
4

154

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Frontier Notes-IV”.
Presented by Municipal and District Boards of Peshawar
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Frontier Notes-III”
Gandhiji left Peshawar in the morning on May 9.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of his belief if Gandhiji had it, as he knew he had it? What was his experience?

[ GANDHIJI:] It can never be a matter for argument. If you would
have me convince others by argument I am floored. But I can tell you
this that I am surer of His existence than of the fact that you and I are
sitting in this room. Then I can also testify that I may live without air
and water but not without Him. You may pluck out my eyes, but that
cannot kill me. You may chop off my nose, but that will not kill me.
But blast my belief in God and I am dead. You may call this a
superstition, but I confess it is a superstition that I hug, even as I used
to hug the name of Rama in my childhood when there was any cause
of danger or alarm. That was what an old nurse had taught me.1
But you think that superstition was necessary for you?

Yes, necessary to sustain me.
That is all right. May I now ask if you had anything like a prophetic vision?

I do not know what you call a vision and what you will call
prophetic. But let me give you an experience in my life. When I
announced 2 my fast of 21 days in jail I had not reasoned about it. On
retiring to bed the previous night I had no notion that I was going to
announce the next morning a fast of 21 days. But in the middle of
the night a Voice woke me up and said: ‘Go through a fast.’ ‘How
many?’ I asked. ‘21 days,’ was the answer. Now let me tell you that
my mind was unprepared for it, disinclined for it. But the thing came
to me as clearly as anything could be. Let me tell you one thing more
and I have done. Whatever striking things I have done in life I have
not done prompted by reason but prompted by the instinct, I would
say God. Take the Dandi Salt March of 1930. I had not the ghost of a
suspicion how the breach of Salt Law would work itself out. Pandit
Motilalji and other friends were fretting and did not know what I
would do; and I could tell them nothing, as I myself knew nothing
about it. But like a flash it came, and as you know it was enough to
shake the country from one end to the other. One last thing. Until the
last day I knew nothing about announcing the 6th of April 1919 as a
day of fasting and prayer. But I dreamt about it—there was no Voice
or Vision as in 1930—and I felt it was just the thing to do. In the
morning I shared it with C.R. and announced it to the country, you
know with what a wonderfully spontaneous response.3
Harijan, 14-5-1938
1

Vide “An autobiography” sub-title “ Glimpses of Religion”
On April 30, 1933; vide “ Statement on Fast”, 30-4-1933
3
Vide “ Speeh at Chowpatty, Bombay”, 6-4-1919
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

155

169. INTERVIEW TO A PROFESSOR1
P ESHAWAR,

[Before May 9, 1938] 2
[PROFESSOR:] How is it that many of the English Pacifists are talking of
defence and elaborate plans of defence?. . . May it not be possible to carry pacifism
too far? Supposing Abyssinia had simply non-resisted and said to Italy, ‘Do your
worst’, would the Italians have been ashamed and desisted from their design?
Lansbury said they would.
[ GANDHIJI:] I shall take up the Abyssinian question first. I can

answer it only in terms of active resistant non-violence. Now nonviolence is the activest force on earth, and it is my conviction that it
never fails. But if the Abyssinians had adopted the attitude of nonviolence of the strong, i.e, the non-violence which breaks to pieces but
never bends, Mussolini would have had no interest in Abyssinia. Thus
if they had simply said: ‘You are welcome to reduce us to dust or
ashes but you will not find one Abyssinian ready to co-operate with
you’, what would Mussolini have done? He did not want a desert.
Mussolini wanted submission and not defiance, and if he had met with
the quiet, dignified and non-violent defiance that I have described, he
would certainly have been obliged to retire. Of course it is open to
anyone to say that human nature has not been known to rise to such
heights. But if we have made unexpected progress in physical
sciences, why may we do less in the science of the soul?
Now about the English Pacifists. I know there are some great
and sincere men amongst them, but they are thinking in terms of
pacifism as distinguished from unadulterated non-violence. I am
essentially a non-violent man, and I believe in war bereft of every
trace of violence. An essentially non-violent man does not calculate
the consequences. The English Pacifists you are talking of calculate,
and when they speak of pacifism they do so with the mental
reservation that when pacifism fails, arms might be used. With them
not non-violence but arms are the ultimate sanction, as was the case
with Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen Points3 . No, someone has to arise in
1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Frontier Notes-III”. The Professor has not
been identified in the source.
2
Gandhiji left Peshawar on the morning of May 9.
3
Outlined by him in a speech before the U. S. Congress on January 8, 1918,
they became the basis of the armistice between Germany and the Allies and the
subsequent peace treaty signed at Versailles.

156

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

England with the living faith to say that England, whatever happens,
shall not use arms. They are a nation fully armed, and if they having
the power deliberately refuse to use arms, theirs will be the first
example of Christianity in active practice on a mass scale. That will be
a real miracle.
Harijan, 14-5-1938

170. A TELEGRAM

1

[On or before May 9, 1938] 2
TELL BOTH
FAST HAS NO MORAL BASIS. IF PEOPLE FASTED
AGAINST WRONGS, FANCIED OR REAL, AND THERE
WAS ANY
YIELDING ON ACCOUNT OF THE FAST, SOCIETY WOULD BE DISRUPTED.

Harijan, 21-5-1938

171. TELEGRAM TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
P ESHAWAR,

May 9, 1938
NANAVATI
MAGANWADI
WARDHA
YOU CAN START
ARRIVING BOMBAY

WEAVING SHED.
ELEVENTH.

AM

WELL.

LEAVING

TODAY.

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 10748

172. LETTER TO PYARELAL
May 10, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

Mahadev’s letter seems to explain everything. Resolve things
there properly and come early. I do not insist on your bringing
1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”. This was in reply to a
telegram from Salem that A. Manikkam, an “orthodox Congressman”, was on a fast
unto death and his pregnant wife had started a sympathetic fast.
2
According to Mahadev Desai the telegram from Salem was received during the
Frontier tour. Gandhiji left the Frontier Province on May 9.
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

157

Sushila. Do only what you think would be for her good and what she
herself would like. Do not unnecessarily take a responsibility on
yourself. Remember what I have said today, that is, what is at the root
of all that is happening at present.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

173. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
BOMBAY,

May 10, 1938
CHI. SUSHILA,

I had been awaiting your letter. I had it yesterday. I found
nothing in it that would do any harm if Mahadev read it. Mahadev
read all the letters. What was there in it to add fuel to the fire?
Stupid girl! You are indeed stupid. For that reason I love you all
the more. Your obstinacy does not hurt me. I will not let you remain
stupid forever. You are not a goddess, nor is Mahadev a god. The
future is bright if this illusion has been dispelled. I consider both of
you simple-hearted. The only difference is that you have not experienced lust. Mahadev has done so in full measure. He is a married
man after all. But the god of love is subtle. You were both unaware of
his attack. You needlessly blame yourself. Desire had certainly taken
possession of you. But you were not aware of it at all. For that matter
even Mahadev was not aware of it. Mahadev was not careful. But he
was not aware even of that.
Neither you nor Mahadev has given me any unhappiness. So
long as your reason does not accept something, you must never accept
it, however much it may hurt me or anybody else.
My advice is that you should now forget the past, and remaining
cheerful by doing your present duty, free my mind from anxiety. Let
me know your programme.
Dr. Gilder was here. The blood-pressure was 180/108. The
climate is lovely. We expect to go to Wardha from here on the 17th.
I return your letter to Mahadev. I shall tear up the remaining
letters. There is a churning going on in my heart. I am happy. God
158

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

alone knows what the outcome will be. Massages, etc., have been
stopped. I bathe alone.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Are you laughing? I have not revised this letter. I have torn up
all the letters.
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Dr. Sushila Nayyar

174. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS
NEW D ELHI,

May 10, 1938
The Associated Press sought the opinion of Mahatma Gandhi regarding the
terms of the settlement arrived at between the Mysore Government and the Mysore
Congress over the flag trouble, 1 announced by Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, when he
arrived here this morning by the Frontier Mail on his way to Bombay.
Mahatma Gandhi said that he fully concurred with the terms of the settlement
as he thought that it was the proper decision in the circumstances. When he was told
that some Socialists objected to Sardar Patel’s decision to allow the State flag to be
hoisted by the side of the Congess flag, Mahatma Gandhi said that their objection
was nevertheless not without reason; because they wanted to abolish the States,
which was only possible by armed revolution to which creed he did not subscribe.
When questioned as to what should be the attitude of the general public towards
the Congress flag and the Red (Socialist) flag in the case of the Congress sponsoring
the labour cause in a strike, Gandhiji thought that with him the only flag that counted
was the Congress flag. A labour union which had faith in the Congress should, in all
circumstances, work under the Congress flag. If there were many flags, he feared that a
clash was bound to occur.
1

The terms of the settlement were: (1) Recognition of Mysore Congress; (2)
declaration by the Mysore Government that it is open to the Reforms Committee to
discuss and recommend responsible Government for Mysore State; (3) four Congressmen who resigned from the Reforms Committee to be renominated with three
additional Congressmen to be selected by the State Congress; (4) the satyagraha to be
called off by the State Congress; (5) general amnesty to political prisoners and
withdrawal of all repressive orders; and (6) the flag dispute to be settled on the lines
suggested by Mahatma Gandhi, namely, that the Congress flag should be flown along
with the State flag on all ceremonial occasions. But at purely party functions of the
Congress only the National flag is to be flown.
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

159

Regarding the release of the Delhi political prisoners, Mahatma Gandhi said
that the question of their release was before him. He would do his utmost to secure it,
but at the moment he could not say as to when he would take up the matter.

The Bombay Chronicle, 11-5-1938

175. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
May 11, 1938
CHI. LILA,

I very much wanted to write to you, but how could I get the
time? I have your letter telling me about your entering your 31st year.
Little by little you are sure to achieve steadiness. You have certainly
made progress. But you have still a long way to go. You will acquire
steadiness by observing rules in all matters. I have left Pyarelal and
Sushila in Delhi. They will return in a few days. A. S. joined us at
Delhi. Kanti and Saraswati joined us at Agra. Ba will remain in Delhi
for the present.
I am all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9371. Also C.W. 6646. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

176. LETTER TO PYARELAL
May 11, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

Sushila is causing me considerable worry. I am afraid she may
break down. It will be terrible if that happens. I would not in any way
feel sorry if she were to find happiness by going away from me and
this atmosphere. Then I would feel that I had no right to keep her.
But, then, who am I? Do I know her? Or, if I know her, why am I not
in a position to explain what I see? Your profound love can save her.
Her bitter experiences here will be like medicine to her. Do not be
hasty in anything. For the sake of Sushila, stay there as long as
you must. It is possible that she has now understood a lot on her own
and is calm and cheerful. In that case you can perhaps return early.
Mahadev has left a heap of letters with you. Deal with them
there. Keep a list of the names of people to whom you write.
160

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am writing this letter on the train. Do write to me every day.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Pepers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

177. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
May 11, 1938
CHI. SUSHILA,

How are things with you? When will you calm down? The 9th of
May was auspicious for us as the 14th [of April]. 1 The 9th had a
special tranquillity. On the 14th I was very much upset. On the 9th I
was miserable but calm. How nice it would be if you too could
understand this in your heart.
Blessings form

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Dr. Sushila Nayyar

178. TELEGRAM TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
BOMBAY,

May 12, 1938
JAMNALAL BAJAJ
S IKAR
HOPE

YOUR

YOU

SHOULD

APPEAL
STAY

TO

THERE

SIKAR
TILL

PEOPLE

WILL

BE

LISTENED.

REQUIRED.

BAPU
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 196

1

For allusions to the incident on this day: vide Vol. LXVII pp. 58, 60-1, 80
and 166.
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

161

179. TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
BOMBAY,

May 12, 1938
R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
GUEST HOUSE
BANGALORE
ARRIVED
SAFE.
FRONTIER
YOU
KEEPING
WELL.
AM
LEAST.
LOVE.

VISIT
NECESSARY
USEFUL.
BOMBAY
TILL SEVENTEENTH

HOPE
AT

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3861. courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7017

180. LETTER TO MERABEHN
May 12, 1938
Your letter is most helpful. I would have called it perfect if there
had not been the usual exaltation. But I have no time to dissect your
letter. Your own experience settles me. I must change my manners.
There will be considerable response to your suggestions. I have been
daily taxing myself about my course of action. I am not yet certain
what shape the change will take.
About Lilavati I can’t recall anything of what you say. But once
I felt that I had put my arm around her neck. I asked her in the
morning. She said she had no knowledge of any touch. Nevertheless
from that day I asked her to sleep at a proper distance. Give me more
details about the incident you relate.
You will continue to make whatever suggestions may occur to
you. I must not interrupt the experiment, but there is room for
revision. My problem is: “Had the awful experience of the 14th April
anything to do with the contacts or has it any other meaning?”
Love (in great haste).

BAPU
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

162

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

181. NOTE TO D. B. KALELKAR1
[Before May 14, 1938] 2
My silence should not in any case stand between us. I have
nothing to say about Nanavati. I only wanted to know all that might
be said about him. I have organized myself in such a way that his or
anyone else’s going will not inconvenience me. It is not necessary for
Nanavati to stay here whenever I am here. When he serves you I
consider it as service to me. Nanavati is staying here to know what
village life is and to find out what part he can play in it. He is mainly
useful as a musician and when everyone leaves Segaon he would stay
on and die here. It is quite difficult to explain the usefulness of such
a man. But it is enough if, even while staying with you, he remembers
that he has to pass his life in Segaon. In this way he can retain his selfrespect and keep his word too. So I think it is his dharma to go from
here so long as you need him. But if deep down in his heart he has
lost interest in Segaon, he should unhesitatingly take his mind off
Segaon. His aim in life would then be to follow in your footsteps and
take up Hindi. This is the proper age for him to fix his aim. I have
very little use for him when I am in Segaon because for the most part
Kanu takes up the responsibility for music. At present his main job in
Segaon is to propagate weaving and to think of and experiment on
village sanitation. These two tasks are very important. The result may
not be visible today but eventually it will grow into a big tree. This
aspect may however be ignored for the present. It is good I am
observing silence, so that you can ponder over this note. Yet if you
want to discuss something I am prepared to talk. Today’s silence
leaves room for such violations.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10786

182. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
May 14, 1938
CHI. MUNNALAL,

You shall certainly know about my agony.
Mirabehn.
1
2

You may ask

The note was subsequently sent to Nanavati.
The postmark bears the date May 14, 1938.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

163

This is how you and Kanchan should live. You should not meet
alone, nor touch each other. If either of you is aroused in the presence
of the other, and if you are keen on observing brahmacharya at
present, you should stay away from each other. Don’t suppress
passion forcibly. If you desire from the depths of your heart to
observe brahmacharya, you will certainly be able to overcome your
passion. If you are inspired to observe brahmacharya merely because
it is good, it will not be enough. You may be certain that it can be
observed only if you are convinced that without it you cannot shape
your life aright.
The rest when we meet.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8576

183. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
JUHU,
May 14, 1938
CHI. VIJAYA,

I had hoped to see you in Bombay. Now that is over. You must
build up your health. You should live on butter milk, milk, rice if you
can digest it, and juicy fruits like mosambis. You need no medicine.
Mirabehn will write about my health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7080. Also C.W. 4572. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

164

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

184. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
JUHU, B OMBAY,

May 14, 1938
CHI. SHARDA,

Do come to Bombay. I am at Juhu. If you let me know,
somebody will go to the station to receive you. I shall most probaly
leave here on the 17th or the 18th.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the
Chokhawala

Gujarati original: C.W.

9995.

Courtesy:

Shardabehn

G.

185. LETTER TO PYARELAL
JUHU

May 14, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

I have received your letters. I have had Mahadev read them all.
You will learn more from Sushila’s letter. It is a good thing for me
that Sushila seems to be coming out of her stupor. A great burden will
be off my mind if she returns to her original self and devotes herself
to whatever she considers her duty.
After I had written the above, I got another letter from you. I
can bear this distance because you are with Sushila. I would not have
been able to stand it had she been alone in Delhi. I have compared her
to a tender plant and the comparison is very apt. It was not in the least
difficult for me to understand the purpose of Sushila’s letter. I have
never believed that she would deliberately resort to a lie in speech or
action. Sushila acted as if in a stupor. With the exception of going to
the toilet, every action of hers was in my view a lie. Once we accept the
state of stupor, it is unnecessary to impute to her any other fault. The
incident of that night only supports this contention. It has no other
relevance.
Sushila is unnecessarily being angry with herself. There will be
no time to write separately to her about it. Plead with her on my
behalf and console her. Is she cheerful? Does she laugh? If she does
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

165

not laugh, how can she be stupid? If she accepts the adjective I have
used for her, she must forget her unhappiness and prove her stupidity.
Do not the foolish and the wise have some common characteristics?
If your understanding of [the incidents of] the 14th in daytime and of the 9th night is different, what is there in it to make
you shudder or render you unhappy? Am I omniscient? My understanding has not always been correct. And on this occasion, I see
myself distressed and senile; so what wonder if I act like a jaundiced
man who sees everything yellow? Hence, have no fear about my being
firm. Right now, I am beginning to give more importance to the view
of the other party rather than to my own.Please therefore let me know
your interpretation in clear terms and without any fear. If I find it
acceptable, it will not take me long to change my view.
When would you prepare rotis for me? Sushila is confused.
Only you can show her the straight path. Take whatever time is
necessary to do that.
Blessings form

BAPU

[PS.]
I hope to leave here for Wardha on the 17th.
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

166

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

186. LETTER TO KHWAJA NAZIMUDDIN
BOMBAY,

May 15, 1938
DEAR KHWAJA SAHEB,

I thank you for your letter 1 of the 11th instant received yesterday. I showed it today to Subhas Babu. I must confess that it does not
satisfy my expectations. At the same time, I fully recognize the
labours given to the question by the Government. I can also appreciate their extreme caution. I am not, therefore, going to come to any
hasty decision. But before I can examine the implications of the
policy adumbrated in your letter, I should like to know the number of
prisoners that will still remain to be dealt with after the operation of
the first three clauses. And before I can come to any conclusion, it will
be absolutely necesary for me to know how the prisoners will respond
to the propositions laid down by the Government.
I can well understand from your standpoint that such a procedure may not be countenanced. But I am bound by a moral promise given to the prisoners and in pursuance thereof, if the whole
programme is to work smoothly, it is necesary for me to know their
mind. It would be a breach of promise on my part if I submitted
without demur to anything less than almost immediate and unconditional discharge.
I am sure you will not ask me for this purpose to travel to
Calcutta. I would, therefore, ask you kindly to grant permission either
to Subhas Babu or to Sarat Babu to see the prisoners as my deputies.
Of course, your request for secrecy will be strictly respected.
Subhas Babu has not seen this letter. He is engaged in the
Working Committee meeting away from where I am staying, but if he
was here, I am sure he would share the views expressed herein.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G ANDHI

The Hindustan Times, 4-10-1938; also C. W. 9922

1

Vide “Letter from Khwaja Nazimuddin”

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

167

187. LETTER TO VIJAYA GANDHI
May 15, 1938
CHI. VIJAYA,

I have your beautiful birthday letter. I pardon you for not
writing any letter till now. Last year you learnt the Gita by heart. What
will you do this year? Does Purushottam pass your pronunciation?
Finally, of course, it will have to be passed by me. He might even show
partiality towards you. After all, isn’t he your teacher? But when do
you ever cross my way so that I may test you?
All of us are just near the sea and so have a very pleasant
breeze.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

188. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
May 15, 1938
CHI. SUSHILA,

If you wish, I would take you and the children, and Manu also,
to Delhi. You may stay there as long as you like.
BAPU

[PS.]
God has given enough to Surendra. And you have an
independent hoard of your own. Moreover, boarding will be free.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1570. Courtesy: Manubehn S.
Mashruwala

168

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

189. LETTER TO PYARELAL
VISHRAM VATIKA,
JUHU,

May 15, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

You will have received my letter of yesterday. Mahadev has
been terribly hurt by your letter. He has been crying. He had already
been anguished and given to crying. Your letter has added to his
agony. However, it is just as well that you have expressed through this
letter whatever was weighting on your mind. That is the only way to
regain mental composure and to be cleansed of the kind of suspicions
and prejudices lurking there. Mahadev has not written the letter
“under pressure from me” as a last resort. Yes, the letter was the
result of his discussion with me. But it was not written under pressure.
His pen moved because he felt that his writing the letter would be
justified. All arguments were his own.
Mahadev wrote to you on his own and the letter was full of
anguish. That is why I did not allow it to go. It would have only
intensified the misery and there would have been more misunderstanding. Now he has decided to stop writing to both of you for the
time being. I have approved of this decision. You and Sushila may
write if you feel like doing so. You can even write if the absence of
Mahadev’s letters irks you. Mahadev had told Sushila that he would
write [to her] about my health. But for thetime being even that has
been stopped. In any case, I would be writing almost every day.
Hence, you would continue to get the news. This should not lead to
the conclusion that I have suggested to Mahadev not to write to you,
since the idea was Mahadev’s. I have given it my approval for the time
being. The past, except when it is essential for the present, needs to be
forgotten. I wish to discuss the past only to be certain that I have not
done any injustice either to Mahadev or to Sushila. No one has
deliberately committed mistakes. That is sufficient consolation for me.
It should be so for Mahadev and Sushila as well. Where there was no
wrong at all, I saw wrong and insisted that all of you should also see it.
I wish I had not committed such a grave sin. You can be of great help
in my quest to find out. Do not conceal the truth from me by showing
me undeserved pity. Of course I know that you will not stay on there a
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

169

moment longer than necessary and I am not therefore impatient. My
blood-pressure is not checked every day. What daily news then can I
give about my health? My own diagnosis says that my health is fine. I
sleep well. I take my walks regularly. I eat well. Perhaps mangoes are
a little difficult to digest. I do a fairly good amount of work. It does
not show any adverse effect. I lie down in the bath-tub. I get sleep.
My legs are massaged. My head and feet are massaged with ghee.
A[mtus] S[alaam] gives me nourishment. She prepares rotis with her
own hands. She is quite successful.
Kanti and Saraswati are here. Manilal and Sushila have arrived
today.
There is a letter from Nazimuddin. I cannot say it is wholly
satisfactory. I shall see what I have to do.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

190. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
VISHRAM VATIKA,
JUHU,

May 15, 1938
STUPID GIRL,

Should I dispense with the quotation marks? I shall do that if
you can send me a telegram saying that you have calmed down and
are abiding by your promise. Can you understand that there can be
stupidity tempered with knowledge? May you always have that type of
stupidity. Do suggest whatever you want with regard to my health. I
shall need to have letters from you. Write to Rajkumari, Prabha, Mira,
Kanu, A. S., etc. Now you must quickly make your life normal. More
in the letter to Pyarelal. How is Mother? Is she in good cheer?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Dr. Sushila Nayyar

170

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

191. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
JUHU,

May 16, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

I have all your letters from Bangalore. Of course, there is the
other side. But there is no rest for Mirza except through responsible
government. I shall go through the papers carefully.
I am keeping good health. Pyarelal and Sushila are in New
Delhi—19 Raja Bazar Square. Write to them. I am sending them today
three letters from Mira with instructions to forward them to you after
perusal. You will destroy them. Robbed of Mira’s hysteria, they are
sound. I am contemplating some changes. I have not yet decided
upon anything. You will make what suggestions you may like. The
despondency is there but the inner peace is coming.
Talks with J. 1 are still going on. S.2 is very patient. He is a good
listener. He may succeed where others might have failed. I would like
him to succeed.
No hasty resolution will be taken about Mysore.
Your visit to Mysore was after all a good thing. You have
gained a rich experience.
Ba is in Delhi. Amtul Salam is with me. And she is looking after me.
Love.
R OBBER

[PS.]
Expect to leave for Wardha on 17th or 18th. So write to
Wardha.
From the original: C.W. 3862. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7018

1
2

M. A. Jinnah
Subhas Chandra Bose

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

171

192. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
VISHRAM VATIKA,
JUHU (P.O. SANTACRUZ),
BOMBAY,

May 16, 1938
MY DEAR C. R.,

I have gone through the salty note. It you mean that I should
take notice of the flagrant breach, I shall do so. If you mean anything
more, please be clear. Are we breaking up by the sheer weight of our
own folly or worse? You must give yourself a moment’s leisure and
think out where we are drifting to. Don’t say you have no time. I want
to go away tomorrow or as early as I can consistently with the business
here.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 2069

193. A LETTER1
Monday [May 16, 1938] 2
The violence that I see running through speeches and writings,
the corruption and selfishness among Congressmen, and the petty
bickerings fill one with dismay. In the midst of this, we who know
must be unyielding and apply the golden rule of non co-operation.
Harijan, 21-5-1938

1
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”. The addressee has not been
identified in the source.
2
Monday prior to May 21 fell on May 16,

172

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

194. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
JUHU,

May 16, 1938
BA,

How could I expect any letter from you? There was no need for
you to write when you were with Jamnalalji. I am all right. Kanti and
Saraswati are here. Most probably they will go to Matunga. We shall
be leaving for Wardha on 17th or 18th. It would be better if you went
straight to Wardha. Devdas may perhaps go to Madras and take
Lakshmi with him. He may have some relief from heat, too. If he
should go to Dehra Dun, I feel that it would not be proper for him to
stay there for more than a day or two. Pyarelal and Sushila are there
in Delhi. Both of them or Pyarelal alone may perhaps accompany
you. However, consult Devdas and do what you like. Manilal and
Sushila also are here, and so is Rajagopalachari. He will go back to
Madras in two or three days. Kanam must be fine.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, p. 28

195. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
VISHRAM VATIKA,
JUHU,

May 16, 1938
S TUPID DAUGHTER S USHILA,

Forget your own unhappiness now and understand and share
mine. In truth you have no reason at all to feel unhappy. I am sending
Mirabehn’s three letters by this same post.1 Ignore the exaggerations,
etc., in the letters and see the love, the truth they contain. Go through
the letters patiently. Tell me what it is proper for me to do. Write to
Mirabehn if you want. I need women’s help in this matter. You can
show the letter to anyone you wish.
1

Vide “Letter to amrit Kaur”, 16-5-1938

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

173

I am quite well of course. There is nothing new to write. We
shall go to Wardha in a couple of days.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar

196. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
May 16, 1938
STUPID DAUGHTER SUSHILA,

I received Pyarelal’s letter after I had already written to you. He
writes that [you think] you have lost for ever the place you had in my
heart and that consequently you have lost your lustre. This has
disturbed me. Your place with me remains as it was. I cannot
understand why you should think otherwise. You should cast the
doubt out of your mind. The truth is that perhaps I am not the same
to you now as I was. But I have no fear. If I am true, your doubt will
be dispelled. I do have a fear that I may have unwittingly been unfair
to you. But I am not writing this to tell you of my woes. You should at
least believe this much, that you have not lost your place with me. I
should have your reply by wire.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Dr. Sushila Nayyar

197. LETTER TO PYARELAL
VISHRAM VATIKA,
JUHU,

May 16, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

There was no letter from you yesterday. It would be good if you
did not keep me without letters these days. I am now putting out of
my mind the distress of Mahadev and Sushila. It should now be
considered entirely a matter of the past. I am sending today by
book-post three letters from Mirabehn. Both you brother and sister
174

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

may peruse the letters and let me know your reaction. Is not
Mirabehn’s description similar to that of Ravana’s palace by
Tulsidas? Ravana is lying unconscious and his numerous queens are
reclining around him in various states of undress. I laughed and cried
when I read it. How could I have been affected in that way ?
Disregarding Mirabehn’s exaggeration, I was affected by what
remained in the letter and I wrote that I would change my practice.
What if the suffering witnessed on the 14th was the result of those
physical contacts? So far I have not found any clear evidence to
conclude that it could not have been so. Then have all these women
become impure by my touch ? If that is so, have I been like that from
the beginning. In that case, is the peace that some women and young
men are supposed to have found by being close to me a delusion ? If
that is the case, do I have a place in the world? Who am I to find fault
with Mahadev and Sushila? Who can say that I may not be thrusting
my own faults on them? What have you all gained from me? Is it only
disappointment? Would it be proper for me to guide you? Such
thoughts pass through my mind. I am maintaining my calm in the
midst of this turmoil. My attention is centred on you. If you remain
composed then I may regain my self-confidence. Your action will
help me only if it is natural. Or, if I find that whatever steps you take
express your sense of duty, then too I shall feel at ease. This means
that I have found the guru that I have’ been looking for. I shall
consider myself fortunate if that happens. It is my belief that
suchshould be the result of my training. I shall attain glory only if
those who are my heirs have reached higher than I. Right now I see
you, Mahadev, Sushila, etc., as occupying a loftier place. This does not
mean that now I cannot guide you in any matter at all. But it does
mean that if the experience of the 14th is indicative of my generally
diseased mind, the situation in which all of you sustained yourselves
would have reduced me to bits!
I shall not elaborate further.
If possible, decide about the time of your coming. After you
receive this letter, write to me at the Wardha address.
Today’s post has not yet arrived. I expect to hear that Sushila has
regained her calm.
Blessings from

BAPU

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

175

[PS.]
I am sending “Thought for the Day” copied from the Times of
India of today. The person who copied it is also a Sushila1 . She is the
headmistress of a high school at Rajkot.
Post Mirabehn’s letters to Rajkumari. I have received your letter. Is
Sushila so mad ? It is unbearable that she should lose her place with
me. I am awaiting your detailed letter.
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

198. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
After May 16, 1938] 2
If you take it with a smile the pain will be lessened. Of course if
you wish to make me cry you may wear the long face. I cannot put up
with your looking sullen. Is not one Pyarelal enough?
If you have read Mahadev’s letter to me you will know that I
have told Leela nothing. I have told nothing to anyone. I told only
Mirabehn that I had conveyed her complaint to both of you. What is
your fault after all? I am at fault in having accused a young man
likeMahadev and a pure girl like you. Is this not all that I can tell
anyone? Why should you make me more unhappy by being unhappy
about it? If you can bear with me, keep a cheerful face and absorb
yourself in service. If there is even a little purity and love in me,
Pyarelal will be saved and with him both of us will be saved too.
Otherwise, both of us will be ruined.
Keep this letter with you. I am afraid of somebody reading it if
it is left with me. Ultimately it has to be destroyed.
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1
2

176

Sushila Pai
Vide the preceding three items.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

199. LETTER TO PYARELAL
May 17, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

How is it there is no letter from you today? Not a day should
pass without a letter from you. At present, I am working sometimes
for ten hours a day. Let us see what happens.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI P YARELAL NAYYAR
19 R AJA BAZAR S QUARE
NEW DELHI
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

200. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
May 17, 1938
CHI. SUSHILA,

After reading Mahadev’s letter, you must neither get angry nor
abandon me. I have spared nothing in making you unhappy. I do not
regret it. Whatever I did was for your good. If you remain unhappy
there, it will be breach of promise. If you are not tired of me, both of
you should come back at once. Pyarelal’s parting from me is like
Shravana’s being snatched from his parents. I do not have so much
right over you. If I remain alive, you will be convinced one day. For
the present I shall be awaiting your letters.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Dr. Sushila Nayyar

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

177

201. TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
BOMBAY,

May 18, 1938
R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
MANORVILLE
S IMLA W
HEALTH
DEJECTION

PASSABLE.
DIMINISHING.

CAN’T

LEAVE

BEFORE

TWENTIETH.

BAPU
From the original: C. W. 3863. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 7019

202. LETTER TO PYARELAL
May 18, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

Your letter to Mahadev is shocking. It would seem of all the
people you are the most distressed. If anyone has to be distressed, it
should rightly be I. I shall put up with your absence so long as you
remain cheerful there. Otherwise it would be unbearable.
I for one feel that it will be good for you to come away. My
state of health is described in the letter to Sushila. Even from that
point of view it may be necessary for you to come. Maybe it would be
inadvisable for me to be unrestrained.
I must definitely have your reaction. How would that distress
me? You may be sure I am calm.
Mahadev’s greatest sorrow is that he has lost his place with you.
Unwittingly, he has caused you untold misery. I am persuading him.
Wipe his tears if you can.
Do not deprive me of your letter even for a day.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

178

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

203. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
May 18, 1938
STUPID DAUGHTER,

You have been proving your stupidity in every letter. Yes, I did
say that if you were tired of Segaon then I had not been entitled to
receive service from you. This could not in any way imply that you
should not come to me. It did imply that you should hasten your
return. If your mind cannot grasp such a simple thing, ask me again.
In this context let me describe to you my condition. These two days
have not passed well. Yesterday I worked for 12 hours. I was mentally
exhausted. I had a terrible backache. I slept well. I was alert again. But
the mental condition is not good. In such a situation I do feel your
absence. But how can I send for you, how can I ask you to come so
long as you do not feel drawn to this place? Would I have been able to
work so much if you had been near me? Now do you understand what
I want? But this certainly does not mean that you should come here at
once under any circumstances.
Now your second question. I accept your version of what happened on the 9th night. There is no question of your account being
incorrect. Those who see silver in a sea-shell are right at all times. But
he who knows a sea-shell will see it only as a sea-shell, will he not? Oh,
the things that sexual impulse makes us do! This does not even mean
that I am in the right and what you thought was merely imagination.
Believe me, I admit I may have been a prey to illusion; so you can
stick to your own position. Indeed it is your duty to do so. Ponder
that verse in the Bhajanavali. Only that is dharma which is followed
by the learned and practised by the saintly and by peoplefree from
attachment and hatred, and which your heart accepts as dharma. What
the learned, the saintly and people free from attachment, etc., believe
can never be acceptable to us if our heart does not accept it. I am
neither a learned man, nor a saint; nor am I free from attachment, etc.
I have only appointed myself your godfather. The words of such a
man must be rejected unless your heart and mind accept them.
Whatever you do, your position with me will always remain the same.
In no way have you fallen in my estimation.
Yes, a man’s words should be taken at their face value. But even

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

179

so, one must consider their context. That is to say, while it is necessary
to exercise discretion, we must take it that if the reasons which dictate
avoidance of physical contact are applicable to any other behaviour or
gestures, such gestures, too must be avoided. So much for the literal
interpretation. But even this much is not sufficient. To know the
meaning of words it is also necessary to know their deeper significance. When you recite the Gita every day, you know the literal
meaning of the words. But so long as you do not understand their
deeper significance, going by the literal meaning of the words would
be futile and burdensome. Does this fully answer your letter?
We shall probably leave here on the 20th. I have torn up your
letter. Mahadev does not read your letters these days. He sees what I
write. He continues to be miserable. That is in his nature. Time will do
its work. Is not Kaala1 one of the names for God?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar

204. RESOLUTION ON MYSORE SETTLEMENT2
[May 18, 1938] 3
The Working Committee has read the popular and official
versions of the recent firing that took place near Vidhuraswatham in
Mysore on an unarmed crowd. The Committee deplores the fact that
the State authorities felt called upon to resort to firing. On seeing that
the Mysore government has appointed a tribunal to inquire into the
causes that led to the firing, the Working Committee refrains from
expressing any opinion on the tragedy. But the Working Committee
thinks that H.H. the Maharaja should establish responsible government in his State so that the responsibility for law and order including
firing, whenever it is deemed necessary, will be shouldered by a
government answerable to the people. The Working Committee sends
its condolences to the members of the bereaved families and expresses
its sympathy with those who suffered injuries.
1

Time
According to The Bombay Chronicle, 19-5-1938 the resolution drafted by
Gandhiji was discussed by the Working Committe on May 18 and passed the
following day.
3
Ibid
2

180

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The Committee approves of the settlement effected by Sardar
Vallabhbhai Patel and Acharya Kripalani as between the Mysore State
and the Mysore State Congress. The Working Committee notes with
satisfaction that in furtherance of the settlement the Mysore Government have issued a communique,1 and congratulates H. H. the Maharaja and his advisers on the prompt manner in which they are
carrying out the settlement. The Working Committee hopes that the
settlement will be strictly carried out also by the Mysore State Congress.
On the question of hoisting the national flag the Working
Committee hopes that care will be taken not to do anything that may
imply any disrespect to the State flag by the State Congress or the
national flag by the State authorities.2 The final status of the national
flag will depend not upon the ability to exercise compulsion but upon
the correct conduct of Congressmen and the progressive record of
service that the Congress establishes in the country. It should further
be borne in mind that the national flag is the symbol of non-violence
and national unity to be brought about by means strictly truthful and
non-violent. It should further be borne in mind that though there is a
growing party among Congressmen who seeks the total abolition of
States as a relic of the Middle Ages, the policy of the Congress as a
whole has hitherto been and remains one of friendliness to the States
in the hope that they will recognize the signs of the times and establish
1

The communique of the Mysore Government dated May 17, stated that:
(i) The Government would recognize the Mysore State Congress provided
it co-operated with the Government in the task of constitutional reforms and carried
on its activities in a peaceful and constitutional manner.
(ii) The Government would add three new members selected by the Mysore
State Congress on the committee on constitutional reforms.
(iii) On all ceremonial occasions the Mysore flag and the flag of Indian
National Congress would be hoisted.
(iv) The Mysore State Congress would withdraw the civil disobedience and
no-tax campaigns.
(v) All the political prisoners would be released and the prohibitory orders
withdrawn.
2

The Hindu, 20-5-1938, carried the following report: “ Mahatma Gandhi has
instructed the Mysore State Congressmen to hoist first the Mysore State flag, that is,
give precedence to the Mysore flag on all ceremonial occasions when they hoist the
national flag, as a mark of their loyalty to the Ruler and in order to avoid any
conflict.”
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

181

responsible government within their borders and otherwise extend and
guard the liberty of the people under their jurisdiction.
Harijan, 21-5-1938

205. TELEGRAM TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
WARDHA,
May 19, 1938
S USHILA
21 R AJA BAZAR S QUARE
NEW DELHI
THOUGH
THE
YOU.
WOULD

STILL

BETTER.

FEEL

SOUNDARAM
RATHER

UNWORTHY

PYARELAL
HERE.
SEE

YOU

AGREES
HOWEVER

SOUNDARAM

ARE

BRING
YOU

TO

COME.

SHARDA.
CAN

SOONER

GOD

WAIT

IF

BLESS
YOU

THERE.

BAPU
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy
: Dr. Sushila Nayyar

206. LETTER TO PYARELAL
May 19, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

There are no letters from you today. maybe they have gone to
Wardha. I hope to get away from here tomorrow. Today the bloodpressure was 168/105. There is no time to write more.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI P YARELAL NAYYAR
19 R AJA BAZAR S QUARE
NEW DELHI
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

182

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

207. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1
BOMBAY,

May 20, 1938
Sardar Prithvi Singh, who has been just taken in custody by the
collector of Bombay Suburban District, is a life-sentence prisoner in
connection with what is known as the first Lahore Conspiracy Case of
1915. He served part of the sentence in the Andamans, and when as a
result of public agitation that criminal settlement was closed, Sardar
Prithvi Singh was transferred to Madras and then to Rajahmundry.
There, having grown tired of jail life, he made two attempts to
abscond. He succeeded in the second attempt in 1922, and has ever
since succeeded in eluding the police. He is a self-made man. He is a
leading revolutionary and for some time has been revising his views
on armed revolution, and ultimately decided in consultation with his
friends to surrender himself to me and be guided by me. After having
had a full conversation with him, I decided to take charge of him, and
told him that according to my view of life there could be no secrecy
and voluntary surrender to authorities was in itself a service to the
country. He recognized the force of my opinion. He came to me on
the morning of the 18th, and I wrote to the District Magistrate on the
19th, informing him that Sardar Prithvi Singh had surrendered
himself to me, and that I was about to put myself in communication
with the Government of India with a view to securing his discharge,
and that if the District Magistrate could not legally allow Sardar
Prithvi Singh to remain with me, he was at liberty to take him into
custody. The District Magistrate wrote to me to say that he had no
authority to leave him free. He himself accompanied by the Superintendent of Police arrested him today at 1 p.m. at our residence at
Juhu.2
I have been given to understand that he will be treated as an Aclass prisoner. I had asked Sardar Prithvi Singh to write an account of
his career. It is a thrilling romance. So far as I can see, he has not been
1

This was published under the title “A Fellow-pilgrim”.
Mahadev Desai in his “Weekly Letter”, published in Harijan , 28-5-1938,
commented: “Gandhiji was visibly moved as the Magistrate and the Police
Superintendent bore him away, and after dictating the statement for the press, said: ‘It
is people like these who can be true satyagrahis.’ ”
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

183

guilty of anything of which he need be ashamed. He developed
revolutionary ideas in Canada where he had migrated in his youth. He
was witness to the illegal and shameful turning away of the Coma
Gata Maru from the Canadian shore, and he and a band of Indian
settlers in Canada decided to return to India and lead a revolution.
After absconding he has evidently made himself useful to the nation
in various ways. He is very powerfully built Rajput. Five months
of hunger-strike in the Andamans and injuries received, whether in
scuffles with the police or in escaping from custody, have left no
visible trace of weakness on his body. He became a first-class gymnastics teacher and studied the science of physical culture and the art
of massage, and gave training in physical culture in many schools.
To seek the relief of the political prisoners has come to me in
the later years of my life as a God-sent mission. To strive for the early
discharge of Sardar Prithvi Singh is the latest addition to this mission.
He tells me that he is endeavouring to examine the method of nonviolence for the deliverance of the country. He says that many of his
past revolutionary companions are thinking along these lines. He has
no other aim in life but the freedom of India. I was so much taken up
by the sincerity with which he talked to me that I had no difficulty in
taking his word at its face value, and I should love to have men like
him as fellow-pilgrims in the pilgrimage to the temple of freedom,
Harijan, 28-5-1938

208. INTERVIEW TO JAMES A. MILLS

1

JUHU,

[May 20, 1938] 2
I hope to live to see India united and independent. When that
day comes I hope to carry out the long-cherished wish of visiting
America.
The Hindu, 23-5-1938

1
Special correspondent of the Associated Press of America, interviewed
Gandhiji in Juhu just before his departure for Wardha on May 20.
2
Ibid

184

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

209. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
S EGAON (WARDHA),

May 21, 1938
MY DEAR C. R.,

I had two hours and a half with friend Jinnah yesterday. The
talk was cordial but not hopeful, yet not without hope. I must not
enter into the details of the conversation, but he complained bitterly of
Hindi having been imposed in particular areas of Madras in primary
schools. What is exactly the position? Are Mussalman boys affected?
Please send me as early a reply as possible and one that I could
publicly use.
I had a long chat with Jawaharlal about the Communist party. I
think we understand each other better than before on this particular
question. He says [in] the Communist Party’s programme, there is no
violence, there is no secrecy. Why should it [be] banned therefore as
such? If any communist or party resorts to violence openly or
secretly or incites to violence they must be dealt with not because of
allegiance to a particular party, but because of violence. Thus the
author of the writing that you showed me can clearly be dealt with
under law, not because there is a ban on the Communist [Party] but
because the writing itself has a criminal taint. Have you anything
against this argument? If the ban is lifted, what will happen?
I hope you have received the official reply from Subhas. It
enables you to deal with your correspondent.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat; G.N. 2070

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

185

210. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

May 21, 1938
DEAR FRIEND,

Sardar Prithvi Singh is an old revolutionary who, belonging to a
party that believed in armed revolution, was one of the odd hundred
Indians, who being enraged over the treatment meted out to the
passengers of the Kamagata Maru who vainly sought legal landing on
the Canadian shore, took their passage to India with the avowed
purpose, I believe, of causing trouble. Sardar Prithvi Singh was tried
and sentenced to 10 years’ imprisonment. He was then tried in what is
known as the first Lahore Conspiracy case of 1915 and was sentenced
to transportation for life, and was sent to the Andamans. When the
penal settlement was broken up, he, with many other prisoners was
transferred to Madras and thence to Rajahmundry. On the way he
absconded — this was in 1922—and successfully evaded capture. All
these years of hiding he passed in studying the science of physical
culture, and was responsible for training hundreds of youths. But this
life gave him no satisfaction. He fell in the company of those who
believe in the non-violent method. He seems to have developed faith
in non-violence. On the 18th instant, he surrendered himself to me,
and put himself under my guidance. I told him that I would love to
keep him with me, watch him, and engage him in constructive national
activity if the Government left him free. But I told him also that I
could not keep him without informing the Government of what I was
doing. On the 19th instant, therefore, I wrote to the Collector of the
Suburban District in Bombay (for I was living in Juhu) telling him
that if he had no authority to let Sardar Prithvi Singh remain with me,
the Sardar was ready to be arrested. Yesterday the District Magistrate
came to Juhu and arrested Sardar Prithvi Singh and lodged him in
Thana Jail as an “ A” class prisoner.1
I have given only the bare outline of Sardar Prithvi Singh’s
activities. I feel that persons like Sardar Prithvi Singh should be given
an opportunity of leading a useful life, instead of being kept in
custody, especially when some person like me, known to the Government, is willing to keep them, and hold himself responsible for their
1

186

Vide “Statement to the Press”, 20-5-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

peaceful conduct. I wonder if my presentation makes any appeal to
you. If it does I would urge you to make my way smooth, and restore
Sardar Prithvi Singh to me. I may tell you that my having interested
myself in the discharge of political prisoners has brought me in touch
with many revolutionaries. I entertained high hopes of their conversion, especially if I received hearty co-operation from the authorities
concerned.
I do not know exactly whom or which department, or which
provincial government I should properly approach. But I felt that
aswe have come to know each other, and there is a friendly contact
between us, I would approach you, the fountainhead.1
May I expect an early reply? I know how busy you are, but
perhaps you realize the importance of the matter and will therefore
forgive me for the trouble I am giving you.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm: Linlithgow Papers. Courtesy: National Archives of India

211. LETTER TO DR. N. B. KHARE
S EGAON via WARDHA,

May 21, 1938
2

DEAR DR. KHARE ,

Though you are in trouble 3 I know you will not neglect the
accompanying important newspaper article. As it professes to be
authoritative it demands a reply. Will you kindly inquire and send a
detailed reply in respect of each count in the indictment? How I wish
Government will guide the forthcoming deliberations.4 It requires
1
In his letter of June 18, the Viceroy had said he was touched by the terms in
which Gandhiji had pleaded Prithvi Singh’s case, but that records revealed that Prithvi
Singh had been guilty of crimes of exceptional violence, aggravated by deceit, and he
could not properly ask the Governor to press his Ministers to release him.
2
Then premier of the Central Provinces
3
In the Central Provinces serious differences had arisen among the Ministers
and three Ministers had resigned.
4
The reference is to the meeting of the C. P. Congress Assembly Party
scheduled to be held at Pachmarhi on May 24, called by the Parliamentary Committee
“to compose the differences that had arisen among the Ministers and investigate
certain charges that had been brought to the notice of the Working Committee”.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

187

bravery of a high type to insist upon cleaning one’s own house and
putting it in order.
May I expect an early reply to the indictments? At the time of
sending it, please return the newspaper.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI

[PS.]
Newspaper separately posted.
Gandhi-Khare Papers, file No. 107, P. I. Courtesy : National Archives of India.

212. LETTER TO PYARELAL
May 21, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

Yesterday I did not dictate any letter. I am writing this on the
train. My health can be said to be good. I am under mental tension.
What does Prakash intend doing? What does Ba propose doing? Will
Devdas be going to Rajaji or not? Tell Devdas that it was unnecessary
to send the long telegram. How is Sushila?
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI P YARELAL
19 R AJA BAZAR S QUARE
NEW DELHI
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

188

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

213. LETTER TO PYARELAL
May 21, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

I have sent off a postcard today after paying late fee. I got your
note after I reached here.
I am feeling quite well. I had my weight taken. It was 106 lbs. It
is not bad.
It is quite hot here, though it is not unbearable. Do not be slack
in writing letters.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

214. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON,

May 22, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

A letter addressed to me at Calcutta in which you wrote about a
young graduate, went from place to place and was received only
yesterday. Your letter written on the train was duly received and was
easily readable. And now has come yours of 19th.
I feel better and rested after reaching Segaon. I want mental rest.
The mind has been overworked. I can take that rest only here, so I
find from experience.
The heat is no doubt trying. But I feel the joy of being a cosharer with the other inmates. I propose presently to take daily silence
for a few hours.
My weight was found to be 106 yesterday—not much of a loss
for retaining the health I was able to keep.
Yes, the Mysore communique 1 was distinctly good. You must
have liked the W. C. resolution2 . It was good you went to Mysore.
1
2

Vide “Resolution on Mysore Settlement”, 18-5-1938
Ibid

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

189

I shall gladly revise what you may send.
What do you say to my exploit about Prithvi Singh?
I must send you a copy of what happened between Jinnah and
me. He is a very tough customer. If the other members of the League
are of the same type a settlement is an impossibility. But there is a way
out for a unilateral undertaking. Settlements cannot be unilateral. I do
not know that a unilateral undertaking will not be in the prevailing
atmosphere a better mode of handling the situation. But every attempt
must be made to arrive at a mutual understanding.
I have not yet written to the Mirza. I shall do so in a day or two.
As for myself you are right. You and others can help me only
through prayer. I feel that the cloud is lifting. What is happening to
make me feel easy, I do not know. And why should I worry? God’s
ways are mysterious.
I had an hour’s good chat with Jawaharlal on 19th. Your
diagnosis is correct. The European visit will do him good. Of course
he is at heart religious, though he denounces religion. He reads the
Gita. He sports a Buddha head in his bedroom. Whatever he does and
wherever he is, it is well with him.
Did I ever tell you that I did not deliver your letter to Jinnah? I
did not like it. It should have made no mention of me but should have
confined itselt to the question itself. But it does not matter.
How are you doing? What about the eczema? And the throat?
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3629. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6438

215. LETTER TO PYARELAL
May 22, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

Have you and Sushila decided not to write to me? I have written
to you that your letters are a necessity for me. You must at least do
this much.
I may say I am getting along well. Pass on the enclosed letters.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

190

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

216. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR1
S EGAON,

May 23, 1938
I have your wire. I await letter. Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3864. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7020

217. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
May 23, 1938
CHI. JAMNALAL,

There is a wire from Gosibehn. She has lost her mother. I have
sent a wire. You may send a wire or write a letter.
I hope Rajendra Babu is cheerful. Please let me know the
temperature if anybody is coming this way.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a Photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2991

218. LETTER TO SHANTIKUMAR N. MORARJEE
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

May 23, 1938
CHI. SHANTIKUMAR,

I could reach your letter only today. May you live long and
grow in your devotion to duty day by day.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4727. Courtesy : Shantikumar N.
Morarjee

1

This is in the form of a postscript to Mirabehn’s letter to the addressee.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

191

219. LETTER TO PYARELAL
May 23, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

I have your letter. I do not find in it any contempt for me. What
you have done is scientific analysis. I agree with many of the points. I
shall enclose with this the article I had written. You can tear it up after
having Devdas read it. Nothing has been published. If I write anything
afresh, I shall circulate it among friends. I am still not convinced that
there is anything wrong about discussing such matters. To my knowledge, such discussions have been beneficial so far. I am not aware of
the harm done. There will be a great deal of dirty discus-sions. How
can filth be removed unless it is brought out through discussions? All
this is unnecessary today. I submitted to Mahadev, Raja, etc., because I
am a little scared of them myself. We shall see about it when I have
acquired confidence in myself.
Does it not follow from your letter that it is not right that I
should forbid others from taking the liberties I permit myself? I am
not perturbed. I have almost regained my original calm. I am thinking
impartially about everything, including the bitter experience of the
14th.
Can you indicate the date of your return
Blessing from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

220. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
S EGAON,

May 23, 1938
CHI. SUSHILA,

I have received two of your envelopes together. Mahadev
appears calm. But if his calm is genuine, he will not be distressed by
your letters. I send him all your letters.
You certainly are stupid, but certainly not unfortunate and
192

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

undeserving. And why unfortunate? Have you lost my love? Have you
lost Mahadev’s love? Why undeserving? What have you done to make
you undeserving? You certainly are stupid because you could not
understand some simple things about the world. But it is I who make
you stupid, What if I should be seeing my stupidity in you?
Now about the 9th night. Why are you suffering so much? Can
it not be that my affliction is the result of my latent lust? Maybe it is
not. Can it not be that it is the result of my delusions? I have not
claimed divinity. If you can be in the wrong, why can I not be in the
wrong too? Both are a matter of imagination, are they not? You have
not experienced anything and I cannot know your heart. God alone is
the ruler of the hearts of both of us. He alone knows our hearts. That
is why as your godfather I command you to regard your conduct as
having been absolutely innocent and to forget your anguish. My
misconceptions are the cause of your anguish. Forget it; that you
forgive me I can hardly ask.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Dr. Sushila Nayyar

221. NOTE TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
[1.30 p. m. Monday, May 23, 1938] 1
You have not to say anything. There is no need to take Jajuji.
You have to go and sit there 2 . You should join in when you can
contribute something. Otherwise remain silent. I have no doubt that it
is your duty to go there. If the corruption cannot be removed you will
have to leave the Provincial Committee3 .
From a photostat of the Hindi : G. N. 2992

1

Supplied by the addressee in Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, “How NonViolence Works”
2
At the meeting of the C. P. Congress Assembly Party which was to be held at
Pachmarhi on May 24; vide footnote 3, “Letter to Dr. N. B. Khare”, 21-5-1938
3
Nagpur Provincial Congress Committee, of which the addressee was President.
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

193

222. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
S EGAON,

May 24, 1938
CHI. VIJAYA,

So, learn a lesson now, that wherever we are we must not eat
food that does not agree with us. When will you build up your health
and be your old self again? If you prefer Amritlal to look after you,
then keep him and send A. S. back. Anyhow, get well quickly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 7084. Also C. W. 4576. Courtesy :
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

223. LETTER TO PYARELAL
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

May 24, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

I wrote to you at considerable length yesterday. You have asked
in your letter to Kanu as to what is being decided about you. He will
no doubt write. I can only say that all that we are thinking of is your
return. When will you be coming?
And what is there to, think about? You had said three weeks at
least. I had thought it would be three weeks at the most. Deep within
me I had felt that you yourself would not be able to stay away for
three weeks. If you do not fix another date, I shall await your arrival
on the 30th. Counting from the 9th, would not three weeks be over on
the 30th?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

194

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

224. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

May 24, 1938
CHI. SUSHILA,

You will have received my letter of yesterday. Ba is enquiring
when you will be coming back. Others are also enquiring, so am I.
Whatever work you are doing there you can do here as well. You will
be serving me besides. Vijaya is quite ill. So is Vasumati. Bhansali had
seven glands taken out. You can certainly help in all these cases. Now
you have been away sufficiently long. Think over it and write to me.
Do you or do you not wish to come?
Whatever the case, you must cease your lamentations.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
C. S. had come today. The blood-pressure was 155/95 at
10 o’clock.
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar

225. LETTER TO PYARELAL
S EVAGRAM, W ARDHA

May 25, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

I have your letter. I understand from Mahadev’s letter that you
have not passed on some of my letters to Sushila. Now I know why
some letters have remained unanswered. But I think you were right in
withholding the letters. Only you can imagine Sushila’s state of mind.
It seems she is still suffering unnecessarily. Will she ever get over her
suffering? What can I do from here to relieve her distress? Is it possible that she may recover if you bring her here even for a few days?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

195

226. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
S EVAGRAM, W ARDHA,

May 25, 1938
STUPID DAUGHTER,

When will your sorrow end? In expressing your sorrow, you use
words which pierce me like arrows. Have I ever worked for 12 hours
in your presence?
Are you receiving Mahadev’s letters now? Did I write to you
that Mahadev had resolved to stop writing to you?
In today’s letter you have reached the limit of your stupidity.
Where is it laid down that if you see silver in a sea-shell once you will
do so every time. And only yesterday I wrote that if something was
possible in your case, it would be possible, in my case too. Could it
not be that I saw silver in a sea-shell?
You will have to withdraw the adjective “undeserving”. Would
you be undeserving when I considered you so or would you believe it
of yourself on your own? Do you wish to abandon me altogether by
saying that? Now I am unable to bear your sadness because there is no
cause for it at all. Can even Pyarelal not tell you such a simple thing?
Forget your sorrow, if only for my sake. What can I do to comfort
you? Granted that you have made me unhappy. But have I made you
any less unhappy? Who should blame whom? Why should we not
leave it to God to decide?
When shall I have a comforting letter from you? Rajkumari’s
letter is enclosed. Let Devdas also read it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar

196

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

227. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

May 26, 1938
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL

How very business-like and prompt you are ! I am so glad you
were able to go into the Gurgaon D. C. C.’s affairs. I hope your
advice will be accepted by both parties, as it should be.
Today I have your letter about my notes of my talks with
Jinnah.1 I think my second talk with him was inevitable. I hope it
won’t do any harm. If you have time I would like you to give me a
line about Jal after you have seen him. How I wish you will give
yourself rest during your European tour and not rush as you have
been doing here all the time.
Love.
BAPU
A Bunch of Old Letters, p. 279

228. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
May 26, 1938
CHI. VIJAYA,

I learnt about your fever. Don’t be disheartened. Every thing
will be all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 7081. Also C. W. 4573. Courtesy :
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

1

Vide “Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru”, 30-4-1938

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

197

229. LETTER TO PYARELAL
S EVAGRAM, W ARDHA,

May 26, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

There is no letter from you today.
I was perturbed by Sushila’s letter of yesterday. How can she be
consoled? She seems to be hurt all the more by my letters. It seems
that my letters, instead of healing her wounds, are keeping them raw.
Why can you not console her? I am sure you understand my state of
mind. As for the night of the 9th I have explained that I fully agree
with what Sushila says. I have indeed said that her impression might
not have been correct. By the same token, I also believe that my
impression might not have been correct either. I am even going a step
further. Sushila is witness to her purity of mind. I cannot even claim
purity of mind. I am willing to admit that I might have had a dirty
mind. Can it not be that my diseased mind might have aroused me
and I might have seen the reflection of my own morbidity in that
innocent girl and in her action? Why should Sushila feel unhappy
when all this is possible? Why should she feel miserable on account of
my morbidity, my delusion and my imperfection? Why should
Sushila go on feeling unhappy in spite of my acceptance of all these
possibilities? I am not accusing her of anything. If you are convinced
by my argument, try to pacify Sushila in your own words and in your
own way. I do not wish that she should be calm for my sake. I can be
calm only if her mind accepts that there is no reason at all to feel
perturbed. I have somehow started feeling that in all these incidents I
alone have played the role of Satan and by imputing guilt to an
innocent act have caused untold misery to Sushila, to Mahadev and
even to you. Thus, while on the one hand I am beginning to feel calm
under the intoxication of work, on the other hand, whenever there is
free time, I keep analysing the incidents of the day of the 14th of
April and the night of the 9th. I have found no clue so far. I do not
know if I shallfind it at all. As Rajkumari says my faith in God is
being tested. If Sushila cannot be pacified at all, I can see that it will
be a terrible thing for me. But if she cannot be pacified what will you

198

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

do? What will poor Sushila do? As for me, I shall reap what I have
sown.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
You may use this if you really think it is proper. If I cannot
reduce Sushila’s misery, let me at least not add to it?
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

230. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
May 26, 1938
DEAR DAUGHTER,

1

I am well. Sharda is looking after me well. Now you have to
keep Vijaya there. Her temperature should come down.
I expect you have made proper arrangements for your food.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G. N. 399

231. LETTER TO SARASWATI
S EGAON,

[After May 26, 1938] 2
CHI. SARASWATI,

I am glad I got your letter at least. Keep on writing thus.
You have not been tested. You had once said ‘no’, but there is
no harm if you wish to marry now. Your earlier decision was immature.I cannot understand the resentment of your uncle and Mother.
What a cunning girl you are! Kanti was sent there for a month
and now you ask for two. Don’t do so. Don’t keep Kanti for more
than a month.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 6153
1

This is in Urdu.
From the contents it appears that this letter was written during the period of
about a month that the addressee and Kantilal Gandhi had spent at Trivandrum. They
had left Wardha for Trivandrum an May 26, 1938; vide also “Letter to Prabhavati”,
27-5-1938 and “Letter to Prabhavati”, 20-6-1938
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

199

232. LETTER TO KHWAJA NAZIMUDDIN
MAGANWADI, W ARDHA,

May 27, 1938
DEAR KHWAJA SAHEB,

I thank you for your exhaustive reply of the 24th instant. 1
Evidently my position has been misunderstood. I do not wish to
suggest that my judgment or that of the Congress is to be made subservient to the opinion of the convicts, but before I could come to a
final judgment, it would be necessary for me in the interest of the
common cause itself to sound the prisoners’ mind. If I had not,
subject to confirmation after an examination of details, come to the
preliminary conclusion that the solution suggested by the Bengal
Government might be worthy of acceptance, I could not have thought
of any interview with the prisoners. My idea is, after deeper examination of the solution, to convince the prisoners of the desira-bility of
its acceptance. Before, therefore, I can finally accept the solution
suggested, I hold it to be necessary to take the prisoners into confidence. I hope that you will agree with this opinion, for the sake, as I
have already said, of the common purpose, viz., to ensure peace so far
as this ticklish question of prisoners’ release is concerned.
I take it that the question of detenus has been satisfactorily
settled. I would appreciate a line as to how the matter stands.
yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Hindustan Times, 4-10-1938; also C. W. 9925

1

The addressee in his letter had said that Gandhiji’s suggestion that the
proposals for release of political prisoners and detenus should first be discussed with
the convicts would promote misunderstanding both among the prisoners and the
public.

200

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

233. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

May 27, 1938
CHI. PRABHA,

Kanti, Kanu and I wrote to you around the 15th. How are we to
blame if you didn’t get the letters?
Please continue to write to me. I am all right. A meeting is going
on here just now. Kanti and Saraswati left for Trivandrum yesterday.
Ba arrived from Delhi yesterday. The rest, after I hear from you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a Photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 3514

234. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
S EVAGRAM,

May 27, 1938
CHI. VIJAYA,

What reply did you give Vinoba? Where did you catch the
illness? But what has happened has happened. Now get well soon and
return here. We shall forget the past.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 7082. Also C. W. 4574. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

235. LETTER TO PYARELAL
S EVAGRAM, W ARDHA,

May 27, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

There has been no post from you yesterday and today. There
are only three days before the 30th. I gather from Ba’s broken
sentences that you are planning to run away somewhere. I cannot
believe it. But if you want to throw pepper into a raw wound you will
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

201

do that too. Think of it if you can. Is not my prestige in your hands?
You will have received my letter of yesterday. My mind at
present is inclined in that direction. I am back in the same state of
mind as I was in on the 14th. If that conclusion is correct, have I not
been like the guilty person arraigning the policemen? Can you be of
some help in this as well? I shall feel greatly relieved if Sushila’s
agitation subsides.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

236. LETTER TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
[About May 27, 1938] 1
DEAR SUBHAS BABU,

This is Shri Dayal Singh. He says he is in search of national
service. I have told him I have . . . 2
From a copy: C. W. 4575. Courtesy: Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

237. FOREWORD TO “ BASIC NATIONAL EDUCATION”
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

May 28, 1938
The fact that the first one thousand copies of this pamphlet have
been sold out shows that what Dr. Zakir Husain and his committee
have called Basic National Education is exciting fair interest in India
and outside. A more correct though much less attractive description
would be Rural National Education through village handicrafts.
‘Rural’ excludes the so-called higher or English education.‘National’
at present connotes truth and non-violence. And ‘through village
handicrafts’ means that the framers of the scheme expect the teachers
to educate village children in their villages so as to draw out all their
faculties through some selected village handicrafts in an atmosphere
free from superimposed restrictions and interference. Thus considered, the scheme is a revolution in the education of village children.
It is in no sense an importation from the West. If the reader bears this
1
2

202

This is written on the reverse of the preceding item.
The letter is incomplete.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

fact in mind he will be better able to follow the scheme to the preparation of which some of the best educationists have given their undivided attention.
M. K. GANDHI
Basic National Education

238. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
May 28, 1938
CHI. VIJAYA,

Today I am sending A.S. You must carefully follow all the
instructions of the doctor. It is your duty to get back your health
quickly. I have written today to Naranbhai and Manubhai.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 7085. Also C. W. 4577. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

239. LETTER TO PYARELAL
S EVAGRAM, W ARDHA,

May 28, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

No letters from you for three days! I do not like it. You must be
receiving my letters every day. The absence of your letters may also
mean that both of you, brother and sister, will be arriving here on the
30th. In that case I shall forget the absence of your letters. You have
sent all the luggage with Ba. That is an additional cause of worry.
Have both of you deserted me? If the implication is as terrible as that,
I have explained in my two previous letters what that would mean to
me. Maybe I deserve only that! Hence, I am not in a position to write
anything more this time. If you are still in Delhi when this letter
reaches there and if you have not written any letters in the meantime,
send me a telegram immediately. I shall await it on Monday.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

203

240. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
May 28, 1938
CHI. A. S.,

I am comfortable. Vijaya has to stay there as long as the doctor
does not allow her to move. If this is more than six days, I shall call
you back.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
There is no reply from Jinnah.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 659

241. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
[After May 28, 1938] 1
CHI. A. S.,

I have your letter. You had better not damage your health.
Bring Vijaya only when the doctor permits. You may come over if
someone can stay there for a few hours. Vijaya should be given
butter-milk only if she feels hungry. Bhansalibhai can travel by car.
So when Ba comes here, you may put him in the car or bring him in
the car.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 631

242. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
May 29, 1938
CHI. VIJAYA,

I hope you are better today. I intend to replace A. S. tomorrow.
I am thinking of sending Lilavati. If you have any suggestion to
make, let me know.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 7086. Also C.W. 4578. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi
1

204

Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

243. LETTER TO ANNAPURNA
S EGAON,

May 29, 1938
CHI. ANNAPURNA,

I have your letter.You don’t mention how many years you have
completed. How can I say, therefore, how old you have grown?I got
your gift. Today I am wearing the kuchchha 1 made from your khadi.
There is still room for improvement in your handwriting, though, of
course, you have tried to write with greater care.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 9424.

244. LETTER TO PYARELAL
May 29, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

Give the enclosed letter to Sushila if you think it proper. It will
give you an idea of my present state. It seems by entering into
Sushila’s life I have embittered it at least for the time being. How
should I punish myself for it?
I have not shown your letter to Mahadev. I have understood
your point. So far, I should say, I have not made any changes yet. The
conflict is still going on. I like Mirabehn’s conclusion better than that
of all of you. That is exactly what Sushila’s great anguish suggests. I
attributed guilt where there was none. Does this not point to my own
morbid state of mind? Mirabehn is not even aware of that incident.
Yet she has warned me as gently as she could. The direct implication
of Sushila’s anguish is this: “What sort of a father are you that you
saw guilt in an innocent girl?” Even by deserting me she gives me the
same warning. She is of course taking the whole responsibility on
herself. But if I let her do it, would it not be the limit of my wickedness? If this conclusion is correct, would I not be doing penance by
not taking service from any woman? This question is before me in
spite of myself. I am perplexed. I cannot see my way. I cannot make
up my mind. Who can help me in this matter? Hence I am praying to
1

An article of underwear.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

205

God that He may either guide me or take me away.
I have taken note of your programme. Even for the sakes of
Prakash, Satya and Sushila, stay there as long as necessary. Do not
desert me altogether. Ba’s remarks have scared me.
I have given vent to the fire that burns me. However, do not
think that I am in the least disturbed. I continue working as much as I
can. All the things have been safely received. What tyranny? Why did
you join in it?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

245. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
S EVAGRAM, W ARDHA,

May 29, 1938
CHI. SUSHILA,

I received your two letters together. For three days I talked to
you only through Pyarelal. I do not know whether you have seen
those letters or not. Be that as it may. I am picking up the courage to
write to you today.
You have written: “When I have the faith that you understand
me and I too understand myself, the period of my separation will also
end.” When will you have the faith that I understand you? When will
you understand yourself? When you understand yourself you will
have attained to the farthest reaches of knowledge. Then, instead of
your coming to me, the whole world will come to you. In short, I have
lost you. You are not an undeserving daughter. What trouble have you
given me? I have not had such a thought even in my dreams. I have
already been proved an undeserving father. Have I not troubled you
enough? Am I not the one who saw guilt in your innocent act? I had
lost you at that very moment. I had even told you so that day. I am
reaping as I sowed. You have returned everything. Some of those
things were meant solely for you. The microscope, etc., were not
bought for me. They were bought only for you. Permit me to return
those things to you if you can accept them.
206

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

What else should I write? I do not deserve even a letter from
you. I shall of course feel happy if you write.
I could not do you any good, but God will.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar

246 LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
May 29, 1938
DEAR DAUGHTER,

1

The question of sending Lilavati arises only if Vijaya has to stay
there long. If she is released tomorrow, nothing need be done.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 400.

247. LETTER TO PYARELAL
S EVAGRAM, W ARDHA,

May 30, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

You will have received the letter I wrote you yesterday. It seems
I forgot to mention that I had not shown your letter to Mahadev.
I would wish this to be my last letter concerning the
Sushila-Mahadev episode. So far as I am concerned, the conclusion I
have come to from the facts that have come to me is final.
Sushila’s firmness has opened my eyes. I thrust my suspicion
on Mahadev. Only what Mahadev said to me on the 14th was correct.
Whatever he wrote and said since then has been done merely under
my influence. Hence, I must treat it as cancelled. In the process, the
innocence of both of them comes out clear before me. My love was
full of suspicion. That is why I saw pure gold as brass. I attributed my
morbid tendencies to both of them. It is my cussedness which is the
cause of Sushila’s tortured state of mind. I have now got to look into
the source of this cussedness. The fact that Sushila has abandoned me
because she feels that she is undeserving is due to her determination
1

This is in Urdu.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

207

not to see any cussedness in me. The result is of course good. I do not
consider myself worthy even to touch Sushila. But would I thereby
forget the anguish I have caused her? How can I expiate for
maligning Mahadev? Did I not do the same with you in relation to
Yoga? Your firm stand conquered me. I shall handle Mahadev. He
cannot abandon me at all. When you could not abandon me, how can
Mahadev do so?
You have been looking after Sushila. Bring her back into line.
Once your affairs are settled there you have got to come here. If
you can give me a firm assurance about your coming, I can patiently
wait.
Now about me. If I have caused anguish to Sushila even
unknowingly, where do I have the right to serve women or be served
by them? I cannot expiate for it by fasting. I cannot do it by suffering
in any other way. My expiation can only be in one form and that to
avoid the touch of women altogether and serve them from a distance
in whatever way I can. In no sense have I been a brahmachari of my
definition. I must make this known to my colleagues and do the
necessary sadhana to approximate to my definition.
I do not know if my cussedness has gone that far. I am trying to
carry on an impartial search in that direction. If it results in
something, I shall inform you.
Neither you nor Sushila need be disturbed on reading this. I am
certainly not perturbed. I am trying to understand myself in the light
of the Gita. I am not troubled by my cussedness. I have not deliberately cultivated it. I was not aware of the stench I was carrying. But
when Sushila’s fragrance entered my nostrils I thought it was a stench.
Such a feeling cannot develop in a day. The root must be lying deep
somewhere. Who can unravel this tangle except God? He alone can
pull us out of trouble. He will show me the way.
If Sushila can benefit by reading this letter, let her read it.
Otherwise there is no need at all to show it to her.
I have already written to Mahadev something to this effect in the
morning. I have said the same thing to him in a clear manner.
I do wish you would not feel upset. Nothing is to be gained by
feeling upset at this time of trouble.
I am well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

208

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

248. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
May 30, 1938
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

I shall make no change in your time-table now. Talk less.
I shall release you from Sharda’s tuition. I shall protect you.
You have given me good warning.
Your food charges may well be met here. What you spend on
books is too much. It would be good if you received books from
home. Are you not satisfied with whatever books we have? Mahadev
also has many books. You can look at them.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 4292.

249. CABLE TO AGATHA HARRISON1
WARDHA,

[May 31, 1938] 2
AGATHA HARRISON
2400 BATTERSEA
2 C RANBOURNE C OURT
ALBERT BRIDGE R D., S. W. 1
BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 1501.

250. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
May 31, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

I read your letter. Despatch my letter. I understand what you
say. I have not failed to understand. Let me follow my own way for
the present. I made my attitude clear only when I made up my mind.
“One who has had the good fortune to see Rama has won all the three
worlds.” I see in this the boundless compassion of the Lord.
1

This was in reply to the addressee’s cable which read: “Is rumour you
contemplate visit here shortly correct? Cable.”
2
On the addressee’s cable Amrit Kaur has noted: “Sent Tuesday, May
31, 1938, 7.30.”
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

209

“One who has had the good fortune to see Rama has won all the three
worlds.” I see in this the boundless compassion of the Lord.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 11596.

251. LETTER TO PYARELAL
May 31, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

I have your letter. After writing to you yesterday, I think I can
see my way clear.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI P YARELAL NAYYAR
19 R AJA BAZAR S QUARE
NEW DELHI
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

252. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
S EVAGRAM, W ARDHA,

June 1, 1938
CHI. SUSHILA,

I received your two letters together. Now everything is changed,
is it not? My letters of yesterday and the day before will have made
this clear. Now I have more or less decided that with the exception of
Ba I will not accept from any other woman any service involving
physical contact. After that, there is no question at all of an
affectionate touch. I have made another discovery. In saying that I
alone might touch women and that no one else might do so, I was
guilty of a terrible error—and for how many years I persisted in the
error! I should have known that I could claim no scientific sanction
for the experiment. I was impelled solely by my terrible arrogance.
Among all my colleagues I considered only myself entitled to break
the restrictions of brahmacharya. As long as I am not willing to
accept my colleagues touching women I have not the slightest right to
touch a woman. I hope to settle everything in a day or two. I have
210

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

only your firmness to thank for making me see my error. In my
viewthe restrictions I had laid down for you and Mahadev are no
longer justified. What qualifies me to lay down such restrictions?
When I admit that my accusing you was merely the reflection of my
own failing, not yours or Mahadev’s, where is the place for the
restrictions set by me? To the extent I am involved in this affair, I am
the guilty person, not you, nor Mahadev. I am writing all this dispassionately.
And what reward I gave you for your services! Now for Pyarelal.
Mother’s words were like nectar to me: “You have already taken
away Pyare. Now you want to take away Sushila too?” She was right.
I did not do you any good. What good have I done to Pyarelal?
Pyarelal’s future would be the test whether my acts were good or evil.
As for you, I still consider you stupid. You have worked for me like a
benign spirit. But for your resolute stand, my eyes would not have
been opened. I would have still been in the slumber of my illusions.
Mira-behn has rightly said that I would have died repenting. God has
alerted me only through you. Even though you came to me as a
daughter, you have acted like a mother. Not my merit but maybe
yours will save your brother.
It is good that you are helping Brijkrishna. My advice is that
you should take the place for the hospital. You must be fully
recovered. But who am I to guide you? You have got a brother like
Pyarelal. He is with you. Do only what he says. After all, how can God
give you up? Who will be left for Him if He gives you up? You will
always prosper. Do not worry about me. I am well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar

253. LETTER TO PYARELAL
June 1, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

There is not enough time to write to you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

211

254. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
June 1, 1938
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

Your questions are very pertinent. Our duty, as I understand it, is
not to spend public funds and not to refuse the money which our
relatives are willing to give us. However, if they give unwillingly and
because they cannot help it, that money should be refused. You can
judge for yourself in the present situation. If you consider it your
duty not to take anything from there, then your expenses on food,
dress, some little postage, etc., should be met from here. Now about
books. If it is a matter of a rupee or two, I do not find any harm in
taking that money from here. It would be desirable to consult me on
such occasions.
I hope everything is clear now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 4293; also S. G. 63.

255. TELEGRAM TO PYARELAL
WARDHA,

June 2, 1938
P YARELAL,
19 R AJA S QUARE
NEW DELHI
YOURS
WAS
WHOLLY
UNPREPARED
FOR
REBELLION.
SUSHILA’S
RIGHT
OF
SERVING
HAD
BEEN
SPECIALLY
RESERVED.
YOU
MUST
RELY
ON
YOUR
ABILITY
CONVINCE
ME.
IMPLORE
YOU
BOTH
START.
YOU
WILL
LEAVE
WHEN
YOU
LIKE.
IF
YOU
STILL
WONT
COME
YOU
WILL
MAKE
MY
POSITION
PRECARIOUS.

BAPU
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy
: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

212

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

256. LETTER TO DR. SYED MAHMUD
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

June 2, 1938
DEAR SYED MAHMUD,

You are a long time coming. If you come now, I won’t be able
to provide for you even the comforts you would need for your health.
You must now let the rainy season pass.
Hope your drive against illiteracy is making rapid progress.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From the original: Syed Mahmud Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Also G. N. 5111.

257. LETTER TO E. RAGHAVENDRA RAO
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

June 2, 1938
DEAR RAGHAVENDRA RAO,

I must thank you for your frank letter.1 As you must have seen,
such 2 of your objections as have force have been anticipated by the
Working Committee. But it seems to me that you are judging a big
institution by the shortcomings of individual members. The Congress
has to be judged by its capacity of resistance to the foreign
exploitation of the country. In that test I hope that even the present
ministry won’t be found wanting. I invite you to return to the
Congress fold and fight impurity wherever you see it with all your
might.3
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a facsimile: Madhya Pradesh aur Gandhiji, pp. 131-2.

1

Vide “A criticism”
The source has “so much”.
3
Vide also “Letter to E. Raghavendra Rao”. 10-6-1938
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

213

258. NOTE TO ASHRAM INMATES
Not Revised
June 2, 1938
I have been distressed since the 7th of April. I had a dirty dream
that night. I did wake up before the crisis but I felt ashamed. After the
experience I hardly slept that night. I was restless. I walked about on
the terrace and calmed myself a little. I felt that I was not fit to accept
service from Sushila and Prabhavati who slept close to my bed. After
the prayer, I first recounted to them what I had been through and then
told them that I would not be taking service from them. But both took
this decision very badly. Within twelve hours I reviewed my decision
and continued to take service from them. But my distress did not
cease. On the 14th I had another type of experience which increased
my shame and added to my anguish. I had not made any change in
my outward behaviour. But consciously or unconsciously, my mind
was preparing itself. While I was caught in that whirlpool, I had to
meet Mr. Jinnah. I thought it was my duty to write something for the
occasion. I wrote something and indicated my sense of shame in it.1
I had lost my self-confidence. I had shamed my brahmacharya.
After a great deal of thought I have come to this decision. For the
time being, and so long as I am able to bear such physical contact with
other people, I should not take any service from women which
involves physical contact, unless it is absolutely unavoidable. It is
obvious that I must not touch them in jest or in affection. This change
is very important to me. My whole life has been shaped in the belief
that there is nothing wrong about innocent physical touch of women.
Before I took the vow of brahmacharya and after, I touched numerous woman in a light-hearted way or in affection, I have not experienced any adverse effect thereby and have not known any woman
who may have been sensually aroused.
But a doubt arose after my experience of the 7th April. Why
have I not become free from passion in spite of my constant
effortstowards brahmacharya? Why have my thoughts and my mind
not become purer and purer? I can say that I have not felt myself free
from carnal desire in India as much as I did in South Africa. Could
the contact with women have obstructed my path in some subtle way?
Who can answer that question? The only solution is that unless God
Himself answers it, I should try to shun all physical touch and
1

214

Vide also “ Letter to E. Raghavendra Rao” 10-6-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

understand my own mind and conquer it.
Yesterday it became clear to me as day that it was very wrong of
me to prevent my colleagues from taking the liberties which I myself
have taken. I still cannot understand how I allowed it to happen for so
many years. It seems to me that behind that restriction was my pride.
It was a failing. I should not have undertaken the experiment if it was
so terrible. If it was worth undertaking, I should have encouraged all
my colleagues to pursue it on my condition. My experiment was a
transgression of the limits prescribed by brahmacharya. Only a sage
like Shukadevji who was always pure in thought, speech and action
would be entitled to exercise such freedom. Such thinking led me to
the above decision yesterday.
I feel that the bitter experiences of Dahyabhai and others at
Sabarmati had my experiment at their root. Who can say in how many
cases my behaviour has led to wrong actions?
Only he who can observe complete brahmacharya can give
complete training in non-violence. I am the self-appointed leader of
the path of non-violence! What wonder if my non-violence is weak to
the extent that I cannot pass the above test? Even then, I shall continue
my experiment in non-violence so long as I feel convinced that even
my imperfect brahmacharya has lent considerable support to
non-violence. Otherwise too my behaviour would remain the same at
least for the present. Who can say where the future will lead me? My
strongest desire is to submit lovingly to God and let myself be driven
whither He wills.
It was my clear duty to convey this much to my co-workers. I
assume that any co-worker who wishes will let me know his reactions
and point out any error he may find in my thinking.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

259. LETTER TO PYARELAL
June 2, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

Your letter was received late. You had written ‘Shegaon’, which
is not this Segaon. The letter went to some other Shegaon. If you write
‘Wardha’, I shall receive the letters regularly and intact. The postal
service is bad here.
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

215

You must have read my letter to Sushila which I wrote
yesterday. You will see that I have gone further ahead. Now what have
I got to draw out of Sushila? The whole misunderstanding arose
because of my misguided imagination and poor Sushila had to pass
through an ordeal. I am not now feeling sorry about it. Whatever I did
had been prompted by my love. But according to my definition I
proved to be a father with sensual tendencies. How can such a father
do justice even to his own children? He would see his morbidities in
others. Where do you figure in this? According to my analysis, this
entire tragic episode is the result of my mistaken thinking. Now my
eyes have been opened and so things must calm down. Does my
diagnosis now sound complete? The credit for everything goes to
Sushila’s firmness.
I have now understood about Sushila. Now why should I worry?
Did my worry have behind it the fear that Sushila migh be harbouring
a scorpion? Sushila having shown her crystal purity, why should I
worry about her? She will shine wherever she settles.
I am enclosing a copy of the I note1 have addressed to coworkers. I hope it will make everything clear. Give this to Devdas to
read.
What should I say about you? My conclusion is clear. If I have
to lose you, the blame will be entirely on me. I realize that in some
matters I am slow-witted. I shall not go into a fresh analysis of myself
If I lose you, I shall know myself as I really am. If I can have you
back with me in the natural course, I shall feel reassured thatI was not
an absolutely undeserving co-worker and father. I have written to
Sushila that if my meritorious acts do not save me, hers will certainly
save her. During this period of turmoil I have without a doubt
obtained a jewel in the person of Sushila. By saying this, I am not
undeservedly praising her. I am describing her as I see her at present.
Your letter of today confirms that thought.
Sushila writes that l should get my blood-pressure taken twice a
day and get my urine also examined twice a day. That will be possible
when you come here and attend to it. I am myself not too keen about
it. All that Sushila wants you can carry out. But definitely not right
now. Only after you have settled everything there and settled Sushila
well.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1

216

Vide “Letter to Amrit Kaur”, 15-7-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

260. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

[On or after June 2, 1938] 1

STUPID DAUGHTER SUSHILA,

There is no letter from you. Then why should I write? But on
second thoughts I decided to write.
My decision should not hurt you in the least. Though stupid,
you are intelligent enough to see that my decision is absolutely
independent and inescapable. How can I do what others could not do?
How was it I did not understand such a self-evident thing, till today?
Why was I so silly? And yet, I do not hesitate to call you stupid!
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar

261. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
[After June 2, 1938] 2
STUPID GIRL,

Are you trying to prove your stupidity? What did I know of
your purity before Mahadev told me? Since then I have been taking
service from you. If you too have experienced desire, it is as well. For
then we are both in the same plight and we both ought to be on our
guard. For me it is sufficient that I am on my guard. The day I have
to save myself from you, you will only see my dead body, you will
not see me alive. After my 69 years, the vikara 3 in you cannot affect
me. I burn with my own vikara. Because of my vikara I regard myself
unfit to take service from any woman. For that reason, you are free to
abandon me, but you are always telling me that you do not want to
leave me under any circumstances, so I must accept your services in
1

From the contents it appears that the letter belongs to this period.
This letter is written on the reverse side of the addressee’s letter to Gandhiji
dated June 2, 1938.
3
Meaning here lustfulness
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

217

all humility.
Have you read the letters of others? No one has any complaint
to make. Mirabehn had only imagined things. Even then there was no
complaint against you. Only I have a complaint. But that is a different
story altogether. You should forget these people.
You have to consider two questions. I must not take you away
from your duty to Mother. Deep in your heart you desire to study. It
is a good desire too. Should I make you give up that desire and continue taking service from you? These two questions are very pertinent.
About my experiment later. I can write now, but you must show
pity for my hand.
BAPU
From the Hindi original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar

262. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
June 3, 1938
CHI. LILAVATI,

I have your letter. You will understand everything by and by.
Have patience for the present.
Don’t run away from there in haste. Stay on till Durga has
completely recovered. Here Kanchan is looking after everything quite
well. The bread she makes is also quite good.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9372. Also C. W. 6647. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar.

218

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

263. LETTER TO VIPIN D. PATEL1
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

June 3, 1938
CHI. BABA,

I got your letter only today. How old will you be on your next
birthday? Why did you forget to write that? And shouldn’t one who
asks for blessings give something in return? What will you give? What
new thing will you do in the new year?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 162.

264. LETTER TO PYARELAL
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

June 3, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

It was not difficult for me to read even those portions in your
letter which were scored out. You have harassed Sushila for no reason.
But she has already passed through the ordeal. It was just as well that
she was thus tested. You too should stop lamenting. My decision is
based on entirely different grounds. It has nothing to do with Mira’s
argument. It is not possible that my argument would have occurred to
Mira. If I see something wrong in a practice I have continued for
forty years, shall I not say that there is the hand of God in it? That was
why I did not wait for your and Sushila’s letters. Now you can both
see that even if it could be proved that Sushila was perhaps on the
verge of succumbing to impure thoughts, my conclusion would
remain unaltered. So long as I am not prepared to allow others to do
what I do myself, why should I do it? This seems to me self-evident. I
am now beginning to see this fault has a historical background. After
my decision all of us must feel at ease. According to me everything
has become clear.
I understand about the machines. Only you can put them to use.
Right now I am not even in a position to tempt Sushila. When she
comes on her own I shall of course embrace her in spite of my having
1

Grandson of Vallabhbhai Patel.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

219

stopped taking service from women. But right now her well-being
does not lie with me. It lies in her settling somewhere. But it is not for
me to decide. Only you two should jointly decide. I see from what
you have scored out in your letter that you are shouldering a heavy
responsibility there. I do wish you would leave as soon as the
problems are solved. And if Sushila wishes to come, her place will be
higher than it was. Where would you escape to by running away from
me! Such words should not have come from your pen. I am returning
your letter.
My health I should say is good.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Reply at Wardha address.
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

265. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

June 3, 1938
STUPID DAUGHTER,

You are like a benevolent spirit but you unfailingly show your
stupidity. What letters you write! Who can stop you if you are eager to
rush back to an unjust father? I see that you were not in any way at
fault. My own blunder is very clear to me. Even then you are trying to
convince yourself that the fault was yours. Is it not stupidity? Now be
calm. Take up some work there. When Pyarelal is ready to come, you
may also come if you wish. Do not torment me by saying that you
have lost your place with me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar

220

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

266. TELEGRAM TO PYARELAL
WARDHAGANJ,

June 4, 1938.
P YARELAL
19 R AJA BAZAR S QUARE
NEW DELHI

NO
CASE
CAN
SUSHILA
IF BOTH
COME.
LOVE.

COME

ALONE.

MOST

WELCOME

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy
: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

267. LETTER TO PYARELAL
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

June 4, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

I have read your letter to Mahadev. Why so much lamentation
now? Having taken the decision I am now absolutely at peace. Even
Mahadev is calm as far as I can understand him. l am not worried
about Sushila either. You are there. That particular incident has
nothing to do with my decision. Although it provided the immediate
pretext I have justified it independently of that incident. Even if
Mahadev and Sushila had been proved guilty instead of innocent, I
would still consider my decision right. Since they have been proved
innocent my decision is of course correct. My decision is not at all by
way of expiation. Whatever blame I am taking upon myself appears to
me justified. It may well not be so. But even if the cause of the
incidents of the 9th and the 14th is proved to be purely imaginary the
legitimacy of my decision holds. Very often, a decision becomes
necessary to open our eyes. Hence, let us stop lamenting. Let us forget
the past and look after the present.
Sushila therefore does not have to come to pacify me or to find
her peace of mind. I would certainly like to have Sushila by my side. I
would take service from her in so many ways. But I would be afraid to
let her come alone. She is a chain that binds. I. would not willingly
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

221

permit you to keep out. I wish your presence even without her. I
would be very happy if she too accompanied you. That is why I have
sent a telegram1 today to let you know my state of mind. Now decide
what seems right after taking into consideration what needs to be done
there. I am in fine fettle.
What Sushila’s instrument says or what the urine test indicates
only Sushila or you will know. But I am sleeping well and eating well.
My diet includes 10 to 12 oz. of milk, roti, vegetables, garlic, onions
and fruit. This is sufficient. I am not taking jaggery for the present. In
the afternoon I take juice of raw mango or lime withsoda. I have a
tub-bath in the morning. I rub ghee on the soles of my feet twice a
day. I massage my head with oil at night. As usual, I apply mud-pack
to my abdomen morning and evening. This is for two to two-anda-half hours altogether. I take light walks. I invariably sleep in the
afternoon.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

268. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
S EGAON,

June 4, 1938
CHI. MUNNALAL,

That my ideal is Shukadevji does not mean that I should like to
have a face like his, to sleep, sit and eat like him and go to the
Himalayas as he did. It only means that I should like to cultivate
brahmacharya like his. And if you say that this can’t be the ideal of
one who wishes to live and serve in this world or that it cannot be
attained by such a one, then brahmacharya like Shukadevji’s is of
little value. A perfect brahmachari should remain unaffected by
passion in any circumstances. If you say that nobody has ever been,
and nobody will ever be, able to cultivate such freedom from passion,
then it means that we should abandon the struggle to cultivate
brahmacharya. If this is correct, then it follows that one can never
cultivate perfect ahimsa.
I am alarmed, or was, by my experience2 because I was at a loss
1
2

222

Vide the preceding item.
Vide “Letter to Amritlal T. Nanavati”, 2-5-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to know what to do. Now that I know, the reason for alarm has
disappeared. Saying that I know does not mean, either, that physical
contact with women was one of the causes or the only cause of my
painful experience. But this has become clear to me as day that I
should not have done what I was not prepared to tolerate in others.
Now that I have given up the practice I shall discover whether it was
physical contact with women that was obstructing my progress or
whether there was some other cause. Hence, for fully assessing the
result of the experiment of refraining from physical contact with
women, I must avoid such contact completely, for the present at any
rate. There is no question here of more or less contact.
I hope you will understand everything from this.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 8574. Also C. W. 7028. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah.

269. TELEGRAM TO PYARELAL
WARDHA,

June 5, 1938
P YARELAL
19 R AJA BAZAR S QUARE
NEW DELHI
READ

LETTERS.

REPLY.

BOTH

START

TODAY

UNFAILINGLY.

LOVE.

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

223

270. LETTER TO PYARELAL
June 5, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

I hope that before you get this letter, both of you will have
arrived here. I had sent one telegram yesterday. Today I am sending
another. I am sure you will not delay it. Both of you have understood
me wrong. Nothing can be explained through letters. Poor Durga
knows nothing. I do not think she has even the slightest suspicion.
And now what is there to discuss? I have explained this in my letter of
yesterday. But I shall not write anything more. I think I have not
blundered. But if you can prove that I have, do you think I shall take
long to make amends? You are unnecessarily putting the whole blame
on Sushila. I have not exonerated Mahadev independently. What I am
saying is that the scale by which I was measuring Mahadev was
itselffaulty. He is innocent from that point of view. Right now,
Mahadev has lost all capacity to decide whether or not he has
committed a wrong. My wretched suggestions are responsible for that.
What can poor Mahadev do? Hence it is useless if he considers himself
innocent and a thousand times more so if he considers himself guilty.
Sushila’s case is different. But today’s letter puts her in Mahadev’s
position. Both you and I are responsible for that. And even there do I
not take the lead? Sushila’s agony started with my intimation [of the
happening] of the 14th. But I have not taken my decision on that
basis at all. It does not involve any expiation. It involves awareness on
your part. In your view it is utter ignorance. If you prove that to me I
shall swallow my pride. I shall do what I did about Bardoli. Hence, if
both of you have not already started, do so after seeing this letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

224

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

271. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
June 5, 1938
STUPID SUSHILA,

How stupid you are! Sitting there, you cry and make me cry!!!
You are unnecessarily taking the blame upon your self. I have not
given up taking service from Ba. Other women feel a little unhappy,
but they are cheerful. They have also understood the point. A. S. does
feel miserable. But I am also making her laugh quite a bit. She is
more stupid than you. She too will calm down in a few days. I hope
that abiding by my order, both of you will have arrived here. It is
impossible to start today. I am writing this letter so that the day does
not pass without communication in case you are unable to leave. Stop
crying now. I am eager to see you laugh. You have committed no sin.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Dr. Sushila Nayyar

272. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
Unrevised

S EGAON, W ARDHA,

June 5, 1938
CHI. MANILAL,

You will be leaving on Wednesday. You came but I feel as if
you had not come at all. We had long enough conversations but I
can’t say that we talked at leisure. But, then where do I have such a
thing as leisure? Whatever decision you take, do it calmly. If you can
keep [Indian] Opinion going, do so. But remember the meaning of
keeping it going, which I explained to you. I would not consider it
being kept going if it is done through advertisements. This does not
mean that you should now stop accepting advertisements. But it would
be pitiable for the journal to be kept going on advertisements.
Advertisements should be used for increasing the profits or for
reducing the subscription rate. In the case of pice-newspapers a pice
would not help to meet even the cost of the newsprint. But because
they get advertisements they are able to reach lakhs of readers by
charging a nominal price. If we accept the policy of taking in
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

225

advertisements we can justify it only in this way. The royal road for
you, therefore, is that you should divide the total expenditure by the
number of prospective subscribers and fix that figure as the
subscription rate from the very beginning. If you don’t get subscribers at that rate, then you should conclude that I. O . should be
closed down. The rest you know. If you want to earn, settle down
there. I won’t consider that objectionable. If you wish to return to
India, you should be content with whatever you get and decide to
devote yourself to public service. Please treat all this as no more than
my advice and do what you yourself wish.
Have an amicable talk with Kallenbach.
Don’t carry with you any worries about Sushila and the children. Vijayalakshmi and Nanabhai are there to look after them. They
will stay in Akola as long as they wish and then come here. You
should also know that what the children will acquire in India in the
ordinary course from the surrounding atmosphere they cannot
acquire in a foreign country, despite all our efforts. You need not,
therefore, worry about the children’s education either. Sushila should
come to Segaon early, because most probably I shall be in the
Frontier Province in October. And I can’t say how long I shall be
there. My health is all right. Pyarelal and Sushila are still in Delhi.
Maybe they will come after a few days. Don’t be lazy in writing
letters.
If my message 1 has not been sent already, it will be enclosed
with this. Please give it to Ramdas. The enclosed letter2 is for Ramdas.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 4871.

1
2

226

Vide “Message to Indians in South Africa”, 6-6-1938
This is not traceable.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

273. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
June 5, 1938
CHI. PREMA,

How silly you are ! What a long letter you write when you
should have just said: ‘I want five rupees every month; please send the
amount.’ 1 Now say how you want me to make the remittance? Shall I
send it by money order or in any other way I like? Shall I send the
sum every month or every three or four months together?
I have no time to write more. I have torn up your letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10394. Also C. W. 6833. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak.

274. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

[June 6, 1938]2
CHI. MANILAL,

I forgot yesterday to enclose a letter for Kanam. Here it is. I am
sending the message3 also. I had almost forgotten about it.
Don’t worry about me. You are bound to feel the pain of
separation, but you should bear it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 4874.

275. LETTER TO PYARELAL
June 6, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

Notwithstanding all my explaining what anger, what misunderstanding and what lamentation! You even refuse to understand
what in my belief is cent-per-cent truth. But I shall not write more. It
is my hope that this letter will be proved superfluous, and honouring
1

The addressee wanted this amount to meet her personal expenses.
Vide following item.
3
Ibid
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

227

my command, both you brother and sister will be on your way here.
You have not fully understood my step. I hope to explain to you fully
when you come. All of us cannot be mad at the same time. Either I
shall be proved right or you two on your part will have to give up
your obstinacy. Then why fear? We shall understand at once when we
meet. If you have not left already, you must leave at once after seeing
this letter. I do not know what will happen if you really do not come.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

276. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
June 6, 1938
STUPID GIRL,

Is there any limit to your stupidity? How could I abandon you
forever? Why are you raising me so high? The place you assign to me
is not my place, though I certainly wish it was. My experience on the
night of the 7th could not in any way have been influenced by the
prurience of any of you. As for the incident of the 14th, I find only
my own sensuality reflected in it. I shall explain it further when we
meet. Why do you presume the existence of something in your heart
which was not there? Your saying such a thing is a matter of shame
for me. I constantly see that I am sensual. In that case why should we
ignorewhat is evident and look for what is not evident? But you both
will have left before this letter reaches Delhi.
Blessing from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar

277. MESSAGE TO INDIANS IN SOUTH AFRICA
S EGAON,
June 6, 1938
I can give only one message to the Indians in South Africa. We
shall never be able to preserve our self-respect in South Africa without
self-sacrifice. There can be no such distinctions as Hindus, Muslims,
Christians, Madrasis, Gujaratis or Punjabis.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 4872.

228

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

278. TO SEGAON WORKERS
June 6, 1938
The manager should copy out whatever I write herein and read
it out to the others. This note-book should always be kept in front of
me.
*
*
*
I have been asked if there are any rules here about anything.
There are. For when winding up Sabarmati Ashram I had said that we
would from then on be a mobile Ashram and carry with us wherever
we went Ashram life and Ashram rules. Prayers, etc., thus stay as
before as also the hour of rising. We may certainly introduce changes,
excepting in principles, according as circumstances may warrant, as
has been done here. We deliberately employ Harijan servants, because
we want to serve the Harijans. But though we employ them as servants
we have to treat them as our brothers.
*
*
*
*
Therefore we must do even menial work that we can do
ourselves. If we cannot do some particular work ourselves we may
have it done by others. Only work that even others cannot do may we
ask Harijans to do.
From Hindi: C. W. 4674; also G. N. 6866.

279. LETTER TO ATULANAND CHAKRABARTY
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

June 8, 1938
MY DEAR ATULANAND,

I have not been able to overtake your letter of 20th May earlier.
Yours of 22nd April I saw only today. The reason for this delay you
know.
About the year-book, you have to do what Subhas Babu
suggests. I may not, and must not take the lead. I can’t issue invitations. The thing has got to be taken up by the Congress. What I said
was that an accurate year-book would supply a felt want. It is not the
work of any single individual, but you can make yourself responsible
for it as editor if the Congress would entrust the work to you.
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

229

I am glad that you have dropped the idea of the monthly
journal.
I hope your daughter is fully restored.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C. W. 1479. Courtesy: A. K. Sen.

280. LETTER TO KHWAJA NAZIMUDDIN
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

June 9, 1938
DEAR KHWAJA SAHEB,

I am grateful for your letter of the 1st inst. If you will please
refer again to my letter of 27th ultimo, you will find that the sentence
referring to deeper conviction has been wholly misunderstood. You
will see that it does not bear the meaning you have put upon it. It is
clear from the context that if, after deeper examination of the solution
suggested by the Government, 1 I should find it acceptable, I would
like to convince the prisoners of the desirability of their acceptance.
For deeper examination I must have more material, which is lacking
and which I am seeking from you and other sources. If, before I or
Sarat Babu or Subhas Babu went to the prisoners, we all three came to
the conclusion that the Government’s was a sound offer, I for one
should stand by it, even if I failed to get the prisoners’ acquiescence,
unless they could convince me of the error of my judgment. I must
however inform you that my deeper study is shaking my belief in the
workability of the solution offered by the Government. Naturally I
must weigh every solution in the scales I have set up for my guidance,
and on the basis of which I submitted my propositions to you before
leaving Calcutta. I do not mind through what formula or through what
machinery the object of securing the release of every prisoner inside
of one year or thereabouts is attained.
With reference to the detenus and the State prisoners I
remember the paragraph you refer to in your letter of 17th April. I
did not raise any objection to it, although I felt it to be a new introduction, because I had hoped that an early solution of the prisoners’
question would be reached. I venture to remind you that in the very
1

For the scheme proposed by the Government for the release of political
prisoners, vide “Letter From Khwaja Nazimuddin”, 11-5-1938

230

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

beginning of the conversations it was agreed that the detenus and the
prisoners who were incarcerated without trial were to be separately
considered from the convicted prisoners. In my opinion it would be a
grave injustice if the discharge of the detenus and State prisoners is to
be made contingent upon an agreed solution of the question affecting
convicted prisoners.
May I also remind you that the policy about detenus has been
already made public by you? It would be a thousand pities, therefore,
if the release of detenus and State prisoners were delayed or
indefinitely postponed because of the possible breakdown of the
negotiations for the release of convicted prisoners.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: C. W. 9927.

281. LETTER TO E. RAGHAVENDRA RAO
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

June 10, 1938
DEAR RAGHAVENDRA RAO,

I have your letter of 6th inst. Mahadev has already asked you to
send a copy of your first letter. 1 I want to work at it without in any
way disclosing your name.2 All I wish to say at this stage is that you
should send facts and figures to support your conclusions.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI,
From a facsimile: Madhya Pradesh aur Gandhiji, p. 130.

282. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
June 10, 1938
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

Women may well be there, but I must nevertheless have a man
by me. Whether I want support or not is not the question. I am trying
to do without it but how can I say when I may have to have it?
I shall see about the massage. Sushilabehn knows every nerve
and tissue of the body. That is why even she does not dare to give it
1
2

Vide also “Letter to E. Raghavendra Rao”, 2-6-1938
Vide “A Criticism”

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

231

up too soon. You should learn how to massage by practising it on
Kanu.
Blessings from
BAPU,
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4294; also S.G. 64.

283. TALKS ON VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 1
[Before June 11, 1938]
I had long been impressed with the necessity for a new
departure as I knew the failure modern education had been through
the numerous students who came to see me on my return from South
Africa. So I started with the introduction of training in handicrafts in
the Ashram school. In fact an extra emphasis was placed on manual
training, with the result that the children soon got tired of the manual
training and thought that they had been deprived of literary training.
There they were wrong, for even the little that they gained was more
than children ordinarily get in the orthodox schools. But that set me
thinking, and I came to the conclusion that not vocation cum literary
training, but literary training through vocational training was the
thing. Then vocational training would cease to be a drudgery and
literary training would have a new content and new usefulness. The
acceptance of office by the Congress prompted me to place the
thought before the nation, and I am glad that it was welcomed in
many quarters.
English we decided to taboo, because we knew that most of the
time of the children was taken up with memorizing English words and
phrases, and even then they could not put in their own language what
they had learnt, and could not properly follow what the teacher taught
them. On the other hand they forgot their own language by sheer
neglect. Education through vocational training seemed to be the only
way to avoid both these evils.
I should make a start on the first day with finding out the calibre
of the boys—whether they know any reading and writing, any
geography, and then start with trying to add to their equipment
through the introduction of the takli.
Now you might well ask me why I picked up the takli out of the
many other existing handicrafts. Because takli was one of the first
crafts that we found out and which has subsisted through the ages.In
the earliest ages all our cloth used to be made of takli yarn. The
1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Education through
synthesis”, Desai does not say when or where the talks were delivered

232

Vocation—A

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

spinning-wheel came later, and [as] the finest counts could not be
produced on the spinning-wheel, one had to go back to the takli. In
devising the takli man’s inventive genius reached a height that had not
been reached before. The cunning of the fingers was put to the best
possible use. But as the takli was confined to the artisans who were
never educated, it fell into disuse. If we want to revive it today in all its
glory, if we are to revive and reconstruct the village life, we must begin
the education of children with the takli. My next lesson would
therefore be to teach the boys the place the takli used to occupy in
our daily life. Next I would take them into a little history and teach
them how it declined. Then would follow a brief course in Indian
history, starting from the East Indian Company, or even earlier from
the Muslim period, giving them a detailed account of the exploitation
that was the stock in trade of the East India company, how by a
systematic process our main handicraft was strangled and ultimately
killed. Next would follow a brief course in mechanics—construction
of the takli. It must have originally consisted of a small ball of clay or
even wet flour dried on to a bamboo splinter running through its
centre. This has still survived in some parts of Bihar and Bengal. Then
a brick disc took the place of the clay ball and then in our times iron
or steel and brass have taken the place of the brick disc and a steel
wire the place of the splinter. Even here one might expatiate with
profit on the size of the disc and the wire, why it is of a particular size
and why not more or less. Next would follow a few lectures on cotton,
its habitat, its varieties, the countries and the provinces of India where
it is at present grown and so on. Again some knowledge about its
cultivation, the soil best suited for it, and so on. That would make us
launch into a little agriculture.
You will see that this takes a fund of assimilated knowledge on
the part of the teacher before he can impart it to his pupils. The whole
of elementary arithmetic can be taught through the counting of yards
of spinning, finding out the count of yarn, making up of hanks,
getting it ready for the weaver, the number of cross-threads in the
warp to be put in for particular textures of cloth and so on. Every
process from the growing of cotton to the manufacture of the finished
product—cotton picking, ginning. carding, spinning, sizing,
weaving—all would have their mechanics and history and mathematics
correlated to them.
The principle idea is to impart the whole education of the body
and the mind and the soul through the handicraft that is taught to
thechildren. You have to draw out all that is in the child through
teaching all the processes of the handicraft, and all your lessons in
history, geography, arithmetic will be related to the craft.
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

233

If such education is given, the direct result will be that it will be
self-supporting. But the test of success is not its self-supporting
character, but that the whole man has been drawn out through the
teaching of the handicraft in a scientific manner. In fact I would reject
a teacher who would promise to make it self-supporting under any
circumstances. The self-supporting part will be the logical corollary of
the fact that the pupil has learnt the use of every one of his faculties.
If a boy who works at a handicraft for three hours a day will surely
earn his keep, how much more a boy who adds to the work a
development of his mind and soul !
Harijan, 11-6-1938

284. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

June 11, 1938
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I saw your letter1 addressed to Mahadev. I can understand your
pain. I hope the step I have taken will help to lighten your pain to
some extent. I have drafted a statement2 in English for newspapers, but
I have not as yet published it. Your suggestion is certainly worth
thinking over. My temperament inclined me to another course. I
experience greater peace when I make such things public. The fear
mentioned in your letter is based on practical considerations. I don’t
feel that I have lost the strength to stick to a step which I may have
decided to take deliberately and as a matter of dharma. However, I
won’t publish the statement in a hurry. Even though I am putting it
off, for non-Gujarati readers there must be a statement in English
similar to the one in Gujarati.
I got the news yesterday through Gordhandas about Savitri3
having given birth to a son. I am writing a few lines on a postcard to
Lakshmanprasad4 .
Blessings from,

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2993.
1

Not traceable. It had referred to the adverse comments by some of the Ashram
inmates on Gandhiji’s practice of resting his hands on shoulders of girls during his
walks and his decision to give up the practice.
2
Gandhiji had written an article on his decision for Harijan but it was never
published as some of the Ashram inmates did not approve of making Gandhiji’s
decision a public affair.
3
Addressee’s daughter-in-law.
4
Savitri’s father. The letter is not traceable.

234

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

285. LETTER TO BALWANTSINHA
S EGAON,

June 11, 1938
CHI. BALWANTSINHA,

Your letter is extremely good. It is pure. Your doubts are
pertinent, even your fear is relevant and your caution is quite
welcome.
The vow1 of 1935 was worded in English, I had not seen the
Gujarati or the Hindi translation. The purport of the original English
is that I renounce the practice of placing my hands on the shoulders
of women. I did not feel then that there was anything wrong about it,
nor do I now. I gave up the practice only for the sake of public good.
My heart never took it to mean that I would never place my hand on
the shoulder of any girl whatsoever. I have no recollection of the
particular girl with whom the practice was resumed in Segaon. But I
do recollect that I fully remembered my vow of 1935 when I placed
my hand on her shoulder. Possibly I could not resist her request, or
may be I needed her support. I cannot of course say that the support
became necessary because of my weak state for had that been the case
I could have had the support of some man so as to keep the vow
inviolate. But my vow never had such a wide meaning, at least for me.
From the very begining I have regarded Sushilabehn in the same way
as Ba, as an exception. My tender feelings are to account for that too.
I would like to give up physical contact even with these two if it were
possible, but I have no desire to do so at the cost of the deep hurt
which I would be causing them while my heart feels no sin in the
contact of these two. I took the decision only after much discussion
with the girls here, after some laughter and some cajoling. I have
caused Ba much pain. I still occasionally do, but I have no courage
nor any desire to inflict any further pain on her. Sushila has observed
brahmacharya since childhood but her observance does not include
the exclusion of innocent contact with men. Pyarelal too is a
brahmachari and one of the reasons for his joining me is that I do not
advocate total avoidance of innocent contact between the two sexes
and I have had a certain measure of success in this. Once I intended to
give up all personal services from Sushila but within twelve hours my
soft-heartedness had put an end to the intention. I could not bear the
tears of Sushila and the fainting away of Prabhavati. I did not even
want to. It is these brothers and sisters that my decision has affected
most and that is why I summoned them by wire. I want their sincere
1

Vide, “A Renunciation”

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

235

co-operation in my present task. Sushila has been present in the
bathroom while I have bathed in the nude and in her absence Ba or
Prabhavati or Lilavati have attended on me. But I see nothing wrong
in it. It was necessary for someone to be there. I could call a male coworker, too. Pyarelal has been in attendance occasionally but I have
never felt any embarrassment in being seen naked by a woman. Still it
would have to be a woman whose relations with me cannot come
under any kind of suspicion.
Now for its implementation. As soon as I put my decision into
practice the discussions arose. During the first round of discussions I
started acting upon the decision the very next day though the step was
to be taken only after 3-4 days. The discussions are inevitable as long
as my mastery over the passions is incomplete, perhaps they are even
necessary. Complete realization can be expressed best only through
silence. Speech can never fully express thought. Ignorance denotes
disorganization of thought which is why it needs the vehicle of
speech. Thus you may take it for certain that the very necessity of any
explanations and persuasions on my part proves my imperfection or
proneness to passsions. My claim is and has ever been very small. I
am striving incessantly to have full control over my thoughts, i.e., to
remain unaffected in every circumstance. I am quite vigilant but the
outcome lies with God which fact relieves me of worry. Do write to me
if some points has still not been covered or a new doubt arises.
I return your letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1904.

286. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR

1

[About June 11, 1938] 1
Your argument is welcome. I haven’t the time for long
argument with you.
S.2 is out of the picture. She must be an exception being a
doctor. But your objection is sound in that even one woman vitiated
the experiment. I am struggling to exclude Ba, too. S. has put herself
1

She had written to Gandhiji regarding his decision to give up touching

women.
1

There is a reference in the text to the article not having gone to the press.
There is a similar reference in the “Letter to Jamnalal Bajaj”,11-6-1938, where
Gandhiji says: “I won’t publish the statement in a hurry.” This letter therefore could
have been written about June 11.
2
Dr. Sushila Nayyar .

236

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

out. She wouldn’t have what others can’t. Therefore she is training a
male nurse.
You are again right in saying that even a woman’s proximity,
speech, look, letter, etc., may work the evil as her touch might. But I
had to think of myself. If I scented danger then I must put out my
eyes, rather than have the animal in me be aroused.
You miss the crucial point. It is not the woman who is to blame.
I am the culprit. I must attain the required purity. This experiment is
but a way to be tried.
The article has not gone to the press. It may never go though
the prohibition is in force. You will put yourself wholly in the wrong
if you avoid me because of my decision. If you were here I would
convince you of the necessity of the decision, in spite of your finding
flaws.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai.

287. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
S EGAON,

June 12, 1938
CHI. SUSHILA,

I got your letter. It is a great crime to feel unhappy over a step
which one may have taken as a matter of dharma. Therefore, forget
the pain of separation. It is your duty to stay in Akola and mine to
keep you there as long as your presence there is necessary for service.
But if there is no such need, then stay in Akola long enough to satisfy
Father and Mother and then come away here. Take care of your
health, as also of the children’s. If you have no special reason for
being in Bombay, you may spend so much the more time in Akola.
Blessings from
BAPU

SHRI SUSHILABEHN GANDHI
C/O M ASHRUWALA
TOPIWALA BUILDING
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4875.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

237

288. FOR SEGAON WORKERS
June 12, 1938
I hope, if I keep well, to join in the takli-yajna daily.
This yajna is not obligatory for anyone but I think it essential
for all inmates of the institution. Takli-yajna is a social and public
yajna and the charkha has no place in it. Takli teaches us silent
service. The millions can perform the yajna only through takli. The
noise of the spinning-wheel is a distraction in the takli-yajna. So those
who understand its worth may ply the takli-exclusively.
The room we sit in is not arranged properly. Quite a few things
there are superfluous. They should be removed after due examination. The case lying near my seat is quite out of place. Every-thing
can be accommodated on the box. Our possessionss hould be the very
minimum. We should remember that non-possession is one of the
eleven vows.
BAPU
From the Hindi: C.W. 4674.

289. LETTER TO PRITHVISINGH
MAGANWADI,
W ARDHA, C. P.,
June 13, 1938
DEAR PRITHVISINGH,

I was delighted to have your letter and am happy to learn that
you are quite comfortable there.
You have rightly asked me how a prisoner wishing to observe
truth and non-violence should behave in prison. Your present behaviour is quite commendable, but let me put down here a few principles:
(1) A votary of truth and non-violence may have nothing
secret.
(2) He will observe all the jail regulations cheerfully.
(3) He may invite the attention of the authorities to such rules
as may appear to him to be improper or hard.
(4) He has a right, and it may be even his duty, to disobey such
rules as may offend his self-respect. But it is his duty first to make a
representation to the authorities in respect of these rules, and he may
238

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

disobey them holding himself ready to suffer the consequences only
after he has failed to obtain redress.
(5) Such a prisoner will never regard himself in any way
superior to the rest, and will never agitate to secure facilities which are
denied to others.
(6) Such a prisoner will regard the prison as a temple of
freedom, and will therefore work for the development of his mind and
his soul by serious study and thinking. He will not waste a single
minute.
(7) Such a prisoner will regard all jail labour as his own work
and will perform it with the same devotion. He will seize every
opportunity to learn a new calling.
(8) Such a prisoner will always think of God, will never give
himself up to despair, and will cheerfully put up with all hardships and
sufferings.
What more can I say? I know you will fill in the details.
I am in correspondence with the authorities regarding your
release. The result is in God’s hands.
Do write whenever you can. I do get news about you from
Shantilal and Jamnadas. Your father has been informed. I shall let you
know when I have his reply.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal.

290. TELEGRAM TO M. A. JINNAH1
June 15, 1938
SURE
PUBLICATION
PUBLISH
OUR

IS
UNAUTHORIZED.
CORREPONDENCE..

BUT

YOU

MAY

GANDHI

Hindustan Times, 16-6-1938.

291. LETTER TO JETHALAL G. SAMPAT
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

June 16, 1938
BHAI JETHALAL,

Parnerkar explained to me all about your dairy activities. But
what he told me about ghee, etc., was not at all encouraging. But his
1

This was in reply to the addressee’s telegram of June 14 saying: “Publication
correspondence Jawaharlal and myself is breach of confidence. Seems leakage is from
Congress circles. I must release fully now your correspondence along with the rest.
Hope you agree.”
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

239

information was nine months old. What is the present position? He
also told me that the dairy would need a capital of seven thousand
rupees for running it efficiently. From where are we to get that? And
even if it were found, one cannot be sure about any very big result
being produced. You must, therefore, learn the art of being selfsupporting with whatever is available. What are the activities at present?
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C. W. 9865. Courtesy: Narayan J. Sampat.

292. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

June 17, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

I have never liked the idea of our women seeking foreign aid in
their fight for freedom. Hence I do not want the League 1 to inquire
into the position or condition of India’s women. This kind of
propaganda turns their attention from themselves. Their fight is not
even against India’s men. It is and must [be] among and against
themselves. I have never relished the fight put up for women at the
Round Table Conference. Such being my radical views you can
understand my indifference to what the League does or does not do.
But if I have to examine their viewpoint, I refuse to read colour
prejudice where there are other cogent reasons to justify a particular
course of action. I wonder if this is plain to you. You may not agree
just yet, though you will in the end. For I am quite sure of my
ground. The women in S. A. rose at a bound by their own action. And
have [not] they, the village women, done likewise even here?
I had a long chat with Asha Lata about Parkinson’s note. I think
she has grasped my point.
Love.

TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3865. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7021

1

240

Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

293. DISCUSSION WITH KALIDAS NAG1
[Before June 18, 1938]
KALIDAS NAG: Wherever I have been . . . non-violence is the question of
questions. But it is just a question or a matter of doubt . . . But . . . has not Buddhism
been responsible for widespread emasculation? And whatever may be the potency of
non-violence, is it not impossible as a weapon of defence?
GANDHI: Do you want me to answer these questions or did you

reply to them?
K.N. I have been replying to them after my own historical fashion, but I want
you to answer them, for yours will be authentic answers. . . .
G. Well, the answer is being given in India in actual practice. It is

no use citing the example of China and Japan. India is the only place
where if an answer must come can come. Experience here is quite
encouraging. Intellectually of course even many people in the West
have come to recognize the futility of violence and begun to ask if
non-violence may not after all be worth a trial. Dr. Stanley Jones has
sent me a copy of his recent article, “Gandhian Solution of the
Chinese Trouble”—and he has seriously discussed various forms of
non-co-operation that may be successfully adopted. There was time
when Dr. Jones had not much belief in non-co-operation, but he now
seriously suggests it as a non-violent solution, and has pressed me to
go to Europe to preach peace. But so long as my mission in India
remains unfulfilled, my visit to the West on a peace mission must be a
vain effort. Whilst it is true that non-violence has made much headway in India, it is not of much value to an outsider and a critic at that.
K. N . What you say, Mahatmaji, is quite correct, viz., that the answer is being
given, and if it is really given on such a scale as the size of our country it will be most
effective. For their acceptance—even intellectual—of non-violence and non-cooperation is in a spirit of condescension.
G. It is impossible that a thing essentially of the soul can ever be

imparted through the intellect. It is just like trying to impart faith in
God through the intellect. It cannot be as it is essentially a matter of
the heart. Faith can be turned into knowledge by experience, and it
can come only through the heart and not the intellect. The intellect, if
anything, acts as a barrier in matters of faith.
Harijan, 18-6-1938
1
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”. Kalidas Nag had visited
many foreign countries on cultural missions. This time he was going to Australia. On
his way to Calcutta to board a ship, he stopped at Wardha to meet Gandhiji.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

241

294. A CRITICISM
A C. P. correspondent sends me a bitter letter criticizing the
C. P. Ministry.1 I condense it below toning down the bitterest part:
I have been wanting to write to you for some time but did not do so
advisedly. I do so now as one interested in the good government of my
province which, I take it, is also your adopted home for the rest of your life.
We were led to believe that government by the representatives of the
Congress would be so good as to escape calumny and be able to rule for all
time merely by reason and by moral influence. But the main purpose of the
Congress Ministry appears to us to be.
(a) to worship your idol in public and break it in secret;
(b)to worship the symbols of Imperialism in secret and denounce them
in public;
(c) to play the malefactor towards their opponents whom they cannot
conquer by truthful and legitimate methods;
(d) to carry on a brisk traffic in legislation and public offices.
The government of a people cannot be run, as the Congress Ministers in
the C. P. seem to imagine, by the common argument of promised boons and
by corrupting the electorate with hope. During the past ten months your
Ministers have left no stone unturned to shake the moral foundation of good
government of this province. The Ministry and its component parts are
honey-combed with intrigues and corruption. To sum up my conclusion,
which I wish to convey to you, is that the Congress Party might have been
deemed capable of governing had they never assumed power and responsibility. Next to assumption of power is the responsibility of relinquishing it.
It is strange that your soul should not revolt against such a predatory Ministry
for the creation of which the moral responsibility is entirely yours.

The Working Committee referred all the complaints against the
Ministry to the Parliamentary Board which carried on an enquiry on
the spot. Its report2 is public property. The Congress is a wholly
1

Vide “Letter to E. Raghavendra Rao”, 2-6-1938
The Parliamentary Board which held a joint meeting with the C. P. Congress
Legislature Party and the three Provincial Congress Committee presidents from the
C. P. examined the various charges against the C. P. Ministry, including some of
corruption. In a statement Vallabhbhai Patel and Abul Kalam Azad declared that while
the Committee found no evidence to substantiate the charges of corruption it found
certain complaints “not without justification”. For instance, raising from Rs. 15,000
to 1 lakh the limit of the Debt Conciliation Act and appointing underserving persons
to professorships in the University. They were glad to note among those concerned
“a readiness to admit mistakes and make amends” and hoped that “under promise of
prompt rectification all public criticism will cease.”
2

242

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

democratic organization with the widest possible franchise. The
Working Committee is its mouthpiece and has to work within the
limits prescribed for it by the Congress Constitution. It was open to
the C. P. Congress representatives to demand resignation from the
Ministers, but they did not. On the contrary they wanted the present
Ministers to compose their difference and carry on the Government.
The Parliamentary Board could not disregard the wishes of the
representatives. It had no power to do so. But it did all it could to rid
the Ministry of whatever short-comings they had discovered. The
Ministers, it must be admitted, offered no opposition to whatever the
Board wanted to do. It now remains to be seen how the new
arrangement works.
The point, however, that I wish to make is that the Working
Committee does not hush up any evil that is found in the Congress
organization. It is not afraid to impose discipline which is readily
obeyed in most cases.
I wholly endorse the correspondent’s proposition that the
Congress can only rule “by reason and moral influence”. He and
critics like him may rest assured that the Congress will die a natural
and deserved death if and when it substitutes reason and moral
influence by goondaism.
One more point. The Congress is composed of ordinary
mortals. They share the virtues and vices of the nation which they seek
to represent. But after all is said and done, it will not be denied that it
is the oldest political organization in the country, it is the most
representative, it has drawn to itself the best talent in the country, it has
the highest amount of sacrifice to its credit. Above all it is the one
organization that has offered the greatest resistance to foreign rule
and exploitation. Whilst all honest criticism is to be welcomed, I would
like to remind the correspondent and other critics that it is open to
them to join the Congress and criticize it from within and to try to rid
it of all the removable limitations they may discover in it.
Harijan, 18-6-1938

295. QUALIFICATIONS OF A PEACE BRIGADE
Some time ago I suggested 1 the formation of a Peace Brigade
whose members would risk their lives in dealing with riots, especially
communal. The idea was that this Brigade should substitute the police
1

Vide, “Our Failure”

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

243

and even the military. This reads ambitious. The achievement may
prove impossible. Yet, if the Congress is to succeed in its non-violent
struggle, it must develop the power to deal peacefully with such
situations. Communal riots are engineered by politically minded men.
Many of those who take part in them are under the influence of the
latter. Surely it should not be beyond the wit of Congressmen to
devise a method or methods of avoiding ugly communal situations by
peaceful means. I say this irrespective of whether there is or there is
not a communal pact. It cannot be that any party seeks to force a pact
by violent means. Even if such a pact were a possibility, it would not
be worth the paper on which it might be written. For behind such a
pact there will be no common understanding. What is more, even after
a pact is arrived at, it would be too much to expect that there would
never be any communal riots.
Let us therefore see what qualifications a member of the
contemplated Peace Brigade should possess.
(1) He or she must have a living faith in non-violence. This is
impossible without a living faith in God. A non-violent man can do
nothing save by the power and grace of God. Without it he won’t have
the courage to die without anger, without fear and without retaliation.
Such courage comes from the belief that God sits in the hearts of all
and that there should be no fear in the presence of God. The
knowledge of the omnipresence of God also means respect for the
lives of even those who may be called opponents or goondas. This
contemplated intervention is a process of stilling the fury of man
when the brute in him gets the mastery over him.
(2) This messenger of peace must have equal regard for all the
principal religions of the earth. Thus, if he is a Hindu, he will respect
the other faiths current in India. He must therefore possess a
knowledge of the general principles of the different faiths professed
in the country.
(3) Generally speaking this work of peace can only be done by
local men in their own localities.
(4) The work can be done singly or in groups. Therefore no
one need wait for companions. Nevertheless one would naturally seek
companions in one’s own locality and form a local brigade.
(5) This messenger of peace will cultivate through personal
service contacts with the people in his locality or chosen circle, so that
when he appears to deal with ugly situations, he does not descend
upon the members of a riotous assembly as an utter stranger liable to
be looked upon as a suspect or an unwelcome visitor.
244

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

(6) Needless to say, a peace bringer must have a character
beyond reproach and must be known for his strict impartiality.
(7) Generally there are previous warnings of coming storms. If
these are known, the Peace Brigade will not wait till the conflagration
breaks out but will try to handle the situation in anticipation.
(8) Whilst, if the movement spreads, it might be well if there are
some whole-time workers, it is not absolutely necessary that there
should be. The idea is to have as many good and true men and
women as possible. These can be had only if volunteers are drawn
from those who are engaged in various walks of life but have leisure
enough to cultivate friendly relations with the people living in their
circle and otherwise possess the qualifications required of a member
of the Peace Brigade.
(9) There should be a distinctive dress worn by the members of
the contemplated Brigade so that in course of time they will be
recognized without the slightest difficulty.
These are but general suggestions. Each centre can work out its
own constitution on the basis here suggested.
Lest false hopes may be raised, I must warn workers against
entertaining the hope that I can play any active part in the formation
of Peace Brigades. I have not the health, energy or time for it. I find it
hard enough to cope with the tasks I dare not shirk. I can only guide
and make suggestions through corrspondence or these columns.
Therefore let those who appreciate the idea and feel they have the
ability, take the initiative themselves. I know that the proposed Brigade
has great possibilities and that the idea behind it is quite capable of
being worked out in practice.
Harijan, 18-6-1938

296. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
June 18, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

I am sending my two articles today. The one in Hindi should
not be published. Publishing it may possibly harm Raja. What I have
written below the Government note is enough for the present. Make a
suggestion to Raja privately.
I am glad that you are training Babla. He should be fully
satisfied. Please see that while he becomes proficient in English he
does not forget Gujarati, Hindi or Sanskrit. Moreover, he should not

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

245

feel that all that is worth knowing is in English and that everything
else is trash.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 11597.

297. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
[Before June 20, 1938] 1
CHI. MAHADEV,

I hope you will be able to calm yourself now. Send a wire to
Kanti as per enclosed draft. His ship is in mid-sea. “A thought for
today” in today’s Times deserves to be engraved in our hearts by us
all. I have been reading the Dhammapada. It also is a book which can
be of great help. The letters and articles are enclosed.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Details about blood-pressure will be given by Sushila. For Kanti:
“Do come. Love. Bapu.” I got your mail just now. I will now look
into it. No note from you ! Well, let it be so, I forgot about the bloodpressure. Today 164/102. Yesterday also it was the same. In between it
had risen to 176/106.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 11600.

298. LETTER TO KOTWAL
S EGAON,

June 20, 1938
BHAI KOTWAL,

I don’t seem to have got your precious letter. You should not
remain unconcerned where Harijans are excluded. I feel that you can
throw open the temple for Harijans if others co-operate with you.
Somebody who knows the local law would be able to express a
definite opinion.
You may come after the rains are over.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3602.
1

This was obviously written before “Letter to Prabhavati”, 20-6-1938, in
which Gandhiji says “Kanti is expected to come with Saraswati in a day or two.”

246

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

299. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

June 20, 1938
CHI. PRABHA,

I have not been able to write to you myself lately. But what is
the use of writing? Do you ever stay at one place for any length of
time? You do not seem to have got the letters that I wrote to you at
Sewan. And then you complain that I don’t write to you. Now tell me
what I should do? At what address should I write so that you may get
the letters without delay?
You worry too much. But the Gita says that one should never
worry. One should endure everything. One may try to remedy things
wherever possible but one may not worry if one’s efforts fail. I can
guide you further if you write frankly.
Sushila is here. She has been giving me her services. I have
dictated to her one letter. Amtul Salaam also is here and of course
Pyarelal too.
I am all right. My diet is practically the same as it was. I take
walks as usual and also work well enough.
Harijanbandhu is sent to you regularly.
Do you get the food you need?
When may I expect you here? Kanti is expected to come with
Saraswati in a day or two.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3515.

300. LETTER TO FULCHAND K. SHAH
S EGAON,

June 20, 1938
BHAI FULCHAND,

I got the letters of both of you. I have written to that gentleman.
I will send the name if he permits. If he does not, why should we make

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

247

any inquiry? There can be no inquiry about anything which is not
supported by definite evidence. I hope you are completely restored.
Blessings from

BAPU
F ULCHAND KASTURCHAND S HAH
KELAVANI MANDAL
WADHWAN C ITY, KATHIAWAR
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9200. Also C.W. 2853. Courtesy:
Shardabehn Shah

301. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
S EGAON, W ARDHA,
[After June 20, 1938 ]1
CHI. PRABHA,

You are unnecessarily suffering. My statement will not be published as drafted. And why should you be unhappy even if anything is
published? You need not go anywhere for solitude. Your solitude is
with me. Come as soon as you can. I don’t like your worrying. Continue to write to me regularly. Don’t be remiss about it. Come out
with all your suffering and lighten your heart. Kanti has left Saraswati
here. She cannot stay without Kanti now. Let us see what happens.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3310.

1

From the reference to Saraswati’s arrival. Gandhiji wrote to the addressee on
June 20: “Kanti is expected to come with Saraswati in a day or two.”

248

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

302. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

[After June 20, 1938] 1
CHI. PRABHA,

What an angry letter ! Your anger is the result of your suffering.
That you are not educated means that I didn’t educate you. Isn’t that
so? I don’t repent of that. It is possible that you may not be useful
there. I have not trained you for the work there. I have trained you for
public service. I have trained you for work with me. There is no work
here for which you are not fit. You can live in the midst of all types of
people. I wouldn’t hesitate to send you anywhere. I have no fear that
you might do something wrong. You have got the strength now even
to mount the gallows with a smile on your face. What more would you
like to be? If you wish to learn English, you may do that whenever
you like. I can certainly teach you. Do come in September if you can.
I cannot bear to see you unhappy. You have no cause for unhappiness
at all. It is your duty to stay there for the present and serve Jayaprakash in whatever way you can. When you have no work with Father
and when Jayaprakash can let you come, you will certainly come
away, your place finally is here. Work is waiting for you here. What
more do you wish? Why do you unnecessarily make yourself unhappy?
I am well. The blood-pressure is under control. Just now I am
experimenting with a diet of milk, dates and lemons. I take mangoes
when available. I seem to feel better with this. It is only the third day
today.
Saraswati is here. Kanti is in Bangalore. Sushila and Pyarelal are
still here. Kallenbach’s sister-in-law has come. The place is crowded.
There is hardly room even to stand. A takli-yajna is going on daily
and I join in it. I feel very happy doing so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a Photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3311.

1

From the reference to Saraswati’s presence in Segaon, this letter seems to
have been written about the same time as the preceding one.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

249

303. DISCUSSION WITH DELEGATES FROM CONGRESS
PROVINCES 1
WARDHA,

June 21, 1938
To questions from the Frontier delegate regarding the non-violence with
special reference to foreign aggression, Mahatma Gandhi said that violence means a
vicious circle of conquest and defeat. True freedom is only possible through nonviolence and religion lives by non-violence.
Mahatma Gandhi further said that agriculture is not a craft dependent on social
and political condition. Craft training is essential for Indian villages. A compact and
a small area without previous schools and with national work as the background, is
necessary for introducing the Wardha scheme which is primarily rural, and for urban
areas the same principle with the necessary modifications.

The Bombay Chronicle, 22-6-1938

304. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

June 22, 1938
DEAR FRIEND,

I am deeply grateful to you for your letter.2 It has caused me no
disappointment. On the contrary, where mutual confidence is established, one is enabled to correct one’s impressions based upon onesided evidence.
I know you are on the eve of your departure for England. But if
it is no undue tax on your time, and if my request is legitimate, I
would like to have the evidence against Sardar Prithvi Singh, so that I
may correct myself and know the step I should take.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm: Linlithgow Papers. Courtesy: National Archives of India
1

They had come for a fortnight’s training as Educational Officers, under the
Wardha Scheme of Education.
2
In his letter of June 18, the Viceroy ha d said he was touched by the terms in
which Gandhiji had pleaded Prithvi Singh’s case, but that records revealed that Prithvi
Singh had been guilty of crimes of exceptional violence, aggravated by deceit, and he
could not properly ask the Governor to press his Ministers to release him.

250

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

305. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

June 22, 1938
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

I got your letter. Replies tend to get delayed.
The reasons which you have mentioned also may be responsible
for the scene on the 14th.1 But a great experiment can be carried out
only by enlisting the support of those who are most likely to respond,
and only thus can one discover truth. I can now clearly see that it was
a fundamental error on my part to have deliberately excluded other
co-workers from my experiment. I should have tried to get a class of
workers who would be able to carry on the experiment in accordance
with conditions laid down by me. My taking it upon myself, instead of
finding such a class of workers, was the result of abysmal ignorance
and certainly of conceit, too. In consequence, while I would not tolerate even the most trivial departure from the conditions by my coworkers. I myself committed the most serious blunders. This was the
limit of intolerance. The small-mindedness implied in this attitude fills
me with disgust for myself; but on the other hand the generosity displayed by all of you co-workers delights me with its sweet fragrance.
This, in brief, is the truth.
The new experiment2 started on the 2nd. But it is only the
beginning as yet. The ship has set sail and is slowly leaving port. It is
not easy for one who has been used to sailing in one kind of weather
continuously for 40 years to try to sail in weather of another kind.
Hence the slowness of speed.
I am not in a position to advise you much in regard to Gijubhai.
But I should certainly like you to consider one point. Gijubhai is a
devoted follower of the Montessori system. I know its basic principle.
We do not even make an attempt to follow it here. Narandas and you
have understood the principles of the Wardha scheme and are
convinced of the soundness of the scheme. Probably Gijubhai will not
be able to co-operate with you. For, as far as I know him, he will not
1

Vide “Letter to Amritlal T. Nanavati”, 2-5-1938
Of not having any contact with grown-up girls. Gandhiji had decided not to
take the support of girls during his walks.
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

251

be able to co-operate unreservedly in implementing the Wardha
scheme.
Show this letter to Narandas. You may write to me or come here
whenever you wish.1
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5544. Also Bapuna Patro-7: Shri
Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 267-8.

306. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
June 23, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

My idea of boycott is that it can be a perfectly non-violent
measure. When it is that, it becomes a duty. Hence boycott of Japanese
goods does become a duty for those who consider Japan to be wholly
in the wrong. And when it becomes a duty, it takes no account of
consequences. And duty has to be performed whether one has
company or not. Have you seen Stanley Jones’s thesis on the subject?
No more today.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3630. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6439.

307. DISCUSSION WITH STUDENTS2
[Before June 25, 1938]
Gandhiji explained to them how almost since the beginning of his public life
in South Africa he had been closely associated with labour. When he settled down to
practise at the bar in South Africa he decided to give the whole of his spare time to
work for the Indian settlers there, and the first man who came to him for assistance
was an indentured labourer. This case at once put him in touch with labour. The
labourers brought to him their troubles with their employers and also their personal
and domestic worries, and that gave him a glimpse into their lives as nothing else
could have done. Non-violence was the first thing he placed before them, and non1

These two sentences are from the printed source.
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Notes”. A group of university graduates
after undergoing training in the organization of labour had come to see Gandhiji.
2

252

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

violence was the only thing that they had been pledged to observe when, at a critical
stage in the satyagraha campaign, nearly 60,000 labourers downed their tools and
faced imprisonment. They went through untold hardships, suffering, starvation, and
some even died, but they adhered to non-violence until the end. Their condition was
particularly difficult and in a sense worse than the workers’ here. They were not free,
but indentured, and they had to fight not only for justice from their employers but for
the abolition of the opprobrious £3 tax which threatened them with extinction. But
non-violence helped them to pull through. His work in Champaran and Ahmedabad
was recent history. Regarding Champaran he said that the condition of the peasants
there was almost the same as the indentured labourers’, and that they had failed in
their agitation for nearly half a century for there was no cohesive power of nonviolence to hold them together. There had been several riots and their condition had
grown worse every year. But the first taste of non-violence breathed new life into
them, and at the end of a remarkably brief struggle they were emancipated.

Without that necessary discipline in non-violence, they would
have internecine strife and would never be ready to develop the
strength that is needed to enable them to realize the power that they
possess. Organization, technical skill and everything else would follow
the acceptance of the fundamental principle of non- violence. Class
collaboration would also follow as a matter of course. They are
strong in numbers and yet they feel so dependent, so very much at the
mercy of their employers. That is because they do not know their own
inherent strength. Otherwise what is there to prevent them from
pooling their own resources and dictating terms as employers do now.
The thing that they have to realize is that labour is as much capital as
metal. That realization can come only through acceptance of nonviolence.
But after that realization has come and they have come to their
own, non-violence does not become superfluous. If they were to bid
good-bye to it, they would be as bad as capitalists and turn exploiters
themselves. The realizaton of their strength combined with adherence
to non-violence would enable them to co-operate with capital and turn
it to proper use. Then they will not regard it as a conflicting interest,
they will not regard the mill and the machinery as belonging to the
exploiting agents and grinding them down, but as their own
instruments of production, and will therefore protect them as well as
they would their own property. They will not steal time and turn out
less work, but will put in the most they can. In fact, capital and labour
will be mutual trustees and both will be trustees of consumers. The
trusteeship theory is not unilateral and does not in the least imply

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

253

superiority of the turstee. It is, as I have shown, a perfectly mutual
affair, and each believes that his own interest is best safeguarded by
safeguarding the interest of the other. ‘May you propitiate the gods
and may the gods propitiate you, and may you reach the highest good
by this mutual propitiation,’ says the Bhagavad Gita. There is no
separate species called gods in the universe, but all who have the
power of production and will work for the community using that
power are gods—labourers no less than the capitalists.
Harijan, 25-6-1938.

308. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
[Before June 25, 1938] 1
CHI. KAKA,

I want that book about marriage rites. Send two or three copies.
I hope to marry Vijaya to Manubhai shortly. Nanabhai will most
probably attend and he himself will perform the rites. But he says he
would like to perform the rites according to your booklet. I
therefore think it necessary to send a copy to him.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7686.

309. TELEGRAM TO KANTILAL GANDHI
WARDHAGANJ,

June 25, 1938
KANTI GANDHI
HARIJAN S EVAK SANGH
BANGALORE
SARASWATI
LIVE
HER

DISCONSOLATE.

WITHOUT
CARRY

OUT

YOU.

WANTS

SUGGEST

PROMISE

BUT

YOUR

PRESENCE.

YOUR

SENDING

DO

WHAT

YOU

SAYS
WIRE
THINK

CAN’T
ASKING
BEST.

BAPU
From a photostat: C.W. 7336. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi.

1

254

Vide “Letter to Mahadev Desai”, 25-6-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

310. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
Unrevised

S EGAON,

June 25, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

I am not regular nowadays about your letters. For I have not
asked Mira to give a regular letter or p.c. But you shall have it if you
want it.
There is no neglect on the part of the postal department about
the letters. The thing is that I am writing this at night. It will be posted
tomorrow but will bear the date the day after. I hate post-dating
letters.
I have been forgetting always to tell you that the exception in
favour of S. was dropped, she had to nurse me because of her skill.
This is no favour but necessity which is protected in my note yet
unpublished.
I have not yet been able to come to a final decision about the
publication. My own inclination is to publish it. I have not yet given it
final shape. I am in no hurry.
Yes, I read Sastri’s address. I want to deal with it if I get the
time.
Subhas is in Wardha. He is looking a picture of health. All he
needed was work of the type he loves. He has got it and he is happy.
Love.
R OBBER
From the original: C.W. 3866. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7022.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

255

311. LETTER TO KHWAJA NAZIMUDDIN
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

June 25, 1938
DEAR KHWAJA SAHEB,

I thank you for your letter of 18th June, 1 as also for the letters
from prisoners, dated 21st and 26th May respectively. I wish the
prisoners’ letters could have been sent to me earlier. I am enclosing
replies 2 to them, which I hope will be sent to them without delay.
With regard to the prisoners, I had the benefit of a fairly long
chat with Subhas Babu. On his return he hopes to be able to see you,
and then, if necessary, ask for permission to see the prisoners. As, very
properly, his acceptance and that of Sarat Babu is regarded necessary,
it is as well that further negotiations are conducted by one of them.
Moreover this arrangement saves me another journey to Bengal. I am
sorry to inform you that my health has again become very uncertain
owing to the heavy strain of work I have been recently undertaking.
Before the proposed scheme can be accepted by us three it is
necessary that even following out the method of the Government
scheme, the result should approximate to what I have submitted in my
letter of 13th April last. It I accepted anything less I would be guilty
of a breach of faith with the prisoners to whom I gave an absolute
assurance, often repeated, that, subject to their subscribing to nonviolence, I should strain every nerve to secure early discharge for
every one of them. I could, therefore, not be party to any scheme
which does not imply such discharge of all prisoners. The method
adopted for achieving the end would then cause no difficulty.
I hope that when Subhas Babu meets you, it will be possible to
reach a satisfactory solution. If, at any time, you desire my presence,
and if it is likely to facilitate matters, you will please not hesitate to
drop me a line and, health permitting, I would gladly visit Bengal.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
THE HON’BLE KHWAJA S IR NAZIMUDDIN
7 HUNGERFORD S TREET
C ALCUTTA
From a copy: C.W. 9929
1

In this the addressee had said that the Bengal Government were not standing
still in the matter of the detenus and that they would gladly grant facilities for
convincing the prisoners of the desirability of accepting the decision come to
regarding their cases.
2 These are not traceable.

256

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

312. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
June 25, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

Please see Kanti’s letter. Send the accompanying wire1 to
Ramachandran. Hope the wire2 to Kanti was despatched yesterday.
Last night I took serpina. At 3.30 a.m. the blood-pressure was
190/112. Just now it must be less. Nothing need be done because of
this. I shall have to reduce the work. Send the accompanying wire to
Hanna3 .
Blessings from

BAPU

[P.S.]
Did you give Kaka the letter regarding marriage rites? Now at
6.30 a.m. it is 180/102.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11599.

313. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

[After June 25, 1938] 4
CHI. KANTI,

I have been regretting having called Saraswati. She has been
miserable ever since you left. She told Vasumati so the day before
yesterday, and Vasumati told me. I had a long talk with Saraswati. She
said: “I cannot live without Kanti. Send me to Bangalore.” I got into
a fluster. I said: “I certainly could not do that. It would interfere with
Kanti’s studies. It would also spoil your life and your parents would
not approve of it. But I shall write to him. You too may write.” But
she was not satisfied with that. She told me this morning: “Call Kanti.
Send him a telegram.” I did not agree at first. Then I felt that I
should at least inform you and so sent you a telegram. You must have
received it. She goes on repeating: “If K. does not come, send me to
1

This is not traceable.
Vide “Telegram to Kantilal Gandhi”, 25-6-1938
3
Niece of Kallenbach. The telegram to her is not traceable.
4
From the contents; vide “Telegram to Kantilal Gandhi”, 25-6-1938
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

257

Bangalore.” I did not like your not having stayed on. I am now in a
fix. I cannot trust her word. I do not even know what is in your mind.
It is my firm opinion that you should make it clear to her that you two
cannot live together till you are married. You certainly cannot
abandon your studies and come away. It is a different matter if you
marry immediately and live together. But none of her elders would be
agreeable to that. Your firmness is absolutely essential in the interest
of Saraswati’s progress. Without that she would be completely ruined.
And you too will not be happy. But this is only my opinion.
From a copy of the Gujarati : C. W. 7389. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

314. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
[After June 26, 1938] 1
CHI. MAHADEV,

If sleep overcomes you let it. This time we need not worry about
the editorial. Hanna will finish it in a little while. I do understand why
you feel sleepy. Your mind is a little lighter. You certainly did well in
not coming. There is no need for you at all to force yourself. I am
returning the cheque.
Should I look for some assistant? It will be enough if you
manage Lilavati. Here she is absolutely idling away her time and feels
unhappy all the time—for having had to leave the kitchen. She will be
somewhat happy if she goes there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11638.

1

258

From the reference to Hanna who arrived on June 26.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

315. TELEGRAM TO KANTILAL GANDHI
WARDHAGANJ,

June 27, 1938
KANTI GANDHI
HARIJANSEWAK S ANGH
BANGALORE
YOUR

LETTER.

TELL

HER

LEAVE

SHE

SARASWATI
MUST

BANGALORE.

WANTS

FULFIL

YOU

PROMISE

TAKE

LEAVE .

BE

FIRM.

STAY SEGAON. YOU CANNOT

LOVE.

BAPU
From a photostat: C.W. 7335. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi.

316. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
June 27, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

Again pencil hand. I am on my back with the earth bandage on
the abdomen.
If you do not see the Reformer 1 , look up the current number.
You will find Hansa’s article. Do you know anything of that movement?
We have a newcomer in Kallenbach’s niece. She is an extraordinarily good woman. But our climate may floor her. She came in
only yesterday.
The weather just now is cool.
My b. p. shoots up and goes down. Does not interfere with
work.
Love
R OBBER
From the original: C.W. 3867. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur, Also G.N. 7023

1

The Indian Social Reformer.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

259

317. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
June 27, 1938
CHI. KAKA,

I read your letter, as also the article. If the article pertains to the
work of Talimi Sangh, the sentence about Hindi should be omitted.
But if it pertains to the work for the spread of Hindi, it cannot be
omitted. The distinction is clear enough. More when we meet.
Who is Madan Mohan? He has given his address care of you.
The reply1 to him is enclosed.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7687.

318. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
S EGAON,

June 29, 1938
CHI. VIJAYA,

It is not your fault, either. Nor is it Amtul Salaam’s. I had no
other intention except that of changing Amtul Salaam if it was
necessary for you to remain there for more than six days. You ought
not to indulge in conjectures about my intentions. You may come
only if the doctor gives full permission. Lilavati can be sent without
any inconvenience.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 4579. Courtesy: Vijayabehn M. Pancholi.

1

260

This is not traceable.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

319. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
Silence Day [After June 29, 1938] 1
CHI. VIJAYA,

You must be all right. Manilalbhai will bring you here in the
evening, if the doctor permits, that is.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7109, Also C.W. 4601. Courtesy:
Vijayabhehn M. Pancholi

320. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON,

June 30, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

You won’t mind the missing of a day now and again.
My statement is still hanging fire. It is still to be mended. I am
having extraordinary opinions on it.
Did I tell you Kallenbach’s niece had come here? She is very
weak in body. She is most anxious to help. I wish you would see her.
If she does not remain well, I shall have to pack her off.
Shanta has gone back.
Balkrishna is not bad.
Love.
R OBBER
From the original: C.W. 3868. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur, Also G.N. 7024.

321. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
June 30, 1938
CHI. KANTI,

I got your letter. I have done all that you wished and more. I
have arranged for her coaching in Hindi, music, etc. I ask her to sit
with me. I permit her to eat everything. I have permitted her to cook
1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

261

her food with chillies, even offered to get it cooked for her. I have
asked Vasumati and Sharda to keep her company. I give her a good
deal of my time too. But she wants you. How can I give that?
You are safe because you can see your errors sooner or later.
Being at my wit’s end I have already sent a wire to Ramachandran. I
have asked him or Govindan to come over. There has been no reply
so far. It was your duty to let me know what happened there.
Now my advice. If you wish to save yourself and Saraswati you
will have to be hard-hearted. You should plainly tell Saraswati that
you will neither leave Bangalore nor permit her to come over there;
that she will have to stay either at Segaon or at Trivandrum. She will
submit to you. But she knows your weakness. She is, of course, a child
but you, too, have proved to be a child. I had thought that you were
mature and had ability to guide Saraswati. But my judgment has
proved to be wrong. You seem to have become completely infatuated.
If you find it impossible to overcome the infatuation, then there is no
other way for you except to get married. But I would consider it an
outrage for you to marry at present. I would not give my consent to it.
But you do not need my consent. I would regard it as your duty to do
that without which you cannot live. If I cannot give my consent to it
because I don’t like it, you should not feel unhappy.
Give up the idea of going to Nagpur. Complete the course there.
Permit Amtul Salaam to talk. It would be easy for me if you did
so. You should trust me. I will not let Amtul Salaam violate propriety.
I will tell you an interesting thing that happened yesterday. In
the morning Saraswati came and asked me to send you a wire stating:
“I will be brave,” etc. I asked her to write down the telegram. She,
therefore, brought the enclosed. I told her that it being Sunday I
would send it today. She was pleased. Before two hours had passed
she brought another telegram, also enclosed. It was of course not sent.
This is the position. Everything depends on you. I wish to give you all
possible help. But all that should be within the limits of dharma. Be
mature and steady of mind. At present you should live purely a
student’s life. Your life will be ruined if you yield to attachment.
May God show you the right. path. I will not be in a hurry to
send Saraswati to Trivandrum.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7337. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi.

262

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

322. LETTER TO LAKSHMI GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

June 30, 1938
CHI. LAKSHMI,

When I do not write to you how can I expect you to write?
Please write to Saraswati.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2027.

323. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
Segaon, Wardha,
June 30, 1938
CHI. SUSHILA,

I also have had a letter from Manilal. By all means stay there as
long as you wish. Please remember that the law of life is that we
should be governed by dharma rather than by our own desires. Most
often desire and duty, preyas and shreyas, are opposed to each other.
On such occasions we should follow shreyas. This, of course, need not
be applied to your wish to stay there. It is all the same to me where
you stay. I should like you to stay wherever you would be more
cheerful and keep good health. From the point of view of service,
perhaps it may even be your duty to stay there for some more time.
Sita also may stay there. What arrangement have you made for
her education? Does Arun harass you much? Is there any
improvement in your health? Why don’t you write to Vasumati? If
you do not write even though you get time to write, how can you hope
to be excused?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4876.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

263

324. LETTER TO GOSIBEHN CAPTAIN AND SISTERS
S EGAON, WARDHA,

July 1, 1938
I thought I had never been one of the domestic circle and had
never even tried to be one. There has been an invisible spiritual bond
between us derived from the common loyalty to Dadabhai. I have
regarded you as more than his descendants by blood. You have
believed in him and his mission. His life was an inspiration to me
when I was yet a boy. I came under his influence before I had known
any other Indian leader. That influence has persisted. Soon after I
returned to India Perin entered my life and it was more than a joy to
me to find Dadabhai’s granddaughter sharing my ideals. This contact
grew. And it has become such that I instinctively feel and share the
sorrows that overtake you when I come to know of them. I never came
near enough to Jalbhai to know him so well as you four sisters. But I
knew his great worth from many sources. I knew above all his quiet
services. I realize therefore what a shock his death must be to you all.
This is to supplement my wire. May the knowledge that I am a silent
sharer in your grief lighten it somewhat.
With love to you all,
BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal.

325. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
S EGAON,

July 1, 1938
CHI. KANTI,

I did not like your wire. How can we stand between Saraswati
and her parents? How can we insist that she should never visit them at
all? But now your wire has no meaning. The latest position is this. I
had a talk with her about a great many things. I joked with her and I
even assumed a stern tone, but Saraswati did not give up her obstinacy. Firmly she told me: “Get me married.” I said: “I will never
agree to that. I cannot attend such a marriage nor can I give my
blessings. I do not approve of a girl of your age marrying. I am a
reformer and therefore cannot give my consent to a thing which I
264

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

don’t approve of. Moreover, I have every fear that Kanti’s studies will
suffer as a result of the marriage, and that is another reason why I
cannot give my consent. But if your parents agree and Kanti also is
willing, then I will not stand in your way and in that case you will not
need my blessings.” Saraswati was pleased and said at once: “Then I
am ready to go to Trivandrum. You can arrange for that.” I then
asked: “Shouldn’t we first ascertain your parents’ and Kanti’s
views?’’ So she asked me to write immediately. This conversation
took place yesterday during my walk. There was no question of
writing a letter then. In the morning I got your wire. I showed it to her
and asked her how she could go to Trivandrum now and also how the
marriage could take place. But she said: “Kantibhai is definitely
ready for marriage. My parents also will not object. You should write
a letter and after getting his consent send me to Trivandrum.” When
during our talk yesterday I agreed not to oppose the marriage to the
extent of preventing it, she agreed even to study during the time she
had to stay here. She has started learning English from Mr. Kallenbach’s niece. Today she must have started even the Hindi lessons.
This is the position.
The idea of Nagpur is absolutely useless. Mahadev has already
written to you about that. I also have already given you my opinion. I
had given my consent only with the hope that your relationship would
be an ideal one. At the moment, I do not see any sign of that hope
being realized. I said to Saraswati: “Kanti wants that you should be
treated as Kanam.” She vehemently protested: “I am not Kanam. I
know my interests. I will not stay here without Kantibhai. Please call
him for fifteen days.” I cannot make Saraswati obey my orders as
you think. I ought not to do that either. The key is solely in your
hands. My advice is that you should let Saraswati go to Trivandrum,
should flatly refuse to marry just now and should not go to
Trivandrum yourself. You should sacrifice everything else for the
sake of your studies. You should write all this to Saraswati very
frankly. You ought not to leave your studies and come here. But this
is, of course, my opinion. If it does not appeal to you and if you are
ready to marry, you may by all means do so. You need not bother if I
do not think that it will be for your good. Who can foresee the future?
My fear may be unjustified and my reasoning may be wrong. You
know best what is good for you. You should, therefore, decide as you
think best without taking into consideration my opinion and inform
me accordingly. In the mean time, I will do whatever may be

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

265

necessary to humour Saraswati. Yesterday I spared four hours for that
girl. Vasumati is devoting a good deal of her time to her, but she
frankly confesses: “The task is beyond me. How would a girl who
does not listen to you listen to me?” Over and above this Kanu also
gives some time to her. Lilavati, Sharda, etc., try their level best to
make friends with her. But she is not easy to make friends with. It
seems she feels somewhat at home with Vasumati, though. I still think
that Amtul Salaam might be able to influence her.
Now do as God prompts you and write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 7338. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi.

326. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
S EGAON,

July 1, 1938
CHI. KAKA,

I got your letter. I have already read through twice the letter to
Maulana Saheb. I do not reject it but may have to redraft it
completely. Hence the delay. I will redraft it as early as I can.
I understood Ramdevji’s letter. If you come some day, you can
persuade Mirabehn yourself. My persuading her will mean ordering
her, which will not be right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 7685.

327. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

July 1, 1938
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

Your letter was excellent, because it was so frank. There was no
reason at all for you to apologize for it. I fully remember the discussion at the Sabarmati Ashram. But my impression is the opposite
of yours. I think also that the subject was discussed on two separate
occasions. I have a faint impression that at the end of the discussion
266

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

on the first occasion some decision was arrived at regarding my
practice of walking with my hand on a girl’s shoulder. Kaka was not
present at that discussion. When he came to know about it, he raised
the subject again, for he approved of the principle behind my
practice. At the end of the second discussion, my memory is that I had
decided to maintain the status quo. Be that as it may, the main point is
that I do not think I have failed to do what I had promised to do.
As regards the Wardha decision, you will see if you read
Harijan1 that the girls, while going in procession from Maganwadi
to Mahilashram and from Mahilashram to Maganwadi, used to call at
my hut and take me out with them. I walked with my hands on their
shoulders by turns. This was observed by some people and became
the subject of comment. I myself raised the matter for discussion and
published the decision at which I finally arrived. It was not in my
mind at all that I would never place my hands even on the shoulders
of girls who live with me, for after writing that article I continued to
use Manu and other girls as my walking-sticks. But that procession
stopped, and the practice has not been revived and will not be revived.
The reason for stopping it had nothing to do with my vow of
brahmacharya. The only consideration was the good of society. In
this instance, too, there is no question of my having failed to do what I
had declared I would do. If I had made such a declaration and then
failed to abide by it, knowing full well that I was doing so, I would be
pained and feel humiliated in my own eyes. It would give me no
pleasure to know that I had weakened in my determination to keep a
vow. Yes, there may be self-deception sometimes; as, for instance,
when I decided to drink goat’s milk because my vow forbade me to
use cow’s or buffalo’s milk, or when I compromised by counting
several vegetables as one item in observing the vow of not consuming
more than five items at any one meal. This is a painful memory for
me. Even so, I have convinced myself that I have not violated the letter
of my pledges and exercise the utmost strictness in observing a vow. I
have no comment to make about Thakkar Bapa having been pained.
You had no reply to give to the criticism of that muni of Kutch, for
you had before you two instances of what you regard to be violation
of pledges; you should, therefore, bear that criticism without
resentment. Your only reply can be: ‘Even we, who live with him, are
puzzled by some of his actions. But we think we have lost nothing by
1

Vide “A Renunciation”

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

267

our association with him, and so we cling to him. I will ask him about
the comparision which you have made.’ If you gave this reply, it was
correct. If you kept quiet, that also was right. In any case, you can
always give this reply: ‘He has always touched girls with a pure
feeling and never with a gross purpose. But a doubt having occurred
whether, unknown to him, there might not be an impure feeling in his
heart, he has temporarily given up the practice to end that doubt.’
Personally, I cannot compare the muni’s conduct with mine.
According to me, there is a serious error in it. If, however, his own
conscience feels nothing wrong in his practice, he should continue it
no matter what I do. This is so deep a matter that blind imitation of
one another is likely to land one into serious error. Everybody,
therefore, should cultivate a vigilant conscience and be guided by it,
with God as witness.
I am trying to issue a statement explaining my position. I wish
to satisfy as many co-workers as I can. Let us see if I succeed.
You do not seem to have understood the meaning of the remark
“the ship is still in port” 1 . It only means that, though the experiment
is going on, while discussion about it is still continuing it cannot be
said that it is being carried on in thought, speech and action. I can
observe its effects only if I go on with it silently. Just now, therefore, it
is being followed only in action. As for thought and speech, we joke
about the matter daily. This is enough for today.
I can say nothing about the Frontier Province just now. I shall
see about it afterwards.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5547.

328. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
July 2, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

A new phase in my search has commenced. I do not know
where it will end. The statement, if it is issued at all, will have no
relation to the one you have seen. But you must be patient. I can say
nothing yet. All I can say is that something is coming over me.
1

268

Vide “Letter to Chhaganlal Joshi”,22-6-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Nothing alarming. Only the step I have taken is not drastic enough. In
what way I shall have to shape it I do not know. God will guide me.
You seem to have had smooth sailing with your Board. I am
anxiously awaiting your letter.
Love
R OBBER
From the original: C.W. 3869. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7025.

329. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
July 2, 1938
CHI. KANTI

Saraswati has just showed me your letter. One moment you are
angry and the next moment you are pleased. How can anybody,
therefore, feel happy when you are pleased or unhappy when you are
angry?
Have I ever considered your attachment to Saraswati wrong? I
felt unhappy because I did not see what I had expected of you. But
what does it matter? It would be best that you appear to me exactly as
you are.
Saraswati has been jubilant since the day before yesterday, for
she has concluded from your letter that she will be marrying you in a
few days. She was afraid that I would oppose the marriage. She was in
high spirits the whole of yesterday. She showed me your today's letter
to her. I feel afraid now that there will be some hitch again. I strain
myself on her account. I give her as much time as I can and do my
best to cheer her. But I see that whenever her mind gets fixed upon
something it is impossible to do that.
Otherwise I very much like her innocence, her simplicity and
her childlike nature. I will look after her as long as she stays here. I
will watch what effect your letter has on her. She has not yet talked to
me. I did ask her of course.
You are right when you say that wherever my conclusions are
based on incomplete information, they are faulty. They must be so. It
may be called a virtue in a votary of truth, for his conclusions ought
to be strictly based on the facts in his possession. He should not be led
astray by any consideration of self-interest and should preserve an
objective attitude. I should be happy if my condition is such as you
have described it. That is what it should be.
I have received a letter from Nagpur saying that yesterday was

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

269

the last day for filling the posts. There were only nine posts for one of
which you were a candidate, and there were sixty applications for
those nine. What would you have done in such a crowd?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7339. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi.

330. LETTER TO KANU GANDHI
July 2, 1938,
CHI. KANAIYA,

I hurt you in the morning, didn’t I? But did you realize or not
that there was love behind my anger? I could not bear even that
mistake on your part which I knew you would make. It is a good sign.
I want to see you perfect. If you have patience, you will certainly
become so.
Are you not Narandas’s son? Emulate his patience and faith.
You should never yield to despair.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U. /II

331. TESTIMONIAL TO LALJI PARMAR
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

July 2, 1938
Shri Lalji Parmar was under training in the music department of
the Gujarat Vidyapith and he has acquired enough proficiency to
enable him to teach a bit. Only his teachers can give a definite opinion
regarding his progress. I have seen the testimonials given by the
former music teacher and the head of the Gujarat Vidyapith. Shri
Lalji Parmar is a Harijan and it would be good if the Bombay
Government could grant him some aid.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 3289

270

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

332. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
July [4,]1 1938
CHI. JAMNALAL,

The car was expected here today at 6 to take Balkrishna2 to the
hospital. If it has not left and if you can send it, please do. A note is
going to the hospital too. The car will be required only if there is still
time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2994.

333. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
July 4, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

Nobody has yet come from there. Kaka is here and I am
sending with him whatever is ready. An article by me and a note3 on
Sushila's findings concerning sugar are getting ready and will be sent
by and by.
The conversation of the day before yesterday has greatly
benefited me. It suggested some ideas to me, but there is no time to
write about them here. We may discuss them tomorrow. I may have to
visit Wardha at three o’clock. Tandonji and others are arriving.
Inquire before coming here. A letter4 for Kanti is also enclosed.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11601.

1

From Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad
Balkrishna Bhave, who was suffering from tuberculosis
3
Presumably “Bad Teeth and Refined Carbohydrates”, published in Harijan,
30-7-1938.
4
Vide the following item.
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

271

334. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
July 4, 1938
CHI. KANTI,

You must have received my letter of yesterday. You are very
cruel indeed, and also childish. You may write as rude letters as you
can but they will not make me angry. But why do you get so angry?
You are wise and are capable of self-sacrifice, but it pains me to know
that you are eaten up by anger. The knowledge that you are harming
yourself does wring my heart. I feel afraid of you. It does not do you
credit that I should weigh my words when writing to you.
Your letter to Saraswati was bad. She has been terribly upset.
Here is her letter to me. Why pit an army against a goat? It was you
who ensnared her. What is the meaning, then, of your growling at her
now if she cannot live without you? She is your helpmate, your
partner in dharma, and not your slave or your property. It is not
proper that you should first make a doll of her and then treat her as
your property. Do not dismiss all this in a fit of anger. Remember that
I am a man of experience.
I am afraid there is no way out except marriage. After the
marriage you may do what you like. Do not worry if I do not give my
consent to the marriage. It should be enough for you that I do not
oppose it. It would of course be best if you two could bear separation
and be content with writing to each other from time to time and
meeting occasionally. But that seems impossible so far as Saraswati is
concerned. Think over what you should do after the marriage. Discuss
the matter with me. My feeling is that you will have to give up study
afterwards. But I shall be happy if my fear is proved wrong and both
of you study together, as Saraswati says you will. You may now think
calmly and do what you please. Meanwhile I am tending Saraswati
like a flower.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I had finished this letter before I sent you the wire1 , but kept it
back on getting your letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7340. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi.
1

272

The telegram is not traceable.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

335. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
July 4, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

What a heavy mail today ! You must have received the material
sent earlier with Kaka. I hope you have sent the wire to Kanti. My
stars seem to be unfavourable. But if one knows how to offer up
misfortunes also to the Lord, even unfavourable stars become
favourable. I have yet to learn that. Two articles are enclosed. Giri's
letter is there. Kanaiyo is going there for it. About the rest in the next
letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11602

336. NOTE TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
[After July 4, 1938] 1
Does Balakrishna need an understanding person for 24 hours?
Then that should be arranged. Talk about it with Chimanlal. One
person can go at night. Both Krishnachandra and Sankaran are good
workers. It may be necessary to have three shifts during the day.
Among those who can be with him are Anand, Kanu, Bhansali,
Krishnachandra and, if necessary, even Chakrayya and Raj Bhushan.
See what can be done.
From the Hindi original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

Inferred from Gandhiji’s letter to Jamnalal Bajaj of July 4, 1938, on which
day Balakrishna Bhave, who was suffering from tuberculosis, was to be taken to the
hospital.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

273

337. ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS1
S EGAON,

July 6, 1938
QUESTION:

What is the place of religious instruction in the Wardha Scheme of

Education?
ANSWER: We have left out the teaching of religions from the
Wardha Scheme of Education, because we are afraid that religions as
they are taught and practised today lead to conflict rather than unity.
But on the other hand, I hold that the truths that are common to all
religions can and should be taught to all children. These truths cannot
be taught through words or through books. The children can learn
these truths only through the daily life of the teacher. If the teacher
himself lives up to the tenets of truth and justice, then alone can the
children learn that truth and justice are the basis of all religions.
When Mahatmaji was asked whether it was possible to teach children between
the ages of seven and fourteen equal respect for all religions he said:

Yes, I think so. The truth that all religions are the same in
essentials, that we must love and respect others' faiths as we respect our
own, is a very simple truth, and can easily be understood and practised
by children of seven. But, of course, the first essential is that the
teacher must have this faith himself.
The Bombay Chronicle, 7-7-1938

338. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON,

July 8, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

What a question? Of course you pass through Wardha on your
way to B2 . That means you may be here when the W. C. meets. And
here you will find yourself in a crowded room. But that you don't
mind.
1

The questions were asked by Educational Officers from Congress provinces
who had come for a fortnight’s training under the Wardha Scheme and who met
Gandhiji twice during the training. Vide also “Discussion with Delegates from
Congress Provinces”, 21-6-1938
2
Bangalore.

274

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

How you manage to lose your voice from time to time ! You
must go to a place where you can't be pestered. Is it not Segaon [?]
And now I can build for you also to your design !
J.'s1 letter to S.2 You have now, I hope. The talks have stopped of
course. The reply has to go from W.C.
Yes, Jawaharlal is having a grand time. He is raising India in the
estimation of the West.
It is perhaps as well that you will be the only member of your
Peace Brigade. This work does not need thousands. True immolation
of a few will do the trick.
You are wrong. I began work among women when I was not
even thirty years old. There is not a woman in S.A. who does not
know me. But my work was among the poorest. The intellectuals I
could not draw. My appeals have always been from heart to hearts. I
have felt like fish out of water in the company of intellectuals. Hence
you are wrong in laying down the sweeping proposition you have.
You can't blame me for not having organized the intellectuals among
women. I have not the gift. And then my method of organizing is out
of the ordinary, not necessarily superior. All I mean is that I have
nothing to show on paper. But just as I never fear coldness on the part
of the poor when I approach them, I never fear it when I approach
poor women. There is invisible bond between them and me. And why
do you miss the agony I am passing through? Is it not for woman
kind? I am wringing my soul for adequate purity, to enable me [to]
render greater service to them and through them to the whole of
humanity. Ahimsa, which is my sheet-anchor, demands all this.
I expect your next letter to tell me you are well.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3631. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6440

1
2

Jinnah’s.
Subhas Chandra Bose.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

275

339. LETTER TO PADMAJA NAIDU
S EGAON,

July 8, 1938
DEAR LOTUS-BORN,

Hope you have been behaving yourself and that Bhopal air has
done you good. But tell me if you are ever going to be fit enough to
do active work. Don’t tell me that you did excellent work about
Hyderabad famine and the like.
Love.
P LAYMATE
From the original : Padmaja Naidu Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library

340. LETTER TO RAMNIK
July 8, 1938
CHI. RAMNIK,

I get from time to time news of your illness from your father. I
understand that you are not recovering. To get well, to fall ill or to
remain ill, all this is not in our hands. But it is in our power to preserve
equanimity in all circumstances, not to forget God and not to lose the
joy within. I hope you are preserving all this.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8762. Also C.W. 1055. Courtesy:
Champabehn Mehta

341. LETTER TO BALWANTSINHA
S EGAON, WARDHA,

July 8, 1938
CHI. BALWANTSINHA,

One point in brahmacharya is this that the vital fluid should not
be wasted. It is supposed that it is not wasted when it moves upward.
This is not correct. A man giving way to anger mis-spends it or rather
destroys it, thus rendering it unfruitful. To that extent brahmacharya
has been damaged. Similarly a man wastes his vital fluid when he
indulges in intercourse for the sake of pleasure, as it is unproductive.
276

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

When a man has no desire for sensual pleasure and both the man and
the woman desire a child and come together for that purpose, then
alone is vital fluid completely fruitful. Such a couple are truly
brahmacharis. But such a couple might be only one among crores.
Apart from the one single occasion of copulation they live like
brother and sister and refrain from any sensual indulgence in thought,
speech, contact or any other way. Their intercourse for the purpose of
procreation alone can in no way come under the category of
gratification of the senses. This ought to clear your doubt.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1905

342. THE STATES
Events seem to have justified the wisdom of the Congress
resolution of non-intervention in the affairs of the States. The
constitution, however unjust, arbitrary and illogical it may be, is such
that, legally and politically, every State, small or big, is an independent
entity in its relation to the other States and that part of India which is
called British in contradistinction from the States. The similarity
common to all is that they are under the iron grip of British Rule. But
geographically and ethnically the people of the States and the other
parts of India are one and indivisible. We, the thirty-three crores of
men and women, are blood relations who cannot be parted by any
constitutional or military device. This natural relationship is working
itself without let or hindrance because of the recognition of the
constitutional fact while it lasts. That is the way of satyagraha or the
way of non-resistance to evil. It is the aseptic method in which the
physician allows the poison to work itself out by setting in motion all
the natural forces and letting them have full play.
By its resolution of non-interference the Congress put the States
people on their mettle, in other words set in motion the natural forces,
i.e., the powers latent in the people themselves. In the few recent
instances it has been found that the people having discovered their
strength they used it without any aid from outside and won full
victory. The result also was that the assistance of Congressmen was
invoked by the States’ authorities in order to settle the differences
between themselves and their people. No doubt this method like every
other known to mankind has its limitations. The Congress cannot

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

277

dictate unreasonable terms. The people must have a real grievance and
they must approach it with pure hands. For the tool of satyagraha is
ahimsa, i.e., self-suffering without inflicting suffering on the opponent
for the vindication of a cause which must be absolutely just.
If only the people of the States can realize the full meaning and
potency of satyagraha, i.e., of non-violence, they will win their relative
freedom before India as a whole comes to its own. And they will have
to before India has Independence. Thus they can have full liberty of
non-violent speech, writing and action without having to deal with
cumbersome British machinery. They can secure with comparative
ease a more equitable, even if not an equal, distribution of the wealth
produced in the States. They can, without much effort, regulate the
privy purse of their Princes and can have cheap and pure justice
guaranteed. They can deal with the problem of poverty and village
reconstruction with infinitely greater ease than in unwieldy and
bureaucracy-ridden British India. They can have real national
education for the wanting.
This will be their swaraj—no doubt far short of the Independence that the Congress wants. But if the people of the majority of the
major States attain their full height, the day of Independence will be
hastened in a manner no one has dreamt of. Let not the reformers in
the States therefore be unduly impatient; let them not forget their
limitations and above all the conditions of success, viz., strictest
observance of truth and non-violence. They must be ready to face
bullets without flinching but also without lifting their little finger in
so-called self-defence. A satyagrahi abjures the right of self-defence.
Let it also be remembered that a satyagrahi’s minimum is also his
maximum.
Harijan, 9-7-1938

343. HIGHER EDUCATION
The Rt. Hon. Shri Srinivasa Sastri has criticized, as he had a
perfect right to do, the views I timidly and very briefly expressed
some time ago on higher education. I entertain a very high regard for
him as man, patriot and scholar. It is therefore always painful to me
when I find myself disagreeing with him. And yet duty compels me to
re-express my views on higher education more fully than before, so
that the reader may make out for himself the difference between his
views and mine.
278

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I admit my limitations. I have no university education worth the
name. My high school career was never above the average. I was
thankful if I could pass my examinations. Distinction in the school
was beyond my aspiration. Nevertheless I do hold very strong views
on education in general, including what is called higher education.
And I owe it to the country that my views should be clearly known
and taken for what they may be worth. I must shed the timidity that
has led almost to self-suppression. I must not fear ridicule, and even
loss of popularity or prestige. If I hide my belief, I shall never correct
errors of judgment. I am always eager to discover them and more than
eager to correct them.
Let me now state my conclusions held for a number of years
and enforced wherever I had opportunity of enforcing them:
(1) I am not opposed to education even of the highest type
attainable in the world.
(2) The State must pay for it wherever it has definite use for it.
(3) I am opposed to all higher education being paid for from
the general revenue.
(4) It is my firm conviction that the vast amount of the so-called
education in arts, given in our colleges, is sheer waste and has resulted
in unemployment among the educated classes. What is more, it has
destroyed the health, both mental and physical, of the boys and girls
who have the misfortune to go through the grind in our colleges.
(5) The medium of a foreign language through which higher
education has been imparted in India has caused incalculable
intellectual and moral injury to the nation. We are too near our own
times to judge the enormity of the damage done. And we who have
received such education have both to be victims and judges—an
almost impossible feat.
I must now give my reason for the conclusions set forth above.
This I can best do, perhaps, by giving a chapter from my own
experience.
Up to the age of 12 all the knowledge I gained was through
Gujarati, my mother tongue. I knew then something of arithmetic,
history and geography. Then I entered a high school. For the first
three years the mother tongue was still the medium. But the schoolmaster’s business was to drive English into the pupil’s head.
Therefore more than half of our time was given to learning English
and mastering its arbitrary spelling and pronunciation. It was a painful
discovery to have to learn a language that was not pronounced as it
was written. It was a strange experience to have to learn the spelling by

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

279

heart. But that is by the way, and irrelevant to my argument. However,
for the first three years, it was comparatively plain sailing.
The pillory began with the fourth year. Everything had to be
learnt through English—geometry, algebra, chemistry, astronomy,
history, geography. The tyranny of English was so great that even
Sanskrit or Persian had to be learnt through English, not through the
mother tongue. If any boy spoke in the class in Gujarati which he
understood, he was punished. It did not matter to the teacher if a boy
spoke bad English which he could neither pronounce correctly nor
understand fully. Why should the teacher worry? His own English was
by no means without blemish. It could not be otherwise. English was
as much a foreign language to him as to his pupils. The result was
chaos. We the boys had to learn many things by heart, though we
could not understand them fully and often not at all. My head used to
reel as the teacher was struggling to make his exposition on geometry
understood by us. I could make neither head nor tail of geometry till
we reached the 13th theorem of the first book of Euclid. And let me
confess to the reader that in spite of all my love for the mother tongue
I do not to this day know the Gujarati equivalents of the technical
terms of geometry, algebra and the like. I know now that what I took
four years to learn of arithmetic, geometry, algebra, chemistry and
astronomy I should have learnt easily in one year if I had not to learn
them through English but Gujarati. My grasp of the subjects would
have been easier and clearer. My Gujarati vocabulary would have
been richer. I would have made use of such knowledge in my own
home. This English medium created an impassable barrier between
me and the members of my family, who had not gone through
English schools. My father knew nothing of what I was doing. I could
not, even if I had wished it, interest my father in what I was learning.
For though he had ample intelligence, he knew not a word of English.
I was fast becoming a stranger in my own home. I certainly became a
superior person. Even my dress began to undergo imperceptible
changes. What happened to me was not an uncommon experience. It
was common to the majority.
The first three years in the high school made little addition to
my stock of general knowledge. They were a preparation for fitting
the boys for teaching them everything through English. High schools
were schools for cultural conquest by the English. The knowledge
gained by the three hundred boys of my high school became a
circumscribed possession. It was not for transmission to the masses.
280

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

A word about literature. We had to learn several books of
English prose and English poetry. No doubt all this was nice. But that
knowledge has been of no use to me in serving or bringing me in
touch with the masses. I am unable to say that if I had not learnt what
I did of English prose and poetry, I should have missed a rare
treasure. If I had, instead, passed those precious seven years in
mastering Gujarati and had learnt mathematics, sciences, and Sanskrit
and other subjects through Gujarati, I could easily have shared the
knowledge so gained with my neighbours. I would have enriched
Gujarati, and who can say that I would not have, with my habit of
application and my inordinate love for the country and the mother
tongue, made a richer and greater contribution to the service of the
masses?
I must not be understood to decry English or its noble literature. The columns of Harijan are sufficient evidence of my love of
English. But the nobility of its literature cannot avail the Indian nation
any more than the temperate climate or the scenery of England can
avail her. India has to flourish in her own climate and scenery and her
own literature, even though all the three may be inferior to the English
climate, scenery and literature. We and our children must build on our
own heritage. If we borrow another, we impoverish our own. We can
never grow on foreign victuals. I want the nation to have the treasures
contained in that language, and for that matter the other languages of
the world, through its own vernaculars. I do not need to learn Bengali
in order to know the beauties of Rabindranath’s matchless productions. I get them through good translations. Gujarati boys and girls do
not need to learn Russian to appreciate Tolstoy’s short stories. They
learn them through good translations. It is the boast of Englishmen
that the best of the world’s literary output is in the hands of that
nation in simple English inside of a week of its publication. Why need
I learn English to get at the best of what Shakespeare and Milton
thought and wrote?
It would be good economy to set apart a class of students whose
business would be to learn the best of what is to be learnt in the
different languages of the world and give the translation in the
vernaculars. Our masters chose the wrong way for us, and habit has
made the wrong appear as right.
I find daily proof of the increasing and continuing wrong being
done to the millions by our false de-Indianizing education. Those
graduates who are my valued associates themselves flounder when
they have to give expression to their innermost thoughts. They are
strangers in their own homes. Their vocabulary in the mother tongue

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

281

is so limited that they cannot always finish their speech without having
recourse to English words and even sentences. Nor can they exist
without English books. They often write to one another in English. I
cite the case of my companions to show how deep the evil has gone.
For we have made a conscious effort to mend ourselves.
It has been argued that the wastage that occurs in our colleges
need not worry us if, out of the collegians, one Jagadish Bose can be
produced by them. I should freely subscribe to the argument if the
wastage was unavoidable. I hope I have shown that it was and is even
now avoidable. Moreover, the creation of a Bose does not help the
argument. For Bose was not a product of the present education. He
rose in spite of the terrible handicaps under which he had to labour.
And his knowledge became almost intransmissible to the masses. We
seem to have come to think that no one can hope to be like a Bose
unless he knows English. I cannot conceive a grosser superstition than
this. No Japanese feels so helpless as we seem to do.
Nothing but a heroic remedy can deal with the deep-seated evil
which I have endeavoured to describe. The Congress Ministers can, if
they will, mitigate it if they cannot remove it.
Universities must be made self-supporting. The State should
simply educate those whose services it would need. For all other
branches of learning it should encourage private effort. The medium
of instruction should be altered at once and at any cost, the provincial
languages being given their rightful place. I would prefer temporary
chaos in higher education to the criminal waste that is daily
accumulating.
In order to enhance the status and the market value of the
provincial languages, I would have the language of the law courts to
be the language of the province where the court is situated. The
proceedings of the Provincial Legislatures must be in the language, or
even the languages of the province where a province has more than
one language within its borders. I suggest to the legislators that they
could, by enough application, inside of a month, understand the
languages of their provinces. There is nothing to prevent a Tamilian
from easily learning the simple grammar and a few hundred words of
Telugu, Malayalam and Kanarese, all allied to Tamil. At the centre
Hindustani must rule supreme.
In my opinion this is not a question to be decided by academicians. They cannot decide through what language the boys and
girls of a place are to be educated. That question is already decided
282

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

for them in every free country. Nor can they decide the subjects to be
taught. That depends upon the wants of the country to which they
belong. Theirs is the privilege of enforcing the nation’s will in the
best manner possible. When this country becomes really free the
question of medium will be settled only one way. The academicians
will frame the syllabus and prepare text-books accordingly. And the
products of the education of a free India will answer the requirements
of the country as today they answer those of the foreign ruler. So
long as we the educated classes play with this question. I very much
fear we shall not produce the free and healthy India of our dream. We
have to grow by strenuous effort out of our bondage, whether it is
educational, economical, social or political. The effort itself is threefourths of the battle.
Thus I claim that I am not an enemy of higher education. But I
am an enemy of higher education as it is given in this country. Under
my scheme there will be more and better libraries, more and better
laboratories, more and better research institutes. Under it we should
have an army of chemists, engineers and other experts who will be real
servants of the nation and answer the varied and growing requirements
of a people who are becoming increasingly conscious of their rights
and wants. And all these experts will speak not a foreign language but
the language of the people. The knowledge gained by them will be
the common property of the people. There will be truly original work
instead of mere imitation. And the cost will be evenly and justly
distributed.
Harijan, 9-7-1938

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

283

344. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
SEGAON, W ARDHA,
July 9, 1938
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your pamphlet1 . The Rentia Baras day is or should
be the time for drawing up an annual balance-sheet of the progress
of khadi work and thinking out ways and means of speeding it up. I
see that your resolutions are increasing in number every year. But in
comparison to what we have to achieve, even this increased number of
resolutions are nothing. According to the saying, ‘drop by drop fills
the lake’, we should content ourselves with doing the best we are
capable of. Let all participants in this yajna remember that we should
not rest satisfied till the daily income of all workers including the
spinners reaches eight annas for a day of eight hours. And in order to
achieve that we should be proficient in all aspects of the charkha
science. In that way we shall be able to improve the quality of the
khadi without raising the prices very much. If we master that science,
we can prove that khadi, though apparently costly, is actually bound
to be cheap.
I hope to be able to send someone for the Rentia Baras day.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M. M. U./II. Also C. W. 8544. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi.

345. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
S EGAON,

July 9, 1938
CHI. KAKA,

I will read the Hindi book. It is not going to be easy. The whole
policy will have to be reconsidered. If even one false step is taken,
then there is serious danger of the whole structure which is being built
falling to pieces. If you come on Tuesday we will think over it. Come
in the afternoon if the time suits you. Write to me and let me know,
when you get the time, what you thought after your talk with
1

Issued on the 69th birth anniversary of Gandhiji; vide “Note to Narandas
Gandhi”, 9-7-1938

284

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Tandonji. That will help me and also help you to clarify your
thoughts.
Ponder carefully over what I have written1 on education.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 7684.

346. NOTE TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[About July 9, 1938] 2
It will be very good indeed if this is implemented.3 Make some
arrangement to ascertain whether everybody who makes the resolve
keeps it.
[PS.]
I have already replied to your other points.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M. M. U./II. Also C. W. 8551. courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi.

347. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
July 10, 1938
CHI. LILA,

Do you expect a note from me every day? You should not
be over-impatient to come here. You may come here whenever you
get an opportunity in the normal course. I would also like your coming here, but you should not come at the cost of your work or health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9373. Also C.W. 6648. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

1

Vide “Higher Education”
The note is written on the pamphlet mentioned in “Letter to Narandas
Gandhi”, 9-7-1938
3
The pamphlet carried an appeal by Narandas Gandhi to all the workers to take
a vow of spinning 160 rounds of yarn a day, thus spinning 70,000 a year.
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

285

348. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
Unrevised

S EGAON,
July 11, 1938

MY DEAR IDIOT,

I write this just as I got your letter and before destroying it. You
must not allow your imagination to destroy your sanity. I have taken
no drastic step. I shifted to Pyarelal’s hole for giving Hanna the
privacy she needed. She is wholly unaccustomed to our ways. I have
now come back and you will occupy your usual corner. Sharda is my
constant attendant. Amtul Salaam sleeps by my side, fans me and
covers me when I need more covering. She feeds me. Lilavati is
helping Mahadev, Shanta having gone back to England. You must not
be quite so idiotic as you seem to have become over my travail. It is
there. But my faith in my original conception is not shattered. Only I
must learn how to realize it. Bad dreams must be avoided. There must
be no repetition of 14th April.
Hanna has been sent by Kallenbach to gain experience and to
know me personally as she has known me through him for years. She
is most lovable but I fear she is too delicate to be able to stay here
long.
I shall expect you on 23rd, the day of the meeting of the W. C.
It is quite cool just now but the road is fearfully muddy. You will feel
a little crowded. But that you won’t mind.
You are criminally wasting your body. There is no occasion for
all the neglect of which you are guilty. Some people deem it a merit
to neglect their bodies. I wish you would have your name removed
from the register of these illustrious criminals.
Love.
TYRANT

[PS.]
You inquire about my health. I assure you that it is in good
order and condition. Hakumatrai was here yesterday. You can ask
him. It is true I have lost weight. But that is of no consequence in
blood-pressure cases. I must not attempt to regain it in this weather. If
I keep well otherwise, the weight will be regained, at any rate most of
it.
T.
From the original: C. W. 3870. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 7026.

286

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

349. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
July 11, 1938
CHI. LILA,

What a letter from you ! What is the point of your staying on
there in such a condition? If you do not like to remain there, come
over here. I do not want to keep you there against your wishes. If I
have killed your individuality, what good has your staying with me
done you? I did not at all like your letter. Why do you not understand
that you are free to do what you like?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9374. Also C. W. 6649. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar.

350. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
July 11, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

Have you read Lilavati’s letter? If you have not, you will know
about it from my reply. Kanti it seems could give you fairly good
work. Read carefully what I have written today. I feel like writing
about something else too, but I will restrain myself. Mirabehn is down
with malaria.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I am sending that draft for Jawaharlal. I have kept with me a
copy each of the articles.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 11603.

351. LETTER TO PYARELAL
July 11, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

You are at present ruling over me. I often feel like complaining
but I dare not. How did I come to have so much fear?
I am perturbed by Hakumat Rai’s warning. Sushila will not
recover if she is forced to eat. She will recover only when the fear

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

287

which is lodged in her mind is removed. I have not seen such a
woman anywhere. I cannot bear to look at her face. You see how
unhappy Ba is.
I am trying hard to comprehend your idea of your duty but I
am baffled. I find your fasts irksome. I shall suffer so long as you
make me suffer. But is it not your duty to let me know?
Is my experience worth nothing at all? It is true that I no longer
have the right to write like this after my lapse of April 14. But since
you attach no importance to the lapse you should give my writing the
importance it deserves.
I have freed you from all anxiety. If you must fast, I will not fast
with you. Right now I am doing it without any deliberation. I am
trying to follow whither God leads me. But who knows if it is notSatan
rather than God guiding me? But I am carrying on in the belief that it
is God who is guiding me. My wish is not to worry about you or
Sushila. But that does not happen. I do worry about those who have
become part of me. Free me from anxiety on your account if you
can. Consider Sushila.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I do not think Sushila need see this letter. However, do what you
think proper.
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

352. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
July 12, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

For today I am sending Kanu. He will stay at least till Kanti
leaves. And if you wish to detain him for tomorrow also he will stay
on. I do not know whether you get Lilabhai’s help or not. The burden
should not be on you. I see that Deka is worth being trained. I have
decided to observe silence as long as my heart-searching goes on. Of
course if I grant an interview to anybody I will speak. The moment he
leaves, I will stop speaking. I do not know how long I should keep this
up. It will be all right if you do not come here in the present
288

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

atmosphere. Do not strain yourself to come. Come only if you can do
so easily.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I am enclosing the papers.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 11604.

353. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
July 13, 1938
CHI. LILA,

I got your letter. You have not at all forfeited your right to
come to me. You may certainly come whenever you are free. I will be
perfectly content if you can preserve peace of mind there. Ultimately
of course you will have to come here. Build up your health there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9589. Also C. W. 6561. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar.

354. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
July 13, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

I send you herewith a letter from Agatha. Reply to it. Send
Agatha’s letter to Ghanshyamdas. It would be better to help her come
here. Write about the fare, etc. Agatha may also write whatever she
wishes.
Do not forget to bring jamun or, if they are not available, their
stones.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 11605

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

289

355. A MESSAGE TO “THE ARYAN PATH”
SEGAON,
[July 14, 1938]
I welcome your advertising the principles in defence of which
Hind Swaraj was written.1 The English edition is a translation of the
original which was in Gujarati. I might change the language here and
there if I had to rewrite the booklet. But after the stormy thirty years
through which I have since passed, I have seen nothing to make me
alter the views expounded in it. Let the reader bear in mind that it is a
faithful record of conversations I had with workers, one of whom was
an avowed anarchist. He should also know that it stopped the rot that
was about to set in among some Indians in South Africa. The reader
1

A special issue of The Aryan Path exclusively devoted to Hind Swaraj, then
being planned, came out in September. The contributors included such eminent
Western thinkers as Frederick Soddy, G.D.H. Cole, C. Delisle Burns, John Middleton
Murry, Hugh I’Anson Fausset, Gerald Heard and Irene Rathbone. Though none of them
found themselves wholly in agreement with the thesis advanced in Hind Swaraj they
all nevertheless saw the great importance of the work. Frederick Soddy, for instance,
though disagreeing with Gandhiji, suggested that “anyone who wishes to change the
world would do well to study” the book. To G. D. H. Cole Gandhiji’s case against the
West looked “infinitely stronger” than it did in 1908, when “the ephemeral
civilization of the West looked stable under Western eyes”. C. Delisle Burns saw the
highest merit of Hind Swaraj “in its emphasis upon moral issues and opposition to
the pursuit of private wealth and power”. John Middleton Murry considered Hind
Swaraj a “great book”, “one of the spiritual classics of the world”, and compared
Gandhiji’s vision of real swaraj to the Christian vision of the Kingdom of Heaven.
Gerald Heard thought Hind Swaraj was superior to Rousseau’s Social Contract and
Karl Marx’s Das Capital, for it did not mark the end of an age but the beginning of a
new order. Irene Rathbone found the book “enormously powerful”, the language of
which forced her “by its tremendous honesty to search my own honesty”. She thought
the work was “simple and logical, economical, condensed, poetic”. Hugh Fausset
summed up Hind Swaraj as a book whose purpose was “to save India, not from
Englishmen, but from the modern civilization which is eating into the vitals of the
West”. He had enough trust in the indestructible vitality of the human spirit to be sure
that it would not allow itself to be lastingly mechanized. The machine was exposing
ruthlessly the consequences that must happen to men and nations who had lost their
integrity. Hind Swaraj was an attempt at restoring man to his true estate, and was, for
this reason, “one of the best modern handbooks of that real revolution which must
happen in us all, if we are to fulfil the creative purpose of life”.

290

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

may balance against this the opinion of a dear friend, who, also, is no
more, that it was the production of a fool.1
M. K. GANDHI
The Aryan Path, September 1938, Vol. IX, No. 9, p. 423.

356. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
S EGAON,

July 14, 1938
CHI. PREMA,

You have not asked for a reply to your letter, 2 but I felt like
writing at least a postcard. Though I do not write to you, I naturally
think of you on innumerable occasions. May you go on making
steady progress. The rest from Harijan, and from Mahadev.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10395. Also C. W. 6834. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

357. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
[July 15, 1938] 3
MY DEAR IDIOT,

What a sad and wretched letter, yours of 11th. I am enjoying
myself and you are sorrowing for nothing. When you come here, you
will laugh at your own folly. My misery is superficial if there is any
yet left. My peace cannot be permanently taken away by anything or
anybody. You simply do not know me if you think that my
experiences have undone me. If there is real attempt at purification, it
must strengthen me and make me more joyful. But how can I help
you if you must allow your imagination to run riot?
1

Mahadev Desai in a preface to Hind Swaraj published by the Navajivan Trust
wrote: “When Gokhale saw the translation, on his visit to South Africa in 1912, he
thought it so crude and hastily conceived that he prophesied that Gandhiji would
himself destroy the book after spending a year in India.” (p. 14).
2
The addressee had written to Gandhiji on her birthday for his blessings and
had also asked some questions which she said Mahadev Desai could answer if Gandhiji
was busy.
3
According to the addressee the postmark on the envelope bears the date
16-7-1938.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

291

You have to apologize about women. I could not organize
intellectual women as such.1 I have not organized intellectual men as
such. But this thing does not lend itself to argument. I simply cannot
subscribe to the charge that there has been any neglect on my part
about organizing women. It may be that I have not had the qualifications for doing better. But that would [be] no charge against me.
However I do not mind your complaint. I rather like it. It shows that
there are things in which we look at things differently. And why not?
True affection does not demand identity of outlook. But I do not even
on this point despair of convincing you that I could not have done
better than I have. My passion for brahmacharya has that meaning. I
must be wholly pure if I have true love for womankind.
Love.
TYRANT

[PS.]
I believe apricots did arrive—all rotten. Apples have come. I
shall certainly eat them. You must be well quickly.
From the original: C. W. 3632. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6441

358. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
July 15, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

Herewith some letters. I do not know if you brought liquid
paraffin for Mirabehn yesterday. If you did not bring it, then please
remember to bring it. If you do not come, send it with the person who
comes. I hope you have asked Vyas about jamun stones and written to
Bombay to discontinue sending fruit.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 11606

359. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
July 15, 1938
CHI. KAKA,

I am returning Rajaji’s letter. He is filled with great despair from
all sides. But his sense of humour saves him.
Blessing from

BAPU
1

292

Vide also “Letter to Amrit Kaur”, 8-7-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[PS.]
A letter from Rajkumari is enclosed.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10900

360. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
July 15, 1938
CHI. LILA,

Do take tea if you cannot maintain your health without it. If you
can do without it, try to forgo it. But you have got to keep good
health. If you apply mud-pack to the stomach at night, it should do
some good. Instead of tea, one can take hot water and milk with
jaggery or honey. About bananas Mahadev will have told you. Be it
good things or bad things keep writing to me. It is desirable that you
get rid of bad thoughts. But if they do come, it will only be to your
good to write to me.
Blessings from

B APU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

361. SPEAKERS AND POLITICS
Some controversy has raged round the propriety of the
Speakers of the various Provincial Assemblies taking an active part in
politics. There has been the Speaker’s ruling and a full debate and a
resolution in the U. P. Assembly to the effect that the Speaker can
consistently with the due discharge of the obligations of office take an
active part in politics. Shri Sambamurti was with me for a few days
and exhaustively discussed the question with me. He read to me
copious extracts from authoritative treatises dealing with the Speakers’
duties in the Parliaments of the world. And there has appeared an
article in Harijan by Shri Satyamurti. I had a long discussion on the
question with Shri Purushottamdas Tandon during his recent visit to
Wardha.
After all these discussions and study of the subject I seem to
hold a view perhaps different from those I have heard and read. Mine
is derived from my conception of the acceptance of office by Congressmen. When I advised the Working Committee to authorize acceptance of office, the idea was that whilst the letter of the Government of

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

293

India Act should not be transgressed, its interpretation should be
stretched to the farthest limit so as to widen the liberty of the people
and to strengthen the Congress. The Act was not to be worked in the
manner conceived by its authors, but while it lasted should be fully
used for the advancement of the Congress goal and therefore in a
manner least expected by its authors. Such being my conception of
office acceptance, British and foreign precedents are of little use to
me. Moreover, in the nature of things, they can help us but little for
the simple reason that unlike ours the constitutions of the world’s
Parliaments are not imposed on the respective peoples but are their
own creation.
A Congressman who is a member of an Assembly, no matter
what office he occupies there, is subject to the discipline of the
Congress and has to carry out its instructions from time to time.
Therefore, so long as the Government of India Act does not in so
many words prohibit it, the Congress may, if it thinks it necessary,
require Speakers in the Congress Provinces to take an active part in
the politics of the country.
But the Congress, as far as I know, has not considered the question. In my opinion Congressmen who are members of Assemblies,
whether as mere members or Ministers or Speakers, have in every act
of theirs to bear in mind the fact that they have, in virtue of the
Congress constitution, to conform to truth and non-violence. Thus
the conduct of a Congressman in an Assembly would have to be that
of strictest honesty and courtesy in dealing with his opponents. He will
not resort to shady politics, will not hit below the belt, will never take a
mean advantage of his adversary. The greater his position in the
Assembly, the greater is his responsibility in these matters. A member
in the Assembly no doubt represents his constituency and his party
but he also represents the whole of his province. A Minister no doubt
advances his own party but never at the expense of the nation as a
whole. Indeed he advances the Congress only so far as he advances
the nation. For he knows that if he has no sword to give battle to the
foreign ruler, he has it not to give battle to his adversary inside the
nation itself. And since the Assembly is the place where all communities meet together willy-nilly, it is the place where by winning over
his opponents he expects to forge sanctions which can be made
irresistible. All the problems that affect the body politic including
communal unity can be solved if the Assembly is regarded not merely
294

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in terms of the Government of India Act but as an instrument to be
used for solving questions which representatives of different communities composing the nation can be expected to solve if they had
unrestricted powers. And the Government of India Act does not prevent the use of the Assemblies for solving the many problems which
are outside its scope but which are necessary for national progress.
Looked at from the point of view here suggested, the Speaker’s
position assumes very high importance, greater than that of the Prime
Minister. For he has to discharge the functions of a judge while he
occupies the chair. He has to give impartial and just rulings. He has to
enforce decorum and laws of courtesy between members. He has to be
calm in the midst of storms. He has opportunities of winning over
opponents which no other member of the House can possibly have.
Now if a Speaker outside the House ceases to be impartial and
indulges in party polemics, he cannot possibly carry the weight he
would if he observed impartiality and calmness everywhere. I claim
that if a Speaker cultivates the habit of uniform impartiality outside
his own very limited sphere, he will enhance the Congress prestige. He
can, if he realizes the unique opportunity his office gives him, pave
the way for the solution of the Hindu-Muslim tangle as also many
others. Thus in my opinion the Speaker, if he has to be that not only
inside but outside the House, must be a first-class Congressman. As a
man too he has to have a character without reproach. He must be able,
fearless, naturally just, and above all truthful and non-violent in
thought, word and deed. Then he may stand on any platform he likes.
Harijan, 16-7-1938

362. SOME OBJECTIONS
A Muslim correspondent writes:
During the last four months opinions have been appearing in the Urdu Press
regarding the Wardha scheme. As usual nobody seems to have read the report carefully
or to have thought out the subject of basic educations. The objections centre round
three points:
(a)

that religious instruction has been completely ignored;

(b)

that boys and girls are to be taught together; and

(c)

that a respect for all religions is to be inculcated.

These objections have been culled from the Urdu Press.

Religious instruction in the sense of denominational religion has
been deliberately omitted. Unless there is a State religion it is very

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

295

difficult, if not impossible, to provide religious instruction as it would
mean providing for every denomination. Such instruction is best
given at home. The State should allow enough time for every child to
receive such instruction at home or otherwise. It is also conceivable
that the State should provide facilities for private tuition by those
denominations which may wish to instruct their children at school
provided that such instruction is paid for by such denominations.
As for co-education, the Zakir Husain Committee has not made
it compulsory. Where there is a demand for a separate school for girls,
the State will have to make provision. The question of co-education
has been left open. It will regulate itself according to the time-spirit.
So far as I am aware the members of the Committee were not all of
one mind. Personally I have an open mind. I think that there are just
as valid reasons for as against co-education. And I would not oppose
the experiment wherever it is made.
As to the necessity of teaching equal regard for all religions, I
personally hold strong views. Till we reach that happy state, I see no
prospect of real unity among all the different communities. I regard it
as fatal to the growth of a friendly spirit among the children
belonging to the different faiths if they are taught either that their
religion is superior to every other or that it is the only true religion. If
that exclusive spirit is to pervade the nation, the necessary corollary
would be that there should be separate schools for every denomination with freedom to each to decry every other, or that the mention
of religion must be entirely prohibited. The result of such a policy is
too dreadful to contemplate. Fundamental principles of ethics are
common to all religions. These should certainly be taught to the
children and that should be regarded as adequate religious instruction
so far as the schools under the Wardha scheme are concerned.
Harijan, 16-7-1938

363. A FALLACY
July 16, 1938
An A.I.S.A. agent asks what he is to say to his co-workers who
have formed a union and presented him with terms. I regard the formation of such unions a fallacy. The workers have evidently missed
the scope and the message of the A.I.S.A. It is a philanthropic
organization formed by the Congress and has been given an
autonomous charter for the specific purpose of developing the central
village industry of hand-spinning and all it implies. Those who are
296

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

engaged in this voluntary organization not only derive no pecuniary
advantage from it but are expected, if they can, to give their labour
free of any hire. And since in this the poorest country in the world
many persons cannot do so, a large number are paid an emolument
only enough to sustain them. Whilst every attempt is made to make
them comfortable, they are not regarded as employees in the ordinary
sense. There are no profits shared by anyone. If there are shareholders or proprietors, they are the spinners, weavers and the like.
Even the consumers are not beneficiaries. They are expected to wear
khadi not because it is cheaper or better to look at than mill cloth, but
because it gives employment to the largest number of half-starved
half-employed persons, mostly women. The whole of the takings go
to these dumb artisans after deducting the salaries and other expenses
incurred in running this vast philanthropic organization.
If, therefore, any body of workers form unions as against the
Association, they are against the artisans. What they take has to
come out of the pockets of the artisans or the consumers. It
would be manifestly absurd to tax the consumers in the interest of the
workers. Will they, the workers, not realize that the agents are
themselves as much workers as they themselves? In several cases the
agents are purely honorary. It is of course a different thing where an
agent is found to be going beyond his sphere of duty and acting as if
he was the lord and master of, instead of being co-worker with, the
men working with and under him. In such a case the workers have
their remedy through the central office but surely not through unions
after the orthodox style. In the one case they are a necessity, in the
other they are not only superfluous, but they are, as I have said above,
a fallacy and, if persisted in on a wide scale, they may kill the Association of which they are part creators and trustees.
Harijan, 16-7-1938

364. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON,

July 17, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

This will be my last.
Your advice can’t be accepted. You do not know the facts. You
have exaggerated everything. I believe I am slowly finding my way. I
have imposed silence on myself without limit of time, to be broken at

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

297

will. I do break it to see people to whom I must give appointments or
to those here who may be ill or when I must speak to express my
wants. This answers my purpose well. It enables me to conserve my
energy and go through my work. Do not be alarmed. I shall break it
to speak to you. I am quite sure that your sadness will leave you as
soon as you reach Segaon. Of course you are coming here 23rd
evening, if weather permits your coming.
There is nothing the matter with me. The B. P. keeps fairly
steady. I take my walks regularly.
The rest from Sharda.
Vijaya went to her home yesterday. Balkrishna went to Varoda
today.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3871. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7027

365. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
July 17, 1938
CHI. LILA,

You will have tried the remedies I suggested. Constipation must
be cured.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11607

366. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
July 17, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

The article about khadi with my revisions is enclosed. I am
sending other material also. Your notes are of course there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11607

298

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

367. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
July 17, 1938
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have read your note. I have forwarded to him the question
arising out of the point you make. The rest seems all right. It is short
and to the point. I am doing well. Taramati and the children will be
well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

368. LETTTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

July 18, 1938
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

Sheriff 1 spent nearly an hour and a half with me yesterday. He
showed me during our talk the correspondence he has had with you.
He wanted to know why you had not replied whether or not you had
written to Sir Manmath 2 regarding him. I told him that you would
never write to Sir Manmath. All the same I promised to find out from
you. Please let me know now.
I have drafted the reply to be sent to Jinnah. You will read it
when you come.
About the rest, Mahadev writes to you from time to time.
Blessings from
BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro–2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 221

1
Minister for Law and Justice in the Congress Ministry of Central Provinces.
He had recommended to the Governor the release, on ground of mercy, of certain
persons convicted of rape of a thirteen-year-old Harijan girl. The working Committee
had decided that he should resign from the ministry.
2
Manmathnath Mukherjee, a retired judge of the Calcutta High Court, who had
been entrusted, on Gandhiji’s advice, with an inquiry into Sheriff’s case. His verdict
was against Sheriff.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

299

369. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
S EGAON,

July 18, 1938
CHI. VIJAYA,

You must have reached there safely. I hope the journey was
comfortable. Ba’s verandah looks deserted without you. Sushila seems
to have lost her occupation. Remember that crying is prohibited. I am
awaiting your letter. Sushila and Arun arrived yesterday.
Blessings from

BAPU

SHRI VIJAYABEHN
C/O NARANBHAI VALLABHBHAI
VAROD, via BARDOLI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7088. Also C.W. 4580. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

370. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
July 18, 1938
CHI. PRABHA,

I got your letter. You are silly. Who told you that only the
educated have intelligence? What is education? Do they not send you
Harijan, etc., at Siwan? Today, of course, I am sending the copies
from here. If you are eager to study, there is still time. You have not
yet become old. Come here from Malabar if you can. Probably I shall
be here then. Kanti has gone to Bangalore and Saraswati to Trivandrum.
You can find solitude, or whatever you call it, only here. Siwan,
Patna, etc., may be all right for service, but during the rest of the time
you should stay only here. I will cure you of your despondency. Do
not ruin your health completely. I must hear from you once a week at
least.
Manilal’s Sushila came yesterday. Vijaya has gone to Bardoli
with her father. There is thus rise and fall in the tide. Balkoba went
away yesterday to live in the hut at Varoda. Anasuya gave birth to a
son three days ago.
300

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am all right. I continue to take milk and fruit—mangoes, if
available, otherwise prunes and mosambis.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3516

371. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
July 18, 1938
CHI. MUNNALAL,

What you write about light is correct. But some inconveniences
have to be endured. Often they are remedied by themselves while we
put up with them. It is not proper that I should interfere in such
matters. You yourself should find a way out patiently and with love.
Don’t you think this is the right thing?
I have written a letter to Nana after my talk with Kanchan.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8572. Also C.W. 7030. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah.

372. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
S EGAON,

July 18, 1938
CHI. NIMU,

How can you afford to show yourself weak? On the contrary,
you should be glad if Ramdas stays on in S.A. for some more time.
More than anything else, he is bound to keep good health there. That
is no small thing. Is it right for you to be unhappy for selfish reasons?
Is it not better that Ramdas should be happy where he is and does
what dharma requires of him rather than that you two were together
and felt unhappy looking at each other? You are absorbed in your
work and it is right that he should do there as he pleases. He will
return when God wills that he should. If, therefore, you have not
pulled yourself together, do so after you get this and smile at your
foolishness.
I understand what you say about the books. I am making
inquiries.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

301

You are doing right by taking the medicines. If you do not
improve your health, how will you be able to keep up your study?
Sushila and Arun have arrived. Vijaya has left for her place with her
father.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy : Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

373. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
July 18, 1938
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

Your question is relevant when considering brahmacharya.
Whether procreation by itself is right or not is a separate issue. We can
even question whether it is right for a brahmachari to engage in any
activity at all. But the problem before us is to determine when
brahmacharya is violated. I hold that no violation of brahmacharya
occurs when a man does anything while remaining free of passion and
attachment. The vital fluid is power and its proper use does not impair
brahmacharya; this is the assumption underlying my interpretation.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4295; also S.G. 65

374. LETTER TO SARASWATI
July 18, 1938
CHI. SARU,

Your letter is very good. Continue thus to say what is in your
heart. Remain cheerful. We should live as God wills. A few years will
soon pass and then pangs of separation will be forgotten. You will in
any case meet Kanti through the letters. This separation is only for the
good of you two. You can come to me when you have become
stabilized. Sending you away only gave me pain. I had built such high
hopes. I was to teach you everything and listen to your singing but
God willed otherwise.
What harm can there be in Sharda’s reading your letters? Your
letters are so innocent. But I shall withhold them from her unless you
give your permission. Sharda is a serious-minded girl. She is not the
302

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

one to blabber unnecessarily.
Your health must be better. Sushila Gandhi has arrived with
Arun. Sita is at Akola.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 6167. Also. C.W. 3440. Courtesy:
Kantilal Gandhi.

375. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

July 19, 1938
MY DEAR AGATHA,

Here is a letter received by Dr. Shaukatullah Shah from
H.E.’s office about Harold Ansari. Poor Shaukatullah has not yet
built up any practice worth the name. He has sent all the money
he could scrape together. And now he has nothing. He and Zohra, Dr.
Ansari’s daughter, were with me for two days. Shaukatullah had
drafted a reply which I advised him not to send. Now I would like you
or Polak to find out and tell me what this Education Department is
and what is its function. Does it help students in distress? I am
anxious to find the money here. But this is a difficult case. In any case
Harold’s studies must not suffer. If therefore the Department can
make an advance, they should do so in the hope of recovering it from
the heirs or Harold himself when he begins to earn. If you know
Harold and his mother, do please get in touch with them and guide
me. I am writing to Harold too. I have never met the boy. Of course I
knew nothing of Dr. Ansari’s domestic affairs.
I am sending you the papers Dr. S. has left with me. Please
return after use.
Love.
BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

303

376. LETTER TO NAWAB OF BHOPAL
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

July 19, 1938
DEAR NAWAB SAHEB,

Zohra and Shaukat were with me for two days. They left
yesterday. It was distressing to learn from them that they were unable
to discharge the obligations left by Dr. Ansari. His boy Harold has to
finish his education. Harold’s mother has to be supported. This means
£35 per month for 3 years at the end of which Harold should finish his
education. Dr. Ansari has left petty debts amounting to Rs. 12,000. I
know the intimate friendship that existed between you and the late Dr.
Ansari. I know too that you sent some help after Dr. Ansari’s death.
But as Zohra and Shaukat were talking to me I could not help
thinking of you and asking you to come to the rescue if it is at all
possible for you to do so. I hardly need add anything by way of
pleading this cause. For I know that you had known Dr. Ansari before
I had the privilege of knowing him.
I hope you are keeping excellent health.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

377. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
July 19, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

You do not seem to have got the mail sent form here in the
morning by the time you sent the mail from there. It contained four
letters and a list of medicines for Sushila.
You did right in not coming. When there is no work, you can
skip the day.
The Danish engineer has captivated my heart. One does not
come across many such frank faces.
I am sending with this some other letters. “Skill overhead” 1 is
all right. As we reduce “overhead charges”, we increase “over-head
1

304

Vide “Duty of Khadi-weavers”, where Gandhiji has used this expression.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

skill”. But if “skill overhead” does not seem correct English, you
may change it suitably after understanding the meaning.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11608

378. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

July 19, 1938
CHI. KANTI,

I hope you reached there safely and are not worrying. It was
very good indeed that you came. There was a long and fine letter
from Saraswati. I knew only this time that she could write. She seems
to feel quite at home with me. She feels the separation from you a
good deal but is trying to bear it. Sushila and Arun have arrived. Do
you not write to Prabhavati? Do write. She is in Patna.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7341. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

379. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
July 19, 1938
CHI. MANILAL,

I got your letters. So far I have not been able to write to you. It
is now three days since Sushila and Arun arrived here. Arun is all the
time asking to be taken to Akola. We hope he will calm down by and
by.
I understand your anguish. Do what you think is proper. Consider calmly all the pros and cons and do what you feel it is best to do.
Do not worry about things here. It is good that Ramdas has
come and stayed here for a few days.
My health, one may say, is quite good. Ba also is fine. Segaon is
rather crowded just now. It is difficult to manage in the rainy season.
There is not sufficient room for sleeping. But God helps us to manage
somehow.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

305

Hanna is unfit for this place. She has a very delicate constitution. She is not able to put up with any discomfort. She cannot digest
the food either. She will leave on the third.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4877.

380. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
S EGAON,

July 19, 1938
CHI. NARANDAS,

I have sent something1 for Harijanbandhu as per your suggestion. It is a good beginning.
If the atmosphere there is congenial, it would be good to visit
the Harijan colony and take up the welfare work. But this should be
done only if persons other than those already engaged in the
spinning yajna volunteer. All the activities are likely to fail if only one
group tries to conduct them. Do not therefore take up anything unless
it is supported by your own experience. I have merely suggested it for
the sake of variety. Otherwise, the real object of celebrating Rentia
Baras is to concentrate on the charkha alone during this period.2
About Purushottam3 , I will write in my letter to Jamna4 .
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8545. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi.

1

Vide “Notes”
The programme chalked out by the addressee on the occasion of 69th
birthday of Gandhiji called for 69 days’ spinning.
3
Addressee’s son
4
Addressee’s wife
2

306

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

381. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
S EGAON,

July 19, 1938
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

If you had not asked the questions which you did,1 I would have
been really pained and you would have committed an offence.
I am in correspondence with Rajaji on the subject of popularizing Hindi. I also have not understood his policy. It would not be
proper to rush to the Press before understanding his point of view.
Ministers many certainly be criticized in public, but the criticism
should be balanced and well informed. No opinion should be formed
on the basis of Press reports and, before criticizing, one should seek
clarification from the Minister one wishes to criticize.
The shortcomings which you point out in the behaviour of
satyagrahis really exist. Read the article2 which I have written for the
next issue of Harijan about the causes of such shortcomings.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5545.

382. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
S EGAON, WARDHA,

July 19, 1938
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

These two friends belong to the Quilon Bank3 . They wish to tell
you their story and also want your advice.4 Give them some time. It is
a sad story.
They want to see Sir Purushottamdas also. I have given them a
note.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro–2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 222
1

Vide “Letter to Chhaganlal Joshi”, 1-7-1938
Vide “How Non-Volence Works”
3
One of the larger banks of Travancore.
4
Vide also “Letter to Mahadev Desai”, 19-7-1938
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

307

383. LETTER TO SAMPURNANAND
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

July 19, 1938
BHAI SAMPURNANAND,

What is this news item about a Congress platoon of 10,000 to be
formed in Farrukhabad? If an armed platoon is envisaged, is it
compatible with the Congress creed of non-violence?
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From Hindi: C.W. 10132. Courtesy: Kashi Vidyapith, Varanasi

384. TO SEGAON WORKERS
July 19, 1938
A painful incident occurred today. A boy was grazing cows near
our field. Balwantsinha tried to dissuade him and on his refusal gave
him a push. This is a matter of shame for us. I have told the villagers
that if Balwantsinha does this kind of thing again he shall leave
Segaon. We must understand that we are servants not masters and we
can live here only through the kindness of the villagers. We have no
right at all to swear at or touch anyone.
BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 4674

385. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
9 p.m., July 19, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

Give the two friends from Travancore the accompanying two
letters, one 1 is addressed to Vallabhbhai and the other2 to Sir
Purushottamdas.
The friend from Denmark seemed to me to be an excellent man.
I have already written you this, but his face is still before my eyes and
so you find me mentioning it again.
1
2

308

Vide “Letter to Sampurnanand
Not traceable
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Some other letters also are enclosed.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Urgent
If two commodes can be spared from Maganwadi, send them
here and also the two thin mattresses belonging to Nimu.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11609.

386. LETTER TO BALWANTSINHA
July 20, 1938
CHI. BALWANTSINHA,

There is only one solution. You must swallow the bitter pill
of yesterday1 and keep up the effort to overcome your anger.
Nothing is too much for the sake of goseva. No one can be angry
by himself. Anger can be mastered only where it is generated. Do you
not agree? We are servants. How can a servant raise his hand against
the master?
I know Ganpatrai.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I am returning your letter.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1907.

387. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
S EGAON,

July 21, 1938
CHI. DEVDAS,

A letter was published in The Hindustan Times about Shuaib
which he has sent to me. He has also sent me a copy of his letter to
you. That letter should not have been published without being shown
to Shuaib. I have written to him that you must not have seen it at all.
As far as possible, such letters should not be published without being
shown to you. You must have now published, without giving Shuaib’s
name, the facts sent by him. If you have not, do so now. You must
1

Vide “To Segaon Workers”, 19-7-1938

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

309

have asked “Fair play” why he sent such a report. If he sticks to his
report, you may then write to Shuaib and inform him accordingly.
We are after all in the midst of a raging fire.1 You will see in the
next issue of Harijan what I have been able to write ultimately.2 I have
completely changed the approach.
These days I am generally observing silence. I speak only when
absolutely necessary. The practice suits me very well.
Sushila and Arun are here. Kallenbach’s niece also is here.
Rajkumari is coming here the day after tomorrow for three days.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 20004.

388. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
July 21, 1938
CHI. KANTI,

You must have received my postcard. I got your letter. It was
very good indeed that you did not get angry with Ramachandran. If
we go deep into the matter we will find nothing over which to get
angry with other people. And, therefore, how can anyone ever have
the right to get angry? Is not anger described as a mild form of
madness in English? And as the Gita says, its root is kama. I will keep
on writing to Saraswati.
It will be very good if you concentrate on your studies.
All of us are well here.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I hope you read Harijan.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7342. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

1
2

310

Presumably the reference is to the ministerial crisis in C.P.
Vide “Functions of the Working Committee”, 6-8-1938.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

389. WHAT IS SARVODAYA ?1
SEGAON,
July 21, 1938
Sarvodaya is impossible without satyagraha. The word
satyagraha should be understood here in its etymological sense. There
can be no insistence on truth where there is no non-violence. Hence
the attainment of sarvodaya depends upon the attainment of nonviolence. The attainment of non-violence in its turn depends upon
tapascharya. Tapascharya, again, should be pure. Ceaseless effort,
discretion, etc., should form part of it. Pure tapascharya leads to pure
knowledge. Experience shows that although people talk of nonviolence, many are mentally so lazy that they do not even take the
trouble of familiarizing themselves with the facts. Take an example.
India is a poor country. We wish to do away with poverty. But how
many people have made a study of how this poverty came about, what
its implications are, how it can be removed, etc.? A devotee of nonviolence, should be full of such knowledge.
It is the duty of Sarvodaya to create such means and not to
enter into controversies. Editors of Sarvodaya should forget Gandhism. There is no such thing as Gandhism. I have not put anything new
before India; I have only presented an ancient thing in a new way. I
have tried to utilize it in a new field. Hence my ideas cannot be
appropriately called Gandhism. We shall adopt truth wherever we find
it, praise it wherever we see it, and pursue it. In other words, in every
sentence of Sarvodaya, we should catch a glimpse of non-violence
and knowledge.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 7680.

390. NOTE TO D. B. KALELKAR
S EGAON,

July 21, 1938
Herewith the list of rules with my letter on the subject and an
article 2 for Sarvodaya.
1

Gandhiji sent this message for the first issue of Sarvodaya published by
D. B. Kalelkar and Dada Dharmadhikari.
2
Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

311

You forgot here that article for Harijan. It is also sent herewith.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10909.

391. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
July 21, 1938
CHI. VIJAYA,

You must have got my postcard. Amritlal is sending the name of
the medicine. Try to regain the lost weight. It is raining hard here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7089. Also C.W. 4581. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

392. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
S EGAON,

July 21, 1938
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

I re-read your letter with care. I think that my answer should
have sufficed. The only answer to the question as to when the desire
for procreation may be regarded justified is when a couple desires
offspring without desiring sexual pleasure. This was believed so in the
case of Dasharatha. The whole process has been given the character of
dharma.
What you write about the mastery over sexual passion is correct.
My interpretation of
”1 is that he who is wholly
free from attachment will not kill at all. Thus the expression may be
regarded as an exaggeration. My walking up to Wardha may not be
called dharma but it is not adharma either. The same is true of the
utterance on procreation.
Now this answers all your doubts. If not, put them to me in the
form of questions and I shall answer.
1

“Even though he slay all these worlds”—Bhagavad Gita,
“Discourses on the “Gita”

312

XVIII.

17 ; vide

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

One suggestion. My pronouncements should not be taken as
authority. They are not all revelations. Some are empirical, some
rational. Such utterances have the same status as every other utterance
which means that any saying of mine which is not acceptable to your
heart or mind may be totally rejected. There will be no need to
compile my opinions if you act thus. Does anyone need to compile
quotations to realize that the earth is round?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4296. Also S.G. 66

393. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
July 22, 1938
CHI. LILA,

If you think that by not writing to me you save my time, you are
making a mistake. I would be satisfied if you wrote once in a while. If
it is necesary for you to take tea for the bowels to move, you may take
just enough for that purpose as medicine.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9590. Also C.W. 6562. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

313

394. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

July 22, 1938
CHI. PRABHA,

I got your letter only today and am replying immediately. A
letter for Jayaprakash is enclosed. If you want to resort to satyagraha,
you must not do so without consulting me. And in any case you must
not worry. Do not ruin your health. One’s duty is but to try. Worries
weaken us in our effort.
Navin has come today.
I am keeping good health. My diet these days consists of two
pounds of milk, mosambis, as many as I can eat— at present I eat
about ten or eleven daily—and garlic water with jaggery thrice day. I
feel better with this diet.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3517

314

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

395. LETTER TO JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

July 22, 1938
BHAI JAYAPRAKASH,

Prabha writes in great distress that you totally neglect your
health. The decision to go to Malabar also seems to be cracking up.
After all even for your own work preservation of health is necessary. I
would request you to go for the sake of Prabha’s peace if not for any
other reason. Her health too is not good. But she will automatically
improve when you get well.
I hope you will follow my advice.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 3518.

396. LETTER TO R.
July 22, 1938
1

BHAI R. ,

Balkrishna conveyed to me your message. I find your case
similar to that of a man living in the midst of fire yet pleading to be
protected from fire. I think you should satisfy your sexual desire
through G. 2 This is the way of the world. Those who want to be free of
passion cannot do so by merely wishing it. The wish must be
accompanied by incessant effort. This is beyond you. This is what I
feel. If your heart indicates another way and you can master your
sexual impulses I for one shall be extremely happy.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 212.

1
2

The names have been omitted.
Ibid

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

315

397. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
8 p.m., July 22, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

I forgot to give today three of the accompanying letters. I did
not look into the pad.
I hope you remember that Rajkumari is coming tomorrow, the
23rd. She is arriving by the Grand Trunk Express. Come after making
arrangements for receiving her at the station. If it is raining, she
should be detained there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati:S. N. 11610.

398. HOW NON-VIOLENCE WORKS
A Congress leader said to me the other day in the course of our
conversation, “How is it that in quality the Congress is not what it
used to be in 1920-25 ? It has deteriorated. Ninety percent of the
members are not carrying out the Congress discipline. Can you not do
something to mend this state of things ?’’
The question is apposite and timely. I can’t shirk responsibility
by saying I am no longer in the Congress. I have gone out of it for
the purpose of serving it better. I know that I still influence the
Congress policy. As the author of the Congress constitution of 1920. I
must hold myself responsible for such deterioration as is avoidable.
The Congress started with an initial handicap in 1920. Very few
believed in truth and non-violence as a creed. Most members accepted
them as a policy. It was inevitable. I had hoped that many would
accept them as their creed after they had watched the working of the
Congress under the new policy. Only some did, not many. In the
beginning stages, the change that came over the foremost leaders was
profound. Readers will recall the letters from the late Pandit Motilal
Nehru and Deshbandhu Das reproduced in Young India. They had
experienced a new joy and a new hope in a life of self-denial,
simplicity and self-sacrifice. The Ali Brothers had almost become
fakirs. As we toured from place to place, I watched with delight the
316

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

change that was coming over the Brothers. What was true of these four
leaders was true of many others whom I can name. The enthusiasm of
the leaders had infected the rank and file.
But this phenomenal change was due to the spell of ‘swaraj in
one year’. The conditions I had attached to the fulfilment of the
formula were forgotten. Khwaja Saheb Abdul Majid even went so far
as to suggest that, as the general of the satyagraha army, which the
Congress had then become and still is (if only Congressmen realize
the meaning of satyagraha), I should have made sure that the
conditions were such that they would be fulfilled. Perhaps he was
right. Only I had no such prevision in me. The use of non-violence on
a mass scale and for political purposes was even for myself an
experiment. I could not therefore dogmatize. My conditions were
meant to be a measure of popular response. They might or might not
be fulfilled. Mistakes, miscalculations were always possible. Be that as
it may, when the fight for swaraj became prolonged and Khilafat
ceased to be a live issue, enthusiasm began to wane, confidence in
non-violence even as a policy began to be shaken, and untruth crept
in. People who had no faith in the twin virtues or the khadi clause
stole in, and many even openly defied the Congress constitution.
The evil has continued to grow. The Working Committee has
been making some attempt to purge the Congress of the evil but has
not been able to put its foot down and risk the loss of numbers on the
Congress register. I myself believe in quality rather than quantity.
But there is no such thing as compulsion in the scheme of nonviolence. Reliance has to be placed upon ability to reach the intellect
and the heart—the latter rather than the former.
It follows that there must be power in the word of a satyagraha
general—not the power that the possession of limitless arms gives, but
the power that purity of life, strict vigilance, and ceaseless application
produce. This is impossible without the observance of brahmacharya.
It must be as full as it is humanly possible. Brahmacharya here does
not mean mere physical self-control. It means much more. It means
complete control over all the senses. Thus an impure thought is a
breach of brahmacharya; so is anger. All power comes from the
preservation and sublimation of the vitality that is responsible for
creation of life. If the vitality is husbanded instead of being dissipated,
it is transmuted into creative energy of the highest order. This vitality
is continuously and even unconsciously dissipated by evil, or even
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

317

rambling, disorderly, unwanted thoughts. And since thought is the
root of all speech and action, the quality of the latter corresponds to
that of the former. Hence perfectly controlled thought is itself power
of the highest potency and can become self-acting. That seems to me
to be the meaning of the silent prayer of the heart. If man is after the
image of God, he has but to will a thing in the limited sphere allotted
to him and it becomes. Such power is impossible in one who dissipates
his energy in any way whatsoever, even as steam kept in a leaky pipe
yields no power. The sexual act divorced from the deliberate purpose
of generation is a typical and gross form of dissipation and has
therefore been specially and rightly chosen for condemnation. But in
one who has to organize vast masses of mankind for non-violent
action the full control described by me has to be attempted and
virtually achieved.
This control is unattainable save by the grace of God. There is a
verse in the second chapter of Gita which freely rendered means.:
“Sense effects remain in abeyance whilst one is fasting or whilst the
particular sense is starved, but the hankering does not cease except
when one sees God face to face.” 1 This control is not mechanical or
temporary. Once attained it is never lost. In that state vital energy is
stored up without any chance of escaping by the innumerable outlets.
It has been said that such brahmacharya, if it is at all attainable,
can be so only by cave-dwellers. A brahmachari, it is said, should
never see, much less touch a woman. Doubtless a brahmachari may
not think of, speak of, see or touch a woman lustfully. But the
prohibition one finds in books on brahmacharya is mentioned
without the important adverb. The reason for the omission seems to be
that man is no impartial judge in such matters, and therefore cannot
say when he is or is not affected by such contacts. Cupid’s visitations
are often unperceivable. Difficult though therefore brahmacharya is
of observance when one freely mixes with the world. it is not of much
value if it is attainable only by retirement from the world.
Anyway, I have practised brahmacharya for over thirty years
with considerable success though living in the midst of activities. After
the decision to lead the life of a brahmachari there was little change in
my outward practice, except with my wife. In the course of
my work among the Indians in South Africa, I mixed freely with
women. There was hardly an Indian woman in the Transvaal and Natal
1

318

Bhagavad Gita,

II.

59.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

whom I did not know. They were so many sisters and daughters to
me. My brahmacharya was not derived from books. I evolved my
own rules for my guidance and that of those who, at my invitation,
had joined me in the experiment. If I have not followed the prescribed
restrictions, much less have I accepted the description found even in
religious literature of woman as the source of all evil and temptation.
Owing as I do all the good there may be in me to my mother, I have
looked upon woman never as an object for satisfaction of sexual
desire but always with the veneration due to my own mother. Man is
the tempter and aggressor. It is not woman whose touch defiles man
but he is often himself too impure to touch her. But recently a doubt
has seized me as to the nature of the limitation that a brahmachari or
brahmacharini should put upon himself or herself regarding contacts
with the opposite sex. I have set limitations which do not satisfy me.
What they should be I do not know. I am experimenting. I have never
claimed to have been a perfect brahmachari of my definition. I have
not acquired that control over my thoughts that I need for my
researches in non-violence. If my non-violence is to be contagious
and infectious, I must acquire greater control over my thoughts. There
is perhaps a flaw somewhere which accounts for the apparent failure
of leadership adverted to in the opening sentence of this writing.
My faith in non-violence remains as strong as ever. I am quite
sure that not only should it answer all our requirements in our
country, but that it should, if properly applied, prevent the bloodshed
that is going on outside India and is threatening to overwhelm the
Western world.
My aspiration is limited. God has not given me the power to
guide the world on the path of non-violence. But I have imagined that
he has chosen me as His instrument for presenting non-violence to
India for dealing with her many ills. The progress already made is
great. But much more remains to be done. And yet I seem to have lost
the power to evoke the needed response from Congressmen in
general. It is a bad carpenter who quarrels with his tools. It is a bad
general who blames his men for faulty workmanship. I know I am not
a bad general. I have wisdom enough to know my limitations. God
will give me strength enough to declare my bankruptcy if such is to
be my lot. He will perhaps take me away when I am no longer
wantedfor the work which I have been permitted to do for nearly half
a century. But I do entertain the hope that there is yet work for me to
do, that the darkness that seems to have enveloped me will disappear,
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

319

and that, whether with another battle more brilliant than the Dandi
March or without, India will come to her own demonstrably through
non-violent means. I am praying for the light that will dispel the
darkness. Let those who have a living faith in non-violence join me in
the prayer.
Harijan, 23-7-1938

399. DUTY OF KHADI-WEARERS
July 23, 1938
I have before me several letters, some protesting against the
constant rise in the price of khadi, and some piteously appealing to
me to show the way to poor middle-class people for buying dear
khadi.
The A. I. S. A. exists only for the betterment of the khadi
producers, the majority of whom are poor women spinners. I hold that
the Association cannot be satisfied till every woman who puts in an
honest hour in spinning gets one anna per hour. We are on the point
of reaching half an anna per hour, and if the consumers and the
Congress Governments do their duty, the Association expects to give
the anna per hour much earlier than most people expect.
This must mean some rise in the price of khadi, but not a
proportionate rise. City people should know that ceaseless effort is
being made to evoke greater skill among the artisans so that the whole
of the increase in the wages may not fall upon khadi. Overhead
charges are also being constantly reduced. Skill overhead increases
with experience. But sixteen times increase in the wages of spinners
cannot all be brought about merely by increased efficiency Therefore
some rise in the price of khadi is inevitable with the increase in the
wages. This is being unequally distributed among the different
varieties so that the heaviest rise will take place in the khadi that is
purchased by the monied classes. Everything that can be done to ease
the burden on poor buyers is being done and will be done by the
Association.
But khadi-wearers should know that the economics of khadi are
different from the ordinary economics which are based on competition in which patriotism, sentiment and humanity play little or no part.
Khadi economics are based on patriotism sentiment and humanity.
Before the new policy of the Association was laid down, its aim
was to cheapen khadi, mostly in disregard of the wages of the
320

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

spinners, the most helpless artisans perhaps in the world. This continued for nearly a decade. It was a mistaken ploicy, but the mistake
was unconscious and based on faulty reasoning. I must take the
largest share of the blame for the mistake. Khadi-wearers had the sole
benefit of the mistake. Is it right for them to complain when the
mistake is being repaired and the spinners are gradually being paid
what is their due ?
The Association has expected hearty co-operation from the
khadi-wearers and I am glad to be able to say that on the whole the
increase in the price of khadi has not been resented by them. Many
consider it a privilege that they are partners in the tardy justice that is
being done to the dumb sisters whose need is infinitely greater than
that of the wearers of khadi.
I know that there are many middle-class persons who find it
difficult to make the two ends meet, and for them every additional
anna becomes a problem. And they will not spin. They have my sympathy. But they cannot have it both ways. If they will not spin, they
should cut down their requirements or reduce other expenses. In this
climate we do not need the clothes we use. Where there is a will there
is a way.
A correspondent suggests that khadi is mainly supported by the
poor middle class, and contends that if the prices are not brought
down to the level at which they can buy it, it will not survive me. If
that is the condition on which alone khadi can live, it deserves to
predecease me. Happily there is a fallacy behind the argument. The
question of cheapness mainly affects the city-dwellers. If all of them,
rich and poor, took to khadi, they could hardly use more than ten
percent of the possible production of khadi. The rest has to be used
by the producers themselves who are villagers. The question of price
does not affect them materially, if at all. It is true that khadi has not
penetrated the villages to the extent expected. During the transition
period, therefore, it has to depend upon the patriotic spirit of city
dwellers both rich and poor. Those who believe in the message of
khadi will not consider any price too dear for khadi. It is the only real
insurance against famine and unemployment. Even if India were to be
industrialized overnight, much of the unemployment would remain.
In this country the problem is to find work for a whole nation which
has one-fourth of her time without occupation. If pestilence, poverty
and blood-shed are to be avoided, there is no remedy but khadi and
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

321

other village industries. Those who believe in this mission of khadi
and who believe also in a living wage being paid to the spinners, will
not grudge the increase that has to be made in the price of khadi.
They may rely upon the Association moving with the utmost caution.
The past two years’ experience warrants the hope that the public
welcome the increase in the wages that the spinners are receiving.
Harijan, 23-7-1938

400 . LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
July 23, 1938
MY DEAR AMRIT,

Pray don’t come tonight. The weather is awful. Wet, wet, wet
everywhere. Tomorrow you will come anyhow, unless of course you
are ill and it is raining hard as it is now. Your corner is of course
reserved.
Love.
BAPU
From the original:C. W. 3633. Courtesy:Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6442

401. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
July 23, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

You were wise not to come. It is wet all around. Khan Saheb
wants to come for the night. It would be better for him not to. He may
come tomorrow if it is dry or after the Working Committee meeting.
Even the cot meant for him is not here. Rajkumari also should not
come tonight. I think it is impossible to bring the car. It is certainly
risky. She may come tomorrow during day-time. The letters are
enclosed.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I completely forgot to send this letter. Fortuately for me, I am
able to send it now.
From a photostat of the Gujarati:S. N. 11611

322

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

402. LETTER TO AMRITAL T. NANAVATI
July 23, 1938
CHI. AMRITLAL,

Since Vasumati has asked for time, you should tell her that you
cannot spare more time. Give her fifteen minutes. Explain to her that
she can get much in fifteen minutes if she works with concentration.
Do not worry if you cannot at present give help in preparing
bhaji. Those who feel hurt by people’s criticism become old prematurely. Such persons violate brahmacharya according to my
definition of it and those who do so become old.
We should feel unhappy about our own shortcomings. When
others impute faults to us we should laugh it away. If they are inclined
to listen we can explain to them. It is our duty to explain to those who
have formed a wrong opinion about us. We should treat others as if
they were our kith and kin.
By all means take Sunday off. On that day you may help in
preparing bhaji. Cultivate a sense of humour.
There were four or five mistakes in Dahyalal’s Gita recitation
yesterday. Observe all such mistakes and correct them. His recitation
has certainly improved, but there is scope for futher improvement.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati:G. N. 10749

403. LETTER TO PYARELAL
July 23, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

You were to write something on education. You have not done
it yet. It will be good if you write. Why not give your own experience?
You should not think that you cannot express yourself if you hold a
view different from mine.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

323

404. LETTER TO SARASWATI
July 23, 1938
CHI. CRAZY SURU,

What a letter ? You must have had my postcard and the letter1 as
also the telegram2 I sent. How can I comfort you ? Even if I call you
back here you will have no peace in Kanti’s absence. I wanted to
keepyou with me. You are deluding yourself to no purpose. Do not
harass Kanti. Let him pursue his studies. There you have your father,
mother, grandfather and uncle with you. What more do you want ?
You will have no rest here even for a day. You will daily exhort me
either to send for Kantibhai or to send you to him. What shall I do
then ? Think well and give up this madness and folly. Do write to me
daily if you want to. I never wrote to your uncle: “Save me from
Saraswati.” Why should I wish to be saved from you ? Are you not
my beloved daughter ? I hope you can read my hand.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 6168. Also C. W. 3441. Courtesy:
Kantilal Gandhi

405. TO THE KATHIAWAR HARIJAN SEVAK SANGH3
July 24, 1938
While sending the foregoing Shri Narandas writes5 :
Shri Narandas also suggests that one half of the amount
collected may be donated to Harijan service work, one-fourth to khadi
work and one-fourth to the National School. The suggestion has my
approval. A total of Rs. 17,000 has already been donated to Harijan
service in this manner. The quantity of yarn spun and the amount of
4

1

Vide “Letter to Saraswati”, 18-7-1938
This is not traceable.
3
This was published under “Notes”.
4
Not translated here. It was an appeal to khadi workers in Saurashtra for their
co-operation in the spinning programme of 69 days to celebrate the 69th birthday of
Gandhiji on Bhadrapad Vad 12, according to the Vikram calendar.
5
Not translated here. Narandas had stated in the letter that the spinning
programme had been inaugurated in the National School on July 15 with prayers and
flag-salutation.
2

324

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

money collected have kept on increasing from year to year. If that
happens this year, too, all the three causes will receive increased aid.
There is, therefore, no doubt that if the men and women engaged in
Harijan and khadi service do their work conscientiously, a substantial
sum of money will be collected and greater interest will be created in
spinning.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 24-7-1938

406. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
July 24, 1938
MY DEAR AMRIT,

I don’t know whether it is your misfortune or mine. I wrote
yesterday a note to you and by my stupidity it was left out. I have
been waiting for you all the morning. If you come after 2 p.m. I shall
have taken the weekly silence. I see Jivraj1 is coming with you. I
suppose he does not want to hear my voice. He wants to see my face
and take the b.p. I hope you are quite fit. How nice if you could walk.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3634. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6443

407. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
July 24, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

What weather! I will keep myself ready tomorrow, at 2.45 p.m. I
have sent a note to Subhas Babu saying that I am prepared to be
present at the bungalow at that time. I would prefer that. I would not
like so many dragging themselves here.
The cart is just leaving here. In the last resort Rajkumari may
come in that cart. If she is not well, she need not. And if I have to go
there tomorrow, she may as well stay there. Here it is wet all around.
Navin2 has drawn a life-like portrait of Ba. Why need Jivraj go in such
1
2

Dr. Jivraj Mehta
Son of Vrajlal Gandhi

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

325

weather! His health is more delicate than mine. Do not write too much.
I do not like your keeping late hours. I am writing.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I do not understand why Rajagopalachari was to come.
Vallabhbhai, therefore, may telegraph to him whatever he thinks
proper. There is nothing special for which I should like to give him
trouble. Ask Vallabhbhai to reply to me regarding Sheriff. 1 Let me
also have his opinion about the will2 . I hope he is dealing firmly with
the C. P. affair. Take out enough from the fruit baskets for your use
there.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11612

408. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
July 24, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

You must have got the two letters sent with the doctor.
Write to Narahari and tell him that Parnerkar cannot be spared.
Apart from the moral consideration, he is busy at present in the
farming and the co-operative dairy experiments. If he wants, he may
have the man sent by Trivedi. You may send the thing to Jugatram
over your signature 3 . Write to Krishnan and ask him to keep me
informed. The Trivandrum affair was well settled. I did have fears
about Khare. The cart must have reached by now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11613

1

Vide”Letter to Vallabhbhai Patel”, 18-7-1938
Vithalbhai Patel’s will in favour of Subhas Chandra Bose
3
The source is obscure here.
2

326

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

409. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
S EGAON,
July 24, 1938
CHI. VIJAYA,

I got your postcard. I might put up with your not improving
here, but I cannot tolertate your not doing so there. Here I will have
the satisfaction of giving you intelligent treatment. I do not have any
faith in the treatment given to you there. Therefore, take every step
after due deliberation. Living entirely on butter-milk is perfectly all
right. I might be satisfied if you gave me the details of the vaid’s
treatment.
The blood-pressure is at my normal level. It remains at about
172/102. I take milk up to 2 1/ 4 lb. and 9 mosambis. Sometimes the
number goes up to eleven. For the last two days I have been having
peaches brought by Khan Saheb. He and Rajkumari have come here.
They have not met yet because of the rains.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7090 Also C.W. 4582. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

410. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
July 24, 1938
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

Desire for progeny has a place as service has. Some go to the
length of prescribing that the seekers of mukti should refrain from
any activity whatsoever. But we have not accepted this as our creed.
The appointed work must be done without attachment. If a man in full
mastery over passion desires offspring he may procreate. We cannot
be arbitrary in our judgment.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4297. Also S.G. 67

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

327

411. LETTER TO H. L. SHARMA
S EGAON,

July 24, 1938
CHI. SHARMA,

Mahadev does keep writing to you. I can write very little these
days. I have to take care of the body. Doing a lot of work in a short
time necessitates giving up a great deal of work. There was no special
occasion for my writing too. You have had the permission to go to
Satis Babu. 1 I hope everything is going on well.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi in Bapuki Chhayamen Mere jivanke Solah Varsh,
facing p. 271

412. LETTER TO BALWANTSINHA
July 24, 1938
CHI. BALWANTSINHA,

Water accumulates in a puddle in the southern verandah of
Jamnalalji’s cottage. Earth or sand should be spread there to form a
slope as has been done in my verandah and there should be a gunny
screen to keep off water.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1906

413. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
July 25, 1938
CRAZY DAUGHTER,

You created a fine scene today! You conclusively proved that we
do not understand each other. I had said I would have roti today as
also the vegetable though prepared separately. And you threw away
the roti ? In what I said there was no suggestion of not taking the roti
and vegetable served by you. Such anger! And for what crime! You
will gain nothing by being so angry with poor me. It is as well that I
1

The addressee was to go to Satis Chandra Das Gupta to learn about cheap
remedies for villagers.

328

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

am observing silence. Now tell me what I should do ? Shall I fast ? Or
give up all service from you ? What is a girl of such a temper not
capable of ? Why do you not leave me if I am so unworthy ? Maybe it
is best for you to leave me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 403

414. LETTER TO P. G. MATHEW
SEGAON,
July 27, 1938
MY DEAR MATHEW,

I have your letter. I shall watch your progress. Hope your
mother is on the road to recovery. You left a good book with me.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1539

415. LETTER TO VALJI G. DESAI
July 27, 1938
CHI. VALJI,

I saw your handwriting after a long time. Mahadev is trying to
get that book. There is no truth in what the Bombay doctor says.
Countless people protect their teeth with the babul twigs. Yes, there is
one thing. Those who go on brushing the gums with a twig and that
too without chewing it into a soft brush do cause their gums to recede.
But this has no connection with the babul juice. The juice has the
quality of strengthening the gums. Pyorrhoea is not caused by
external infection but results from internal decay.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I hope the children are well
S HRI VALJI DESAI
GONDAL
KATHIAWAR
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7479. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

329

416. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
S EGAON,

July 27, 1938
CHI. VIJAYA,

I got your letter. Balkoba has gone to Varoda. He is fine.
Get rid of your fever. Try to find out what medicine the vaid is
giving you. It is no doubt an advantage to you that the milk there is
thin. It means that there is less fat in it.
Khan Saheb has arrived in Wardha. When the work of the
[Working] Committee is over, he will come to Segaon.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7091. Also C.W. 4583. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

417. LETTER TO SARASWATI
SEGAON,
July 27, 1938
CRAZY DAUGHTER SURU,

There has been no letter from you for some three or four days.
Write daily until until you are well. Remember God and recite the
following bhajan:

and repeat Ramanama.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 3442. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

1
“ I dedicate myself to that name, the two letters of which bring salvation to
all. The Lord Rama of Tulsidas is like a cloud showering mercy, while all other gods
need gratification.”

330

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

418. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

July 28, 1938
CHI. KANTI,

I got your letter. I am returning Saraswati’s letters. She writes to
me also in the same strain. I feel that you two should get married and
after marriage, as you suggest, stay separately in Bangalore and
observe self-control till your studies are over. But I see positive harm
in keeping Saraswati in Bangalore without marriage. After you get
married, Saraswati perhaps may not insist on staying with you and
may come to me or go to Trivandrum. I am prepared to write to
Ramachandran on hearing from you. I have discussed the matter with
Navin. If Ramachandran put those questions, it is a painful thing.
If you have given up milk and ghee, you have certainly not
done right. It would be duragraha. Resume normal food immediately. If necessary send me a wire.
Saraswati regularly writes to me, and so do I to her
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.W, 7343. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

419. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

July 29, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

Your letter and wire. This is just to tell you all is well here. Too
busy to say more. I am in the midst of friends and work.
Hanna still on glucose and oranges.
Love there to the Tyabjis and for yourself.
Yours,

R OBBER
From the original: C.W. 3872. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur.Also G.N. 7028

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

331

420. LETTER TO C. A. TULPULE
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

July 29, 1938
DEAR FRIEND,

Though the fullest brahmacharya is unattainable whilst one is in
the flesh a very near approach is perfectly possible in my opinion.
The way to it is yet unexplored. So far as I am concerned I am
exploring it in the hope of finding it. What progress I have made
makes me hopeful.
The sphere of limitations simply means the limits nature has put
upon us as fractions of the Divine. A fraction is not the whole.
If a person has as full control as is possible for a human, his
willing affects his surroundings. I have personal experience of that in
several instances. It may be argued that correspondence between the
willing and the alleged response were mere coincidences. For such
doubters I have no reply.
I hope this answers all your questions.
Yours sincerely,

M. K.

GANDHI

S HRI C. A. TULPULE
TILAK R OAD
P OONA C ITY
From a copy:C.W. 2898. Courtesy:C.A. Tulpule

421. A CLARIFICATION
July 30, 1938
An ex-professor writes a long letter on my article on higher
education1 from which I take the following relevant extracts :
There is need for further clarification of your views on higher education as
they have appeared in the Harijan of the 9th inst. I agree with many of your
views—especially those regarding the enormity of the damage caused by the
foreign medium. I also feel that what passes as higher education today
contains much brass mistaken for gold. I speak from experience as I was a
teacher in the line of the so-called ‘higher education’ till very recently. It is
1

332

Vide “Higer Education”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

your third conclusion about general revenue and claims of higher education
and its corollary, viz., that universities should be self-supporting, that has
left me unconvinced. I believe that every country to be a progressive country
must have sufficient faicilities for the pursuit of all branches of knowledge—
not merely chemistry, medicine and engineering, but every kind of
knowledge—literature, philosophy, history, sociology, both abstract and
applied. All higher pursuits require many facilities which cannot be had
without State support. A country depending only on voluntary effort for such
pursuits is sure to fall behind and suffer. It can never hope to be free and be
able to maintain that freedom. The State must be jealously watchful over the
position of higher education in all fields. Voluntary effort must be there and
we must have our Nuffields and Rockefellers1 . But the State cannot and must
not be allowed to remain a silent spectator. It must actively come forward to
organize, help and direct. I wish you to clarify this aspect of the question.
You say at the end of your article:“Under my scheme there will be more and
better libraries.” I do not find the ‘scheme’ you speak of in your article, nor
am I able to make out how ‘more and better libraries and laboratories’ will
come into being thereunder. I am of opinion that such libraries and
laboratories must be maintained and so long as donors and voluntary agencies
are not coming forward in sufficient numbers, the State cannot divest itself of
this responsibility.

My article is clear enough if the expression “definite use”
mentioned in it is given its extensive meaning. I have not pictured a
poverty-stricken Indian containing ignorant millions. I have pictured
to myself an India continually progressing along the lines best suited
to her genius. I do not, however, picture it as a third-class or even a
first-class copy of the dying civilization of the West. If my dream is
fulfilled, and every one of the seven lacs of villages becomes a wellliving republic in which there are no illiterates, in which no one is idle
for want of work, in which everyone is usefully occupied and has
nourishing food, well-ventilated dwellings and sufficient khadi for
covering the body, and in which all the villagers know and observe the
laws of hygiene and sanitation, such a State must have varied and
increasing needs, which it must supply unless it would stagnate. I can
therefore well imagine the State financing all the education my
correspondent mentions and much more that I could add. And if the
1
Viscount Nuffield established the Nuffield Foundation fo medical, scientific
and social research and John D. Rockefeller similarly endowed many charitable
corporations for the advancement of learning.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

333

State has such requirements, surely it will have corresponding
libraries.
What, however, according to my view the State will not have is an
army of B.A.s and M.A.s with their brains sapped with too much
cramming and minds almost paralysed by the impossible attempt to
speak and write English like Englishmen. The majority of these have
no work, no employment. And when they have the latter, it is usually
clerkships at which most of the knowledge gained during their twelve
years of high school and college is of no use whatsoever to them.
University training becomes self-supporting when it is utilized
by the State. It is criminal to pay for a training which benefits neither
the nation nor the individual. In my opinion there is no such thing as
individual benefit which cannot be proved to be also national benefit.
And since most of my critics seem to be agreed that the existing
higher education, and for that matter both primary and secondary, are
not connected with realitites, it cannot be of benefit to the State. When
it is directly based on realities and is wholly given through the mother
tongue, I shall perhaps have nothing to say against it. To be based on
realities is to be based on national, i.e., State, requirements. And the
State will pay for it. Even when that happy time comes, we shall find
that many institutions will be conducted by voluntary contributions.
They may or may not benefit the State. Much of what passes for
education today in India belongs to that category and would therefore
not be paid for from the general revenue, if I had the way.
But the agreement of my critics on the two main points, medium
and the realities, cannot lull me to rest. They have criticized and
tolerated all these many years the existing system. Now that the
opportunity for reform has come, Congressmen ought to become
impatient. If the medium is changed at once and not gradually, in an
incredibly short time we shall find text-books and teachers coming
into being to supply the want. And if we mean business, in a year’s
time we shall find that we need never have been party to the tragic
waste of the nation’s time and energy in trying to learn the essentials
of culture through a foreign medium. The condition of success is
undoubtedly that provincial languages are introduced at once in
Government offices and courts, if the Provincial Governments have
the power or the influence over the courts. If we believe in the
necessity of the reform, we can achieve it in no time.
Harijan, 30-7-1938
334

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

422. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
[July 30, 1938]
With regard to the recent ministerial crisis in C.P., it has been
suggested that Dr. Khare was asked to sign a prepared draft
containing humiliating admissions. I have no hesitation in saying that
this suggestion is baseless. Dr. Khare accompanied by several
members of the Working Committee, came to Segaon on July 25, and
after discussion he prepared a statement to be issued to the Press. 1 I
made corrections and additions to it, but after reading my corrections
and additions he changed his mind and said that he would consult his
friends and then decide whether to issue it or not. In my opinion there
was nothing humiliating in it, if only because it contained nothing but
facts. I hardly think Dr. Khare will dispute this. The best thing,
however, is for the public to have the statement itself before it. I invite
Dr. Khare to publish a facsimile of it. I have kept no copy of his own
with my amendments. He took it with him to Nagpur.
Harijan, 6-8-1938

423. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
July 2, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

Herewith a letter to Dr. Khare. Send with it a copy of my statement2 . I hope you have gone through it closely. Send a copy to me
also.
I hope Lilavati is feeling better. She must be wearing the glasses.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati:S.N. 11615

1

For the text of the statement and Gandhiji’s corrections, vide “Statement of
Dr. N. B. Khstr”, 25-7-1938
2
Vide the preceding item.
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

335

424. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
July 30, 1938
CHI, JAMNALAL,

You have told somebody here that you wish to come and stay
here. If you wish to come, everything is of course ready. But if you
are not coming, I should like to keep Kishorelal here for some time.
But this does not mean that you should drop the idea of coming. I will
ask Kishorelal only if you are not coming. I wish you to visit Ramana
Maharshi as early as possible.1
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati:G.N. 2995

425. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
SEGAON, W ARDHA,
July 31, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

This is for the sake of telling you all well again. Khan Saheb is
leaving tomorrow. Hanna the day after. Probably Kishorelal will come
to stay here for a few days on Tuesday.
Your apples are still being eaten.
Jivraj brought a new thermos yesterday. That is the result of
entrusting you with a mission—quite a paying thing !
Love
TYRANT
From the original:C.W. 3873. Courtesy:Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7029

426. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
July 31, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

I had got word, before you brought it, that David would be
coming at 3.
1

336

The addressee called on Ramana Maharshi on August 19, 1938.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am replying to Dr. Khare. Send the letter 1 today. What a
pitiable condition!
Two other letters also are enclosed.
What The Hindu says about the Governor is strange. I wish to
write even more strongly than that.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati:S.N. 11616

427. LETTER TO SARASWATI
S EGAON,

June 31, 1938
CHI. CRAZY SURU,

I have your letter. I hope that you have calmed down now.
Kanti’s letters too keep coming and they cause me anxiety. Why do
you despair ? Even as regards food you have to build up your health
on a regular diet.
Manu has arrived. Sushila has stayed on for two or three days at
the Mahila Ashram with Tari. It has stopped raining these days.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi:G.N. 6169. Also C.W. 3443. Courtesy:Kantilal
Gandhi

428. INSTRUCTIONS ON PRECAUTIONS AGAINST
CHOLERA2
August 1, 1938
Segaon has cholera. Therefore nothing should be taken by
anybody from Segaon. Those who have got cholera may be isolated
where they are, unless they could be conveniently shifted elsewhere.
1

Not traceable
According to the source D.B. Kalelkar, Narhar Athavale, Pandurang Bhurke,
Gajanan Dabke, Murlidhar Sabnis and Shripad Joshi had drunk of unfermented palm
juice, nira, on July 30 and on July 31 developed symptoms which the Civil Surgeon
of Wardha diagnosed as those of cholera. On August 1 Aryanayakum reported the
matter to Gandhiji who wrote out these instructions. Athavale, Bhurke and Dabke
later succumbed to the disease.
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

337

No one should be allowed near them except those who have been
entrusted with nursing. The latter should be bare-bodied or have
special clothes which should be put away when they come into contact
with the outside world. They should wash themselves in permanganated water (rose coloured) every time they come in contact
with others. All should drink only boiled water and have simple food,
rather underfeed than overfeed. Those who have no scruples may be
inoculated.
Send me report through Mahadev. He starts from Maganwadi at
about 12.30 p.m. Did Kaka drink nira ? It should be stopped for the
time being.
The Bombay Chronicle, 12-9-1938

429. LETTER TO HANNAH LAZAR1
[August 1, 1938] 2
If he has money to spare, he has to send you back when the
climate is bearable and you have trained yourself in South Africa for
the Indian life as you now know it—no risks can be taken here. And
what is the use of your going away from me for three months? And if
you have to go away, then off to the far south, that is to say, since you
can’t stay here in Segaon for three months, you have to go away.
Therefore, the safest thing is to go to the far south, i. e., South Africa,
and then, if all is well, you may return when the cold climate sets in.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

430. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
August 1, 1938
CHI, MAHADEV,

I have written a rather long article. The typing has not begun
yet. It can therefore go only tomorrow. If possible I will send it
tonight.
Dhiru is coming tomorrow. Navin will go there today. I have
still to read the mail sent by you. I do not know when I shall be able
to write about picketing. I am sending Nayakum’s article. You will see
1
2

338

Niece of Herman Kallenbach
As noted by the addressee
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

that I have divided it into two parts. I will have no objection if they are
combined.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11618

431. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
[August 1, 1938] 1
CHI. MAHADEV,

Bablo also would require something. Please, therefore, have this.
I suppose someone will give the ticket, etc., to Hanna when she goes
there. She is to be sent off tomorrow.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati:S.N. 11558

432. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
August 1, 1938
CHI. VIJAYA,

I am in a very great hurry. It is good that you sent the names of
the medicines. Observe the rule about writing on a fixed day in the
week.
Hanna is leaving tomorrow. Khan Saheb has left. Kishorebhai
and Manu are coming tomorrow. And so the number will remain the
same.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7092. Also C.W. 4584. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

1

Vide the following letter in which Gandhiji writes : “Hanna is leaving
tomorrow.”
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

339

433. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
[After August 1, 1938]
CHI. MAHADEV,

Cholera has broken out in Karanji. Help has been sent, but let
this man take a note to C. S. He will bring from there medicines, the
doctor, etc., whatever is available. Send the post. When will the oranges
start coming ?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati:S.N. 11557

434. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
August 2, 1938
CHI. KAKA,

Kanu has frightened me. He says you flatly refuse to take
medicine. This is not right. Sushila and Amritlal are going there.
Having heard that Mahodaya needs help, I am sending Sushila. Take
whatever medicine she gives, either oral or for external application. I
have told her that she must give no medicine containing nonvegetarian or alcoholic ingredients.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati:G.N. 10902

435. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
August 3, 1938
CHI. KAKA,

I have deliberately hardened my heart and am not coming there
to you. You need not reply to this letter. Get well soon. Do send for
me whenever you consider my presence necessary.
My vandemataram to Bhai Daftari.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati:G.N. 10903

340

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

436. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
August 3, 1938
CHI. KAKA,

Pandurang and Dabke have gone where all of us will go sooner
or later. I kept back this fact from you. But why keep it a secret ? It is
necessary that you should not let the news affect you. Is not our study
of the Gita tested in digesting such news calmly ?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10904

437. TELEGRAM TO PRESIDENT, BURMA CONGRESS
COMMITTEE
[On or before August 5, 1938] 1
YOUR WIRE 2. . I

DO

NOT KNOW WHAT

BURMESE FRIENDS. THE RIOTS

3

INFLUENCE

I

CAN

HAVE ON

ARE MOST DEPLORABLE WHAT-EVER THE

CAUSE. THEY SHOW THAT WE BOTH HAVE NOT PASSED THE BARBAROUS
STAGE. HOW I WISH THE HEADS OF BOTH COMMUNITIES COULD DEVISE
WAYS AND MEANS OF AVOIDING A REPETITION OF

SUCH

TRAGEDIES.

The Hindu, 5-8-1938

1

The news item reporting this is dated August 5.
This read : “Happily with the services of Indian and Burmese elders peace is
being restored. The Burma Congress Committee believes that a suitable public
statement by you will go a great way in removing the misunderstanding, if any, and
restoring the original cordial relations and amity between Indians and Burmans.”
3
Between Buddhists and Muslims which broke out on July 26. Vide also
“Recent Riots in Burma”, 20-8-1938.
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

341

438. TELEGRAM TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
WARDHAGANJ,

August 5, 1938
MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
74 WALKESHWAR
BOMBAY HIGH
ARRANGE

SALVATION

ARMY

SEND

IMMEDIATELY

TWELVE

STERILE EGGS.

BAPU
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

439. LETTER TO SHAUKATULLA SHAH
August 5, 1938
MY DEAR SHAUKAT,

Since this was written I have your letter. I think we need not
worry for the moment. Miss Harrison must have overtaken the immediate need. I am making my effort. Haven’t heard from Bhopal.1
You must set Zohra right.
Love to you both.
BAPU
From a copy:Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy:Pyarelal

440. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
S EGAON,

August 5, 1938
CHI. KANTI,

Mahadev has replied to your letters. I am writing this with the
greatest difficulty. I have been thinking a great deal about you. From
Saraswati’s latest letter which I have received, it seems that she is calm.
Ramachandran also writes to say that she is regaining poise. If so, it is
very good indeed. I think it is best that Saraswati should stay at
1

342

Vide “Letter to Nawab of Bhopal”, 19-7-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Trivandrum at present. All the same I will be ready for all contingencies. You should stop worrying. Whatever is to happen will
happen. Keep me informed. Give up your anger towards Ramachandran. Do not distrust him. Your respect for him should not diminish.
Kakasheb is down with cholera. Chances are he will survive.
Chimanlal has been sent to the hospital for an operation for piles. Two
very dear co-workers of Kaka died of cholera. Nana Athavale1 is also
down with it. Such is the position. Manu has come. She is very happy.
Write sometimes to Ba.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati:C.W. 7345. Courtesy:Kantilal Gandhi

441. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
S EGAON,

August 5, 1938
CHI. AMRITLAL,

Chimanlal has been sent to hospital for an operation for piles.
Please send someone to find out if he requires anything. If you
yourself can visit him, do so.
Kaka is all right I hope. Tell him that I have sent a telegram2 to
Bal three days back.
Look after your health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10752

442. LETTER TO SARASWATI
August 5, 1938
CHI. SARU,

If I am not to call you crazy shall I call you wise ? Have you
really grown wise ? Why would Kanti be uneasy if that were true ?
Kanti’s letters reveal that you are only crazy. Tell me now what I am
to believe. Give me all the details:what your diet is, how many hours
1
2

Narhar Lakshman Athavale, a worker of the Mahila Ashram
Not traceable

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

343

you sleep, what you study and whether you play the vina. Do you go
to school or study at home ? Do you keep cheerful ?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Manu has arrived. Kakasaheb has had cholera but I hope he will
survive.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 6170. Also C.W. 3444. Courtesy:
Kantilal Gandhi

443. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
August 5/6, 1938
CHI, VIJAYA,

I am writing this with great difficulty. As Kakasaheb is down
with cholera, Amritlal is at Wardha nursing him. Chimanlal has been
sent to the hospital for an operation of piles. Most probably Kishorelal will come tomorrow. Two very devoted young co-workers of Kaka
fell victims to cholera and have left this world. Nana of Mahila
Ashram has also fallen a prey. I have frequently to go to Wardha.
Such is the position. I hope you are improving. Cholera has spread a
little in Segaon too.
Blessings from

BAPU
KUMARI VIJAYABEHN
AT NARANBHAI VALLABHBHAI P ATEL’S HOUSE
VARAD
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7093. Also C.W. 4585. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

444. FUNCTIONS OF THE WORKING COMMITTEE
August 6, 1938
Press cuttings on the ministerial crisis in C.P.1 make most
1

The crisis in the C. P. Ministry had begun soon after the assumption of office
by the ministry headed by N. B. Khare. First a minister had made recommendation
direct to the Governor concerning the release of certain convicts (see footnote 1, p.
178) and later there were differences among ministers leading to tension. In April the

344

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

instructive reading. That the resolution of the Working Committee
condemning the action of veteran leader like Dr. Khare would come
in for some severe criticism was a foregone conclusion.1 But I was not
prepared for the ignorance betrayed by the critics on the functions of
the Working Committee.
Dr. Khare was not only guilty of gross indiscipline in flouting
the warnings of the Parliamentary Board, but he betrayed incompetence as a leader by allowing himself to be fooled by the Governor, or
not knowing that by his precipitate action he was compromising the
Congress. He heightened the measure of indiscipline by refusing the
advice of the Working Committee to make a frank confession of his
guilt and withdraw from leadership. The Working committee would
have been guilty of gross neglect of duty if it had failed to condemn
Dr. Khare’s action and adjudge his incompetence. I write these lines
in sorrow. It was no pleasure to me to advise the Working Committee
to pass the resolution it did. Dr. Khare is a friend. He has run to my
aid as a physician when quick medical assistance was needed. He has
often come to me for advice and guidance and has expressed himself
to be in need of my blessings. I banked on this friendship when, on
the 25th ultimo, I appealed to him bravely to stand down and work as
a camp-follower. He himself seemed to be willing but he was badly
advised, and not only declined to accept the Working Committee’s
advice but sent a letter instead, questioning the propriety of the whole
of the action of the Working Committee in connection with his illadvised and hasty resignation of office and equally hasty formation of
a new Cabinet. I hope that on mature reflection he would have seen
the error of his conduct and taken the action of the Working
Committee in a sportsmanlike spirit. There is no moral turpitude
involved in his action. He is a good fighter. He is free with his purse in
helping friends. These are qualities of which anyone may be proud.
But these qualities need not make the possessor a good Prime Minister
Congress Parliamentary Committee managed at a meeting at Pachmarhi to resolve
these differences and achieve a settlement. But Khare did not keep the terms of the
settlement and continued to function without consulting the Working Committee or
the Parliamentary Committee. In order to get rid of certain ministers he submitted his
resignation to the Governor and asked the ministers concerned to resign. When they
refused to oblige, the Governor dismissed them and later invited Khare to form a new
ministry.
1
The Working Committee condemning the action of Khare held him to be
“unworthy of holding positions of responsibility in the Congress organization”. For
the text of the resolution, vide “Working Committee Resolution on C. P. Crisis”
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

345

or administrator. I would urge him as a friend to work for the time
being as a camp-follower and give the Congress the benefit of the
admitted qualities I have recited.
If Dr. Khare was impatient of his recalcitrant colleagues he
should have rushed, not to the Governor, but to the Working Committee and tendered his resignation. If he felt aggrieved by its decision,
he could have gone to the A. I. C. C. But in no case could any
Minister take internal quarrels to the Governor and seek relief through
him without the previous consent of the Working Committee. If the
Congress machinery is slow-moving, it can be made to move faster. If
the men at the helm are self-seekers or worthless, the A. I. C. C. is
there to remove them. Dr. Khare erred grievously in ignoring or, what
is worse, not knowing this simple remedy and rushing to the Governor
on the eve of the meeting of the Working Committee to end his
agony.
It is suggested that the men who succeed him are self-seekers
and incapable, and can make no approach to Dr. Khare in character.
If they are as they have been portrayed by their critics, they are bound
to fail in the discharge of the onerous responsibility they have
undertaken. But here again the Working Committee has to work
within the limits prescribed for it. It cannot impose ministers on a
province. After all they are elected members, and if the party that has
the power to elect them chooses to do so, the Working Committee has
no authority to interfere so long as they remain under discipline and
are not known to be persons unworthy of public confidence. But the
crisis should surely put the Ministers on their mettle. It is up to them
to show by their conduct that the charges levelled against them are
baseless, and that they are capable of discharging their trust ably and
selflessly.
It speaks well for the impartiality of the Indian Press in that
several journals found it necessary to condemn the action of the
Working Committee in pronouncing the opinion it did on the part H.
E. the Governor of C. P. played during the unfortunate crisis. I am
not in the habit of hastily judging opponents. The criticism of the
resolution has left me unconvinced of any injustice done to the
Governor by it. In estimating his action, time is of the essence. In
accepting the resignations of Dr. Khare and his two colleagues, in
demanding resignations from the other three Ministers, in expecting
an immediate answer, in summarily rejecting their explanation and
346

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

dismissing them, and for this purpose keeping himself, his staff and
the poor Ministers awake almost the whole night, the Governor
betrayed a haste which I can only call indecent. Nothing would have
been lost if instead of accepting Dr. Khare’s resignation there and
then, he had awaited the meeting of the Working Committee which
was to meet two days after the strange drama. In dealing with a similar
crisis the Bengal Governor acted differently from the C. P. Governor.
Of course, the Governor’s action conformed to the letter of the
law, but it killed the spirit of the tacit compact between the British
Government and the Congress. Let the critics of the Working
Committee’s action read the Viceroy’s carefully prepared declaration
which, among other declarations, induced the Working Committee to
try the office experiment, and ask themselves whether the Governor
was not bound to take official notice of what was going on between
the Working Committee and Dr. Khare and his colleagues. These
indisputable facts lead one to the irresistible conclusion that the
Governor, in his eagerness to discredit the Congress, kept a vigil and
brought about a situation which he knew was to be uncomfortable for
the Congress. The unwritten compact between the British Government
and the Congress is a gentleman’s agreement in which both are
expected to play the game.
The resolution therefore gives English administrators more
credit than evidently the critics would give. Englishmen are sportsmen. They have ample sense of humour. They can hit hard and take a
beating also in good grace. I have no doubt that the Governor will
take the Congress resolution in good part.
But whether he does so or not, the Working Committee was
bound to express what it felt about the Governor’s action. It wishes to
avoid a fight if it can; it will take it up if it must. If the fight is to be
avoided, the Governors must recognize the Congress as the one
national organization that is bound some day or other to replace the
British Government. The U.P., the Bihar and the Orissa Governors
waited for the Congress lead when a crisis faced them. No doubt, in
the three cases, it was obviously to their interest to do so. Is it to be
said that in C.P. it was obviously to the British interest to precipitate
the crisis in order to discomfit the Congress? The Working Committee
resolution is a friendly warning to the British Government that if they
wish to avoid an open rupture with the Congress, the powers that be
should not allow a repetition of what happened at Nagpur on the night
of the 20th July.
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

347

Let us understand the functions of the Congress. For internal
growth and administration, it is as good a democratic organization as
any to be found in the world. But this democratic organization has
been brought into being to fight the greatest imperialist power living.
For this external work, therefore, it has to be likened to an army. As
such it ceases to be democratic. The central authority possesses
plenary powers enabling it to impose and enforce discipline on the
various units working under it. Provincial organizations and Provincial
Parliamentary Boards are subject to the central authority.
It has been suggested that, whilst my thesis holds good when
there is active war in the shape of civil resistance going on, it cannot
whilst the latter remains under suspension. But suspension of civil
disobedience does not mean suspension of war. The latter can only
end when India has a Constitution of her own making. Till then the
Congress must be in the nature of an army. Democratic Britain has set
up an ingenious system in India which, when you look at it in its
nakedness, is nothing but a highly organized efficient military
control. It is not less so under the present Government of India Act.
The Ministers are mere puppets so far as the real control is concerned.
The collectors and the police, who ‘sir’ them today, may at a mere
command from the Governors, their real masters, unseat the Ministers,
arrest them and put them in lock-up. Hence it is that I have suggested
that the Congress has entered upon office not to work the Act in the
manner expected by the framers but in a manner so as to hasten the
day of substituting it by a genuine Act of India’s own coining.
Therefore the Congress conceived as a fighting machine has to
centralize control and guide every department and every Congressman, however highly placed, and expect unquestioned obedience. The
fight cannot be fought on any other terms.
They say this is fascism pure and simple. But they forget that
fascism is the naked sword. Under it Dr. Khare should lose his head.
The Congress is the very antithesis of fascism, because it is based on
non-violence pure and undefiled. Its sanctions are all moral. Its
authority is not derived from the control of panoplied black-shirts.
Under the Congress regime Dr. Khare can remain the hero of Nagpur,
and the students and citizens of Nagpur, and for that matter other
places, may execrate me or/and the Working Committee without a hair
of the demonstrators’ heads being touched so long as they remain
non-violent. That is the glory and strength of the Congress—not its
weakness. Its authority is derived from that non-violent attitude. It is
348

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the only purely non-violent political organization of importance, to
my knowledge, throughout the world. And let it continue to be the
boast of the Congress that it can command the willing and hearty
obedience from its followers, even veterans like Dr. Khare, so long as
they choose to belong to it.
Harijan, 6-8-1938

445. LETTER TO DR. GOPICHAND BHARGAVA
MAGANWADI,
WARDHA (C. P.),

August 6, 1938
DEAR DR. GOPICHAND,

I have your letter of the first instant. I had the earlier letters also.
Bapu had no opportunity to have a talk with the Maulana, because
other important subjects engaged the whole of the time and attention
of the w. c. Bapu thinks that no member of the Parliamentary Board
has a right to dictate any important course of action without reference
to the Working committee. You will therefore represent the matter to
the Working Committee, who will consider it at the next meeting.
Yours sincerely,
MAHADEV DESAI
From the original : Dr. Gopichand Bhargava Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

446. LETTER TO MANGALDAS PAKVASA
S EGAON,

August 6, 1938
BHAI MANGALDAS,

I got your letter too late to be able to send you my blessings on
the 3rd. You did not give either your son’s or his bride’s name. The
marriage celebration must have passed off without any trouble. Please
convey my blessings to both. May both of them devote themselves to
service and may God grant them long lives.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4680. Courtesy: Mangaldas Pakvasa

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

349

447. NOTE TO KRISHNACHANDRA
August 6, 1938
I understand. I shall not keep you away from serving me. Do
sleep when you feel sleepy. It will be good if you give up trying to get
up at night. I shall wake you up if I feel the need. You must fix the
quantity of your food. More on hearing the details regarding the
piles.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4298. Also S.G. 68

448. TO SEGAON WORKERS
August 6, 1938
We should bear in mind the following:
1. Spittle is also excretion. Therefore we must never clean the
untensils where we spit or wash our soiled hands.
2. We should not use water direct from the tap as it wastes water
and not many poeple can use the tap at the same time. Therefore
everyone must collect the water he needs in a lota.
3. No one should brush his teeth at the place meant for washing
hands and mouth. The teeth must be brushed at a separate place and
the mouth rinsed with water from a lota. Brushing of the teeth too
should be done near a hedge or where people do not happen to walk.
4. We should never spit or blow the nose on the paths.
BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: C.W. 4674

350

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

449. LETTER TO H.J. KHANDEKAR
[Before August 7, 1938] 1
I would urge you not to enforce your threat. 2 It would be an
abuse of satyagraha.3 You cannot impose a Harijan on the Ministry.
You can agitate in a peaceful manner for the inclusion of a Harijan in
the cabinet, if you are satisfied that among the members of the C.P.
Assembly there is a competent Harijan prepared to accept the
Congress discipline, enjoying the confidence of the Harijan members
and able to shoulder Ministerial responsibility. I am sure you will not
insist that in every case and irrespective of merit a Harijan must have a
place in the C.P. Ministry.
The Hindustan Times, 8-8-1938.

450. HARIJANS AND HINDU HOTELS
The strike of the Hindu hotel owners does credit neither to them,
nor to Ahmedabad, nor does it afford protection to Hindusim. These
hotel owners could close down their hotels if others did not go to their
hotels because of the presence of Harijans there. But resorting to
strike is tantamount to preventing the Congress Government from
doing justice.
The question arises whether the Hindus on strike are on the side
of the Congress or opposed to it. Are they enemies of Hinduism or
are they its well-wishers? If they consider themselves supporters of the
Congress, they should lovingly feed Harijans despite having to put up
with difficulties. If, while doing so, other Hindus stop coming to their
restaurants, they should put up with this. If all Hindu restaurantowners practise this dharma, other Hindus would either be forced to
take advantage of those very restaurants or wholly give up eating in
such restaurants. In the latter eventuality the restaurant-owners should
look for a new source of livelihood. They should on no account
forsake their dharma.
If they are Congressmen—and they should be—they should
1

The news item from which this has been extracted is dated August 7.
This sentence is from a report in The Hindu, 8-8-1938.
3
The addressee, a Harijan member of the C.P. Congress Committee, had
threatened to start a satyagraha if a Harijan was not included in the C.P. Cabinet.
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

351

regard untouchability as adharma and, if that is so, it is evident that by
resorting to strike they are practising adharma.
This strike indicates that the ordinary mass of Hindus share the
opinion on the restaurant-owners. If that is so they are opposed to the
Congress. But that cannot be so, because Ahmedabad has always sided
with the Congress. How can they not be convinced that the practice of
untouchability cannot survive in this age? Akha Bhagat has taught us
that untouchability is a superfluous appendage and the cutting off of
such a limb is beneficial.
Moreover, today, we find Hindus everywhere eating in all sorts
of places. Their religion does not come in their way there. They
frequent Irani restaurants. They freely visit English hotels. There is no
prejudice against Harijans in those places.
If Harijans put on the caste mark on their foreheads, wear
beads and go to restaurants without proclaiming their caste, who
can prevent them? How can one find out about their caste? There is
no doubt that many Harijans go to restaurants in this way. Is the strike
then merely for the crime which the Government has committed in
issuing the order to enforce its own law? If those who regard
untouchability as their dharma actually wish to put it into practice,
they should stop going to restaurants, taking foreign medicines; they
should refrain from eating sweets whether foreign or Indian, as there
is every possibility of Harijans having had a hand in their making.
Foreign medicines are not made by Hindus and who knows how many
Harijans may not have touched them before they reach the consumer?
Today there are many vaids who do not practise untouchability. Is not
their medicine polluted? And the less said about sweets the better. All
this is worth considering. And those who do so will certainly come to
the conclusion that those who practise untouchability should give up
many other things. And, as that is not possible, they should realize the
difficulty involved in it and tolerate the presence of Harijans in
restaurants.
The path of those who regard untouchability as being opposed
to dharma is simple. If no restaurant-owner opens the doors of his
restaurant to them these people should start restaurants in whatever
way it is possible and lovingly feed those visiting them. If anyone
feels that Harijans are dirty, that their clothes are unclean, rules of
cleanliness applicable to all can be enforced with regard to restaurants.
Absence of cleanliness is not a monopoly of Harijans alone.
352

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

A few words about the duties of the Government. So long as
public opinion is in favour of the Congress, the dharma of the latter is
clear. On no account will it tolerate untouchability. It will sink or swim
with Harijans. Even if the Congress can rule over the entire world by
doing injustice to Harijans, it should regard it as dirt. Abolition of
untouchability is an indispensable part of Congress policy. If no one
starts a restaurant which would be open to all, either the municipality
or the Government should run such places as required at its own
expense. If such a restaurant does not find enough customers it could
be closed down. But not a single Hindu restaurant should be allowed
to function which does not permit the entry of Harijans.
Now a few words to the Harijans. Just as Congressmen and
sanatanist Hindus have to practise their dharma, so have the Harijans.
These men and women have to see to it that they do not lose the game
which is almost theirs. I have before me letters written by some proven
Harijan workers. In these they have mentioned that at some places
either in order to show their enthusiasm or to show their gratitude
towards the Government, or for some other reason, Harijans, in large
numbers, had surrounded restaurants and attempted to enter them.
They were not even properly dressed. Those who do so render no
service to Harijans but rather do them harm. They misuse laws laid
down by the Government. Some rights are such that they cannot be
utilized fully as soon as they are given. Some time must elapse before
they are fully enjoyed and we should patiently put up with it. This
right to enter restaurants is of this nature. Not a single Harijan must
visit them to assert a right. Any Harijan who is really hungry and is
passing by a restaurant, who has the money and is clad in clean
clothes, should certainly go to the restaurant. He should suffer any
insult which he encounters while doing so, he should inform the
Harijan Sevak Sangh of this without taking any offence and the latter
will certainly take steps to ensure that he is not insulted again. And,
finally, if steps outside of the law prove to be futile, he will resort to
legal help. The statement made by Shri Muldas in this connection is
very useful. Harijan men and women will see it published in the
current issue and I hope that they will put it into practice.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 7-8-1938

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

353

451. LETTER TO DIRECTOR, THE TIMES OF INDIA, BOMBAY
S EGAON,

August 7, 1938
DEAR SIR,

I thank you for your letter of 28th ultimo and a copy of The
Story of the World in Pictures.
I do not consider myself in any way qualified to pronounce an
opinion on ventures like yours. I would therefore ask you to excuse
me for my inability to comply with your request.
Yours faithfully,
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

452. LETTER TO PERINBEHN CAPTAIN
S EGAON,

August 7, 1938
DEAR SISTER,

Your letter was welcome. If you knew of my relations with
Parsi women, you would not feel the distrust that you do. I cannot
even dream of having ill will for Nariman.1 I was responsible for
bringing him in to the Working Committee. But my conscience still
tells me that whatever happened as a result of the inquiry conducted to
probe into the mistakes committed by him was perfectly right.
Vandemataram from

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11562

1

K. F. Nariman had accused Sardar Patel of using his influence to get B. G.
Kher elected as the leader of the Congress Party in the Bombay Legislative Assembly
in March, 1937. The matter was referred to a tribunal consisting of Gandhiji and
Bahadurji. Their judgment went in favour of Sardar Patel. Nariman and his followers
then accused Gandhiji of favouritism.

354

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

453. LETTER TO VALJI G. DESAI
August 7, 1938
CHI. VALJI,

I have kept back both your articles. The one about Shankaracharya seems unnecessary. The argument does not sound
convincing. The other about the Manusmriti is rather imaginative.
It makes pleasant reading but it does not help much in understanding
the meaning of the Smritis. What would you suggest?
How is Dudhibehn? How is the children’s education going on?
How is their health? And yours? Here Kaka and a few others have had
cholera. Two workers have passed away.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 7480. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

454. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
August 7, 1938
CHI. AMRITLAL,

I was told that Vijaya’s letter was sent to you yesterday. Even
though the doctor has given permission, let Kaka start eating gradually. Do not give him plum-water. Its effect is not good. Nothing
can equal mosambi juice. Let him take semi-liquid porridge of sago,
and that also only if he feels hungry. He may take a mixture of five
tolas milk, five tolas water and one spoonful of sago. It is advisable to
go slow. I hear that Dharmadhikari had been sent for. In any case he
had been given permission. If that is so, I must apologize to him.1
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 10754

1

Vide the following item.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

355

455. LETTER TO NANA DHARMADHIKARI
August 7, 1938
BHAI NANA,

I thought that you had left without permission and that is why I
was angry. I see now that you had been called away. No doubt I thus
did you an injustice, though unintentionally. I make amends for it
now by acknowledging my mistake through this letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C. W. 4754

456. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
S EGAON,

August 7, 1938
CHI. PRABHA,

I got your letter. I do not like your being ill. I should like
Jayaprakash to come here after his work in Malabar is over. In the
beginning of October I shall have to go to the Frontier Province. Here
Kaka, Nana and some other workers have had cholera. Two very fine
young workers have succumbed. Kaka barely survived. Cholera is
raging all around. It is raging in Segaon, too. Sushila has been
working hard. Manu is here. Navin and Dhiru also are here. I am
arranging to send Harijanbandhu and Harijan.
Mirabehn, Ba and the rest are well. I am also keeping well. I take
milk and eat khakhra, vegetables and fruit.
Rajkumari is coming on the 9th. She is in Poona. Kanti is in
Bangalore. I am observing voluntary silence and it is going on. I
speak only when necessary.
Rajendra Babu is going to the south in two or three days to see a
sadhu, a maharshi.1 You know him by name because you were to go
to his ashram while returning from Travancore. His name is Ramana
Maharshi.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 3519
1

Rajendra Prasad visited Sri Ramana Maharshi’s Asramam from August 14 to
August 18. He then requested the Maharshi for a message for Gandhiji The Maharshi
said: “Adhyatma shakti is working within him and leading him on. That is enough,
what more is necessary?” (Talks, under 18-8-1938)

356

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

457. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
August 7, 1938
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

I got your letter. I was much relieved. I am sending milk from
here. Sushila, Pyarelal and I think that it would be better if you
refrained from taking milk today. Fruit and lime juice will be enough.
Do not worry about the weakness, but there should be no injury to
the piles. For their quick shrinking it is better to avoid food.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10582

458. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
August 7, 1938
CHI. MUNNALAL,

I think that the women alone will not be able to cope with the
vegetables. Two of them are guests. And the sick Ba should be left out
of account. Mirabehn also is not there. You should, therefore, put the
responsibility on a man. For the present let it be Navin. He shoud
carry on with whatever help he may get from the women.
A bucket for everybody is too much. Everybody must have a
lota of course. A lantern for everybody is also a luxury. We should
always think of what the poor do and try as far as possible to live as
they do.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 8571. Also C. W. 7069. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

459. LETTER TO RADHAKRISHNA BAJAJ
August 7, 1938
CHI. RADHAKRISHNA,

I shall want the motor-car tomorrow, Monday, at 12 o’clock, if
it is not raining. Balkrishna is to be taken to Nagpur.
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

357

It was my fault that the car was kept here the whole day yesterday. I
was sorry Kishorelal did not turn up yesterday. My heart cried and
memory failed. What am I to do?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 9123

460. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
August 7, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

If you cannot find Jayantiprasad’s address there, please return
the letter here. It is all right that you did not come. The story about
. . . 1 has got a wide publicity from there. How did it happen? Please
make an inquiry. From what Santok writes, what has happened is
serious. This refusal has shocked me a good deal indeed. Such
incidents test me fairly severely. ‘In a man brooding on objects of the
senses attachment to them springs up.’2 I am cancelling the note about
Sarvat. I do not wish to give him publicity in that way. I am returning
the rest to you, believing that you will prefer to get it typed by Babla.
If that is not so, return it early in the morning so that I may get it
typed here.
There has been one more case of cholera here. Sushila, Kanu
and Soptekar were therefore busy in the village from 6.30 to 11.30 in
the morning. Eighty persons were inoculated. The man was on deathbed. May be he will survive.
For today I am sending milk for Chimanlal from here. Most
probably I will do that every day.
There are many letters to be posted. Check the addresses on
them. There is no need to despatch them urgently. Sushila and
Balkrishna will leave tomorrow by the 1 o’clock train. I have already
written to Radhakrishna Bajaj about the car. However, please inquire
about it. If it is raining, then of course we will not let them go.
Kishorelal has come. He does have some fever. Yesterday he had an
attack of asthma too.
Blessings from

BAPU
1
2

358

The omission as in the source
Bhagavad Gita, II. 62
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[PS.]
I do not have the courage to write about Manahar. If you have
and if you wish to ask, you may. I am afraid there will be a negative
reply from that quarter also.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 11621.

461. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
August 7, 1938
Dharma says that you should not accept any money from your
uncle. Whatever book I may sanction may be purchased with the
public funds.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 4299

462. TELEGRAM TO S. K. PATIL
August 8, 1938
S. K. P ATIL
BOMBAY
WITH
REFERENCE
YOUR
LETTER
SORRY
HAVING
CAUSED
WORRY CONFUSION PLEASE
IGNORE
ADVICE
CONTAINED
MY
AND
DO
TELEGRAM
WHATEVER YOU THINK BEST IN CONGRESS
INTEREST.1

From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

463. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
August 8, 1938
CHI. AMRITLAL,

It will be better to keep Kaka hungry rather than overfeed him.
Do consult the doctor, though of course not about food—that you
may ask me.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10755

1

This was in reply to the addressee’s letter regarding the suspension of the
Joint Honorary Secretaries of the Girgaon District Congress Committee.
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

359

464. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
August 8, 1938
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

I hope you are better. Go slow about food.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10583

465. LETTER TO PYARELAL
August 8, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

I would ask you to stop fasting on Mondays and Thursdays so
long as you do not get over your weakness. If I am entitled to
command you, this is my command, Your weakness is unbearable to
me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

466. LETTER TO PYARELAL
August 8, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

I could not wholly understand your letter. What have I or
Sushila done to aggravate your uneasiness? I never at all interfere with
your discipline. I am trying to root out the very desire to do so.
I am sure that you will not disregard my letter.
In what way are you in darkness? I really do not understand.
Why do you not leave everying to God? But everyone does not
worship Him in the same way. Your way of worshipping may be
appropriate for you. I am trying to understand in what way it is so.
My orders are not unnatural. They certainly cannot be so in
your case. That is why I wrote that I was commanding you only if I
360

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

was entitled to command you. It meant that the command should
easily go down with you. It should have immediately occurred to you
that what Bapu said was justified. Since that has not happened, take it
that my order is withdrawn. I do not want to force it on you if it
makes you unhappy. I only want to do what will bring you peace.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

467. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
August 9, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

I am sending whatever is ready. Hope you are well. Do not be
too eager to come.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 11643

468. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

August 9, 1938
CHI. MANILAL,

I got your letter. The practicability of Mr. Kallenbach’s suggestion will depend on my ability to send teachers from here. But that is
nil. It is difficult to get teachers who would satisfy me. Even if I come
across such a teacher, he would have to be paid a salary which we
cannot afford. Thus whatever arrangement you think of making will
have to be made locally. My opinion, therefore, is that the plan of a
school will not work.
So I have to think only about I. O.1 If the people there give a
clear guarantee to make good the loss, not oral but such as will satisfy
the bankers, then it is your duty to keep it going.
If Rustomjee Trust offers some help, there is no harm in
accepting it. But I would like only direct help from the people.
1

Indian Opinion

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

361

If the I. O. can be kept going, Sushila must return there. I think
that essential for helping you as also for her and your peace of mind.
Sushila’s presence by your side will by itself be a source of comfort,
such as you cannot have from anything else.
I feel that if Sushila goes there, Arun should accompany her and
Sita should stay here. Both of you should learn to bear such separation. I am considering here only the welfare of the children.
In case Sushila goes there, you should treat Phoenix as your
home and stay there. You should overcome your desire of coming
over here too often. It is, of course, a different thing if you get an
unsought opportunity of coming.
You should overcome the desire to see your elders. If separation
from one’s people is one’s dharma, one must cheerfully abide by that
dharma.
Today this is enough. The other news Sushila may give if she
wishes and knows how to.
If Ramdas can be tempted to stay there, then there is nothing
better than that. In that case the children of both of you should also
be trained to look after the work there.
About Hanna also, whatever Sushila may write.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 4878

469. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
August 9, 1938
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

I read your letter to Sharda. Do not take all the freedom about
food that the doctors may give. Eat only as much as the body
demands. If you do that you will be able to return early and there will
be no complication.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10584

362

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

470. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
August 10, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

How wholly confidential? But you did right. Herewith is a
telegram for Ramachandran. Sell the eggs to Bharatan and Nayakum.
If they do not want them, send them to the hospital.
I went and saw Nana last night. While on the way, I got a note
from him and so went on foot with Sushila. His condition at the time
was good. The present report is not bad. From there I returned in the
car.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 11622

471. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
August 10, 1938
CHI. AMRITLAL,

There is no change in Pyarelal’s condition. At the moment there
seems to be no danger. Kaka will regain strength slowly. Do not be
impatient.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Kaur and Krishna, Jamnalal and Ramana Maharshi, Ba.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10763

472. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
August 10, 1938
CHI. VIJAYA,

I got your letter and rakhi. I am writing this letter with the rakhi
tied round the wrist. Congratulations on the improvement in your
health. Kaka and Nana are fairly well. The danger seems to have

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

363

passed. I am doing well. The diet is practically the same. Girdhari and
his wife (recently married) have come here for today.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Rajkumari arrived on Tuesday.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 7094. Also C. W. 4586. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

473. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
August 10, 1938
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

You are right in taking less milk. I have nothing else to say.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10585

474. LETTER TO PYARELAL
August 10, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

What tyranny is this! My claim as father and mother to you two,
brother and sister, is absolutely nullified. Why did you go there? Why
should you interfere if Sushila has patients on hand? But you were
bent on going and you said that Sushila was free not to go if she did
not want to.
So leaving the patients at God’s mercy and yours, I have sent
her to the hospital crying. Now explain to her her duty and pacify her
if you can. Come back soon. It should not be necessary for me to go
there.
Girdhari and Draupadi are sitting right in front of me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

364

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

475. LETTER TO UMABAI L. ATHAVALE
SEGAON,
August 11, 1938
DEAR SISTER,

I hope you are not brooding over Nana’s1 death. I am
impressed by your courage. After seeing you, I am able to understand
Nana’s spirit of sacrifice and self-control better. Nana’s body has
perished, but his spirit will remain in the Mahila Ashram and will be a
source of inspiration to the sisters.
Vandemataram from

M. K. GANDHI

[From Gujarati]
Bapuki Virat Vatsalata, p. 75

476. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
August 11, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

Post tthe accompanying to Jairamdas at Hyderabad. Send the
following telegram today, if possible:
“Jairamdas
Prem Bhavan
H’bad. (Deccan)
Girdharijidas had reported your health. You must leave Sindh.
G. D. will suggest Nainital. Love.
Bapu.” 2
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 11623

1
2

Narhar L. Athavale, her son
This is in English.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

365

477. LETTER TO BALWANTSINHA
August 11, 1938
CHI. BALWANTSINHA,

If Premji is well enough he should be ready to leave today. I
shall write to Jhaverbhai about the piles, he will arrange about the
operation.
Consult Munnalal about Bankelal, I have already done so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 1908

478. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
S EGAON, WARDHA,

August 12, 1938
CHI. KANTI,

I got your letter. You should not be impatient. I am trying to
help you according to my lights. I hope you will not spoil things by
your impatience. Do not give up your faith in Ramachandran and
others. If you slight him, my efforts will be wasted. I have had a letter
from Saraswati about her having got dysentery and I have therefore
wired to Ramachandran. I am not at all negligent in this matter.
What a silly thing to say? Why you didn’t get cholera ! If you
accept my diagnosis you will make rapid progress. Nana Athavale
passed away yesterday.1
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 7346. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

479. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

August 12, 1938
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

You may certainly call a meeting of the A. I. C. C. in Bombay if
you wish. Delhi will not suit. If you think my presence will be
1

366

Vide “Letter to Umabai L. Athavale”, 11-8-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

necessary, call the meeting in Bombay. The best place, of course, will
be Wardha. If you agree, consult Jamnalal by wire. From the point of
view of facilities Bombay will probably be better. You need not
consult my convenience. It will be better if the notice of the meeting is
issued early. Do what you think best. On second thoughts, I am
inclined in favour of Bombay. Allahabad also may be considered. We
never hold meetings there. But this is only a suggestion for your
consideration.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro–2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 223

480. LETTER TO PYARELAL
August 12, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

At the moment I am unable to talk. If I try I am likely to burst
into loud wailing. I cannot reason with you. You have thrown a new
light on things today. No vows, no religion—since I know no
satisfaction outside these, how can I understand?
Still, I shall talk with you when I am in a position to do so. In
the mean time you may take the liquids that you like. If the stomach
is still heavy with what you took in the afternoon, what can you drink?
I have now given up insisting on anything. Do whatever brings you
satisfaction. I had thought you were under my protection. But where
do I have the purity for it? You are under the protection of God. Let
His will be done.
Am I also not under His protection? I shall be guided by Him.
Right now, the doors to light are closed. The light of love will shine
when the time for it comes.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

367

481. LETTER TO PYARELAL
August 12, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

It is not right that you do not take liquids. What I am doing is
not because I am angry with you. If I am angry, it is only with myself.
I am not sorry that you are not taking glucose. Now I am thinking
about my own duty. If you are inclined to help me, be calm and
regain your health by taking whatever you want to while keeping
within limits. I do not wish to force you to eat or drink anything
against your will. I had only come to persuade you. During that visit
I got a certain impression. How can I ignore it? It prevents me from
holding you guilty. Could it be that it is I who am under the influence
of evil stars? Or, if what I am doing is right, why bewail it? Hence I
would urge you to take the necessary treatment. It is not at all right
that just because I am not able to eat at present you also should not
eat.
Blessings, from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

482. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

August 12, 1938
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

Go through this and give me your opinion. I do not wish to use
the money received from you on such matters without your approval.
And it might not even be possible to divert such a large amount
considering the expenditures I am incurring these days. Anyway, I
want your free opinion about it. Dr. Shaukat has nothing at present.
Begum Ansari owns some rural property over which Dr. Ansari’s
brother has staked a claim. Nobody wants to help Harold except
Shaukat and Dr. Ansari’s daughter Zohra. Ansari of course was

368

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

always giving him money. I am not very clear what it would be best to
do. You should write to me unreservedly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi: C. W. 7994. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

483. LETTER TO SARASWATI
S EGAON,

August 12, 1938
CHI. SURU,

You are nothing but crazy. What a letter you write ! You are
calm one day and agitated for the next several days. If you continue
thus it will ruin your life as well as Kanti’s. Everything can be
accomplished by patience only. If you give up patience you will ruin
everything. So, if you will but listen to me, you will compose yourself
and get well. How can even I be of any help to you in your agitated
state? I do want you to see Kanti soon but not by straying from the
path of dharma, not by straying from propriety. Now, what would you
like to do? Get well quickly. Get rid of the dysentery. Your letter this
time has caused me considerable pain.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 6171. Also C. W. 3445. Courtesy:
Kantilal Gandhi

484. IS VIOLENCE CREEPING IN?
Mahadev has passed on to me information containing complaints about violence being done by Congressmen. One complaint is
that, in the name of peaceful picketing, picketers are resorting to
methods bordering on violence, such as making a living wall beyond
which no one can pass without being hurt or hurting those who make
the wall. As the author of peaceful picketing I cannot recall a single
instance in which I had encouraged such picketing. A friend has
quoted Dharasana against me. I had suggested the occupation of salt
works. But that is wholly inapplicable to the case under consideration.
In Dharasana the objective was the salt works of which possession had
to be taken and maintained as against the Government. The action
could hardly be called picketing. But to prevent workers from going
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

369

to their work by standing in front of them is pure violence and must
be given up. The owners of mills or other factories would be fully
justified in invoking the assistance of the police and a Congress
Government would be bound to provide it if the Congressmen
concerned would not desist.
Another instance brought to my notice is that of a body of
Congressmen having taken possession of the offices of a Congress
Committee recognized by the Provincial Congress Committee. This is
surely unpardonable unruliness.
The third instance is that of breaking up meetings by shouting
and otherwise creating disturbances.
The fourth is that of reviling capitalists as a class and inciting
people to loot them.
All these are clear instances of violence and indiscipline. I am
told that such unruliness is on the increase. I have before me a letter
which bitterly complains that whereas capitalists used to get justice
during the old regime, now under the Congress regime they not only
get no justice but are even insulted and humiliated.
There can be no doubt that the British system favours capitalism. The Congress, which aims at securing full justice for the
famishing millions, cannot favour capitalism. But the Congress, so
long as it retains non-violence as its basic policy, cannot resort to
usurpation, much less allow any class of persons to be insulted or
humiliated in any way whatsoever or allow any Congressman or a
body of Congressmen to take the law into their own hands.
Nor can the Congress tolerate violent picketing or speeches
inciting to violence.
If violence is not checked in time, the Congress will go to pieces
purely from internal decay. It is up to the heads of provincial and
subordinate committees to root out the evil without the least delay. If
on the other hand Congressmen in general are tired of non-violence,
the sooner the first article of the constitution is revised the better it will
be for all concerned and the country. Let it not be said of the great
organization that it used truth and non-violence as a cloak to cover
untruth and violence.
Harijan, 13-8-1938

370

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

485. TWISTING OR INTERPRETING?1
A friend writes a long letter with reference to my article on
‘Speakers and Politics’.2 What is discussed in the letter can be put thus
in the form of a question:
When you say that the language of the Government of India
Act should be stretched to the farthest limit, so as to give the
greatest strength to the movement for Independence, do you
imply that the Speaker should, or can, knowingly twist any
section of the Act so as to give it the desired meaning?
I should be surprised if such an implication could be extracted
from my article. It will amount to encouraging untruth. A Speaker
who knowingly gives an interpretation contrary to the plain meaning
of a text, renders himself unfit for the high office and discredits the
Congress cause. He must, at all cost, preserve the Congress credit for
honesty and integrity. What, however, I have meant is that where a
section is manifestly capable of two meanings or more, he is bound to
give that which favours the national cause. And when a section bears
only one meaning which is manifestly restrictive of the people’s
liberty, he must unhesitatingly give that meaning. I have no doubt that
such impartiality on the part of a Speaker will enhance his reputation
and to the extent increase the moral prestige of the Congress. Having
discarded violence, the strength of the Congress depends wholly upon
the moral fibre and fearlessness of individual Congressmen.
Harijan, 13-8-1938

486. LETTER TO SHAUKATULLA SHAH
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

August 13, 1938
MY DEAR SHAUKAT,

Here is another instalment from Miss Harrison. I have got no
news from Bhopal. I do not know what should be done now. I am
trying. But that takes time. Is anything possible about the village?
1
2

This was published under “Notes”.
Vide “Speakers and Politics”

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

371

Even if I get something, I do not know that I can get £ 900 for which
the guarantee is required.
How is Zohra doing?
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
At the time of replying please return the enclosures.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

487. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
August 13, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

I am sending these letters. Agatha’s letter which should have
gone with Ghanshyamdas’s has been left out. I am now getting a copy
made. Pyarelal has 100.6∞ temperature and feels quite weak. We can
do nothing but wait and see what happens. You may come at your
usual time. Treatment is going on.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Get a copy of Perinbehn’s letter made there and bring it along.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 11624

488. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
August 13, 1938
CHI. KAKA,

Once you are on your feet, we shall discuss about the change in
your diet. I may say even now that your argument is not correct. If
Amritlal shares everybody’s food, he will not remain fit for your
service. But we shall argue about it later on.
I will have a talk with Amritlal about ghee. Pyarelal’s fever has
gone up to 104.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 10905

372

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

489. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
August 13, 1938
CHI. AMRITLAL,

Hope Kaka passed the night comfortably. Here Pyarelal is laid
up with typhoid.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10757

490. LETTER TO JIVANJI D. DESAI
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

August 14, 1938
BHAI JIVANJI,

What kind of an article do you expect from me? Should you not
leave me out of it? You should give me a reward if I can carry out
even your other assignments.
I understand about the Autobiography.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9946. Also C. W. 6921. Courtesy:
Jivanji D. Desai

491. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
August 14, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

I saw your post just now. If worrying about me gives you peace
of mind, by all means do so. This incident itself is such as will not
allow me any peace of mind. I get a good deal of it, of course,
through silence. I can see how shallow my non-attachment is. As for
Pyarelal, after doing the best we can about his treatment, why need I
worry about him?
I will go through your thing. Pyarelal has started with 101.2. He
keeps cheerful. He had good sleep. He is still sleeping. Outwardly at

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

373

any rate he remains peaceful. He does not resist me in anything. Let
us see what happens.
Send a wire to Mridu as under:
“Can come between seventeenth nineteenth. Hope Madan
better. Love to all. Bapu.”
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 11625

492. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
August 14, 1938
CHI. AMRITLAL,

The ghee is the same that we had. Ba says that if you heat it
again, it will be all right.
We need not worry about Kaka getting loose motions. He will
improve only gradually. Pyarelal seems better. At the moment of
writing, i. e., at 8.45, the mercury shows 103.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Has not the loom been installed yet?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 10758

493. DISCUSSION WITH HENGCHIH TAO1
[Before August 15, 1938] 2
GANDHIJI: I am exceedingly sorry to receive you when I am in
distress. I may not break my silence even to speak to you. But of
course you will say whatever you want to. You may speak, I may not.
Prof. Tao explained that he was a member of the People’s Council of Action of
all China. This was a body of 140 or 150 drawn from all parties in China, under which
the whole of China was united to meet Japanese aggression . . . . All parties. . . were
1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Notes”. Since Gandhiji was observing
silence his part of the discussion was conducted in writing.
2
Vide “Letter to Mahadev Desai”, 15-8-1938, from which it would appear that
Gandhiji had met Tao before that date.

374

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

united in fighting the common danger, under one supreme military command of
Chiang Kai-shek. . . . Tao was happy that a Medical Mission from India was sailing
to China as a token of India’s sympathy, and he asked Gandhiji if he had any
suggestions to offer in order to fight the war to a successful conclusion.
G.

I do not know that I can throw any light on the problem at
the present moment. My method is so radical that it is wholly
inapplicable to your struggle. You cannot all of a sudden change the
course of the struggle. A nation in arms cannot all at once give up
arms and accept non-violence as its weapon.
Prof. Tao saw the difficulty and explained that the Chinese had not even time
to think, the aggression was so sudden and so unprovoked. But he would like to
discuss problems of national reconstructions. He had given up University work in
order to take up peasants’ education and he was deeply interested in the Wardha
Education Scheme. “What exactly is the core of the Scheme?” he asked.
G. The central fact is some village craft through which the whole
of the man or the woman in the child can be drawn out.
“But there was the difficulty of teachers,” said Prof. Tao, and Gandhiji laughed.
“We had the same difficulty. Would you have trained teachers to learn a craft or
craftsmen to learn the art of teaching?” asked Prof. Tao.
G. The average educated man can be expected easily to master a
craft. Our craftsmen will require much longer time to acquire the
necessary general instruction than an educated man, say like you, can
require to learn say, carpentry.
“But,” said Prof. Tao, “our educated man is after fat jobs and money. How can
he be interested in this?”
G. If the scheme is sound and appeals to the educated mind, it
must prove attractive in itself and thus wean the educated youth from
the lure of gold. It must fail, if it does not evoke sufficient patriotism
from the educated youth. There is one advantage with us. Those who
have received instruction through the Indian languages cannot enter
colleges. It is just possible that they will find the scheme attractive.
Prof. Tao was deeply interested in our present political struggle. How were we
going to acquire power at the centre?
G. If we are true to our salt in the seven provinces, the accession
of strength that will come to us will put us on the way to power at the
centre.
T. But the power is being felt everywhere, and the Congress prestige has risen.
Has it not?

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

375

G. The Congress prestige has risen. The people have become
conscious of their power and strength. The Government also recognize this. My fear is that this power may throw us off our balance.
Prof. Tao reverted to the question of mass education. He made an attempt to
describe the Chinese system of “relay” teachers whereby each man or woman who had
learnt something had to pass it on to the next one he or she came across. Even the
child, the “little” teacher, had to share his or her learning with his illiterate parents,
and the Chinese through this system were liquidating illiteracy and ignorance on a
mass scale.
G.

I have no doubt that it can. I would like you to write for me a
short note on how the “relay” teachers and the “little” teachers are
taught, how they teach and with what result.
Prof. Tao said he would gladly comply.
Prof. Tao would not go without a message from Gandhiji for the people of
China. He explained that even a non-violent message would be welcome . . . . They
were engaged in a war of self-defence, but in other respects they were observing nonviolence . . . . On May 20 Chinese planes had flown over Japanese towns, and they
might easily have spread death and destruction among the people of Japan in
retaliation for the bombing of so many Chinese ports by Japan. But instead of
raining bombs they rained handbills and leaflets showing the wrong of the war . . . .
G.

But the self-inflicted restraint won’t last when the real stress
comes. The temptation will be irresistible. I shall not be surprised. It is
inevitable. There is no love in war. We have got to come to the conclusion that either there is to be complete non-violence or undiluted
violence. Is not this enough message?
Prof. Tao wondered if some day the Chinese might expect to have Gandhiji in
their midst.
G. I almost came to your country when those who had invited
me had to stop me from going owing to the disturbances that had
taken place. I do want to see peace reigning in your land during my
lifetime. Nothing will please me better than to visit your great country
some day.

Harijan, 27-8-1938

376

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

494. TELEGRAM TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
WARDHAGANJ,

August 15, 1938
MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
74 WALKESHWAR R OAD
BOMBAY HIGH
YOUR
“ARGUMENT”
SOUND.
INCLUSION SEEMS
INEVITABLE.

MISGIVINGS

JUSTIFIED

BUT

BAPU
From the original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

495. LETTER TO C. P. RAMASWAMI IYER
[August 15, 1938] 1
DEAR FRIEND,

In order better to guide R. and through him the State Congress
and if at all possible to avoid friction between the State and the people,
I am sending Shri Rajkumari Amrit Kaur to study the situation and to
offer friendly assistance. She expects to leave here tomorrow and to
proceed to Trivandrum after a day’s stay in Madras. The Rajkumari
will not address public meetings or do any public propaganda. I hope
you will make full use of her services.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C. W. 4217. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 7853

496. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
August 15, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

Pyarelal’s fever has risen to 104. It is futile to hope for it to
come down soon. But one good sign is that, though today is Monday,
he took mosambi and lime juice. He appears cheerful. Sushila devotes
all her time to nursing him. Pyarelal would not accept service from
1

In the text Gandhiji says about Amrit Kaur: “She expects to leave here
tomorrow.” Amrit Kaur left on August 16.
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

377

anybody except her. There is also the cholera work for her in the
village. May God protect both !
I am sending one article. I have now finished another, on
Burma.1 The fingers refuse to work any longer now.
You yourself may write to Sarup. Send her what you can. Send
a wire to Mathuradas as follows:
“Your arrangement sound. Misgivings justified but inclusion
seems inevitable. Bapu.”2
Bring the Australian friend. Since I gave so much time to Tao,
why not to this gentleman?
The Burma article cannot be sent before tomorrow.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 11626

497. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

August 15, 1938
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

You did very well in going to Rajkot. So long as your star
is in the ascendent, such occasions are bound to arise. Chudgar 3 is
following a wrong path. Let him do what he likes. If the subjects of
the State have some salt in them, they would not try to fly in the air
but fight on peacefully without looking for outside help. If they do so
they cannot but win. And if the Congress does not abandon principles,
it will become strong even in the States.
You were bound to fall ill. You are a sardar4 of others, but seem
to be a slave of yourself. A true sardar is one who commands himself.
If you regulate your time and draw up rules for doing all your work,
you will live long. Do not dismiss this suggestion, saying, ‘Here is a
pan laughing at a pot.’ Mahadev also is paying for his carelessness.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro–2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 223-4
1

Vide “Recent Riots in Burma”, 20-8-1938
This is in English.
3
Popatlal Lavjibhai Chudgar, a barrister of Saurashtra
4
Leader
2

378

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

498. LETTER TO PYARELAL
August 15, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

Why should I feel bad if you enquired about my bloodpressure? But what reply could I give? what is the way when anxiety is
eating me? I continue my efforts. But what about my responsibility
for whatever is happening? My constant thought is only that you
should soon be well and leave your bed. Did I not write to you that
illness would be unbearable to me? But I did not know how
unbearable it would be. What can I do?
Blessings from

BAPU

[P.S.]
There is no need to reply to this. It will be sufficient if you have
peace.
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

499. LETTER TO TARADEVI NAYYAR
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

August 15, 1938
DEAR SISTER,

What can I write? You will know everything from Sushila’s
letter. Pyarelal gets whatever service he needs. I have become quite
useless. Pyarelal’s illness is a test for me. It is a difficult test. I am sure
Pyarelal will live. If not, I shall be responsible for his death.
Do come over if you want. Do not worry.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

379

500. NOTE TO PYARELAL
[After August 15, 1938]1
PYARELAL,

It can take a little more jaggery. The skin should be cooked a
little longer. The seeds should be cooked too. The seeds are not eaten.
But their property is different. You can eat them if you like the taste.2
How long did it take to cook in jaggery? I did tell you about cutting
them, did I not? You can eat anything else you wish.
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

501. NOTE TO AMRIT KAUR
[On or before August 16, 1938] 3
There are two things, I want you to do:
(1) To go to Travancore to set the quarrel right;
(2) To visit Kathiawar for the birthday celebrations which begin
on 23rd September.
You can well tackle both. But if you don’t feel like going, you
shall not.
From the original: C. W. 4219. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 7855

502. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
August 16, 1938
CHI AMRITLAL,

I hope Kaka is able to walk about a little. Pyarelal is better.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10759
1

The note is written on the reverse side of a letter dated August 15, 1938.
This sentence is in Gujarati.
3
In the source the addressee has dated the note “Segaon, August 1938”. She
was in Segaon till August 16.
2

380

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

503. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
August 16, 1938
CHI. VIJAYA,

I got your letter. Are you now planning to go to Ahmedabad
and improve your health there? What more will you have there? It is a
different thing, of course, if you wish to consult a doctor. But let that
be. My only desire is that wherever you go you should get well. What
a fine body you had and now it is so shattered. Hereafter write to
meat Delhi. Address the letters : Harijan Nivas, Kingsway, Delhi. I
shall be there for eight days at least. Ba will accompany me. Amritlal
came here the day before yesterday. Nanabhai had also come.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 7095. Also C. W. 4587. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi.

504. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
August 16, 1938
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

Send the milk early. Rajkumari is going to Travancore today.
Pyarelal may be said to be better. But the fever is still there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10587.

505. LETTER TO PYARELAL
August 16, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

I would certainly feel happy if you allowed someone or other to
sit with you by turns. As it is I find it difficult to take even a minute of
Sushila’s time. If while she nursed you, you had someone by your
side it would not be so difficult. But what pleases you will please me. I

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

381

am letting you know what has been agitating me these last two days.
Give your reply to Sushila.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

506. TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
WARDHAGANJ,

August 17, 1938
R AJKUMARI
C ARE AMMU S WAMINATHAN
MADRAS, C HETPUT
PYARELAL NOT BAD.

I

HAVE GAINED ONE POUND.

HOPE YOU WELL.

LOVE

BAPU
From the original: C. W. 3875. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 7031

507. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EGAON,
August 17, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

It was difficult to part with you in the state you were.
At the time of writing Pyarelal is not quite what he was
yesterday. He had a restless night. But deep down in me there is the
faith that he will pull through.
Shuaib Qureshi came the same time you went, by the same train.
You left your glasses and some papers which I enclose here
with. Unless I hear from you to the contrary, I am keeping the glasses
with me.
I hope you will keep well there. Do not overstrain yourself.
Have no anxiety about the mission.
I am well. The diet and silence continue. the silence gives me the
peace I need. More food I cannot do justice to at present.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3874. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7030

382

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

508. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
August 17, 1938
BHAI MUNSHI,

In your difficulties Girish’s1 fever is a great calamity indeed. It
is difficult to understand so many relapses. As an antidote, I am sending the whole bhajan from which I had sent one line to Lilavati. To
me that bhajan has given great comfort.
My opinion about the ‘Rifle Club’ is this: seek the opinion of
the Working Committee about this matter. I think we cannot refuse the
request outright. Licences may be given to all those who submit to
rules and regulations. The Congress Government will not bear the
expenses. Its policy will remain non-violent.
I will be ready to write in Harijan.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7640. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi

509. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
August 17, 1938
CHI. AMRITLAL,

I take it that you are daily writing to Bal. I was careless about
writing to him regularly. Tell Kaka not to start thinking about the
future from now. We shall think about everything after he has completely recovered.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Pyarelal is not quite well today. However, there is no cause for
worry.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10760

1

Addressee’s son

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

383

510. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
August 17, 1938
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

I have learnt everything about the operation from Sushila. After
the remaining complaint is completely cured, there should be no
difficulty in building up the body. I hope you get milk regularly.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Pyarelal is not quite well today. There is no cause for worry,
though.
Tell Shankaran that I got his note. He wants a change. Ask him
about his food, etc. Ask him to write to me again.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10588

511. LETTER TO PYARELAL
August 17, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

There seems to be something. the matter with my health today. I
could not even sleep at night. Could yesterday’s conversation be the
reason for it? I did not wish to express my opinion. But since you
insisted I wrote it to you. Right now I have only one wish: not to
entertain any thought, utter any word, write any sentence, that may
hurt you. I am only counting days for you to recover fully. I hope for
your part you will make full efforts. If you resolve to get well, you
will certainly succeed.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

384

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

512. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
August 18, 1938
CHI. AMRITLAL,

It was really good news about Kaka. I hope the progress will
continue. Pyarelal’s ship is in mid-sea. The temperature is lower than
in your case. It had risen up to 105 yesterday. One reason may be that
he has a strong constitution.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
There is no letter from Vijaya. I have written to her.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10761

513.

LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
S EGAON,

August 18, 1938
CHI. VIJAYA,

You are quite lazy in writing letters. That will not do. Have you
not promised to write every third day ? One must keep one’s promise
even unto death.
Pyarelal’s typhoid still persists. In Segaon the cholera is raging.
We can do nothing but wait and see. I am observing complete silence
these days. That is the only way in which I can preserve my peace of
mind.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7096. Also C.W. 4588. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

385

514. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
August 18, 1938
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

I am glad the operation is sucessfully over. I understood about
Shankaran. How long will you have to remain there ? Pyarelal’s fever
will go only when it has run its course.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10589

515. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
August 18, 1938
CHI. MUNNALAL,

Today if the rain stops, otherwise tomorrow under any circumstances. You yourself should go to see Gajanan . . .1 having fallen
ill. . . If he does not feel comfortable there, he may stay at the Harijan
Ashram. Let him not . . . endanger his health . . . Ask him and find
out if he wants anything. A co-worker of his has got cholera. Who is
he? Where does he come from ?
Here all . . . carefully . . .
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8570

516. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
[About August 18, 1938] 2
CHI. MAHADEV,

I have been thinking about Khare. Do give up the idea of writing the article. About Pyarelal, I will let God guide me.
1

The letter is illegible at many places.
About this day Pyarelal’s condition was critical. In “Letter to Amritlal T.
Nanavati”, p. 259, Gandhiji wrote, “Pyarelal’s ship is in mid-sea.”
2

386

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Herewith is a bottle containing Balkrishna’s1 sputum. If the bottle can
be returned, he wants it back. We shall pay no attention to his fever
just now. Let them send any medicine they think proper.
You need not worry about me. I have been forewarned. So there
will be no trouble. Ultimately God’s will must prevail. Read the letter
addresssed to Shanta and give it to her.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
If Shantikumar can pay the money, let him do so. Let him not
do so against his will at all.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11536

517. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
August 19, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

I understand what you write about Maharashtra. We should stay
where God ordains. How can we make any distinction between Maharashtra and Gujarat? However, you will not come to Segaon in an
unnatural way. You will see your path clear before you if it becomes
necessary for you to come.
Just now there is no need for you to come. There is enough
work for you there. You have to attend to a hundred things there.
What would you do here? What part would you play in the quarrels
here? What service can you render to Pyarelal? What service can he
ask of you? He does not accept much service from anyone except
Sushila. He lets the others take turns by his side and shift the cot. But
it is Sushila who does the real nursing. They are a wonderful pair, the
brother and sister. I have not seen their like anywhere.
I understand about Lilavati. Her good lies there. Suffer her,
therefore, and train her.
Tell Radhakishan that neither he nor anyone else need make
any preparations about Sunday. As we refrain from opposing them,
1

Balkrishna Bhave was suffering from tuberculosis at this time.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

387

they will calm down.1 It would be better if the Inspector-General of
Police also does not come. What will he do even if he comes?
Shuaib will pass the night there, as it might rain in the morning.
His luggage has gone to the station. If you need anything send for it.
I have thought it better to lodge Shuaib with you. That is the only
correct course for us.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11627

518. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
August [19] 2 , 1938
CHI. MANILAL,

I have only sent you my opinion 3 . If you get 200 subscribers
who would pay £25 each or 100 who would pay £50 each, and if you
get an assurance regarding the I. O. expenses and do not have to go
about for collections, you ought to stay on there. You should increase
your efficiency. If you become steady there, Sushila and Arun may
go there and Sita may stay here. She seems to be progressing very
well in her study at Akola. If Sushila goes there, you will of course get
help and also peace of mind. I do feel that, when Sushila is living near
me, I am observing silence and so cannot train her or get her trained
as I should like to do. Moreover, as I take my meals by myself, I
cannot watch what she and Arun eat. If I were in better shape,
Sushila’s swollen body and Arun’s weak one also would certainly
have improved. But what can we do? She can receive from me only as
much as her fate permits. She can be said to have been freed from my
clutches. It is no easy thing to get caught in my clutches. Well, God’s
will prevails in all things.
Just now Pyarelal is confined to bed. There have been three bad
deaths. Now Pyarelal is in mid-sea. He is being nursed carefully, of
course. I hope he will survive.
1

The reference is to the Harijan satyagrahis who wanted a Harijan to be
included in the C.P. Ministry; vide “Discussion with Harijan Satyagrahis”,
27-8-1938 and “Letter to Mahadev Desai”, After 27-8-1938.
2
The date in the source reads “29”, though perhaps Gandhiji
intended to
write “19”.
3
Vide “Letter to Manilal Gandhi”, 9-8-1938

388

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

What you write about Ramdas is correct.
I have already told you that no school can be run in Phoenix.
Hanna must be an old face there now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4880

519. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
August 19, 1938
CHI. MUNNALAL,

Relieve Salekar so that he can go to fetch the medicine. Entrust
his work to Rajbhushan. If there is any difficulty about this, let me
know.
BAPU

[PS.]
Gunvant should not take it. Let him discuss with me. I did not
read one of the letters. The telegram in reply to this is given just now
so that it can be sent early tomorrow. You need not put yourself to
inconvenience to come here in the morning. If you can come
conveniently, you may. Perhaps that may be enough. This was
one . . .1
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8569. Also C.W. 7034. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

520. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
August 19, 1938
CHI. AMRITLAL,

The mistake regarding plums should not be repeated. Nana
Dharmadhikari should go only after the work for which he had come
is over. He need not stay on because of Kaka. If the latter wants him,
however, by all means let him stay. In fact what I said was just off
hand, so there was no question of your being guided by it.
I will tie the rakhi.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10762
1

Omission as in the source

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

389

521. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
[After August 19, 1938] 1
CHI. NANAVATI,

Send detailed report about Kakasaheb. If there is a letter from
Vijaya send that too. Ba has become more impatient than I. I had
already told Mahadev that the Punjab tour was cancelled because of
my illness. If the message has not been conveyed, please do it. If
necessary send a wire tomorrow or write a letter. If Dharmadhikari has
not returned admonish him and send him off. A public worker cannot
leave his duty to visit his dear ones. He should know that there will be
enough men to look after Kakasaheb.2
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 10753

522. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
[After August 19, 1938] 3
CHI. AMRITLAL,

I have given instructions for sending you ghee. Add a few drops
of ginger juice to Kaka’s drink. If calomel does not suit him, one
ounce of castor oil can be given every half hour. But ask Mahodaya
about this. Have you not started giving glucose yet ?
Blessing from

BAPU

[PS.]
I tied the rakhi.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 10764

523. HOW TO SAVE HANDLOOM WEAVERS
August 20, 1938
The statement that the handloom industry has defied mill
competition is only partially true. There are not today half as many
handloom weavers as there were, say, twenty-five years ago. There was
a time when, as the spinning-wheel spun the whole of the yarn
1
2
3

390

From the reference to Nana Dharmadhikari in the preceding item.
The letter was signed by Kanu Gandhi, under instructions from Gandhiji.
From the reference to rakhi in the letter of August 19 to the addressee.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

required by the nation, the handloom wove all the cloth required.
When the mills were established the spinning-wheel all but died out
for the very simple reason that it gave a paltry return and was never a
whole-time occupation. But the loom offered stubborn resistance, for
the reason, among others, that it was a full-time occupation by itself
and paid the weaver enough to eke out a living. When the spinning
mill came, the weaver fell back upon it for his hanks of yarn. He even
welcomed the change because he could get more evenly spun and
stronger yarn. Little did he know that he was to become perfectly
helpless if the mills for any reason could not supply him with yarn.
Unlike the village spinner the millowner dictated the price of his yarn.
By and by the weaver who wove simple patternless khadi could not
withstand the mill competition and he died. And for the past few years
the weaver of fancy cloth has felt the pressure from weaving mills.
Public taste is slowly but surely changing. If the mills cannot exactly
copy the patterns woven by the village weaver, they can, as they do,
produce new patterns and by efficient advertising attract customers.
Therefore several thousand Orissa weavers are idle for want of custom.
A similar cry came to me the other day from Ahmednagar,a strong
weaving centre. My advice to them all was that if these weaving
families would but introduce carding and spinning in their homes,
they could be wholly independent of mill yarn and enlist the neverfailing assistance of the A. I. S. A. It might be that the weavers might
not earn as much as before because of part of their time being given
to spinning. But now, under the revised policy of the A. I. S. A. which
aims at giving one anna per hour to the spinner and is actually giving
one and half pice per hour, the weaver would hardly feel the reduction
in his income. And in any case a reduced wage is surely better than
starvation.
Let it be borne in mind that the weaver, in introducing spinning
and carding in his family, has to go in for very little outlay. The wheel
he already has. It will no doubt require some improvment. He has to
invest in a carding-bow costing a few annas.
I understand that the Orissa Government is banishing mill yarn
from their jails and restricting their cloth purchases to khadi. They
deserve congratulations for conforming to the constructive programme of the Congress. Let the workers in charge of the organization remember the prescription herein suggested, and they will find
that production of the yarn required will be the easiest by educating
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

391

the weavers to take up spinning. They will also by this method probably find that khadi can be, comparatively speaking, more cheaply
produced than if they were to wait till they trained raw villagers to
become efficient spinners. No doubt they will have to introduce
spinning in all the villages. For that is the goal of the A. I. S. A. But
they may not neglect the handloom weavers till the high purpose is
accomplished.
Harijan, 20-8-1938

524. RECENT RIOTS IN BURMA
August 20, 1938
A telegram says :
Burma riots deserve more attention than you paid. Whatever Government information, no peace till tenth, when I left Rangoon by aeroplane.
Indians frightfully perturbed. They adopted your non-violence, suffered
terribly. Effective steps urgently solicited.

The step that I took immediately on receipt of a wire from
Rangoon was the only effective step I could then take.1 I was not then
even in possession of facts. Now there is before me a narrative of the
cause of the Burmese fury. It appears that a Burman wrote a tract in
disparagement of Islam some time ago. A Burman Buddhist who had
become a convert to Islam wrote a counter-tract attacking the original
and also attacking Buddhism. No Indian had a hand in the writing of
the counter-tract. It did not attract notice at once, but the Burmese
Press fiercely criticized it and inflamed the Burmese mind. The result
was the savagery which took many precious, innocent lives and
destroyed property worth, it is said, millions. Nor was it confined to
Rangoon; it spread throughout Burma wherever there were Indian
settlers.
If, as my correspondent says,“Indians adopted your (i. e., my)
non-violence,” I can only say they suffered less than they would have
otherwise done. Non-violence has no limits. If a particular dose does
not seem to answer, more should be administered. It is a never-failing
remedy.
But why call it my’ non-violence? Probably the wire is a gentle
rebuke to me, so much as to say that my remedy failed. The pertinent
question is whether they believed in non-violence as a sure remedy
against violence, or was it undertaken because there was no help for it
? I, however, need not wait for a reply. If one is to believe the papers,
1

392

Vide “Telegram to President, Burma Congress Committee”, 5-8-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

there was not complete non-violence practised by the Indians. I have,
however, no difficulty in believing that a considerable number
observed non-violence whether from belief or necessity.
The question for consideration, however, is: ‘what of the
future ?’ There will no doubt be some kind of an inquiry. There may
be some compensation paid to the losers. There would be some
punish-ment meted out to the offenders who are not likely to be the
prime movers but their dupes. I must confess that I am uninterested in
these proceedings. There will be no insurance against future out
breaks.
Indians in Burma should realize that they are at the mercy
of the inhabitants of Burma. They have no Government in India that
can really afford them protection. We know what is happening in the
other parts of the world; nor is it to be wondered at. England will
never go to war with any nation or country because it has insulted or
wronged Indian settlers in that country. It may, it will, make representations, sincere of course; it will lodge energetic protests even. But
there her help will end. And in a case like the Burmese riots, the relief
that the Government of India can afford will be next to nothing. What
does it do when riots take place in India itself ? It can do very little
after they are over. The utmost it can do is to take measures to quell
riots when they take place. What have even Congress Governments
been able to do after the riots that have recently taken place in some
Congress Provinces? They do not admit of relief being granted to the
sufferers except in rare cases. What is possible in Burma I do not
know.
I am concerned with attainment of permanent peace in so far as
permanence is possible in this very impermanent life. When once
religious animosity is roused, it has a knack of repeating itself with
periodic regularity, if radical measures are not adopted by the
communities concerned. One such measure is cultivation of mutual
respect for the several religions professed by the parties. If the
Buddhists of Burma have little regard for Islam and the Muslims for
Buddhism, the seeds of dissension are there. They will take little
watering to sprout into the savagery such as we saw the other day. I
would, therefore, suggest a mutual understanding of these great
religions.
My fear is that at the bottom of the riots there is an anti-Indian
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

393

feeling, due, perhaps to economic causes. For though Muslims seem
to have suffered most, Hindus too seem to have come in for a fair
share of the Burman fury. Therefore, Indian settlers must see to it that
their dealings with the Burmans are fair and above board. It is said
that everything is fair in trade, and that no turpitude attaches to a
trader taking advantage of his customer’s ignorance and demanding
from him even an unconscionable price for his goods. That kind of
dealings will surely acerbate feelings. Wherever we have gone, even
before the British rulers took possession of our country, we have
depended solely on the goodwill of those among whom we have lived
and with whom we have traded. Such is the history of our relations
with Zanzibar, Aden, Java, etc.
Times have however changed. The people all over the world
have become conscious of their rights. Whereas formerly foreign
settlers in other lands did questionable things with impunity, they
cannot do so now. Honesty has never been so much proved to be the
best policy as it is now for those who do not or cannot back their
dishonesty with gunpowder and poison gas. If India is to escape that
training and is to adopt, as a free nation, peace as her motto in every
walk of life and in every country where her children go, they will have
to practise strictest honesty in their human dealings.
To the Burmese friends one word. When I was in Burma some
years ago, Burmese priests were good enough to invite me to their
conference and honour me with their address under the shadow of the
mighty Pagoda. They were good enough, as Buddhists, to claim me as
one of them. It therefore hurt me when I read of the mob fury which
knew no distinction of sex or age and wreaked vengeance on persons
who could never have had anything to do with the offending
pamphlet. I have the greatest veneration for the Buddha. He is one of
the greatest preachers of peace. The gospel of the Buddha is gospel of
love. It passes comprehension how representatives of that faith could
give themselves up to savagery, and that on an apparently flimsy
pretext. The pity of it is that, if the newspaper reports were true, even
priests, the repositories of the Buddha’s gospel, were to be seen
among the mob, not stilling its fury, but actually taking part in loot,
arson and murder. Would that the wise men among them would do a
little heart-searching and take steps to prevent a recurrence of the
tragedy which all right thinking persons must deplore !
Harijan, 20-8-1938
394

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

525. TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
WARDHA,

August 20, 1938
R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
S TATE GUEST HOUSE, T RIVANDRUM
YOUR
PRAYING

WIRE.
SUCCESS

SARAS WATI’S

PATIENT
YOUR

CONDITION.

BETTER.
MISSION.

SELF
WELL.
ANXIOUS

LOVE.

BAPU
From the original : C. W. 3876. Courtesy : Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 7032

526. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
August 20, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,

There must be a wire awaiting me at Maganwadi. I heard
yesterday that you were to be State Guest. I do hope my letter 1 went
through all right (or alright ?).
Pyarelal is decidedly better today. The temperature is only 101
against 103 at this time yesterday (8 a.m). If he is restored it would be
a great and good thing.
I have no doubt that you will be able to fix up everything
nicely. I had a visit yesterday from the President of the T [ravancorre]
National Congress. Of course I was silent. He is an able man. He
spoke with sweet reasonableness.
I hope you will keep well and drive to the Cape if you have
time. Would like you to drop in at Tiruvannamalai for a day to see the
Maharshi2 on your return. My b. p. was 160/100 this morning.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original : C. W. 3635. Courtesy : Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6444

1

Vide “Letter to C. P. Ramaswami Iyer”, 15-8-1938
Ramana Maharshi. In Letters to Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, the addressee says :
“But both Mahadev Desai and I refused to see him as we said our hearts were Gandhiji’s
and Gandhiji did not appreciate the argument.”
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

395

527. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
[August 20, 1938] 1
CHI. MAHADEV,

I have asked the man to go there directly. Sushila says that no
ice is required. And moreover he feels better today. Pyarelal said in
the morning that probably the mercury would not rise tomorrow.
Today he has started with 101. He also slept well in the latter part of
the night.
Send this telegram2 :
I understand about Maharashtra. Lilavati should not have
minded not being permitted to come yesterday. If there is no special
work today, do not come. From the letters sent herewith get a copy
made of Limaye’s letter. That has not been done here.3
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S. N. 11631

528. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
August 20, 1938
CHI. SUSHILA,

You have made a mountain out of a molehill. I only described
my sorrow in the letter to Manilal. As long as I cannot make you sit
down by my side for your meals, I would not suggest any change in
your diet. The same is true about Arun. Moreover, as I do not speak I
cannot joke with you either. I can suggest much even while joking.
I am not dissatisfied with you. Do I not believe you to be wise ?
When did I ever say that women were unfit for service ? Yes, I
have declared myself unworthy. That unworthiness may perhaps be
overcome. As you are ready to serve, you have earned the merit of
having actually served.
It is not easy to please Ba. Have I not told you this ? But she is
simple-hearted. We should, therefore, not mind what she says.
1
From reference to Pyarelal’s temperature, which came down to 101° on this
date; vide the preceding item.
2
For the text, which is in English, vide “Telegram to Amrit Kaur”, 20-8-1938
3
The letter is unsigned.

396

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I do wish indeed that you should increase your reading and
learn to write Gujarati articles for Indian Opinion.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4879

529. LETTER TO PARVATIDEVI GHORPADE1
August 20, 1938
DEAR SISTER,

I learnt about you from Bhai Kaujalgi’s letter to Gandhi Seva
Sangh and also read the account of the concessions that you have
given to the people of your state. I compliment you on your generosity. It is worthy of you. May god make you more generous still and
grant you long life.
Blessing from

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 7454

530. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
August 20, 1938
CHI. KAKA,

I got your message. I have been writing as much as I can. I
remember your suggestion. If God wills it, I will write before the
incense burns out. But who permitted you to resume work ? If you
exert your mind and body so soon, the weakness will be prolonged.
Pyarelal is better.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 10906

531. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
August 20, 1938
CHI. AMRITLAL,

Most probably the Nagpur students will come. If Mahadevi
wants to come, let her come.
But what will she do ?
1

Dowager queem of Mudhol State

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

397

I of course continue to observe silence. Who knows what I shall
think it right to do when the students arrive ?
Blessing from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 10765

532. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
August 20, 1938
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

I understand about you. See that Shankaran does not fall ill.
There is no change in Pyarelal’s condition.
Blessing from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 10590

533. LETTER TO DR. B. PATTABHI SITARAMAYYA
S EGAON,

August 21, 1938
DEAR PATTABHI ,

Please make a searching inquiry into this complaint1 and let me
know the result. I do not want to publish the letter before knowing
your verdict.
Your sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

534. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
August 21, 1938
CHI. VIJAYA,

As I start this letter, here is Sushila ready for massage. So I will
be brief. You seem to be progressing very well. See also that the
discharge of pus from the gums stops.
Pyarelal’s fever persists, but he is improving. There is no danger
so far. His mother came yesterday evening. I am well.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
1

Some people had been reported to have incited people to occupy land by

force.

398

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Chimanlal will be discharged [from the hospital] tomorrow or
the day after.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7097. Also C.W. 4589. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

535. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
August 21, 1938
CHI. MUNNALAL,

Balwantsinha says that Bankelal does very little work. Please
inquire. Ask the village . . . 1 about him. Get a full report. Make a
thorough inquiry.
Who looks after Kuwadu ?
Install the loom in the new building. Nayakum has kept the bag
ready.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
What did you do about Dahyalal yesterday ?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8568. Also C.W. 7036. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

536. REPLY TO NAGPUR DEPUTATIONISTS 2
August 21, 1938
I realize your regard and support for Dr. Khare, I also have
great love for Dr. Khare, but we who are fighting the independence
battle have to forget family relations while doing our duty. After
introspection I found that no wrong or injustice had been done to Dr.
Khare. You have no material for comparison. I myself framed the
Congress constitution in 1920 wherein the All-India Congress is the
final appellate authority which everybody can approach. The Working
1

A word is illegible here.
A deputation of over 150 students and others led by V. A. Khare had come
from Nagpur to see Gandhiji. They expressed support for Dr. N. B. Khare and
demanded withdrawal of the Working Committee’s resolution concerning him. Since
Gandhiji was observing silence he wrote out this reply
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

399

Committee or leaders referred to, if found guilty, deserve punishment.
I advise you to prepare your case in favour of Dr. Khare to be
placed before the A. I. C. C. I have said whatever I wanted to. I cannot
address a public meeting at seventy. I have no desire to prove Dr.
Khare’s guilt, nor do I wish you to lessen your love for Dr. Khare.
Time alone will tell and Dr. Khare will admit his mistake. I have
patience. If I realize that I did injustice in this case unknowingly, I will
apologize.
I do not wish to win independence through hooliganism which
will destroy the Congress if it enters that body. Everybody has the
right to criticize provided the criticism is fair, decent and truthful. No
ban was imposed on Dr. Khare for contesting the election of the
leadership of the C. P. Assembly Party nor did Mr. Subhas Chandra
Bose threaten any member while exercising his right to vote, not did I
deprive Dr. Khare of his right to contest the election.
The Working Committee’s resolution against Dr. Khare was
recommendatory, not mandatory. The charge of favouritism against
the C. P. Ministry was inquired into, and the wrongs redressed, while
the charge of bribery and corruption was not proved. The Working
Committee can correct its mistake if it has committed any. If the
members of the Working Committee had the right to attend the party
meeting none could remove them. It could convene the meeting
at Wardha. That resolution was drafted after consulting constitutionalists and lawyers who committed no mistake in framing it.
The Bombay Chronicle, 22-8-1938

537. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
August 22, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

I am sending as much as is ready. I did not understand about
the hotel. I went through all the articles yesterday and sent them to
you. Only the article about Nagpur is left with me now. It does not
contain your translations. I must have with me my replies. However, I
will see at night. There is no time now during the day. I shall have to
make several additions and omissions. If the article on the hotel is with
you, you may insert your additions in it.

400

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Sushila must have sent the articles about khadi. I had also given
her your letter to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11628

538. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
August 22, 1938
CHI. AMRITLAL,

Your work must be flourishing. Pyarelal passed the night well.
His mother has come. That has lessened my worry.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10766

539. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
August 22, 1938
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

Probably you will be discharged today. Pyarelal passed the
night fairly well. The rest from newspapers or . . . 1
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10591

540. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
August 23, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

Why need we reply to the Sentinel’s canard 2 ? What a canard! I
feel that falsehoods which no one is likely to believe should be
ignored. If you feel otherwise, however, we may reply.
1

A word or two are illegible here.
The reference is to a canard spread by the Delhi correspondent of the Daily
Express that Gandhiji was about to take kayakalpa or rejuvenation treatment. This
was published by other newspapers also.
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

401

I will not, I cannot, send the report about the tourists with
Prabhu Dayal. It will require time. I will, therefore, get it typed here.
Pyarelal passed the night fairly well.
Please send the ice.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Chimanlal is being discharged today. So if you are coming by
car, bring him with you, or if anybody is coming from the bungalow
he may come with him. In the last resort, he may come by tonga. If a
tonga suits you better, you may hire one. But in any case the carriage
will have to be arranged by you.
Telegram for Rajkumari:1
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11629

541. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
[August 23, 1938]2
CHI. AMRITLAL,

There is no cause for worry about Kaka. We shall have to
proceed carefully. Ask Dr. Mahodaya if it would not be better to give
two grains of calomel every half an hour eight times. Go on giving
him glucose, as much as he can digest. Give him small quantities of
mosambi juice. There are toxins in the body and they will remain for
some time. If he commits no mistake in eating, all will be well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10767

542. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
August 23, 1938
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

I have entrusted to Mahadev the task of writing to you or sending anything to you. I assume that you will be ready to start as soon
1
2

402

For the text of the telegram, vide “Letter to Amrit Kaur”, 24-8-1938
The date is as supplied by addressee.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

as you get the call. If there is any change in the programme inform
Mahadev.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10592

543.

TELEGRAM TO AMRIT KAUR
WARDHAGANJ,

August 24, 1938
R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
GUEST HOUSE
TRIVANDRUM
GOD
WILL
PROGRESSING.

SOLVE

DIFFICULTIES.

PATIENT

BAPU
From the original C.W. 3878. Courtesy : Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7033

544.

LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
August 24, 1938

MY DEAR AMRIT,

Just time to send you love. All well.
BAPU

[PS.]
You see how considerate I have been. Say thank you.
From the original : C.W. 3877. Courtesy : Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7034

545. LETTER TO PRITHVISINGH
S EVAGRAM, W ARDHA,

August 24, 1938
MY DEAR PRITHVISINGH,

I write to you in English so that you may get this earlier.
I had your letters. I am glad you are having good treatment and
that you have mental peace. I know that non-violence in thought is the
most difficult of attainment. And yet without the co-operation of
thought, non-violence, in word and action does not become an allVOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

403

prevading irresistible force that it undoubtedly is. Such non-violence
comes only through God’s grace. And that grace descends only on
those who make a ceaseless effort—much greater surely than what we
make to attain material ends.
I am pursuing my work. Much depends upon the external
atmosphere.
You will continue to write regularly to me.
A letter is being sent to your people. I have already told you
they met me and I was pleased they came.
Pyarelal is suffering from typhoid. But he is on the mend.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat : G.N. 5630. Also C.W. 2941. Courtesy : Prithvisingh

546. LETTER TO M. VISVESVARAYYA
August 24, 1938
You may depend upon my doing all I can in behalf of your
project1 .
S IR M. V ISVESVARAYYA
BANGALORE
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

547. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
August 24, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

Fresh ginger is needed for Pyarelal. I have of course made
inquiries in Varoda. Rajaram will see about it. But if he is not able to
procure it, please see to it yourself.
Ice and vegetable soup have been discontinued for the present.
He will take whey.
If you have not written for grape-fruit along with pomegranates,
do so now. Through God’s grace my silence is continuing.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11632
1

404

Of setting up an automobile factory in India
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

548. LETTER TO S. GANESAN
S EGAON,

August 25, 1938
1

MY DEAR GANESAN ,

you are mad. Can’t you be at peace with yourself ? I am glad
you withdrew your letter2 .
Yours,

BAPU
S HRI S. G ANESAN
8 P YCROFT R OAD
TRIPLICANE
MADRAS
From a copy: C.W. 4347. Courtesly: D. C. Jha. Also G.N. 6614

549. A MESSAGE3
August 25, 1938
There will be no peace without non-violence in the hearts of
many. There will be no non-violence without prayer, and prayer is
vain without correspondent work.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

550. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
[August 25, 1938] 4
CHI. KAKA,

I am sending the article after revising it. The changes are selfexplanatory. Did not Subnis drink nira ? Have you regained sufficient
strength now to come ?
1

Editor, Swatantra Sangu, Madras
This seems to have expressed the anguish of workers at some of the
provisions of the Temple-entry Bill then under consideration.
3
This was sent to Muriel Lester for “Prayer for Peace in the World”.
4
There is reference in the letter to Pyarelal having started taking whey “from
yesterday”. In “Letter to Mahadev Desai”, p. 279, Gandhiji mentions Pyarelal being
given whey. This letter would thus appear to have been written on August 25.
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

405

Pyarelal is progressing. Fever is going down. He has started
taking whey from yesterday.
Why do you make yourself unhappy because you are a
Maharashtrian ? Atonement has to be made by all. It is better that the
poison that is inside comes out. If we do not increase it by opposing it,
it will spend itself.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
You did not see Amritlal, did you ?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10911

551. TELEGRAM TO SATIN SEN
August 26, 1938
HELPLESS.

SELF

SUFFERERS
FIND

WORKING

SHOULD CLUB
HONEST

UNDER

HANDICAP.

TOGETHER

AND

LABOUR.

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

552. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
August 26, 1938
SHRI KUMARAPPA,

Please tell Bharatan I was pleased1 to read his good article in the
Aryan Path.
From a photostat G.N. 10135

1

406

This word is not very clear in the source.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

553. LETTER TO JAIRAMDAS DOULATRAM1
S EGAON,

August 26, 1938
MY DEAR JAIRAMDAS,

You should have no worry on you while you are rebuilding
your body. In this we may well copy Englishmen. Out of office they
forget the office cares and every day come fresh to work. If they get
ill they know that they must rest and trust that without them the
nation’s business will go on as usual. This is true Gita living. It is the
soundest economy.
Yes, I remember the two girls.
Know that it was not Premi2 who prompted my wire. I had made
up my mind when Girdhari3 gave me the account. Premi’s letter
added zest to the wording of the wire.
Premi made a definite promise to write to me in Hindi. She has
now a rare opportunity of learning it there and so have you all. Premi
will have no letter from me till she has redeemed her promise.
Love to you all and the Kripalanis.
BAPU

[PS.]
Pyarelal is decidedly on the mend.
From the original : C. W. 11043. Courtesy: Arjun Jairamdas

554. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
August 26, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

Your presumption about ice is correct. It will not be needed
now. Therefore do not be too sure of Rajaram’s coming there. It has
started raining now. Is it but God’s wrath or is He weeping at our
sins ?
1

The first paragraph of the letter has been reproduced “Letter to Jairamdas
Doulatram”, 27-8-1938, under the date August 27, 1938.
2
Addressee’s daughter
3
Girdhari Kripalani, nephew of J. B. Kripalani
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

407

Telegram to Ramachandran:
“Under circumstances you should act as you think proper
without mentioning me. God be with you. Bapu.”1
To Rajkumari:
“No sorrow over your so-called failure. Self well. Pyarelal
rapidly progressing. Love. Bapu.”2
If you have sent a wire in the morning in reply to hers, then do
not bother about this.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11633

555. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
S EGAON,

August 26, 1938
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

What you write is quite proper. I only wanted to have your
reaction. All money needed for the boy3 will be provided by Bhopal.4
The matter was weighing very heavily on my heart.
Yes, anarchy in the Congress seems to be on the increase. I am
doing and will continue to do my utmost to check it, but the results
rest with God. Anyway, the outcome can be nothing but good if our
efforts are pure.
The news about Viyogi Hari has made me very happy. The
weather here is very bad these days.
You should come and stay for a while in Segaon when it gets
better. Jamnalalji’s cottage is quite good.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 7995. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

1

The telegrams are in English.
Ibid
3
Harold Ansari; vide “Letter to G. D. Birla”, 12-8-1938
4
The Nawab of Bhopal; vide “Letter to Nawab of Bhopal”, 19-7-1938
2

408

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

556. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
Night, August 26, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

We have to send money to Nimu. She has sent a reminder.
Pyarelal’s fever has practically gone. There is no other complaint.
Do not force yourself to come. The work should not accumulate
but you should not strain yourself to finish it either. I constantly feel
that we are going to have to bear a very heavy burden. I have been
working rather hard. I cannot say how long I shall be able to continue
in this manner.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
We forgot about the Ramayana. The enclosed was sent by
Ramdas.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11634

557. LETTER TO PRABHU DAYAL VIDYARTHI
August 26, 1938
CHI. PRABHU DAYAL,

You should be patient. You alone can rectify the failing you
have pointed out. Be an ideal [teacher] and impress the boys with
your love.
Khadi can prove cheaper only if you spin the yarn yourself.
They will be acquiring learning of another kind through spinning,
etc., and you should explain the economics of Khadi through that
activity.
I had even tried to prevent the police from going. But how
could I compel them? The only thing I could do was not to put up
with the thing and I did not. However, the newspapers have a way of
saying all kinds of things.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 11687

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

409

558. MY SO-CALLED INCONSISTENCIES
During my student days improperly so called (for they properly
began after the period of examinations and are not yet over for me) I
learnt a saying of Emerson’s which I never forgot. “Foolish
consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds,” said the sage. I cannot
be a little mind, for foolish consistency has never been my hobgoblin.
My critics are shocked over my recent remarks on picketing. They
think that in describing as a species of violence the formation of a
living wall of pickets in order to prevent the entry of persons into
picketed places, I have contradicted my sayings and doings during the
civil disobedience campaign. If such is really the case, my recent
writing must be held as cancelling my comparatively remote sayings
and doings. Though my body is deteriorating through age, no such
law of deterioration, I hope, operates against wisdom which I trust is
not only not deteriorating but even growing. Whether it is or not, my
mind is clear on the opinion I have given on picketing. If it does not
appeal to Congressmen, they may reject it, and if they do, they will
violate the laws of peaceful picketing. But there is no discrepancy
between my past practice and the present statement. When civil
disobedience was first orgainzed by me in South Africa, my
companions discussed with me the question of picketing. The
registration office had to be picketed in Johannesburg, and the
suggestion made was that we should form there a living wall of
pickets. I at once rejected the idea as violent. And pickets were posted
in marked positions in a big public square so that no one could elude
the eagle eyes of the pickets and yet everyone could go to the
registration office, if he liked, without touching anyone. Reliance was
put upon the force of public opprobrium which would be evoked by
the publication of the names of ‘black legs’. This method was copied
by me here when liquor shops were to be picketed. The work was
specially entrusted to the women as better representatives of nonviolence than men. Thus there was no question of the formation of a
living wall. Many unauthorized things were no doubt done during
those days as they are now. But I cannot recall a single instance in
which I countenanced the kind of picketing condemned by the article
that has come in for sharp criticism. And is there really any difficulty
about regarding a living wall of pickets as naked violence ? What is
the difference between force used against a man wanting to do a
410

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

particular thing, and force exercised by interposing yourself between
him and the deed ? When, during the non-co-operation days, the
students in Benares blocked the passage to the University gates I had
to send a peremptory message and, if my recollection serves me right,
I strongly condemned their action in the columns of Young India. Of
course I have no argument against those who hold different views
from mine regarding violence and non-violence.
The other inconsistency imputed to me has reference to my
advice to factory-owners to invoke the assistance of the police to
defend themselves against what I have described as violent picketing.
Having condemned the Ministries for calling in the aid of the police
and even the military for suppressing riots, how could I advise
employers of labour to ask for, and Ministers to supply, police assistance, ask my critics.
This is what I wrote1 in Harijan about the Ministerial action in
U.P.:
It has been suggested that when we have our independence riots and the like
will not occur. This seems to me to be an empty hope, if in the course of the
struggle for freedom we do not understand and use the technique of non-violent
action in every conceivable circumstance. To the extent that the Congress
Ministers have been obliged to make use of the police and the military, to
that extent, in my opinion, we must admit our failure. That the Ministers
could not have done otherwise is unfortunately only too true. I should like
every Congressman, I should like the Working Committee, to ask themselves
why we have failed, if they think with me that we have.

Surely here there is no condemnation of the Ministers’ action.I
have deplored the necessity for it as I would deplore such necessity in
the matter of picketing. But till the Congress has developed a peaceful
method of dealing with violent crimes, its Ministers must use the
police and, I fear, even the military, if they are to undertake the
administration of the affairs of the country in the present stage of its
career. But it will bode ill for them and the country if they do not
devise methods of dispensing with the use both of the police and the
military or at least of visibly reducing their use to such an extent that
he who runs may notice the reduction. There certainly is a way. I have
ventured to give a faint indication of it. But it may be that the
Congress organization is not really fitted for the great task. Without a
living faith in non-violence, neither the military nor the police can be
supplanted.
1

Vide “Letter to Sharda C. Shah”, 22-3-1938

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

411

Cries come in from many quarters of growing insubordination,
indiscipline and even open violence among Congressmen. I hope that
the charge is untrue of the majority of Congressmen.
Harijan, 27-8-1938

559. LETTER TO GOSIBEHN CAPTAIN
August 27, 1938
I am developing ideas about dealing with the growing violence
and untruth. The two go hand in hand.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

560. LETTER TO VALJI G. DESAI
August 27, 1938
CHI. VALJI,

I read your third article and am returning all the three. The idea
of composing a new Smriti is a tempting one, but I am not qualified.
If I assume that I am qualified, I would require the leisure that is
posible in jail. Outside I have no choice. I have to take up the work
that comes to me and do it as best as I can. There is some freedom of
choice in jail. If you wish to contribute in the compositon of a new
Smriti, you will have to go deep into the thing. There are many
interpolations in the Smritis. Some portions, though not interpolations,
deserve to be rejected. Even in the Vedas everything contained is not
eternal truth. The Vedas are a mixture of poetry, history and eternal
verities. We should try to pick out the last. We should formulate rules
of interpretation. And after that, we may place before the people our
interpretations right from the Vedas to the Puranas, as the substance of
Hinduism. You have got the necessary ability for this, but have I ?
This task is beyond the ability of a single person. For this we should
have a group from among ourselves. You will now get some faint idea
about how my mind is working. I do know what is dharma, but I do
not know how to put it as the Vedas do. I am not sufficiently wellversed in the Shastras. And the most important thing is that I am not
completely free from attachment. I aspire to be so in this life. But I
will not feel sorry if I fail. I am using all the strength God has given
me to destroy attachment, etc. It is not impossible for me to attain to
that state, but I do not know whether I have that much time left to me.
412

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Please, therefore, do not give me anything raw just now. Your
language is attractive, but I will not yield even to that attraction and
accept all that you send just now. Please improve your healh if you
can.
Is the politics there unbearable ?
Pyarelal is free from danger.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

561. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
August 27, 1938
CHI. DEVDAS,

I could not spare the time to reply to you. I also have formed
the same impression about Khan Saheb that you say you have.
However, he is so suspicious that one cannot know when he might do
what. But being a man of God, he remains unharmed by mistakes and
perhaps he may live his whole life in this way and remain blameless.
He suffers from mental lethargy and so does not know what to do in
particular circumstances. And, moreover, he is simple-hearted. He
would believe everythng that a man whom he has come to trust told
him, would not believe anything said by anyone against whom he is
prejudiced, and get angry with those that did. Even so, he is a saintly
person, and so one does not mind his faults.
Pyarelal has pulled through this time. Showing him what you
have written would have an adverse effect. He is not fit enough just
now to bear your jokes and it would not do showing him the letter
after it has been edited ! If his temperature is not normal today, it will
be so in a day or two. He follows my advice on most things. He gives
me no trouble, and so you need not worry. My silence has benefited
me so much that if and when I have to give it up, I shall find it hard to
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

413

do so. Most certainly there is anger in me. The silence eats it all up.
After all, how much anger can I give vent to by writing ?
We are going through a period of wet adversity. Water is dripping everywhere. You will see evidence of it in this also. I fully realize
now the meaning of living in a village.
I am enclosing Ramdas’s letter.
Ramachandran is likely to be arrested in a day or two.
Rajkumari will return from Travancore tomorrow. Poor woman, she
did her very best. But after all we can only try, is not that so ? We have
left, and should leave, credit or discredit to God. If we do not act thus,
we would come to grief. I may not give you any more time now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2011. Also the manuscript of Mahadev
Desai’s Diary. Courtesy : Narayan Desai

562. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
S EVAGRAM,

August 27, 1938
CHI. MRIDU,

There is no harm in holding public meetings in support,
provided the speeches at the meetings are courteous and not critical.
The purpose should be to help the members representing the
Congress. You yourself should write to Bhulabhai.
Mrs. Subbaroyan is very sensitive. Ask her why she felt insulted.
I know her quite well. She was happy to find support in Harijan.1 She
has written a good letter to Mahadev. Do not be impatient.
I have instructed Mahadev to write to Bhulabhai. The Working
Committee has not taken any decision in this matter. You should write
to the President urging him to guide the legislators. That is all.
1
Mrs. Radhabai Subbaroyan had proposed a bill to restrain polygamous
marriages among Hindus. The Act as it was to be enacted, bad been spelt out in the
Harijan of July 23, 1938.

414

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Leena1 , Madan 2 and Mummy will be doing well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C. W. 11807. Courtesy : Sarabhai Foundation

563. LETTER TO PYARELAL
August 27, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

Do not be in a hurry to regain strength. If you can suck the
pomegranate seeds without swallowing the stones do so. Stop all work
until you are free from fever for 24 hours.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1
2

Addressee’s sister
Madan Mohan Mangaldas, husband of Leena

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

415

564. DISCUSSION WITH HARIJAN SATYAGRAHIS1
[August 27, 1938] 2
Harijan friends . . . calling themselves ‘satyagrahis’ marched to Segaon on
Saturday last and demanded justice from Gandhiji. Gandhiji was of course silent, but
he received them and asked them in writing if they would be content with written
replies. They said they would. He asked them to explain the purpose of their visit.
“We gave you notice,” their spokesman said, “that unless you could have a
Harijan appointed as a Cabinet Minister we should go to Segaon and do satyagraha
there. You asked us to desist. We did so and wrote to you to say so. But after that,
having heard nothing from you we decided to fulfil our promise.”
GANDHIJI:

But what do you want, and what do you mean by

satyagraha?
HARIJANS : We want a Harijan to be in the Cabinet and a seat reserved in the
Cabinet for a Harijan as there is one reserved for a Mussalman.

G.

But that is not in my power.

H.
It is. You were prepared to lay down your life for the Harijans at
Yeravda and your fast led to the Yeravda Pact. You can do everything for the Harijans.

G.
I am doing all that is in my power. But let that be. What do
you mean by satyagraha?
H.
We will remain here without food until another party from Nagpur
comes to relieve us.

G.
You are welcome to do so. You want me to provide you
with room. Well we are cramped for space, but you tell us where you
will sit, and we will vacate the place for you.
H.
We will be fasting, and five or six people will have to stay with us to
attend to our needs whilst we are fasting.

G. I am not concerned with that. You select the place and we
vacate it for you.
One of the Ashram inmates went out with them to show them over the place.
He returned to say that they wanted a room adjoining a hut reserved for women and
also the verandah in front of it.
G.

Explain to them that that room is reserved for women and

1

Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Notes”
Desai says the Harijans met Gandhiji on “Saturday last”. This would be
August 27.
2

416

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

they might select some other place.
He did so, but came and reported that they would have no other place.
G. Vacate it then. Let not Ba be perturbed. She can come and
occupy my room, and I will go there or in the house outside which is
built for Aryanayakum.

Harijan, 3-9-1938

565. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
[After August 27, 1938] 1
CHI. MAHADEV,

Herewith both your articles.
You must have received one bundle of letters sent with Rajaram.
Herewith also I am sending a few letters which are ready.
Rajkumari has reached safely. The ‘satyagrahis’ are quite well. They
do not give any trouble.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11617

566. LETTER TO HANNA LAZAR
August 28, 1938
MY DEAR HANNA,

Just one line to tell you I have your letter from Mombassa with
your carefully prepared notes with considerately made multiple
copies.
I hope you had an enjoyable voyage and that you have regained
lost health. You must make proper preparations for your next visit
here.
Except from you no further letter from Johannesburg.
Love to you all.
BAPU

[PS.]
Pyarelal is normal today. How nice you were not here during
the typhoid he was passing through.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
1

From the reference to satyagrahis; vide the preceding item.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

417

567. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
August 28, 1938
CHI. KAKA,

I sent a note with Mahadev only yesterday about the medicine to
be taken. Let us see what effect it has. Strength will return only by
degrees.
Let C.S.’s statement be published. It will be enough for the
present if your Marathi article appears in Hindi. Then we shall see.
What a mountain is being made out of a molehill !
It would help if you have the legs and the body massaged.
About the glucose injections, hot-water fomentation is the best
remedy. However, you may try a mud-pack once. The rule for a
patient is that he should not endure anything silently. That does not
show his courage but betrays his ignorance. The doctor should know
where you are having the pain. When he asks you to endure it, you
should of course do so. Do not mind your having taken my time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7682

568. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
August 28, 1938
CHI. KAKA,

Bhogilal Parekh has specially sent some apples. I am sending six
out of them for you. Pyarelal is well.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10907

569. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
August 28, 1938
CHI. AMRITLAL,

What an argument! Anyone going from Maganwadi asks neither
Bharatan nor Zaverbhai. This does not show lack of co-operation. It is
418

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

a question of procedure. What kind of co-operation would it be if a
man on his way here visited Jamnalal, Kishorelal, Rajendra Babu, Jajuji
and others and also Harijan Ashram, Aryanayakum, Mahila Ashram
and Balkrishna and asked if they had any work! The rule is that a man
should not go anywhere without reason. So I myself stopped sending
a note to you. I have not considered it my dharma to send you all the
news about this place. Is it clear now?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Vijaya does not seem to be writing everything to me.
BAPU

[PPS.]
I learnt only yesterday about Pyarelal’s niece. Pyarelal is quite
well.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10768

570. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
August 28, 1938
CHI. AMRITLAL,

There is no question of ordering anybody. You alone understand Kaka’s needs. You also know about the conditions here. So you
alone can say best where you can be more useful or where you will
have more satisfaction. Kaka himself is not able to decide because it is
not as if he could not do without you. I cannot say because I do not
have all the data. You alone can have that, so the burden naturally falls
on you. I will approve of whatever decision you come to
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10769

571. MESSAGE TO HARIJAN SATYAGRAHIS
August 28, 1938
BROTHERS,

I am pained to see the troubles that you are taking because I do
not know what useful purpose your troubles are going to serve. I
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

419

consider that your vow is born of lack of knowledge. Whatever that
may be, your fast cannot effect a change in my views. We should not
coerce anyone by resorting to fasts. I therefore appeal to you that you
should give up the fast and then resort to any other kind of agitation.
At the same time I [do not] consider that agitation of any kind is
necessary because it is the duty of every Congress Ministry to include
a Harijan in the Cabinet if a capable Harijan is forthcoming.
The Bombay Chronicle, 31-8-1938

572. TELEGRAM TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
WARDHAGANJ,

August 29, 1938
BRIJKRISHNA C HANDIWALA
KATRA KHUSALARI, D ELHI
NO

CAUSE

SORROW.1

GOD

BLESS

HER

SOUL.

LOVE.

BAPU
From a photostat G.N. 2466

573. LETTER TO P. C. GHOSH
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

August 30, 1938
MY DEAR PROFULLA,

I am glad you are having an exhibition for khadi and allied
village industries and hope that it will be a glorious success as well
from the point of view of numbers who attend as of sales.
Yours,

BAPU

[PS.]
I am out of stock for palm-gur and need it badly for Pyarelal
who is just convalescent. Please send the maximum quantity carried at
the minium cost per railway parcel or postal, whichever is cheaper.
BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

420

The addressee had lost his mother on August 26.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

574. LETTER TO LALI
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

August 30, 1938
MY DEAR LALI,

It is good that you have trust in my judgment. But I must not
abuse that trust. So instead of using it, I left it to you to decide where
you would be happy. Now you will prove the wisdom of your choice
by becoming a worthy lad both in character and cleverness.
You will give me at least a monthly detailed report of your
progress.
Love.
BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

575. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
August 30, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

I trust Lilavati did not suffer much. Ba was asking bitterly why I
let her go.
Send a telegram to Jawahar:
“Wire Indu’s health. Love all. Bapu.”1
It has become a problem how to cope with the work. I wished to
write for Harijan but found it impossible to do so.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I have read Kishorelal’s article. Let it be published as it is.
BAPU

[PPS.]
Did you send the money to Nimu?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11635
1

This is in English.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

421

576. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

August 30, 1938
CHI. NARANDAS,

Rajkumari Amrit Kaur was born in 1887 A. D. She is the only
daughter of the late Raja Sir Harnam Singh. The late Raja Saheb was
the uncle of the Maharaja of Kapurthala. The Rajkumari was educated
in England for eight years. She has been taking a prominent part in
the women’s movement since 1928. At present she is President of the
All-India Women’s Conference. Her way of living is exceedingly
simple. She has been wearing khadi for years. She is a member of the
Spinners’ Association and the Village Industries Association and takes
great interest in both these activities. This information should suffice
for you.
Tell Chhaganlal that if he wants to arrange a tour of Kathiawar
for her for a few days, he may do so. It is not absolutely obligatory to
arrange the tour. It may be dropped if the atmosphere at present is not
favourable. I have prepared her for it.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
The Rajkumari is a Christian by birth, and a Hindu by conduct.
She cannot be taken to a temple.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8546. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

577. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
S EGAON,

August 30, 1938
CHI. PRABHA,

I got your letter. Who can help one who makes herself unhappy
without cause? Joy and sorrow are mental creations. I experience this
every moment. If Jayaprakash does not go to Malabar at all, will it
mean that you will not be permitted to come? When he goes to
Malabar he may take you from here, or he may go directly there and
422

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you may leave this place at the same time and join him there. My visit
to the Frontier Province may perhaps start around the 20th September. In that case you will remain here. I shall have to be back from
there around October 20.
Pyarelal has no fever now, but feels weak. The danger is over.
My silence is for an indefinite period. God alone knows when it will
be over. But you are not concerned with that. You will be able to talk
to your heart’s content, and I will reply to you by writing. But the
truth is that you do not need to talk. It is enough for you to stay with
me to have peace of mind. I need not worry about you then. Please,
therefore, come if you can. I will see about your studying.
I am well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3520

578. LETTER TO DR. GOPICHAND BHARGAVA
S EGAON,

August 30, 1938
BHAI GOPICHAND,

Rajkumari showed me your letter. I understood you had asked
my personal opinion. If no tangible service is possible by remaining
in the Assembly and if the Congress M.L.A.s do not extend any help,
it would be best to get out of the bother. Even as it is, I had not liked
your getting into the Assembly.
Now I have had a letter from Dr. Dharma Vir. If he cannot at all
meet the trustees, why not relieve him? There has been some
difference of opinion here. Can’t we find another doctor? In that case
I feel he would have to be allowed a certain measure of freedom.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Dr. Gopichand Bhargava Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

423

579. LETTER TO S. GURCHARAN SINGH
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

August 31, 1938
DEAR FRIEND,

I am glad you are free. Your threat pains me and it is unworthy.Why should discharged political prisoners think that they have
a right to expect the nation to support them and pay the expenses of
the education of their relatives? Sacrifice loses all value when it
demands its price with compound interest. And how should your
threatened hunger-strike make wrong right?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

S. G URCHARAN SINGH
OVERSEER
EX-POLITICAL PRISONER
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

580. LETTER TO BHARATAN KUMARAPPA
August 31, 1938
MY DEAR BHARATAN,

Ramdas Gulati saw the museum for the spinning models. His
engineer eyes saw defects in the building. I asked him to reduce them
to writing. Here is his report1 . You should study it and if the defects
pointed out are really defects you should find who is responsible and,
where possible, they should be remedied. How much progress in
Hindi?
Love.
BAPU

Encl. 1
From a photostat G.N. 3595

1

424

Not traceable
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

581. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

August 31, 1938
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

Owing to my limited energy, I have been obliged to repress my
desire to write to you.
I await your reply to my wire about Indu.1
I note your warning about federation. I discount the news, i. e.,
if it is more than a rumour. They won’t call it without first securing
Congress consent. This they can’t get.
Then about the Jews. I feel entirely like you. I boycott foreign
goods, not foreign ability. And I feel keenly for the persecuted Jews.
As a concrete proposal I suggest your collecting the names of the
most deserving ones and making it plain to them that they must be
prepared to throw in their lot with us and accept our standard of
living. The rest from Mahadev.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1938. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Also A Bunch of Old Letters, p. 286

582. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
S EGAON,

August 31, 1938
CHI. NARANDAS,

Please find enclosed a cheque from Gokaldas, Send him a
receipt from there. I have not written to him from here. I hope jamna
is calm.
What is the news about Harakhchand?
Manju has not replied to my letter. Can’t Purushottam satisfy
her love of music?
Blessings from

BAPU
1

Vide “Letter to Mahadev Desai”, 30-8-1938

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

425

[PS.]
You have been covering years well. Cover many more and
continue to serve.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8547. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

583. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
August 31, 1938
CHI. AMRITLAL,

I am sorry about the ghee. I did not know at all. There is a sort
of chaos here. And moreover there was no note from you. As soon as
I came to know, I arranged for it. Now you must have got it. Gajanan
brought Kaka’s letter only this morning, so there has been no delay in
sending ghee. A reply to Prabhu is enclosed. It may go only if Kaka
approves.
I got the hundi for Rs. 69. There seems to be a famine of ghee
just now. Because of an epidemic among the cattle, the supply of milk
has been reduced somewhat.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10770

584. LETTER TO RAJENDRA PRASAD
August 31, 1938
DEAR RAJENDRA BABU,

It seems to me that we do not read in the right spirit what our
opponents write. The point is not that the language is abusive. The
socialists are carrying on massive activities for an ideal. We should not
ignore them. There is some criticism of the Bihar Bill in the current
Congress Socialist. There are other articles too. Read them. Write an
article about the Bihar Bill in reply to the article in the Congress
Socialist. If something has been written about the matter I should like
to see it.
426

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am sending with this three Hindi weeklies. Glance through
them. Somebody at least should read such things. We should not be
unaware of all these ideas.
Leaflets should be distributed among the peasants on behalf of
the Congress governments. This suggestion should be implemented at
once.
Show this letter to Kishorelal and Mahadev.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original : Rajendra Prasad Papers. Courtesy : National
Archives of India

585. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
[August, 1938] 1
CHI. MAHADEV,

Please have this wire despatched: ‘Dr. Zakir Husain. Hope new
Institute will fulfil expectations. Gandhi.’
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S. N. 11614

586. A LETTER
[About August 1938] 2
For what is Rajaram going to Wardha? Are the mosambis over?
Ba says that there are still many mosambis left. Find out correctly and
tell me. How many are there? They are more than enough. Pyarelal
would need very few or none at all. Who all are taking mosambis?
Chimanlal, etc.? The point is that it should not be made a duty for
Rajaram to go. If it can be managed, he should not be sent in such
rains. I have been facing such problems from the days of South
Africa. There too a particular man went to the city every day. I came
to know about it. I took up cudgels and resolved that he should go
only twice a week. Thereby, I saved energy, time and money. Any one
1

As placed in the source
From the contents; vide “Letter to Vijaya N. Patel, “Letter to Chimanlal N.
Shah” and “Letter to Mahadev Desai”,24-8-1938
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

427

who observes non-violence should learn to put up with inconveniences. Creating only means of comfort is the religion of
violent creatures. Hence, let it be made clear that Rajaram should not
be sent unless there is a particular reason. It is not a question only of
today. If it is necessary, he may go today. If he goes, and does not
deliver the post, let the post be left behind. Let everyone understand
this. Whatever advantages are given to me would mean that much of
my time is saved.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C. W. 11323

587. LETTER TO SUMITRA GANDHI
August 31, 1938
CHI. SUMI,

Improve your handwriting still further. Write to me in Hindi
sometimes so that I may know how well you write it. Kanam and Arun
are quite happy.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

588. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
August 31, 1938
CHI. NIMU,

I got your letter. You must have received the money. I can say
nothing about my vow of silence1 . I feel quite comfortable with it. It
will be given up when God wills so. My silence does not inconvenience either me or anybody else. The cholera epidemic has almost
subsided. Pyarelal’s fever has left him. Tell Ramdevji that he will get a
letter from me soon.
Do not worry about passing. It will be enough if you study as
best as you can. What became of your plan of going to Hardwar?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
1

428

Gandhiji had started observing silence from August 18, to regain lost health.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

589. LETTER TO RAJKUMAR SINHA
[On or before September 1, 1938]1
CHI. RAJKUMAR,

I have your second letter today. For my health I am working
under enormous strain. Therefore delay in writing to [you] and other
friends must not be interpreted as negligence on my part of the main
work which has brought you and other friends in touch with me. Let
this suffice for you that there can be no peace for me till every
prisoner is accounted for.
Your soldier-like bearing and promptness when you came to me
captivated me. I hope to enlist you as a true soldier of peace. But that
later.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
R AJKUMAR S INHA
C AWNPUR
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. courtesy: Pyarelal. Also The Hindu, 2-9-1938

590. TELEGRAM TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
THE VICEROY
September 1, 1938
UNDERSTAND
DUTT 2

GOVERNMENT

POLITICAL

AILING
HIM.

SERIOUSLY.
REQUEST

RELIEF

IF

HIS
AT

CONSIDERING

PRISONER

LODGED

HAVE

PRESSING

EXCELLENCY’S
ALL

CASE

OF

BIHAR
LETTERS
INTERVENTION

B.

K.

PROVINCE
ABOUT
EARLY

POSSIBLE.

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
2

The Hindu report carrying this item is dated September 1, 1938.
Batukeshwar Dutt, a close associate of Bhagat Singh

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

429

591. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
September 1, 1938
CHI. SUSHILA,

Tell me who is the better person—Surendra or Manilal? Manu
is never tired of praising Surendra. Have you seen any shortcomings
in Manilal? Does he curb you in any way? So much for jest.
I certainly like it that Sita is coming over but will it not affect
her studies? From my point of view, children do learn here but what
they learn is of a different kind altogether. The two cannot be
combined.
Do you and Manu mind my silence? I certainly feel like speaking for your sake, but silence is very important for my peace of mind
and my work. Both of you, therefore, should willingly put up with it.
Even though I do not speak, don’t you both play with me? Show this
to Manu and both of you give me your willing permission.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4881

592. LETTER TO PYARELAL
September 1, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

Munnalal’s letter was not meant to be read by you. You are still
considered an invalid. Besides, you should not be upset by what
Munnalal says, but should accept anything that may be good in it. In
any case, the letter is not for Mother1 . I would consider it sinful even
to tell her anything. With you and Sushila around, I am not worried
about Mother. I take it that there will be no hesitation in asking for
whatever may be needed by her. I must know when she does not get
what she asks for. The origin of Munnalal’s letter lies in the conversation between Sushila and me. I had asked Sushila to keep an eye on
things. She brought to my notice instances of uncleanliness. I made
inquiries and then there was a certain improvement. The matter went
further and it was desired that rather than make comments in front of
1

430

Taradevi Nayyar
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

everybody one should put down things in writing. That was why
Munnalal wrote that letter. Thus, knowing as I do his nature, I cannot
find fault with him.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

593. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
September 2, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

Let Maulana Saheb come today at 2 o’clock. I will leave the
takli yajna or finish it earlier according as I feel inclined at the time.
When you come, bring some good vegetables for Mother1 if available.
Durga or Lila may go to the market.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11639

594. LETTER TO HARISHANKAR PANDYA2
[On or before September 3, 1938]3
The Sardar is not going to foment trouble. He has been
President of the Rajakiya Parishad. He has been honoured as a guest
in several States. He owes a duty to his co-workers of the Parishad. He
goes merely as a guide. It is strange that you should regard his
coming as outside interference. I expect you to take advantage of his
presence to produce harmony if the agitation is confined to a minority. You may depend upon the Sardar. Knowing as I do so many of
the workers, I am unable to regard them as ill-meaning agitators.
Please share this with Bhayats, Lohana Samaj and the Muslim Council,
who have wired to me. I hope wiser counsels will prevail.
The Hindu, 3-9-1938
1

Pyarelal’s mother
The addressee, as well as some others, had sent telegrams requesting Gandhiji
to dissuade Vallabhbhai Patel from going to Rajkot in connection with the Kisan
agitation there as the situation did not call for outside interference.
3
The news item reporting this is dated September 3.
2

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

431

595. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
September 3, 1938
I have been in close touch with the prime movers affected by the
tragedy which is now being enacted in Travancore, and I had hoped
that I should be able to avoid having to make any public statement.
After a study of the available evidence and interviews with representative men from Travancore, I have come to the conclusion that
the Travancore Government are resorting to repressive methods, far in
excess of the requirements, if there are any.
The Travancore Government contend that the Travancore State
Congress activities are disloyal and subversive. I have studied the
documents alleged to contain evidence in support of such a charge
and have failed to find anything of that nature. On the contrary, I
have seen emphatic repudiaton by the State Congress of the charge
unless constitutional agitation for responsible government is to be
called subversive.
I have, however, read the memorial of the Working Committee
of the Travancore State Congress, making the most serious charges
unsupported by any evidence against the able Dewan, Sir C. P.
Ramaswami Aiyar. They should never have been made, even if the
memorialists had evidence in support. Such evidence is irrelevant to
the case for responsible government. It would have its place in a
memorial for the removal of the Dewan. There is no doubt that these
charges have harmed the memorialists and therefore the State Congress, though they cannot weaken the case for responsible government.
I have no doubt whatsoever that the case for responsible
government will be strengthened by the frightfulness being committed
by the Government of Travancore if only the people will not be
demoralized and will continue to adhere to non-violence. If reports
about violence by students are true, I appeal to the students to desist
and allow the movement to develop non-violently.
Leaders who have been locked up should make amends by with
drawing the charges against the Dewan.
I had the honour of meeting the young Maharaja and the
Maharani. I have had the privilege of knowing Sir C. P. Ramaswami
Aiyar for many years. I appeal to them to retrace their steps and allow
432

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the State Congress to function so long as its activities remain peaceful.
Surely the common law of the State is enough to cope with individuals
using violent language or resorting to actual violence. But at this hour
of the day, to expect the people to submit to the suppression of free
speech or of demands, however advanced these may be is to invite
trouble.
In my humble opinion, the prevention of Shrimati Kamaladevi
Chattopadhyaya from entering the State was a first-class tactical
blunder. it passes comprehension how Sir C. P. Ramaswami Aiyar,
himself a foreigner, prohibited the entry of a distinguished Indian
lady on the grounds, according to him, of her being an outsider. She
was amenable to the State law if she had committed any breach
thereof. I thought it was only reserved for the English administrators
to treat Indians going from one province to another as foreigners. It
ill becomes the Indian Princes and their advisers to follow the pernicious practice of the English administrators—a practice of which
many Englishmen are heartily ashamed. The Government may, by the
terrible repression they have resorted to, succeed in killing the movement for the time being, but it will never die and will leave a bitter
memory behind. I hope that wiser counsels will yet prevail and the
State Congress will be permitted to function properly.
Harijan, 10-9-1938

596. CHOICE BEFORE CONGRESSMEN
Since the publication of my article 1 on violence said to be
creeping into the Congress ranks, evidence is coming in to corroborate the complaints made by my correspondents. Violence at Congress elections, they say, is on the increase. It looks as if Congressmen
are not able to digest the power that has come to the Congress.
Everyone wants to have a share in the spoils of office. And so there is
an unhealthy competition to capture committees.
This is not the way to win swaraj, nor is it the way to work the
office programme. The holding of any office in the Congress
Government must be in the spirit of service without the slightest
expectation of personal gain. If A is satisfied in ordinary life with
getting Rs. 25 per month, he has no right to expect Rs. 250 on
becoming a minister or obtaining any other office under the Govern1

Vide “Our Failure”, 22-3-1938

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

433

ment. And there are many Congressmen who are taking only Rs. 25
per month in voluntary organizations and who are well able to
shoulder ministerial responsibility. Bengal and Maharashtra are teeming with able men who have dedicated themselves to public service on
a mere pittance and who are well able to give a good account of
themselves no matter where they are put. But they are not to be
tempted to leave the fields they have chosen, and it would be wrong to
drag them out of their invaluable self-chosen obscurity. It is true all
the world over, and more true perhaps of this country, that as a rule
the best and the wisest men will not become ministers or accept
positions under Governments. But I have digressed.
We may not always get the best and the wisest men and women
to run Congress Governments, but swaraj will become a distant dream
if the ministers and other Congressmen holding offices are not selfless, able and incorruptible. We are not likely to have such men if
congress committees become job-hunting arenas in which the most
violent would win.
How to preserve the purity of the organization is the question.
Anyone who subscribes to the credal article of the Congress and pays
4 annas can demand registration as a member. Many sign the
congress pledge without believing in the necessity for observing truth
and non-violence as conditions of attainment of swaraj. Let no one
cavil at my use of the expressions ‘truthful and non-violent’ as
synonymous with ‘legitimate and peaceful’. From the very commencement of the Congress constitution I have used those adjectives
without challenge. The word ‘non-violence’ was first introduced by
me in the resolution on non-co-operation carried in Calcutta by the
Congress. Can anything be untruthful and yet be legitimate, violent
and yet be peaceful? Be that as it may, I claim that those who commit
a breach of these two primary conditions, no matter by what adjectives
they are known, can have no place in the Congress organization so
long as it is governed by the present constitution.
Similarly those who do not use khadi as habitual wear have no
place in any Congress committee. This condition should apply also to
those who do not carry out vital resolutions of the Congress, A.I.C.C.
or the Working Committee. My prescription would be that those who
commit a breach of any of these conditions should automatically
cease to belong to the Congress. It may be urged that the remedy is
too drastic. It is, if it is regarded as a punishment. If it is the automatic
434

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

result of a particular act or omission of a person, it is no punishment. I
know that thrusting my finger into a furnace will surely burn it and
still I thrust it; my suffering is no punishment, it is the natural
consequence of my action. Punishment depends upon the will of the
judge. Natural consequences are independent of any person’s will.
It will be urged that under these conditions the Congress will
cease to be a democratic organization, it will become a close corporation.
I hold a wholly contrary view.
Democracy of the West is, in my opinion, only so called. It has
germs in it, certainly, of the true type. But it can only come when all
violence is eschewed and malpractices disappear. The two go hand in
hand. Indeed malpractice is a species of violence. If India is to evolve
the true type, there would be no compromise with violence or untruth.
Ten million men and women on the Congress register with violence
and untruth in their breasts would not evolve real democracy or bring
swaraj. But I can conceive the possibility of ten thousand Congressmen and women who are cent per cent true, and free from having
to carry the burden of innumerable doubtful companions, bringing
swaraj.
Let us reflect upon the past a little. Over fifty years ago a
handful of men and women took it into their heads to meet together
and represent and speak in the name of the dumb millions. Time has
proved the validity of their claim. Since then the prestige of the
Congress has risen not in proportion to its numbers, not in proportion
to the display of intellect on the platform or in committee rooms, but
it has risen in proportion to the ability of Congressmen to suffer and
sacrifice, themselves for the nation. No one will deny that when in
1920 the Congress definitely became a democratic, duly elected body
having a large number of voters on its rolls, it found itself possessed
of new power only because it deliberately adopted truth and nonviolence as its means of reaching its goal. And even at the present day,
the Congress has quite an insignificant number of men and women on
its register compared to the tremendous power it wields. The reason to
my mind is that it shows a measure of sacrifice cohesion and
discipline unequalled by any other organization in India. But as an
experienced servant and general I make bold to say that we shall have
to show a much higher measure of these qualities if we are to win
independence before many years are out. It is my deliberate conviction based on closest observation that we can secure all we want, within
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

435

much less time than perhaps any one of us imagines, simply by
showing high efficiency and equally high honesty in every one of the
Congress activities.
It would ill become us as truly brave men and women to wish ill
to the British in order to gain our end. In non-violent warfare wishing
ill to the enemy is not permissible A non-violent person relies upon
his own strength and refuses to trade upon his opponents’ weakness.
With all the earnestness I can command I, therefore, plead with
every Congressman who believes in his pledge to make his choice:
either to apply the purge I have suggested, or, if that is not feasible
because of the Congress being already overmanned by those who
have lost faith in its creed and its constructive programme on which
depends its real strength, to secede from it for its own sake and prove
his living faith in the creed and programme by practising the former
and prosecuting the latter as if he had never seceded from the
Congress of his ideal. If one or the other thing is not done, I see grave
danger of the Congress collapsing by the weight of its own
weaknesses.
It has given me no pleasure to pen these lines. But having felt
the urge, I would have been untrue to the Congress if I had not uttered
the warning. It is the voice of silence. For the reader should know I
took silence over a fortnight ago for an indefinite period. It has given
me peace I cannot describe, and it enables me to commune with
Nature.
Harijan, 3-9-1938

597. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
September 3, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

I wrote these yesterday. Today, I have been awake from 1.30.
Since my mind has been possessed of the H. M. matter I have been
writing about it. Please remember that you are not to come today
before three. See that both the telegrams are sent without any mistake.
It should not be necessary to tell you this, but I mention it considering
the burden on you. The word ‘mistake’ should be interpreted in two
senses—one, that the copy should be identical with the original and,
two, if you think I have made any mistake, correct it. If there is any
436

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

doubt, ask me. If you wish to wait till you have shown it to V. you
may do so. The urgency is about Travancore.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11620

598. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
S EGAON,

September 3, 1938
CHI. KAKA,

I did not even remember anything about Bombay. You may
now do what you think proper.
Has Amritlal decided anything? I like what you say about the
Smriti. If you can work with the others and select extracts, do so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10908

599. LETTER TO PYARELAL
S EGAON,

September 3, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

Your health today makes me a little scared. Take care and
regain your health. Do not give up fruit juice. Take also buttermilk. It
will be some time before you can take vegetables. Barley can be
started again.
You have seen the letter Sushila has written me. I did not want to
involve you in the problem at this time, but now it seems it cannot be
avoided.
Mother says that I should order Sushila to apply for that job.
Sushila does not seem to like the idea. Whether she will have complete
peace of course rests in your hands and mine. But whatever peace she
can have depends only on her staying with both of us. Hence, in my
view, Mother should let Sushila do what she wishes. If you agree with
this, would you persuade her on my behalf? If you think this is
beyond your capacity at the moment, then let me know. I will see
about it. If you are entertaining a different idea, let me know, so that I
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

437

can think it over again.
We may have to go to Delhi from here around the 19th and then
on to the Frontier Province. I hope you will be ready by that time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

600. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
September 3, 1938
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

My spirit was always with you. It is sad that you were not by
Mother’s bed-side at the moment of her death. But do we regard
death as death? It is a great transformation. The body is constantly
changing. When the self which had associated with it has deserted it,
why lament over it? You can come here when you want. I shall shortly
go to Delhi. Hence if you want to save the expense you may. The
weather here is also not too good.
Blessings to all brothers from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2465

601. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

September 4, 1938
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

How long will you live on medicines? Which kingdom do you
aspire to win? Go slow. Do only as much as you can. Take care of
your health, otherwise you will be guilty of violence.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 224

438

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

602. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
September 4, 1938
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

About the first letter, I can only say that I never suspected the
palate 1 .
About the other, I can say that I allow the massage if I need it,
otherwise I stop it in a few minutes. Why should I let Amtussalaam
come when I do not need her services? I did not know that she woke
you up every night. But you will have to sleep near me when
Amtussalaam leaves me and when Lilavati will not be there. Then you
will see how I box your ears. You must apologize to Munnalal.
Beware of constipation.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4301

603. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
[September 5, 1938] 1
I have read Dr. Khare’s own defence. The only part that directly
concerns me I owe it to the public to answer. It is painful for me to
have to contradict Dr. Khare.
He came to Segaon voluntarily. He came as a friend. There was
no protest on his part when he came. It was not without full argument
that he felt convinced of the charges I brought against him. When he
realized the force of my argument, he said he placed himself
unreservedly in my hands. I told him that as he had admittedly lost his
balance, if he felt like consulting his friends whom I had named, he
should do so. There was no desperate hurry. He said he was quite
capable of deciding for himself and that there was no need to consult
other friends. Then I said he should better write out himself what he
had admitted. He suggested that I should draft a statement, as he was
no draftsman. I said nevertheless that I wanted his language. If I felt it
did not cover sufficiently what he had admitted, I would revise it or
1
1

The Gujarati original has swada, which means relish of the palate.
From The Hindustan Times

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

439

add to it.
After some hesitation he took pen and paper and drew up the
draft. I then took it up and made the corrections and additions. 1 He
read them twice or thrice and said he could never admit betrayal of
trust and that in any case he would not make any statement there and
then but would accept my suggestion that he should consult his
friends. Three o’clock the following day was the time limit fixed for
the receipt of his answer. I have consulted the President, Maulana
Saheb and Sardar Patel, who are here, and they confirm my version.
Harijan, 10-9-1938

604. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
September 5, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

Herewith a telegram for Devdas. We will not take anything in
Harijan in that way. Your labour, however, has not been wasted.
I will get your note typed here. My article is almost ready. If it
is ready earlier, or even otherwise, I will send it complete from here.
Somebody will come.
Your letter was welcome. It is brave of you to write directly to
me. I have torn up the letter after reading it. It is a strange story ! I will
write when you come. There is nothing to worry about. The thing is
so ridiculous. Do we have the time just now for such things? Do your
duty without thinking about my blood-pressure. It would have been
altogether wrong if you had not written the letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11640

605. LETTER TO PYARELAL
September 5, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

Let no one hurt Mother’s sentiments. You will not hurt
1

For Khare’s draft statement and Gandhiji’s corrections, vide “Statement of
Dr. N. B. Khare”, 25-7-1938

440

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Sushila of course.
Mahadev’s letter about Rajkumari contained her views about
all of you. My reply to your letter is still pending.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

606. LETTER TO RADHAKRISHNA BAJAJ
September 5, 1938
BHAI RADHAKISANJI,

Bhai Chakrayya needs some handloom goods. You may give
him whatever you can. How are Anasuya and the child? I have almost
forgotten them both.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 9124

607. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
[Before September 6, 1938] 1
CHI. MAHADEV,

Please send the following wire to Shankerlal: ‘Suggested dates
Delhi accepted. Hope you better. Bapu.’ I am sending with this the
bottle of honey. Lilavati forgot it as usual.
Mother has arrived there. She knows what is dharma but shrinks
from acting accordingly. My advice is that you should tell her that she
should decide the matter with me. If, however, you can see way clear,
do guide her. Tell me also if you have any suggestions to make. I
have intentionally kept you out of this. How much burden can I put
on you? I feel no burden.
BAPU
1

From the contents it appears that the letter belongs to the year 1938. The
month and the date are presumed from Gandhiji’s letter to Abdul Ghaffar Khan,
wherein he says, “The date of the W. C. is now finally fixed”; vide “Letter to Abdul
Ghaffar Khan”, 6-9-1938
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

441

[PS.]
Please send this to Saxena1 : ‘Hope paper will always represent
truth and non-violence. Gandhi.’
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S. N. 11642

608. LETTER TO ABDUL GHAFFAR KHAN
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

September 6, 1938
DEAR KHAN SAHEB,

The date ot the W.C. is now finally fixed. It meets at Delhi on
20th. I reach there on 20th. I hope you will attend. This means that I
can go to the Frontier Province immediately after the Delhi meeting.
You will now advise me please.
Will you also tell me whether you want me to take Amtul Salaam
with me or not?
I hope you are doing well. Are you reading Harijan regularly?
You should if you are not.
Love.
BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

609. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
September 6, 1938
I have read the Travancore Dewan’s statement with the attention
it deserves. I fear I cannot take shelter under ignorance of the Press
messages published from time to time on the tragedy that is being
continued in Travancore.2 Sir C. P. Ramaswami Aiyar’s defence reads
like an edition of the reports that used to be issued on behalf of the
British Government during the civil disobedience campaign. Not even
the massacre of Jallianwalla was justified exactly as the Travancore
shootings are now being justified. Was not General Dyer’s action
subsequently condemned? So is it likely to be in this case.
1

Mohanlal Saxena, General Manager, Associated Journals, Lucknow, the
publishers of the The National Herald, the first issue of which appeared on September
9, 1938; vide also “Letter to Amtussalaam”, 9-9-1938
2
The Dewan in his statement had said, “Mahatma Gandhi is thoroughly
unaware of the facts. . . ”

442

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I ask Sir C. P. Ramaswami to copy Sir Mirza Ismail and appoint
an outsider of unimpeachable integrity to enquire into the whole
affair. Let him declare a general amnesty and allow free expression of
opinion. Instead of importing the military and a Special Officer to
carry on repression, I invite the Travancore Government to request
someone like the Rt. Hon’ble V. S. Srinivasa Sastri, if Congressmen
are anathema, to go to Travancore and help them to re-establish peace
there without further military action.
Harijan, 10-9-1938

610. FRAGMENT OF LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR1
September 6, 1938
This is no rebuke to you. You have done all this with the best of
motives for the love of me. But without a knowledge of the manner of
doing things, all our love may miscarry. Love waits, prays and is
infinitely patient. You have been impatient to do good. If you have
understood this you will dance with joy that you have in me a
knowing friend whose love knows no bounds.
BAPU
From the original : C. W. 4218. Courtesy : Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 7854

611. LETTER TO HARSHADABEHN DIWANJI
September 6, 1938
DEAR SISTER,

I got your loving gift. I have heard that women are in the habit
of concealing their age. Have you justified this belief by concealing
yours? Be that as it may, live a full hundred years.
If you want my compliments for spinning a hundred rounds
more, you have them. But where is the room for compliments when
one is doing one’s duty?
You may come whenever you wish to.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI HARSHADABEHN DIWANJI
KHAR
BOMBAY
From Gujarati : C. W. 9795
1

The first three sheets of the letter are not traceable.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

443

612. LETTER TO LORD BRABOURNE
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

September 7, 1938
,
I am touched by your prompt and sympathetic reply to my wire
about political prisoner B. K. Dutt. I thank you for it.
DEAR LORD BRABOURNE

1

Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers, Courtesy : Pyarelal

613. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
September 7, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,

You may begin in the morning with juice of fruits—either
mosambi or grapes. Increase the quantity of milk by 8 oz. Take less
rice. Eat more wheat instead. You do drink enough water. Stop walking too much, but do continue pacing about for two hours slowly and
at uniform speed. The hour for retiring at night must be strictly
observed. Do not worry if any work is left unfinished. A few things
can be got done here. More in the next letter. Do not put yourself to
any inconvenience for coming today.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11641

614. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
September 7, 1938
CHI. KANTI,

I do not remember the letter in which you had asked
questions. When it is necessary to reply to your letters or act on them,
I do not hesitate even to send a telegram. Saraswati has been writing
1
Governor of Bengal, then acting as Viceroy. He had acknowledged Gandhiji’s
telegram of 1-9-1938 and said he had agreed to the prisoner’s release on grounds of
ill-health subject to certain conditions.

444

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to me and saying that she is perfectly peaceful. You should write to
me about the unhappy circumstances in her family. If I can do
something, I may try.
What Rajkumari writes about my health is not correct. I consider
my health fine.
I would be satisfied if yours was as good as mine, barring the
blood-pressure.
There is no time for more.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7347. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

615. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
September 7, 1938
CHI. VIJAYA,

Who wants to get married, you or I? If you can wait, why need
I be in a hurry? And as long as you are ill how can I give you away?
But please know that the treatment there is mere quackery. So, if
you wish, come over here. But not in my absence. Go to Manjubehn.
Let her examine you and suggest whatever remedy she likes. It would
be better if you did not go to Maroli just now. I will not have your
illness being prolonged there. I would bear it even if you were to die
here because I would be sure then that scientific treatment had been
given. Try Manjubehn first. Naranbhai will not now stand in your
way.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7098. Also C.W. 4590. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi

616. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
September 7, 1938
I have written to Vijaya. Manjula may examine her. She may go
to Maroli if it is necessary. Let her not try quack remedies.
How is it that you too get fever? What is it due to?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10771
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

445

617. LETTER TO JETHALAL G. SAMPAT
September 7, 1938
CHI. JETHALAL,

I got your fine letter yesterday. I finished reading it just now at
6.30 in the morning. I have now given it to Parnerkar to read.
If you are persuading the people to make ghee in their own
homes, you should also show them the correct method of making it. I
do not understand how you guard against adulteration.
Your second letter is based on hasty reasoning. But that does not
matter. Experience will correct the errors of reasoning. Instead of
judging the world, we should judge ourselves and do what we can.
Bearing in mind that He who controls us all is perfect, we should be
content with whatever we are able to do. Have faith that in the measure
in which you are able to improve your village, other villages also will
improve, and concentrate on that task. You do maintain accounts for
everything, starting with cattle feed. Don’t you? How much milk does
a cow give? How much butter and ghee?
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9866. Courtesy: Narayan J. Sampat

618. LETTER TO PYARELAL
September 7, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,

I have told Sushila what I had to. Now her good lies in her
doing what she thinks proper. She need not act under pressure from
Mother. But if she is moved by Mother’s love, she should not grumble. We do many things moved by parental love and find joy in doing
them. I shall be content with whatever she does.
As for you, what can I say? I see that our ideas of duty differ.
You see the same thing in one way, I in another way. So we must tolerate each other and pray that the veil of untruth may be lifted and we
may both see the same truth.
446

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

What I wish is that, if possible, you should assure me and Sushila
that you will not take any step at least while I am alive. Even that you
should not do mechanically. Do it only if you can do so naturally.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

619. LETTER TO TARADEVI NAYYAR
S EGAON,

September 7, 1938
DEAR MATAJI,

You can write to me in Urdu. Your letter has pained me a great
deal. Those who live with me never turn beggars. I. consider myself
the richest person. Beggars are those who work for salaries, because
they are always wanting more and more. They want promotions, no
matter how. I urge you not to press Sushila. Persuade her by love and
argument. Let her go her way if she is not convinced at heart. Parents
who order their grown-up children about, commit a sin. Save yourself
from such a sin. Pyare and Sushila are enjoying greater authority
than you ever did. You had money power. Why delight in the
memory of these things and why shed tears thinking about them? Did
not Father do good to others? Can one do good only by securing a
big job? Are not Pyare and Sushila doing altruistic work? Their life is
full of it. Enough is enough. Listen to me and free Sushila of anxiety
in good cheer.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

620. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
September 7, 1938
MY DAUGHTER AMTUL SALAAM,

I do not know what I should say; you repeat the same question
which I have answered again and again. Bhansalibhai writes to me; but
does he complain? Whatever I say reaches his head and heart.
VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

447

Whatever I say to you does not satisfy you— I cannot discuss your
food. If I ask you to strain less, you will exert more. If I ask you to
sleep, you will not listen. Even if you try to sleep, your heart will
protest that it is not correct advice. How can I know what was said to
the Maulana? Tell me, how can I make you understand.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 728

621. LETTER TO HARIBHAU UPADHYAYA
[September 7, 1938] 1
DEAR HARIBHAU,

Ba and Bapuji have received your letters of the 2nd. Bapuji says that Ba is now
no longer fit for such work and therefore should be spared.
We shall certainly meet in Delhi.
Yours,

MAHADEV
From the Hindi original. Haribhau Upadhyaya Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

622. NOTE TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
[After September 7, 1938] 2
STUPID GIRL,

Your letter of today has pained me much. Why are you so
weak? How is it that you want to serve and at the same time lack
self-confidence? Whatever happens, I do not wish to see you sad.
Remember today’s bhajan.
BAPU
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

From the postmark
This note is written on the reverse of a communication carrying the postmark
“September 7, 1938”.
2

448

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

623. A LETTER
S EGAON, W ARDHA,

September 8, 1938
DEAR FRIEND,

I was unable to speak to Subhas Babu yesterday. But I have
written to him.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat S.N. 11649

624. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
S EGAON,

September 8, 1938
MY DEAR AGATHA,

My capacity for work is very limited and work is daily mounting. Hence the delay in writing to you. But there has been not a
moment’s delay in action on this side. The whole sum is guaranteed. I
gave Shuaib your address and he definitely promised to give the
whole thing proper form and write to you. He was to send you or
Harold £100 on a/c. I am now taking action.1
The rest from Mahadev.
Love.
BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

625. LETTER TO SHUAIB QURESHI
September 8, 1938
MY DEAR SHWAIB,

No news from you! Have you sent £100? The matter admits of
no delay.
1

Vide the following item.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

449

What about your mission?
My right hand needs rest. This is with the left hand.
Love.
BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

626. LETTER TO SHAUKATULLA SHAH
September 8, 1938
MY DEAR SHAUKAT,

This is with the left hand as the right needs rest. Mahadev has
been telling me everything. Poor Zohra!
I hope you are getting full assistance from Dr. Bidhan.
I have your warning about the guarantee for Harold. The idea is
that the Bank should be put in funds and that £100 should be sent at
once.
I am sure Ammijan is at perfect peace with herself.
Love to you all.
BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

627. LETTER TO POTHAN JOSEPH
September 8, 1938
MY DEAR POTHAN,

I am on my back just now for the abdominal bandage. Hence
the pencil hand.
I shall read your article.
You may fail ten times out of ten, and you will come to me as
often as a penitent. What my word may have done for a moment it
may also do permanently. There is nothing in me. But God may
speak to you through me.
Love.
BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

450

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

628. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
September 8, 1938
CHI. KAKA,

There is falsehood, that is madness, in every line of Sheralekar’s
letter. Why reply to him?
You may come whenever you wish. Three o’clock will be the
best time. How did Amritlal get indigestion?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 10909

629. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
September 8, 1938
CHI. MUNNALAL,

The first decision you need to arrive at is whether you can
dedicate your whole life to Segaon. The co-workers are what they are.
I gave you those letters so that you might examine your heart. You
yourself have engaged Govind, Dasharath, etc. It is your duty to live
and work with them. You should spin and weave with them. You have
to make yourself an expert in the science of khadi. This was your
pledge from the very beginning and I have cherished that hope. You
should ponder over Kanu’s hint in this regard.
Do you reflect over all you read? I doubt it.
What does sitting with me mean? By all means sit if you have
free time. The days are over when I could give you personal attention.
I would be satisfied if I could cope with the work I have. But I feel
that the body is bound to become weaker day by day.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8591. Also C.W. 7031. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

451

630. LETTER TO SAMPURNANAND
September 8, 1938
BHAI SAMPURNANAND,

I agree with everything that you have said. The Congress has
merely given a new name to the language. It has not made any other
difference. No honest person would reject a word because of its Hindu
or Muslim origin. What can we say of others? And it has become
fashionable these days to oppose anything done by the Congress or
Congressmen. Do you want to know my views on the subject or something else? Because I have spoken and written at length on this
subject.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From Hindi: C.W. 10133. Courtesy: Kashi Vidyapeeth, Varanasi

631. NOTE TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
September 8, 1938
You are quite mad. If I love you a lot I have also made you cry
a lot. I do not know in what way you torment me. But if you are truly
my daughter, worrying about you should be, as it is, a matter of joy to
me.
Leave Mother to me. If you stay here, it will only be with her
blessings, not otherwise.
BAPU
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Dr. Sushila Nayyar

452

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

632. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
[About September 8, 1938] 1
CHI. KAKA,

We cannot be sure about Sheralekar.
You did well in leaving the dentures there. There is so much
humbug in the so-called Shastras that revised editions should be
brought out. But who will do it?
Pyarelal can now move about.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10910

633. MESSAGE TO “THE NATIONAL HERALD”
[On or before September 9, 1938] 2
I hope the paper will always represent truth and non-violence.
The Hindu, 9-9-1938

1
There is a reference to Sheralekar’s letter in Letter to D. B. Kalelkar”,
8-9-1938
2
The first issue of The National Herald appeared on September 9.

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

453

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I
LETTER FROM M. A. JINNAH1
NEW DELHI,

March 3, 1938
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

I have received your letter of the 24th February, 1938. I am sorry for the delay
in replying as I was not well. In your letter I missed the note of response, first
whether you are of opinion that you see light now and the moment has come, and
secondly, if so, whether you are prepared to take the matter up in right earnest, and
thirdly, I find that there is no change in your attitude and mentality when you say you
would be guided by Maulana Abul Kalam Azad as Dr. Ansari is no more. If you pursue
this line you will be repeating the same tragedy as you did when you expressed your
helplessness because Dr. Ansari, holding pronounced and die-hard views, did not
agree and you had to say that although you were willing, but what could you do? This
happened, as you know, before you went to the Round Table Conference. At the
Round Table Conference the tragedy was repeated by you when you seemed to be
willing to accept provisionally certain terms: but you there also expressed that you
were helpless as the Hindus were unwilling and you, as a representative of the
Congress, would have no objection, if the Hindus and Mussalmans came to an
agreement.
We have reached a stage when no doubt should be left that you recognize the
All-India Muslim League as the one authoritative and representative organization of
the Mussalmans of India and on the other hand you represent the Congress and other
Hindus throughout the country. It is only on that basis that we can proceed further and
devise machinery of approach.
Of course, I shall be glad to see you, although I shall be equally glad to see
Pandit Jawaharlal or Mr. Bose, [as] you may desire. The matter as you know will not
be clinched without reference again to you by either of them. Therefore, I will prefer
to see you first. In any case, I am sorry to say that I cannot come to Segaon to see you
before the 10th March. I have to go to Bombay and also I have fixed various other
engagements of my tour. But we can fix up the time and place that may suit us both.
Yours sincerely,
M. A. J INNAH
The Bombay Chronicle, 16-6-1938

1

454

Vide ”Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 24-2-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX II
A TRAGEDY

1

I proudly write in these columns about Gandhiji’s health, discussing the causes
of its breakdown, warning people, asking them to give him more rest. Ruthlessly I
have turned out people wanting to see him, and have even interrupted talks and
interviews, lest they should strain him over much and raise his blood-pressure.
Fancy, therefore, my misery and my shame when I found one morning at Delang that
what he considered a serious blunder on my part had raised his blood-pressure to the
breaking point and might have brought about a catastrophe. Tuesday and Wednesday
and Thursday, 29th, 30th and 31st—which in that peaceful atmosphere of Orissa
should have been the most blissful days—were the most miserable days I have ever
had in my life. But they were, if anything, more miserable for Gandhiji, as I found
from his heart-broken and heart-breaking utterance on the afternoon of the 30th. I
thought I had made amends indeed at that morning’s prayer by telling everyone
present how I had been the cause of the terrible breakdown, but Gandhiji was not
present when I spoke. But he knew that I had spoken about the incident, and so he
devoted his speech to the incident. I bespeak the indulgence of the reader for
inflicting on him this tale of personal woe. But I do it on public grounds, as he will
find at the end of the story.
The circumstances were somewhat like these. My wife, who rarely attends the
annual meetings of the Gandhi Seva Sangh, or for that matter any such meetings,
came to Delang, especially, I was told, with a view to being able to go to Puri. And
Gandhiji told me that I should make every arrangement for her going to Puri.
Personally I disliked her having come for the sake of Puri, and had no heart to make
any arrangements. I was once again asked if I had made the arrangements, and asked a
third time. My wife to my surprise did not know that the Puri temple was not open to
the Harijans. During Gandhiji’s Harijan tour she was in jail. But that was no excuse
for the ignorance. On the very first day in the course of his exhibition speech
Gandhiji made it clear that the temple of the Lord of the World was not open to the
Harijans, and so long as it remained so, the Lord was not, in his opinion, the Lord of
the World, but the Lord of those who fed and feasted under His shelter. I had hoped that
this speech would be a warning to all, including my wife, though I had a fear that she
would go into the temple. I must also confess that I had a lurking suspicion
thatGandhiji’s repeated insistence on my making arrangements for her going to Puri
sprang out of the depth of his ahimsa—the ahimsa that had made him serve liquor to
Tommies in the Zulu Rebellion, and to serve meat to his friends at table in South
Africa. I had also hoped that because she was going there with a number of other
friends, including Gandhiji’s second son Manilal, she would not go into the temple
when the rest stood out. What I did not do was to din into her head that her going into
1

Vide “Letter to Mirabehn”,4-4-1938

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

455

the temple would break Gandhiji’s heart. As I have said, I was stupid enough not to
realize the possible reaction and had even fancied that in the boundless charity of his
heart he had found room for forgiving a temple-goer like my wife. I must therefore
confess that even if she had definitely told me before going that she had made up her
mind to go into the temple, I should not have resisted her. I did not want to disturb her
faith to that extent. She knew that I was against it, she also knew that I have a horror
of these temples—temples which even when they are opened to the Harijans, would
not be better unless they were purged of the unscrupulous pandas. But if she thought
it would do her soul good to go into the temple, I did not in my heart of hearts feel
like standing in the way. As for Kasturba Gandhi, I must say that I had assumed she
would stand out and her presence would perhaps act as a check on my wife and others.
But as it happened, my wife went in, another friend went in, and also went in
Kasturba. Some members of the party stayed out, including my little son who put up a
plucky fight with the pandas.
On Monday evening when they returned and Gandhiji knew the whole story, he
was sad. He had a sleepless night. He called Kasturba and my wife and me to account.
The explanation, part of which is contained in the argument above, failed to satisfy
him. It even irritated him. He held that I was primarily to blame. He held that I should
have explained to them the history of the movement, how Gandhiji had gone to Puri
in 1934, how violence was organized there, how he had to undertake the Orissa
pilgrimage on foot, how reformers were warned not to go to the temple until Harijans
were admitted, and if my wife still did not listen, Gandhiji’s assistance should have
been sought, and if then too she insisted on going she should have been free to go.
He held hat I had not been watchful enough and that I had thus been unjust to him, my
wife, myself and to the cause. And so he thus poured out his heart to the members of
the Sangh :1
This pouring out of the agony of his heart was for me an added agony. He was
so disconsolate. The next day he felt too weak to speak and went into silence for the
whole day as a measure of precaution. What could I do in the circumstances? I was
afraid lest I should make matters worse by entering into explanations and arguments.
I felt like waiting until he had regained his normal pressure and strength. But the
thought of my having been the cause of the collapse tormented me. If I was guilty of a
grievous error of judgment, how could I continue to serve him? How could I correctly
represent and serve the Harijan cause? What right had I to be his door-keeper? I had
the hell of a night, and in sheer desperation I wrote to him a note imploring him to
put me away. This exasperated him all the more and made the cross heavier to bear. He
would prefer death, he said, at the hands of one who loved, to life at the hands of one
who did not love him ! Instead of realizing my folly and repairing it by going to Puri
with a band of satyagrahi pilgrims, he said, I had gone into hysterics over a wellmeant rebuke ! Instead of serving my wife, he said, I had in my blind love of her
1

For the full text of the speech, vide “Speech at Gandhi Seva Sangh Meeting”,
30-3-1938

456

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

encouraged her superstition !
All this was too stunning for words. I felt that Gandhiji, who has performed
several spiritual operations using the chloroform of love, had performed this one
without that chloroform. In resentment I cried :
To live with the saints in heaven
Is a bliss and a glory,
But to live with a saint on earth
Is a different story.
May it not be that he had made a mountain of a molehill ?
But who am I to judge? As I write this I feel that I was perhaps too dense to
probe into the workings of his highy sensitive mind. And after all he who had
devoted half a century of vigilant endeavour to the pursuit of truth and ahimsa should
be trusted to judge a situation better than I, ever liable to be swayed by passions and
desires. What may appear to me to be trifles may be matters of life and death to him. I
realized that however difficult life with him may appear sometimes, separation would
be still more unbearable. He disclaims saintship. He claims to be no better than the
smallest of us. I realized that I had grievously erred in associating even in thought
those doleful lines with him. Whether he is a saint or a mere mortal, like all of us, I
see that my cry for separation was a fit of frenzy. For when I look upon the note that I
wrote to him, I feel I could not have gone five yards before returning as a penitent.
And after all is said and done, one thing stands out in bold relief—Gandhiji’s
uncompromising love of the Harijans and his anxiety to lay down his life for that
cause. The poignant utterance became a call to greater dedication for the cause. The
incident burnt into every one of those who attended the Sangh meeting this year the
lesson that no one shall tamper with that most important item of the constructive
programme and that everyone shall be wide awake. The week of retreat in sacred
Orissa became more sacred with the cleansing effect of the electric shock that
Gandhiji gave them, and the members went home with a message that they are not
likely easily to forget.

M. D.

Harijan, 9-4-1938

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

457

APPENDIX III
LETTER FROM KHWAJA NAZIMUDDIN1

May 11, 1938
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

I write to acquaint you with the conclusions which have been reached by the
Government of Bengal in the matter of the premature release of terrorist convicts. In
formulating these proposals, Government have given the most careful consideration
to the suggestions which you were good enough to put forward in your letter of
April 12.
It is necessary to emphasize at the outset that the scheme which is embodied in
the succeeding paragraph is to be regarded as a connected plan, the different parts of
which form a single and indivisible whole. As such, it is communicated not only for
securing your own acceptance, but also the acceptance of Mr. Sarat Chandra Bose,
President of the Bengal Provincial Congress Committee as well as the leader of the
Congress party in the Assembly.
Government desire to commend the scheme to your most earnest consideration, because the declared acceptance by you, and by the Congress of Government’s
policy in this matter is a vital precedent condition to the adoption of the plan. In the
absence of that acceptance Government will regard these proposals as null and void
and will continue to discharge their responsibilities in this matter, according to the
policy which has already been announced in the Legislature.
The scheme is as follows :
(1) To release forthwith terrorist convicts suffering from serious and continued illness.
(2) To release as soon as possible those convicts who have not been convicted of offences involving the actual commission of murder and serious violence,
and have a comparatively short period of their sentences not in excess of 18 months
still to serve.
(3) To place the cases of the remaining convicts before an Advisory
Committee which will examine them on individual merits and make such recommendations in each case to Government as it thinks fit.
The decision as to the orders to be passed in each case, after consideration of
the recommendation of the Advisory Committee, will rest with Government.
(4) The Advisory Committee will be appointed by Government and will
consist of 9 members as follows :
(i) The President, a retired judicial officer of high standing;
(ii) A member of the Coalition Party;
1

458

Vide “Letter to Khwaja Nazimuddin”, 15-5-1938
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

(iii) A member of the Legislative Assembly from the Congress Party;
(iv) A member of the Legislative Assembly from amongst the representatives
of the Scheduled Castes;
(v) A member of the Legislative Assembly from the Liberal Party;
(vi) A member of the Legislative Council from the Congress Party;
(vii) A European member of the Legislature;
(viii) One other Muslim member; and
(ix) An official.
The names of the members constituting the Committee will be announced as
early as possible.
As an integral part of the scheme it shall be agreed and accepted between the
Government, yourself and the Congress as follows :
(1) That no attempt will be made hereafter by the Congress, or by any other
body with the support, tacit or open, of the Congress to secure an advance upon these
terms, and the matter shall cease to be a political issue;
(2) That you and the Congress will actively discourage all forms of agita-tion
for the accelerated release of prisoners, all attacks in the Press on the policy of
Government in the matter of terrorist prisoners, all demonstrations and receptions on
the release of such prisoners or thereafter, and all statements,writings and speeches
favourable to terrorists or terrorism;
(3) That you and the Congress will take every step possible to create and
maintain public opinion against hunger-striking and will publicly condemn such a
course if adopted.
In proposing these terms and conditions, the Government of Bengal have
gone to the utmost limit which they consider to be compatible with the discharge of
their responsibilities for the eradication of this canker of terrorism, which has for so
long been a recurrent factor in the political life of the Province. They have done so in
the hope of mobilizing public opinion and of contributing to the creation and
maintenance of the atmosphere calculated to render a recrudescence of terrorism
unlikely. Government earnestly desire the active association with themselves of all
who genuinely wish for the ordered and non-violent political development of the
country. Your own support I claim with the confidence of one who knows how much
you have the same object at heart.
I should be glad, therefore, if you will be good enough to communicate your
views on these proposals as early as possible, and I would suggest that it would be
appropriate if you would communicate with Mr. Subhas Chandra Bose and the Leader
of the Congress Party in the Legislative Assembly, Bengal, with a view to obtaining
their acceptance. . . .

The Hindustan Times, 4-10-1938

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

459

APPENDIX IV
STATEMENT OF DR. N. B. KHARE1

July 25, 1938
I have already admitted an error of judgment committed by me in presenting
my resignation to the Governor on the eve of the meeting of the Working
Committee. I admit that I have been guilty of indiscipline. I, as an old Congressman,
should have known the value of discipline. I realize now2 the enormity of the error,
which has resulted in the dismissal of the Congress Ministers by the Governor under
his constitutional powers under the Act3 .
I am sincerely sorry for what has happened on account of this loss of balance
and I think that it is my duty to relinquish all positions of trust in the Congress,
whose cause I have put in jeopardy by my action. I shall be content if I am permitted
to serve as a camp-follower. I shall do everything in my power to retrieve the prestige
which the Congress has lost through my action.
I hope that all Congressmen will rally round the Working Committee in its
endeavour to form a united and stable ministry, for there are rumours of a split in the
Province between Maharashtra and Mahakoshal. I hope that good counsels will
prevail and we shall not think in terms of Maharashtra and Mahakoshal. I shall try
my best to prevent any such split.

The Hindu, 3-9-1938
APPENDIX V
WORKING COMMITTEE RESOLUTION ON C. P. CRISIS4
After having heard the Parliamentary Sub-committee and given anxious
consideration to the events that have happened since the agreement arrived
at in Pachmarhi between the Ministers in the presence of the members of the
Parliamentary Sub-committee and the Presidents of the three Provincial Congress
Committees concerned, and after having had several interviews with Dr. Khare,
the Working Committee have reluctantly come to the conclusion that by the series
of acts committed by Dr. Khare, culminating in his resignation of his charge and
demanding the resignation of his colleagues of their charge, Dr. Khare was guilty of
grave errors of judgment, which have exposed the Congress in the C. P. to ridicule
and brought down its prestige. He was also guilty of gross indiscipline in that he
1

Vide “Statement to the Press”, 30-7-1938 and “Statement to the Press”,
5-9-1938
2
“Now” was deleted by Gandhiji.
3
“Under the Act” was deleted by Gandhiji.
4
Vide “Functions of the Working Committee”, 6-8-1938

460

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

acted in spite of warnings against any precipitate action.
His resignation was the direct cause for the exercise, for the first time since
office-acceptance by the Congress, by a Governor of his special powers, whereby Dr.
Khare’s three colleagues were dismissed. The Working Committee note with
satisfaction that these three Congress Ministers showed their loyalty to the Congress
by declining, without instructions from the Parliamentary Sub-committee, to tender
their resignations which were demanded by the Governor.
Dr. Khare was further guilty of indiscipline in accepting the invitation of the
Governor to form a new Ministry, and, contrary to the practice of which he was aware,
in actually forming a new Ministry and taking the oath of allegiance without
reference to the Parliamentary Sub-committee, and the Working Committee, specially
when he knew that the meetings of these bodies were imminent.
By all these acts of his Dr. Khare has proved himself unworthy of holding
positions of responsibility in the Congress organization. He should be so considered
till, by his services as a Congressman, he has shown himself well balanced and
capable of observing strict discipline and discharging the duties that may be
undertaken by him.
The working Committee have also come to the reluctant conclusion that H. E.
the Governor of the C. P. has shown, by the ugly haste with which he turned night
into day and forced the crisis that has overtaken the province, that he was eager to
weaken and discredit the Congress in so far as it lay in him to do so. The Working
Committee hold that, knowing, as he must have, what was going on among members
of the Cabinet and the instructions of the Parliamentary Sub-committee, he ought not
to have, with unseemly haste, accepted the resignation of the three Ministers and
demanded the resignation of the other three, dismissed them on their refusal to resign,
and immediately called upon Dr. Khare to form a new Ministry and sworn in the
available members of the new Ministry without waiting for the meeting of the
Working Committee which was imminent.

Harijan, 30-7-1938

VOL. 73 : 21 FEBRUARY, 1938 - 8 SEPTEMBER, 1938

461

