1. TELEGRAM TO THAKURDAS KHUSHALDAS1
[After April 28, 1931]
WHEN
BEING

PEOPLE WON ’T LISTEN TO REASON
LET THEM DO WHAT THEY LIKE.

YOU MAY

FOR

THE TIME

A. I. C. C. File No. 3-A, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library.

2. TO THE CULTIVATORS OF KHEDA
[April 29, 1931] 2
I had written in Navajivan3 That no cultivator4 is obliged to pay
revenue by incurring debt. I write the following further to clarify the
matter.
1. Whether the cultivator has gone on ‘Hijarat’ or not if he
has suffered substantially by reason of satyagraha movement such a
satya-grahi Cultivator is not obliged to pay revenue by incurring debt.
2. The duty of all other cultivators—those who have not taken
part in the satyagraha movement and those who have not suffered
substantially—is to pay the revenue even if it becomes necessary to
incur debt for such purpose.
3. The cultivators covered by item I should realize that in my
opinion their interest lies in keeping the Truce. I shall make every
endeavour to get suspension of their land revenue up to next year but
if I fail the peasants will have to undergo considerable suffering and
this suggestion does not apply to those who are not prepared to
undergo such suffering.
[From Gujarati]
Navijivan, 3-5-1931
1

Secretary, District Congress Committee, Mirpurkhas (Sind), who in his letter
dated April 28, had sought Gandhiji’s veiws on Mirpurkhas cloth merchants’ decision
to sell sealed foreign cloth against the Congress directive and the counter-decision of
satyagrahis to resort to picketing and hunger strike.
2
From The Hindu, 30-4-1931
3
Dated 19-4-1931; vide “To The Satyagrahi Farmer”, 19-4-1931
4
In a translation of the item found in Home Department Political file the word
“Khatedar” has been used.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

1

3. LETTER TO CHARU PROBHA DEVI
BORSAD,

April 29, 1931
DEAR CHARU PROBHA,

I was delighted to have your letter. You would certainly not
reject the company of the young men who may not hold the same
view on non-violence that you and I do but you will expect to convert
them by your affection and still more by proving the efficacy of your
own method in daily conduct. You will not expect me to give you
long letters. No apology is needed for faulty English. Why should
we be ashamed of making errors in a foreign tongue? What, however,
I would like you to do is to pick up Hindi and begin to write in Hindi.
Hindi you can learn in a very short time.
BAPU
C HARU P ROBHA DEVI
R AJBARI [BENGAL]
From a photostat: G. N. 8701

4. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
[AS AT] S ABARMATI, 1

April 29, 1931
I have had so many letters from you but I have seemingly
neglected you. The fact is I have had no time. Karachi washed me out
completely. The fatigue has not yet left me entirely. I am obliged to
sleep two or three times during the day so as to keep me fresh for
work that I must do.
I hope your sister is better if not completely restored. Anyway I
am glad you are by her side. Please give my love to her.
You have taken it for granted that I am going to London. I am
not at all sure and I am certainly not going if there , is no HinduMuslim solution. There is no immediate prospect. And then the
Settlement itself runs the risk of being broken to pieces in Gujarat. Of
course I am making every endeavour to see that it is honoured by the
officials here. But it is an uphill fight and you know how tender the
2

1
Gandhiji was at Borsad up to May 11 when he left for Simla. This address was
given in this and in other letters for convenience of reply.
2
Written from the United States and England

2

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

officials are over revenue matters. If I do come and if I have the
choice, I would like to accept Muriel Lester’s invitation. If however
you think that it would be better not to do so and to occupy
Ghanshyam Das’s hostel you will please see her.
And now for the Transvaal question. It is becoming more and
more difficult day after day. Unless India comes to her own in the
near future, I see no prospect of improvement in the situation. Of
course the resident Indian population will somehow drag on its
existence there. They have sufficient resourcefulness but it would be
living from hand to mouth. However we must do all we can. Yours I
know is just now the largest share. I have become almost incapacitated
for that work. But when we meet we must discuss the situation and I
might be able to find out some effective method of dealing with it.
I hope yor are getting your copy of Young India. This letter is
merely a supplement to that weekly letter.
C. F. A NDREWS, E SQ.
From a photostat: S. N. 17024

5. LETTER TO C. VIJAYARAGHAVACHARIAR
BORSAD,

April 29, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

Ghanshyam Das Birla asks me to write to you if it is only a few
lines. I have failed because up to last week I had practically ceased to
deal with voluminous correspondence that comes daily. Pyarelal and
Mahadev dealt with it as they liked and I knew that in that pressure
you did not expect anything from me. And now that I have a few
moments to dictate some letters what shall I say to you? Why do you
think that because you had no acknowledgments, your wires and
letters were not considered? They were. But the unfortunate fact is that
your suggestion could not be accepted. The legality of the convictions 1 was discussed threadbare by jurists like Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru
with the Viceroy and you know what great influence he had with him.
But it was all of no avail. The Congress therefore had to take up the
only attitude that was open to it. I would ask you please therefore not
to be sensitive. Remember that we have a new generation of men and
women dominating the Congress. They brush aside legal forms. They
1

Of Bhagat Singh, Sukhdev and Rajguru

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

3

have found by experience how powerless these forms have proved for
advancing freedom and they have by bitter experience realized how
powerful they have been for curbing freedom. Why will you not
therefore be satisfied with blessing these young men and women
knowing that they are, on the whole, on the right track[?] This of
course does not mean that you should not continue to give the
Congress and especially me the benefit of your advice. But that you
should do without expectation of its being always followed. I hope, in
spite of old age creeping on you, you are well and able to follow the
vast changes that are taking place in the country.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. C. V IJAYARAGHAVACHARIAR
THE ARAMA, S ALEM
Copy to Sjt. Ghanshyam Das Birla
From a photostat: S. N. 17022

6. LETTER TO R. B. GREGG
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

April 29, 1931
MY DEAR GOVIND,

I have your letter and I read your letter to Mira. I quite
understand and appreciate all the anxiety shown by you in your letter
to her. I do not know that I shall be going to London at all and I shall
certainly not go if the way is not clear for me to deliver my message.
That it is not likely to be accepted just now I have realized all along.
But had the Congress not accepted the offer to discuss terms, the
Congress would have put itself in the wrong. As it is we are safe either
way. It will be great, good and grand if peace can be made permanent
through negotiation. I shall therefore leave no stone unturned to reach
that state but it will be equally good and grand if the negotiations
proved fruitless. Then India will be put upon her mettle and will have
to show her capacity for further suffering. There is no question of my
being invited to parties, feted and lionized. I can eat nothing and
thank God my Ioin-cloth will protect me from being exhibited as a
specimen in Barnum’s show. If therefore I go to London I go for
solid business and to drink in the deep affection of chosen friends
there. I refuse to speculate. I would go where the light leads me in the
fullest faith that all will be well if I follow it.
4

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Do not believe the rumours about my intended visit to America.
Much as I should like to visit that great country I know that my time is
not yet and I do not want to come as a nine day’s wonder.
Love to you and Radha.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
R. B. GREGG, E SQ.
543 BOYLSTON S T.
BOSTON, M ASSACHUSETS
From a photostat: G. N. 4663; also S. N. 17023

7. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
BORSAD,

April 29, 1931
CHI. JAMNADAS,

How is it that you do not write to me at all? I cannot write to
you, but I do think about you. What is your present state of mind?
How are Father and Mother? 'How is the school? Write to me and
describe some of your experiences in jail. What kind of person is the
new ruler? Ask Purshottam to write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 9291. Courtesy: Jamnadas Gandhi

8. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
BORSAD,

April 29, 1931
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

I have gone through your letter of 19th February 1931, the
budget of the Magan spinning-wheel and the khadi scheme. My
desire of setting up an ashram in Almora still persists. I believe we can
pay upto Rs. 15,000/- if we get a good house. Write to me if you come
across a good place at a reasonable price. I may like to buy it.
I would certainly need a person to run this ashram. At present, I
have only you in mind. You must decide to stay there. Finding fault
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

5

with others is a great sin and leads to self-deception. One should not
vie with others. You should utilize whatever you have received as your
share and derive pleasure out of it.
I have not received your.... 1 If it is in the Ashram, I will have it
sent to me. Many improvements have been made in “my” spinning-wheel. Let there be more and call for the sample then. Two
persons are behind it—Laskshmidas and Keshu.
I find your budget for the Magan spinning-wheel all right. Draw
that much money if Chhaganlal and Narandas sanction it. Even if they
do not, send me your spinning-wheel if you want to. I will try to learn
from Padma or anyone who knows how to ply it.
Your khadi scheme is no doubt impracticable. Its conditions are
very difficult. Give it up for the time being. Do whatever you can by
raising men and money there. These are my views. I am sending this
letter to Chhaganlal. He will send it to you after reading it. Let me
know if he has made any changes.
Today 1 am in Borsad. Who knows about tomorrow?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original S.N. 32974

9. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
April 29, 1931
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

Now for the last eight days or so, I am able to write a few letters.
That is to say, I have that much time, mainly after the morning
prayers. That is true of today also. I can say that my health on the
whole is good. I do not have any after-effects of fever now. Whatever
after-effect I had, was from exhaustion. Even now I need rest. I can
take that while working and I am doing that.
I have your letter. I have your earlier one also. It is good news
that both of you are keeping well. I am happy that you have got the
work of your liking. I do not at all like . . .2 Vijapur. He has not even
thought about it. I feel like writing to Diwan directly. Do you think it
1
2

6

A word here is illegible in the source.
A few words here are illegible in the source.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

is necessary? The owner of the neighbouring land died but his heirs
would be there. Find out.
I have come to Borsad as there is a danger of Government
reprisal here. With me are Ba, Mirabehn, Mahadev, Pyarelal and a
young man from Utkal. We will have to stay here for a few days. I will
decide after that. I will have to go either to Mahabaleshwar or Simla or
Nainital. 1 I do not foresee my going to Europe.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32868

10. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
BORSAD,

April 29, 1931
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I have your two letters. I send you a copy of the letter 2 I have
written to Vijayaraghavachariji.
What shall I write about the Hindu-Muslim problem? The
Nawab of Bhopal is doing something. Whenever you have an opportunity of rendering service to a Muslim you should do so. It does not
mean financial assistance. Financial assistance of course has to be
rendered in the case of a deserving but poor Mussalman. And it is also
our duty to try and remove the rowdyism among Hindus. The atrocities committed by Hindus in Cawnpore and Kashi do not help the
Hindu religion, but undoubtedly harm it.
I have as yet no idea whether I am to go to England or not. The
situation here is rather serious.
Do go to America. It will certainly do some good.
Do whatever is possible for the boycott of foreign cloth.
I am well.
BAPU
From Hindi: C. W. 7885. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

1

Gandhiji went to Simla on May 13 and thereafter to Nainital on May 18,

2

Vide “Letter to C. Vijayaraghavachariar”, 29-4-1931

1931.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

7

11. THE LOIN-CLOTH
A critic has fallen foul of my remark made before the meeting
of the Federation of Chambers of Commerce at Delhi that the Indian
civilization must not be allowed to be wiped out by the inroads from
the West. The critic has confused Indian civilization with the loin-cloth
and then condemned it.
Mr. Churchill has been kind enough gratuitously to advertise
my loin-cloth to the whole world. It has therefore become the fashion
to laugh at it as the said critic has done. Let me then explain what it
means.
In 1921 Maulana Mahomed Ali was arrested at Waltair whilst he
and I were going on a tour to the South. 1 He was torn from Begum
Mahomed Ali who was travelling with us. I was deeply moved, she
bore the separation bravely and attended meetings in Madras. I left
her at Madras and went as far as Madura. On the way I saw in our
compart-ment crowds that were wholly unconcerned with what had
happened. Almost without exception they were bedecked in foreign
fineries. I entered into conversation with some of them and pleaded
for khadi. For I had no other way open to me to secure the release of
the Ali Brothers save through khadi. They shook their heads as they
said, “We are too poor to buy khadi and it is so dear.” I realized the
substratum of truth behind the remark. I had my vest, cap, and full
dhoti on. When these uttered only partial truth, the millions of compulsory naked men, save for their langoti four inches wide and nearly
as many feet long, gave through their bare limbs the naked truth.
What effective answer could I give them, if it was not to divest myself
of every inch of clothing I decently could and thus to a still greater
extent bring myself in a line with the ill-clad masses? And this I did
the very next morning after the Madura meeting?2
Here then there is no question of loin-cloth civilization. The
adoption of the loin-cloth was for me a sheer necessity. But in so far
as the loin-cloth also spells simplicity let it represent Indian civilization. It is a mingling of the cultures represented by the different faiths
and influenced by the geographic and other environment in which the
cultures have met. Thus Islamic culture is not the same in Arabia,
Turkey, Egypt and India but it is itself influenced by the conditions of
1
2

8

Vide “Message to Bomba Citizens”, 14-9-1921
Held on September 22, 1921; vide
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the respective countries. Indian cult-ure is therefore Indian. It is
neither Hindu, Islamic nor any other, wh-olly. It is a fusion of all and
essentially Eastern. I had in mind that cu-lture. And every one who
called himself or herself an Indian is bound to treasure that culture, be
its trustee and resist any attack upon it.
European civilization is no doubt suited for the Europeans but it
will mean ruin for India, if we endeavour to copy it. This is not to say
that we may not adopt and assimilate whatever may be good and
capable of assimilation by us as it does not also mean that even the
Europeans will not have to part with whatever evil might have crept
into it. The incessant search for material comforts and their multiplication is such an evil, and I make bold to say that the Europeans
themselves will have to remodel their outlook, if they are not to perish
under the weight of the comforts to which they are becoming slaves. It
may be that my reading is wrong, but I know that for India to run
after the Golden Fleece is to court certain death. Let us engrave on
our hearts the motto of a Western philosopher, “Plain living and high
thinking”. Today it is certain that the millions cannot have high living
and we the few who profess to do the thinking for the masses run the
risk, in a vain search after high living, of missing high thinking.
Young India, 30-4-1931

12. HE LIVES BY DYING
Sjt. G. V. Ketkar writes of an example of great bravery which is
worthy of record:
Sjt. Purushottam, who was popularly known as Bapu Gayadhani, was a
young worker of Nasik. For the past few years he was working as assistant
Secretary of the Gulalwadi public gymnasium of Nasik. He was also
occasionally taking part in Congress and swadeshi propaganda. On the 4th of
April a house in Nasik caught fire. Bapu Gayadhani took leading part in the
work of quenching the fire. On learning that there were children in the house
he rushed in without caring for consequences and rescued all the children. He
re-entered the house to save the cattle also. Unfortunately the fire had spread
all over the house and burning beam crashed over his head. He was badly burnt
and bruised all over his body and was taken to the civil hospital where he
succumbed to his injuries on the 11th instant.”
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

9

His parents, if they are alive, should be proud of their brave son.
Bapu Gayadhani lives through his glorious death.
Young India, 30-4-1931

13. THE GUJARAT FARMER
“Give a dog a bad name and hang him.” Say that the Gujarat
farmer is contumacious and sell him out. In a Press interview1 I said
some days ago that it was unfortunate that Mr. Benn was misled into
saying that the Gujarat farmer was not playing the game; in other
words, he was not paying up. When the suggestion was first made I
was startled, for I had faith that the Gujarat farmer though hit hard
would carry out the terms of the Settlement to the full extent of his
ability. The Settlement expects nothing more.
The complaint made to me in Delhi was that whereas large sums
were collected in Bardoli and Valod before 28th February, only Rs.
3,212 were collected during the fortnight ending 15th March. The
implication was that since the Settlement very little was paid.
Now, the Settlement was announced on 7th March. Sardar
Vallabhbhai and I reached Bardoli on 14th March. It is clear that
nothing could be expected before we arrived in Bardoli and explained
the position to the farmers and they could return to their homes. Here,
however, are the figures of payment:
Revenue Collections in Bardoli and Valod
DATE

Collections before
15-3-31
On 16th March
17th,,
18th,,
19th,,
20th,,
23rd,,
24th,,
25th,,
26th,,
27th,,
1

10

BARDOLI

VALOD

Rs. 2,500-0-0
..
200-0-0
400-0-0
200-0-0
..
500-0-0
1,700-0-0
800-0-0
1,000-0-0
1,000-0-0

Rs. 20,000—0-0
..
..
136—0-0
228—0-0
379—0-0
1,114—0-0
364—0-0
..
117—0-0

Vide “Interview to the Press”, 18-4-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

30th ,,
31st
,,
1st April

2,000-0-0
1,500-0-0
4,000-0-0

DATE
VALOD
2nd April
7th
,,
8th
,,
9th
,,
10th ,,
11th ,,
13th ,,
14th ,,
15th ,,
16th ,,
17th ,,
18th ,,
20th ,,
21st
,,
22nd ,,
23rd ,,
24th ,,
25th ,,
26th ,,

2,229—0-0
1,949—0-0
1,361—0-0

B ARDOLI
Rs. 2,000-0-0
10,000-0-0
900-0-0
2,200-0-0
5,500-0-0
6,800-0-0
20,000-0-0
6,500-0-0
10,028-0-0
11,446-0-0
7,622-0-0
9,981-0-0
11,518-0-0
7,365-0-0
6,162-0-0
4,456-0-0
9,000-0-0
7,129-0-0
..

Rs. 1,208—0-0
1,829—0-0
2,246—0-0
2,429—0-0
1,379—0-0
1,700—2-3
6,932–11-9
1,455–15-9
1,011–12-7
2,791—5-4
3,736—0-0
5,545–14-0
6,349–11-0
1,856–11-0
3,421—6-6
1,090—4-0
4,006–10-7
1,162—3-5
5,500—0-0

1,54,407-0-0
83,528-12-2
I claim that the Bardoli farmers have done exceedingly well and
this in spite of the fact that the forfeited lands had not yet been
returned, that some of these had even been sold, that the old Patels and
Talatis had not been reinstated, that all the prisoners had not been
released and that prosecutions against them were still pending.
But here I must draw the curtain. I may say that great difficulty
is being experienced in establishing friendly touch with the local
officials. The result is that many things that should have long ago
been done on behalf of the Government are still not done and though
there is no unwil-lingness to pay, threats of coercive measures are kept
hanging like Damo-cles’s word over the heads of the people. The
process has begun with Kaira. They do not seem to realize that there is
peace now, provisial though it is, between the people and the
Government and that efforts are being made to make enduring what is
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

11

today only temporary and provisional.
The difficulties in the way are enormous. But I have pledged
my word to Lord Irwin that so far as it is humanly possible, I shall
prevent the Truce from breaking. The Settlement has been called a
gentleman’s agreement. I know that Lord Irwin was sincerely anxious
to see that it was fully carried out by the Government’s agents as he
testified more than once that I was to see it being as fully carried out
by Congressmen.
It has hurt me to take the public into confidence even to the
extent I have done. But I feel that I can no longer suppress the fact
that there are ominous signs on the horizon. A satyagrahi has no
weapon at his disposal but that of public opinion and suffering. Let
the public read no more into this article than the natural meaning the
written word conveys. I shall hope and pray that next week I may be
able to report that the threatenig cloud has lifted.
Young India, 30-4-1931

14. OUR DUTY TO THE VILLAGERS
The intensive political struggle of last year brought out
prominently the importance of foreign-cloth boycott in the fight for
national freedom. That the boycott programme has been in a measure
effective, is evidenced by the fall in the import of foreign cloth. We
have reason for satisfaction in the results achieved, but let us not in
our satisfaction at the measure of success gained, forget the true purpose and implications of the boycott programme. Let us remember
that our nation lives in the millions of village homes and the true and
primary aim of the boycott programme will be missed if the boycott is
not worked in such a way that the benefits accrue pre-eminently to the
villagers. If it is to benefit them it can only be by the nation according
to khadi a position above all other indigenous cloth.
In order to do this it is necessary for us to revise our taste. We
must take to coarse, thick khadi. The cotton grown in India is mostly
short stapled and can yield only low count yarn. The spinners who
have been spinning generally only for themselves or the neighbourhood are accustomed in most of the areas only to the spinning of
coarse yarn and it is difficult therefore at once to raise the count of
yarn spun. This is the case with practically the whole of North India.
In the Punjab, Rajasthan, U. P., Bihar, and Bengal, where lakhs of
12

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

unemployed or partlaily employed charkhas exist, only thich khadi is
being woven. A limited quantity of fine and medium khadi is available in the South, but even there the largest quantity is only made of
low count yarn. The activities under the auspices of the All-India
Spinners’ Association, much as they have grown, have not touched
even a tenth of the known and definitely ascertained facilities for
production in these provinces. There are practicially no limits to the
possibilities of thick khadi production and if only the nation can give
its reasoned preference to thick khadi, it can to a very large extent
take the place till now occupied by foreign cloth and the fruits of the
national programme will go to benefit the vast majority of the population of the country and not merely the moneyed few.
This general plea for khadi from the point of view of the boycott is further strengthened by one peculiar feature of the economic
situation of the country in the current year and the year that is past.
The abnormally low prices of cotton and indeed of all agricultural
produce, have caused great distress in the villages. The prices prevailing do not, in many cases, fully meet even the cultivation and other
expenses. The smaller cultivators of cotton, therefore, have sought to
earn something more on their cotton by plying one or two spinning
wheels in their homes. The cultivators of other agricultural produce
have also similarly sought to add to their scanty income by spinning.
The result is that in many parts of the country spinners from
surrounding villages in great numbers flock to the nearest khadi
depots offering the yarn for sale. The output of hand-spun yarn even
before last year was very much more than what the existing depots
could manage. But now the position has become more difficult still.
With their very limited capital resources the depots are unable to take
in all the yarn and have therefore to turn away many of the spinners.
If the demand for khadi can be increased the consequent increased
turn-over may enable the depots to afford a greater amount of relief
to the spinners. More private capital may also flow into khadi, as to
some extent it did last year. Both from the general viewpoint of the
boycott, therefore, as well as the affording of immediate relief for
present distress the duty of the country to give preference to khadi is
obvious.
If large numbers of people. even if they feel it difficult to wear a
khadi dhoti or sari because of its heaviness, choose only khadi for
their other requirements—towels, shirting, coating, and bed sheets,
carpets, and the like—it will become possible not merely to absorb all
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

13

the hand-spun yarn that is produced today but also many times the
present output. It requires only a proper exercise of imagination to
realize all the possibilities. And if we would adapt our dress to the
climatic requirements and the resources of villagers, we would discard
the many articles, reduce the size of the dhoti or sari, change the
turban for the cap and in the bargain secure greater comfort and
greater cleanliness, not to speak of the great reduction in the cost of
clothes.
Young India, 30-4-1931

15. WHAT IS THE TRUTH?
Sjt. S. D. Nadkarni of Karwar writes a letter from which I take
the following:
I have just noticed that in a letter addressed to you and already published
in the Press Mr. Mushir Hussain Kidwai, one of the leaders of the ‘All-Parties
Muslim Conference’, referring to the minority problem in Egypt, says: ‘In my
opinion, the attitude of the Hindus here should be what Zaglul’s was in Egypt,
i.e., they should sign blindfolded the demands of the minority. . . .’
Without concerning myself here with any other statement made by Mr.
Kidwai in his letter to you, I should like to draw your attention to the true fact
about the one above, where a parallel is sought to be drawn from Egyptian
politics. The enclosed excerpt from a leading article in the Servant of India of
August 15, 1929, whose writer had to deal with a similar statement made about
that time by Sir Ibrahim Rahimatoola, will show you how the truth about
affairs in Egypt (where the Muslims are the majority, and the native Christians
called Copts are the minority) is just the opposite of what your correspondent
Mr. Kidwai would have you believe.
Every single statement in the excerpt, I am sure, can be vouched for by
reference to any work on contemporary history or any standard work of
reference.

From the excerpt referred to by Sjt. Nadkarni, the following
relevent parts are taken:
Indeed Sir Ibrahim seems to have misread history. Look, for instance, at
what he says about Egypt. In pleading for a generous treatment to be meted out
by the majority community to minority communities, he cites the example of
what Saad Pasha Zaglul did to the Christians in Egypt. He appears to think that
Zaglul’s sensitive regard for the rights and interests of the Copts persuaded
the latter to accept the rule of the Moslems. The facts, however, are just the

14

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

contrary. It is the throwing in by the Copts of their lot unreservedly with the
nationalists in Egypt that has persuaded the Muslims to treat them so liberally
as they have done. The Copts were not entirely free from persecution before.
The improvement was solely due to the fact that they were not only not hostile
or indifferent to the national campaign for freedom, but took a very prominent
part in the Wafd. This was a very wise policy for the Coptic community ot
follow, to which they owe the inclusion of Copts in the Ministry.

I give the extract for what it is worth. I have verified neither the
statement made in the extract nor the one to which it purports to be an
answer. Nor am I interested in it except for the sake of truth.
As a satyagrahi I believe in the absolute efficacy of full
surrender. Numerically Hindus happen to be the major community.
Withour reference therefore to what the Egyptian majority did they
may give to the minorities what they may want. But even if the Hindus
were in a minority, as a satyagrahi and Hindu I should say that the
Hindus would lose nothing in the long run by full surrender.
To this argument a retort has thoughtlessly been made, ‘Why
then do you not advise India to surrender to the English? Give them
the domination they want and be happy.’ The hasty retort ignores the
vital fact that I have not advised surrender to the baynet. In the code
of the satyagrahi there is no such thing as surrender to brute force. Or
the surrender then is the surrender of suffering and not to the will of
the wielder of the bayonet. A satyagrahi’s surrender has to come out
of his strength, not out of weakness. The surrender advised by me is
not of honour but of earthly goods. There is no loss of honour in
surrendering seats and positions of emoluments. There is loss of
honour in haggling about them. Let the Englishmen give up the
bayonet and live in our midst as simple friends and I should plead for
them. The law of surrender and suffering is a universal law admitting
of no exceptions.
Young India, 30-4-1931

16. LETTER TO PADMA
BORSAD,

April 30, 1931
CHI. PADMA,

I got your letter. I had certainly not forgtten you. But I was
helpless. I am glad that you are trying to learn verses from the Gita by
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

15

heart. How many rounds do you spin in an hour on the Magan
spinning-wheel? For how many hours at a stretch can you spin?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati original : G.N. 6118

17. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
BORSAD,

April 30, 1931
CHI. MANGALA,

I have your letter. I would certainly like to write to everyone if I
had even a moment’s leisure. True, I get a little time here. I wrote to
Durga because Anandi had written that she wanted a letter from me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 11093. courtesy: Pushpa Naik

18. INTERVIEW TO “FOX MOVIETONE NEWS”
BORSAD,

[April 30, 1931 ] 1
The following is the full text of the interview intended for the Talkie that the
Fox Movietone News and the Associated Press of America had with Mahatma Gandhi at
Borsad. The copy has been corrected by Gandhiji before releasing for publication,
says The Bombay Chronicle.
Mr. Gandhi prefixed the interview with the following remarks:

I do not like this kind of thing, but I shall reconcile myself to it, if not
more than a few minutes have to be given: Although I know this sort
of enterprise will advertise you, which is your primary object, I know
also that it will serve to advertise the cause which I represent—India’s
independence. I do not discount the value of propaganda. I have been
described as the greatest propagandist in the world. I may deserve the
compliment. But my propaganda is unlike the ordinary. It is that of
truth which is self-propagating. Truth abhors artificiality.
You will therefore excuse me for declining to pose for you from
which, apart from the reason I have given above, I am debarred by a
solemn vow I made in 1905.
1

16

From The Hindu, 1-5-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

He therefore declined to give a sitting in a suitable courtyard. The interview
took place in his room.
Q.

Mr. Gandhi, Fox Movietone News and the Associated Press of America,

which combined, reach an audience of several hundred million people throughour the
world, have sent us their representatives across the Seven Seas from New York to
India to see if you wil be good enough to give the American people, through the
medium of Fox Movietone News, a message of greeting and friendship. As you
probably know, there is a great deal of interest and sympathy in the United States for
India’s struggle for independence, because America itself had a similar struggle for
liberation 150 years ago.
A.
I appreciate all the interest and sympathy America has
shown in our struggle, and I hope we shall be able to retain the
friendship and goodwill of the American people to the end of our
struggle.
Q.

When do you expect to visit America?

Much as I should like to visit your country, I have absolutely no notion about it except that I should not like to visit America
until the present struggle for India’s freedom has proved demonstrably successful.
A.

When do you expect to leave for London for the second Round Table
Conference?

About this also, I have no idea, except that I don’t expect to go
to London unless the Hindu-Muslim communal question is satisfactorily solved. Of course, if there should be a break in the present
Truce, I will not go to London at all.
Have you given Lord Irwin any written message for the British Prime
Minister?

It is wholly wrong to say I gave Lord Irwin any such message
for Mr. MacDonald.
Do you expect England will grant all your demands at the second Round Table
Conference?

It is more than I can say.
But you are really hopeful England will this time grant your demands?

All I can say is I am an optimist.
If England does not give you what you want, what course of action will you
follow?

Of course, Civil Disobedience and all other phases of satyagraha, (obedience to the principles of truth) are always at our dispoVOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

17

sal. But Whether we shall resort to these weapons immediately, or what
other steps we shall take, it is not possible to say offhand at present.
Are you prepared to go back to jail if England refuses to grant your demands?

I am always ready to go to jail in the cause of India’s freedom.
Are you willing to die in such a cause?

That is a bad question.
If England should accede to your demands, do you intend to have complete
prohibition in the new Indian State?

Yes, I expect to see absolute prohibition enforced in the new
Indian State.
Do you intend to abolish child-marriages when the new Indian State is
established?

I should very much like to see child-marriages abolished even
before that time.
Do you expect in the new Indian State to exterminate the present caste system
which makes social outcastes of India’s so-called sixty million “untouchables”?

Most decidedly.
Do you intend to abolish the present system of Indian widows living lives of
strict seclusion and celibacy?

There is nothing now to prevent widows from remarrying if they
so wish. It is likewise wholly wrong to say, or to suggest, that Indian
widows in general live in seclusion.
I refer to the system of widows living in purdah.

The system of purdah is in fact confined to a very small
number of the middle-class people, and that too not over the whole of
India.
In the new Indian State, do you expect there will be complete communal social
unity and harmony between Hindus and Muslims?

I certainly look forward to seeing complete social harmony and
unity established between these two great branches of the Indian
family in the new State.
If the King of England invites you to dinner at Buckingham Palace when you
attend the second Round Table Conference, will you dress in native Indian attire or
will you appear in European dress?

It would be a discourtesy to the King for me to appear in any
dress other than my customary Indian apparel. If the weather permits,
I shall dress in England exactly as I do in India, that is, in loin-cloth.
18

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Mr. Gandhi, you have frequently said that you number among the British
people some of your best friends and partisans. Will you be kind enough to give a
brief message of greeting to those friends and other members of the great British
public, through British Movietone News, which reaches a vast audience throughout the
British Empire?

I am glad to be able to say that the circle of my British friends is
increasing. It could not be otherwise, as the present satyagraha
movement, however much it may be mixed with dress, is nothing but a
movement for promoting the establishment of goodwill with those
against whom we seem to be fighting. Therefore, I have no misgivings
as to the ultimate result.
Will you give to the world a new Decalogue, or a new Ten Commandments in
the light of present-day needs?

That is too big an order.
The Hindu, 5-5-1931

19. TELEGRAM TO H. W. EMERSON
BORSAD,

May 1, 1931
MR. E MERSON
HOME S ECRETARY
S IMLA
I OBSERVE THERE IS INSPIRED AGITATION AGAINST ABDUL GAFFAR KHAN
OF CHARSADDA. HE LEFT ON ME AT KARACHI IMPRESSION FOR BEING
QUITE SINCERE IN HIS PROFESSIONS OF NON-VIOLENCE. IF THERE ARE
COMPLAINTS AGAINST HIM WOULD LIKE TO HAVE THEM SO AS TO
ENABLE ME APPRO-ACH HIM. BELIEVE HIM AMENABLE REASON. IT
WOULD BE EMBARRASSING IF HE WAS ARRESTED WITHOUT GIVING ME
OPPORTUNITY GETTING EXPLANATION FROM HIM. LORD IRWIN’S WISH
THAT I SHOULD NOT GO TO FRONTIER PROVINCE IS ADDITIONAL CAUSE
ANXIETY FOR ME. FEEL SURE MY PRESENCE THERE MUST HAVE SOBERING
EFFECT. AS TO PUNJAB GOVER-NOR’S SPEECH1 COULD YOU SEND SPEECHES
WRITINGS OR PARTICULARS OF ACTIVITIES HE HAD IN MIND WHEN HE
GAVE PUBLIC WARNING.

GANDHI
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
1

Following the agitation over the execution of Bhagat Singh the Governor of
the Punjab, on April 25, 1931, had issued a warning that the ordinary law about
incitement to violence would in future be vigorously enforced against Congressmen
as well as others.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

19

20. LETTER TO G. N. COLLINS
[May 1, 1931 ] 1
DEAR MR. COLLINS,

I had hoped to be able to write to you about the various cases I
had in mind. But I am sorry I am not yet ready. I write this therefore
purely about Mr. Rajwade’s case.
You told me he was not discharged because he had incited to
violence. I have now got the certified record of the case and the writing on which the case was based. The charge-sheet has ‘committing
an act which is to the prejudice of good order and of public safety
and evading arrest’. There is no violence here.
I have read the writing in the original Marathi. It is an
unvarnished report of the events. So far as I can see, there is not a
trace of incitement to violence in the report. In my opinion, therefore,
the case clearly falls within the Settlement.
If there is any other writing placed before the court you will
please let me have it. If there is nothing more, I hope Mr. Rajwade will
be discharged without delay.
Yours sincerely,
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-C, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

21. LETTER TO LAKSHMINARAYAN GADODIA
BORSAD,

May 1, 1931
BHAI LAKSHMINARAYANJI2 ,

I have your letter. I am grateful to you for the help you
extended to Ramanandji. Have you seen his work?
Give me the news about the foreign-cloth trade.
What is the dispute in the Congress Committee about?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 5617

1
From the addressee’s reply of May 9 on behalf of Home Department
Government of Bombay
2
A noted business man of Delhi

20

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

22. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1
BORSAD,

May 2, 1931
There was no Patel who had not expressed the desire to resume
service and there was no question of giving an assurance of working
faithfully. That assurance was implied in the resumption of service.
Such terms were, at the beginning stages of the settlement, issued to
Patels, and on complaint being made by me, they were withdrawn.
If 25 per cent of forfeited lands has not been returned, because
owners had not paid land revenue, it is a distinct breach of clause 17 B
of the Settlement, because forfeited lands have to be returned unless
there is reasonable ground for supposing that there is any contumacy
on the part of the holder. It is common ground that there is no
question of contumacy in Bardoli or any of the effected districts.
It is wholly wrong to suggest that there is lack of discipline in
any of the Congress camps and whilst I have pressed every one of the
Congress workers to implement the terms of peace as zealously as
they fought during the struggle I have had no occasion to admonish
any of the workers.
On the contrary, it gives me great joy to find complete response
to every one of the instructions given to the workers. I have no
knowledge of any worker in Congress organizations, especially in the
districts of Surat and Kaira on which Vallabhbhai Patel and I are
concentrating attention, having been dismissed for embezzlement of
Congress funds except one unfortunate case.
The Bombay Chronicle, 4-5-1931

23. TELEGRAM TO HARIBHAU UPADHYAYA
BORSAD,

May 2, 1931
HARIBHAU
“TYAGBHUMI”
AJMER
YOUR TELEGRAM. HAVE NO CONFIDENCE ABOUT
UDAIPUR. 2 LET JAMNALALJI OR MALAVIYAJI INTERVENE.

MY

TELEGRAM

GANDHI
From a microfilm : S.N. 17049
1
This was issued to contradict certain reports which had appeared in a Bombay
newspaper.
2
Vide “Letter to Haribhau Upadhyaya”, 6-5-1931.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

21

24. LETTER TO MANAGER, OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS,
BOMBAY
BORSAD,

May 2, 1931
DEAR SIR,

I thank you for your letter. I do not know how far Mr.
Andrews’s volumes1 would be affected by your suggestion. Personally
I have no objection to your publishing a selection. of extracts. You
perhaps know more than I do about the first difficulty. So far as the
proposed book is concerned I would like you to expand your suggestion so as to enable me to give it fuller consideration.
Yours faithfully,

M. K. GANDHI
THE MANAGER
OXFORD UNIVERSITY P RESS
BOMBAY
From a photostat : G.N. 5685

25. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
BORSAD,

May 2, 1931
MY DEAR KUMARAPPA,

I quite agree with you that Mr. Wadia2 should have some work
given to him. Here is another letter also for your consideration. I hope
your work is making steady progress. I would like your report to be a
text book on the subject.3
BAPU

Encl. 1
S YT. J. C. K UMARAPPA
C ONVENER, C ONGRESS S ELECT C OMMITTEE
ON INDO-BRITISH F INANCIAL S ETTLEMENT
65 E SPLANADE R OAD, B OMBAY
From a photostat : G.N. 10093

1

Mahatma Gandhi’s Ideas (1929) and Mahatma Gandhi : His Own Story (1930)
Prof. P. A. Wadia
3
Vide also “Bahadurji Committee’s Report”, 23-7-1931.
2

22

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

26. LETTER TO SAILENDRA NATH GHOSE 1
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 2, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I do indeed know what a life of exile means
both from my own experience and that of others. I admit that my own
experience has not the same value as yours for the simple reason that
mine was a self-imposed exile but I can easily make it a rule of three
and imagine that if my self-imposed exile meant much to me how
much more must enforced exile be to friends like you. If things shape
themsel-ves properly, exiles won’t have to remain away at the outside
beyond a year. As for my rumoured visit, there is nothing in it and
therefore we need not discuss it any further. I must not visit America
till the experiment here has become a proved success.
Yours sincerely,

S AILENDRA NATH GHOSE, E SQ.
31 UNION S QUARE, N EW YORK C ITY
From a photostat : S.N. 17046

27. LETTER TO MARTIN C. MILLER
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 2, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter for which I thank you. In reply to your
question I can say that I have profited much by a prayerful reading of
the Sermon on the Mount. I regard Jesus to have been one of the
greatest teachers of the world. I do not believe in his exclusive
divinity.
Yours sincerely,

MARTIN C. M ILLER, E SQ.
THE C LEVELAND GRAPHITE BRONZE C O.
C LEVELAND (U.S.A.)
From a photostat : S.N. 17047

1

Ghose was President of the Indian National Congress of America,
New York city
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

23

28. LETTER TO UPTON CLOSE
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 2, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your two letters, the last one dated 8th April. My visit to
America must still remain a rumour and your anticipation of what is
likely to happen if I come to America makes me still more nervous.
At the present moment therefore I must not think of even tentatively
discussing arrangements about an event which is not likely to happen
in the near future.
Yours sincerely,

UPTON C LOSE, E SQ.
NEW YORK C ITY (U.S.A.)
From a photostat : S.N. 17048

29. LETTER TO KARAMCHANDANI
BORSAD,

May 2, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter 1 . I share your feelings about the Garhwali
prisoners and if I can get them discharged today I should do so. I
need not therefore argue about our views. But I can say broadly that
any one whose conscience tells him to disobey certain instructions or
orders is certainly at liberty to do so, but is also expected to suffer the
consequence. You will excuse the delay in replying to your letter.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. K ARAMCHANDANI
KARACHI
From a microfilm : S.N. 17050

1

In this the addressee had pleaded the case of the Garhwali soldiers who had
disobeyed orders and had been sentenced to various terms of imprisonment.

24

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

30. LETTER TO LALJI PARMAR
May 2, 1931
CHI. LALJI,

I got your letter. Be patient. I am inquiring into the matter. If
you wish, you may come over here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3291

31. LETTER TO GULAM RASUL QURESHI
BORSAD,

May 2, 1931
CHI. QURESHI,

I had both your letters. I wanted detailed news about Imam
Saheb’s health. It is good you have given it. Follow Dr. Rajabali’s
instructions. It will certainly be good if Imam Saheb goes to
Mussoorie or some such place. If he does, accommodation will be no
problem. But any arrangement Dr. Rajabali makes is bound to be the
best. Our relations with him are such that we may accept any services
from him. Please do keep me informed about Imam Saheb’s health.
Is Amina going on with her Urdu?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 10805. Courtesy: Gulam Rasul Qureshi

32. LETTER TO KISHORELAL MASHRUWALA
May 2, 1931
CHI. KISHORELAL,

How can you be released so soon? If all of us applied what
Tolstoy said the way you want to apply it, we should all be the plight
of the man in the ghee-and-water story. Should a drink addict not
make a resolve to give up drinking? Should one given to pleasures of
the flesh go on with his ways? It only means that one should not
vainly attempt to scale the mountain of one’s cravings. But the resolve
was hardly yours. If at all, it was mine—and Jamnalalji’s. But while
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

25

the resolve was made by us, the blood had to be supplied by you. But
hasn’t the pain now subsided? I must now have a letter from you
every day.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 10719. Courtesy: Gomatibehn Mashruwala

33. A TWENTIETH CENTURY SATI (?)1
I
I hope that the incident as reported in the Press is not true and
that the lady in question died through illness or through accident, not
by suicide. A sati has been described by our ancients, and the
description holds good today, as one who ever fixed in her love and
devotion to her husband signalizes herself by her selfless service
during her husband’s lifetime as well as after, and remains absolutely
chaste in thought, word and deed. Self-immolation at the death of the
husband is not a sign of enlightenment but of gross ignorance as to
the nature of the soul. The soul is immortal, unchangeable and
immanent. It does not perish with the physical body but journeys on
from one mortal frame to another till it completely emancipated itself
from earthly bondage. The truth of it has been attested to by the
experience of countless sages and seers and can be realized by anyone
who may wish to even today. How can suicide be then justified in the
light of these facts?
Again true marriage means not merely union of bodies. It
connotes the union of the sould too. If marriage meant no more than
a physical relationship the bereaved wife shouls be satisfied with a
portrait or a waxen image of her husband. But self-destruction is
worse than futile. It cannot help to restore the dead to life, on the
contrary it only takes away one more from the world of the living.
The ideal that marriage aims at is that of spiritual union through
the physical. The human love that it incarnates in intended to serve as
1

The Gujarati original of this appeared in Navajivan 3-5-1931. This is a
translation by Pyarelal, with the following introductory note : “A lady correspondent
from Ghatkopar having invited Gandhiji to express his opinion on an alleged case of
sati that was recently reported in a Bombay vernacular paper Gandhiji has delivered
himself on the subject in an article in the Navajivan as follows.” Vide also
“Opinion Unchanged”, 17-5-1931.

26

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

a stepping-stone to the divine or universal love. That is why immortal
Mira sang : “God alone is my husband—none else.”
It follows from this that a sati would regard marriage not as a
means of satisfying the animal appetite but as a means of realizing
the ideal of selfless and self-effacing service by completely merging
her individuality in her husband’s. She would prove her satihood not
by mounting the funeral pyre at her husband’s death but she would
prove it with every breath that she breathes from the moment that she
plighted her troth to him at the saptapadi1 ceremony, by her renunciation, sacrifice, self-abnegation and dedication to the service of her
husband, his family and the country. She would shun creature comforts and delights of the senses. She would refuse to be enslaved by
the narrow domestic cares and interests of the family, but would utilize
every opportunity to add to her stock of knowledge and increase her
capacity for service by more and more cultivating renunciation and
self-discipline, and by completely identifying herself with her
husband, learn to indentify herself with the whole world.
Such a sati would refuse to give way to wild grief at the death of
her husband but would ever strive to make her late husband’s ideals
and virtues live again in her actions and thereby win for him the
crown [of] immortality. Knowing that the soul of him whom she
married is not dead but still lives she will never think of remarrying.
The reader will here be perhaps tempted to ask, “The sati that
you have pictured is a being untouched by passion or animal appetite.
She can have no desire for offspring. Why should she marry at all?”
The reply is that in our present-day Hindu society, marriage, in a vast
majority of cases, is not a matter of choice. Again, there are some who
believe that in our ramshackle age marriage is necessary as a shield to
virtue and as an aid to selfrestraint. And as a matter of fact, I
personally know several instances of persons who, though at the time
of the marriage, were not free from animal passion later on became
imbued with the ideal of obsolute chastity and found in their married
life a powerful means for realizing their ideal. I have cited these
instances to show that the ideal of sati that I have depicted is not
merely a counsel of perfection that has no place outside the world of
1

Seven steps

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

27

theory but something that has to be lived up to and realized in this
very matter of fact world of ours.
But I readily concede that the average wife who strives to attain
the ideal of sati will be a mother too. She must therefore add to her
various other qualities mentioned above a knowledge of rearing and
bringing up children so that they might live to be true servants of their
country.
All that I have said about the wife applies equally to the
husband. If the wife has to prove her loyalty and undivided devotion
to her husband so has the husband to prove his allegiance and
devotion to his wife. You cannot have one set of weights and measures
for the one and a different one for the other. Yet we have never heard
of a husband mounting the funeral pyre of his deceased wife. It may
therefore be taken for granted that the practice of the widow
immolating herself at the death of her husband had its origin in
superstitious ignorance and the blind egotism of man. Even if it could
be proved that at one time the practice had a meaning, it can only be
regarded as barbarous in the present age. The wife is not the slave of
the husband but his comrade, otherwise known as his better half, his
colleague and friend. She is a co-sharer with him of equal rights and
of equal duties. Their obligations towards each other and towards the
world must, therefore, be the same and reciprocal.
I therefore regard the alleged self-immolation of this sister as
vain. It certainly cannot be set up as an example to be copied. Don’t I
appreciate at least her courage to die?— I may perhaps be asked. My
reply is ‘no’ in all conscience. Have we not seen even evil-doers
display this sort of courage? Yet no one has ever thought of complimenting them on it. Why should I take upon me the sin of even
unconsciously leading astray some ignorant sister by my injudicious
praise of suicide? Satihood is the acme of purity. This purity cannot
be attained or realized by dying. It can be attained only through
constant striving, constant immolation of the spirit from day to day.
Young India, 21-5-1931

34. NOTES
TO C ORRESPONDENTS1

Letters rain down on me. Even if I am in absolutely good
1

A similar item “To Private and Personal Correspondents,” under “Notes”,
also appeared in Young India, 7-5-1931.

28

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

health, I can neither read all those letters immediately nor can I
reply to them. In my present delicate state of health, it is impossible to
cope with those letters, to attend to the Settlement, to write for
Navajivan and Young India and do other jobs. Hence only a select
unmber of letters are put up to me and from among these I reply
immediately to as many as I can and deal later with the rest. I am not
happy about this situation. I know that my correspondents expect
timely replies. But my helplessness is my defence. My correspondents can help me and my co-workers. They should oblige me by
abiding by the following conditions :
1. They should not write letters unless absolutely necessary.
2. They should not use lead pencils for writing.
3. They should not write long letters.
4. They should not repeat the same arguments again and
again.
5. As far as possible, they should not argue at all.
6. They should write in a beautiful hand.
These rules are simple and all stem from non-violence. My
handwriting is very poor. I have full experience of what difficulties
readers find in deciphering it. To do anything which causes hardship
to others implies violence. Hence everyone can see that bad hand
writing constitutes violence. The same can be said in regard to the
other conditions. The above rules have permanent application and, in
my present state of health, they are doubly relevant. Be that as it may,
if my correspondents receive no replies, they should not conclude that
this is due to lack of civility.
‘THERE IS NO BASIS FOR UNITY’

The second question 1 posed by the same correspondent is as
follows:
There is imperfect reasoning underlying this question.
Distinctions such as those which have been described are there for
other reasons even in countries like England and the United States of
America; despite this there is political unity in those countries.
Moreover, it is only in cities that some of the distinctions mentioned
above are to be found. There are no distinctions in villages. What is
1
Not translated here. The correspondent had pointed out the artificial
separation of Hindus and Muslims in various fields and suggested that these barriers
be broken. For the first question, vide “Power of Ahimsa”, 7-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

29

required is not the so-called unity achieved through schools,
gymkhanas or through games and sports. Unity of hearts is all that is
necessary. If this cannot be had, all else is futile; if this is accomplished, nothing else is necessary.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 3-5-1931

35. LETTER TO COLLECTOR1 , KHEDA DISTRICT
May 3, 1931
It is a common cause between us that the people should pay
revenue to the utmost of their capacity. I know that in defining the
word “capacity” there may be a difference, or there is a difference as
I now see from your letter. During our talk I thought that you agreed
that no one need borrow money in order to pay the revenue dues. I
am carrying out that healthy formula. I know that is has not been
carried out before, and may not be carried out in future. In any case,
for this exceptional year, I think that there is no way our of it, as I
hope to show conclusively in due course. This of course, does not
mean that those who wish to pay by borrowing should be prevented
by me from doing so. Only I could not take it upon me to press them
to do so.2
The Bombay Chronicle, 8-10-1931

36. LETTER TO JAMES T. RUTNAM
BORSAD

May 3, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I am publishing your letter and a brief reply to it in the forth
coming issue of Young India 3 . I hope that the reply will satisfy you
and those friends who had any misgivings about my attitude.
Yours sincerely,

JAMES T. R UTNAM, E SQ.
S T. X AVIER’S
NUWARA ELIYA (CEYLON)
From a microfilm : S.N. 17028
1

Mr. Perry
In reply, the addressee wrote : “I agree with you about borrowing on interest.
We do not exclude arrangements amongst friends or the like.”
3
Vide “Foreign Missionaries Again”, 7-5-1931
2

30

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

37. LETTER TO HARIDAS T. MUZUMDAR
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 3, 1931
1

MY DEAR HARIDAS ,

Your letter of 26th March2 and the snatch from your diary have
come upon me as a surprise. Your certificate could not be worth much
if a cablegram containing a garbled report of my doings or even an
act of mine truthfully reported which you could not understand
should create such a revulsion in you as to undo your previous certificate. Do you see the terrible implication, namely, that your first certificate was based upon just as hasty calculation as your recantation?
But more surprising still is your protestation that your personal
loyalty remained as deep, intense, whole-hearted and unquestioning as
it was a year ago. Do you not see the flat contradiction between this
statement and your latest opinion of me? Surely your loyalty had no
other foundation than your estimate of me and when your estimate
had to be revised your loyalty became baseless. If you have kept
copies of your letters you will understand more fully than I can
convey the implications of your letters. However there is this
consolation for me that I have survived ruder shocks than you have
given.
Yours sincerely,

HARIDAS T. M UZUMDAR, E SQ.
EDITOR, “INDIA TODAY AND TOMORROW”
20 VESEY S TREET, N EW YORK (U.S.A.)
From a photostat : S.N. 17053

1

Dr. Haridas T. Muzumdar, author of Gandhi the Apostle (1923); Gandhi versus
the Empire (1932); Gandhi Triumphant (1939), Mahatma Gandhi : Peaceful
Revolutionary (1952), Mahatma Gandhi : A Prophetic Voice (1963) and The Grammar
of Sociology : Man in society (1966). He visited India during the Lahore Congress,
1929, stayed with Gandhiji at the Sabarmati Ashram during January-March 1930 and
accompanied him on the Dandi March. He was also with Gandhiji during the Round
Table Conference.
2
Not available; the addressee, it would appear, had written a strong letter
accusing Gandhiji of letting down the people by agreeing to attend the Round Table
Conference without securing an imparital inquiry into police brutality.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

31

38. LETTER TO KISHORELAL MASHRUWALA
Sunday, May 3, 1931
CHI. KISHORELAL,

I have your letter. Doctors have divided their work into so
many branches that sometimes they make great mistakes which we
never know about. A specialist in ear diseases does not understand
diseases of the chest, and a throat specialist does not understand
inflammation of the stomach. As a result a number of doctors lay
siege to the same body and make a mess of the patient’s condition. But
on the whole they are honest and so it is better to die at their hands.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 10720. Courtesy: Gomatibehn Mashruwala

39. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
BORSAD,

May 3, 1931
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

I continue to get your letters. My health is all right, but the
programme is uncertain. I have no knowledge as to when and where I
may have to go. The diet consists of milk, dates and any fruit available
locally. I am unable to take more than 1 12 lb. of milk. My weight is
103 lb.
How are you and how is your brother-in-law?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 2389

32

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

40. TELEGRAM TO FRAMROZE B. GARDA
BORSAD,

May 4, 1931
1

S ARDAR F RAMROZE GARDA
NAVSARI
HEAR

POSSESSION

NOT

YET

GIVEN

OWNERS

RESTORED. PREPARATION FOR CULTIVATION
LIKEYOU
NOT

THEREFORE

YET

AMOUNT.
HAVE

YOU

ANY

WIRE

GIVE

WITHDRAWN.
KNOW

COMPLAINTS

OF

LAND

MUST SOON

IMMEDIATE

YOU

KINDLY

BEGIN.

WOULD

POSSESSION.

CASES

TOO

HOPE DELAY NOT DUE NONPAYMENT AGREED
THAT
WOULD

PAYMENT
GLADLY

IS

ASSURED.

INVESTIGATE.

IF

YOU

PLEASE

REPLY.

GANDHI
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-C, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

41. LETTER TO DR. SYED MAHMUD
BORSAD,

May 4, 1931
DEAR DR. MAHMUD,

I was anxiously awaiting your letter. I am thankful you have
absolved me from having to write to Mr. Hasan Imam. 2 Of course I
have been following your movements. I am not going to shower
congratulations till I see some definite shape being given to the work.
If it is to be lasting it must touch the masses. And you will not touch
the masses until you fulfil two conditions :
1. Your programme must appeal to the Mussalman mass
mind. It must therefore be in their interest.
2. You must have an army of workers to give effect to it.
Why do you say I have broken the contract? Have I spoken or
written about the question anything in contravention of the contract? I
could not very well reject Bhopal’s well intentioned advances. And
after all he was to hae sent for you all to discuss the possibilities. Since
our meeting in Bombay, I have heard nothing from him. Nor have I
1
2

Vide “Notes” sub-title Sold Lands”, 7-5-1931
Vide “Letter to Dr. Syed Mahmud”, 19-4-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

33

seen the Big Brother1 save for half an hour in Bombay. Mrs. Naidu
brought him and I greeted him as warmly as before. Beyond this I
have done nothing save liberal praying even as I said to a newspaper
reporter. Of course I saw the Mullaji too at his repuest. Did I do
wrong?
Yes, the old widow’s 2 condition must be pathetic in spite of her
bravery. I suppose you see her daily. Please give her my loving
regards. Is Sarup3 there?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
[PS.]

I may have to go to Simla about 11th instant.
From a photostat : G.N. 5080

42. LETTER TO TAN YUN-SHAN4
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 4, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

You must come again whenever you like.
My message to the Chinese students is : “Know that the deliverance of China is through ahimsa pure and unadulterated.”
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat : G.N. 9673; also The Sino-Indian Journal—Gandhi
Memorial Number, Vol. I, Part II, p. 37

1

Shaukat Ali
Motilal Nehru’s widow
3
Vijayalakshmi Pandit
4
The addressee had met Gandhiji at Bardoli and requested him to bless the
Chinese students with a message. The message “was widely published in almost all
the important Chinese Journals and was appreciated, not only by the students, but by
the whole people”.
2

34

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

43. LETTER TO DALAI LAMA1
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 4, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your gift. I am sorry I cannot understand your
language. My desire and hope is that Tibetans should understand and
follow the secret of the message of ahimsa given by Lord Buddha.
Your friend,

M. K. GANDHI
HIS HIGHNESS THE LAMA
TIBET
From a photostat : G.N. 9674. Also C.W. 6208. Courtesy : Mirabehn

44. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 4, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

There will be one more burden on you. Jamnadas will tell you
about Ratilal2 . When he arrives there, lodge him in the bungalow. If he
gets out of control, there will be no option but to put him in chains.
Call in Dr. Kanuga and Dr. Haribhai. Pay them their fees and do as
they advise. Dr. Haribhai may keep Ratilal in his own hospital or may
get him admitted to the asylum, as he thinks best. It is possible that he
will come round. All the same, it will be necessary to be careful about
1

Tan Yun-Shan had brought a letter from the 13th Dalai Lama of Tibet. It was
written in Tibetan and no one could read it. Gandhiji said that he would acknowledge
the message in Gujarati so that the Dalai Lama might enjoy it without understanding
it. According to Mirabehn’s note this is an English rendering of the Gujarati original
which is not available.
2
Son of Dr. Pranjivan Mehta, who had become demented
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

35

him. See that no knife or other sharp instrument is within his reach at
any time. If necessary, appoint some person to keep watch over him.
It does not matter if you have to engage a person especially for that
and pay him. I don’t wish that you should have to spend much of
your time over this, but you have to accept the responsibility. Perhaps
Ratilal may respond to love. If Champa 1 accompanies him, I don’t
think she will be able to stay with him. If she comes, let her stay in the
Ashram. But she may certainly stay with him if she herself has the
courage to do so.
The second problem is about Lakshmi2 . She has been so
brought up that she will not be happy if she is married to an Antyaja.
Fortunately Maruti wishes to marry her. Read Lakshmidas’s letter and
let me have your opinion. From a moral stand-point, the proposed
step seems to me justified and even necessary. Even then I wish to
have your independent opinion.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./I.

1
2

36

Ratilal’s wife
Dudhabhai’s daughter adopted by Gandhiji
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

45. LETTER TO KISANSINH CHAVDA
BORSAD,

May 4, 1931
BHAI KISANSINH,

I got your letter. I read no new argument in it. All the objections
which you urge have been answered several times in Young India and
Navajivan. All that I can do now is to discuss the question briefly with
you if you come and see me some time. I cannot spare the time for
this before the month of June. I would advise you meanwhile to think
again over what I have been writing.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C. W. 9295. Courtesy : Kisansinh Chavda

46. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
May 4, 1931
CHI. JAMNADAS,

Arrange to deliver the accompanying two letters to the
addressees. I have sent a long telegram to the Doctor and also written
to him. Write to me regularly. It would be good if you write to the
Doctor. I have mentioned you in my letter and telegram to him.
Write to me about Manu after ascertaining the facts. If you have
seen Kelly, write to me about him too.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati : C.W. 9320. Courtesy : Jamnadas Gandhi

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

37

47 LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
BORSAD,

May 4, 1931
CHI. SHARDA,

Can you expect my letter without writing me one yourself?
Right now, all of you can write to me even if I do not write.
Anandi is not here. What are your five classes and who teaches
you?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9900. Courtesy : Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

48. LETTER TO GULAM RASUL QURESHI
BORSAD,

May 4, 1931
CHI. QURESHI,

I have your letter. How did Imam Saheb’s health deteriorate so
suddenly? Was there any change in food? At his age he should eat
only a measured quantity of food however good his deception may
be. Write to me daily.
Is Amina going on with her Urdu?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 10822. Courtesy: Gulam Rasul Qureshi

49. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
Silence Day, May 4, 1931
CHI. LILAVATI,

I have your letter. You are too sensitive. You should not be
angry over what Gangabehn 1 wrote. It is better she expresses herself
instead of keeping her feelings bottled up. Understand her love and
her service. You should continue to work patiently and remain quiet.
Do not get into argument with anyone. Do not brood too much.
1

38

Gangabehn Vaidya
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Reflect over what you read and remain cheerful. Do keep writing to
me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr.
Sushila Nayyar

50. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
BORSAD,

May 4, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

I have taken some time in getting a reply to the various charges
about Bihar of which you were good enough to send me copies. I now
send you Babu Rajendra Prasad’s summary of the enquiry that he
caused to be made into all the allegations. I am not burdening you
with the report itself. I would be pleased to send it to you if you would
care to follow up the summary.
I send you also a copy of the complaints made by Babu Rajendra Prasad with reference to the implementing by the local government of the various clauses of the Settlement. Technically, about the
lawyers, I know that the Government cannot be held responsible. But
there are ways.
Yours sincerely,
H. W. EMERSON , ESQ.
HOME SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
SIMLA

[May 5, 1931]
[PS.]
This was dictated yesterday. Today is my silence day. I have
your kind letter of 2nd instant. By mistake the first Bihar statement
was not given to my typist. I am therefore sending the original. Please
return.
You have said ‘about 11th’ for my coming to Simla. 11th is a
Monday. Will it be enough if I reach Simla on 13th instant? Please
wire the latest date. I want to finish the Kaira affair so far as I am
concerned, if it is at all possible. But, of course, I will interrupt the
work if my early presence is necessary.
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

39

51. LETTER TO FLORENCE ROSENBLATT
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 5, 1931
DEAR YOUNG FRIEND,

I have your good letter. You should possess your soul in
patience. Whatever good you might have seen in my life you can
adopt even being there and it would be as good as seeing me, indeed
much better. What you can do effectively for India is to put in a good
word whenever anybody talks uncharitably about India and her
people and in order to be able to put in that good word with confidence, you have to find time to study the Indian struggle. You can
then speak with authority.
Yours sincerely,

F LORENCE R OSENBLATT
BROOKLYN, N EW YORK (U.S.A.)
From a photostat : S.N. 17029

52. LETTER TO V. T. KRISHNAMACHARYA
BORSAD,

May 5, 1931
DEAR DIWAN SAHEB,

In Vijapur there is an industrial institution called Udyogalaya. I procured through the good office of your predecessor a plot
of ground for founding a centre for spinning and weaving
especially through women and it was registered in the name of a lady
co-worker. She has now retired from that work and so far as she is
concerned the legal right has been transferred to the trustees of the
Satyagraha Ashram. One of the trustees is working in the Udyogalaya.
He has tried to get the land transferred in the name of the trustees of
the Satyagraha Ashram. After waiting a long time the officer
concerned has rejected the application. He has given, so far as I am
aware, no reasons for it. At one time it seemed that by giving an
undertaking that the institution will have nothing to do with politics
there would be no difficulty about the transfer. Then, I believe, there
was a change of officer. Of course, from its very conception according to my own method of work like my activities in other Indian
States, this institution has been kept out of politics altogether. It
remained so during the last struggle. As you may be aware, the
40

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Baroda State has been receiving the help of the All-India Spinners’
Association for village reorganization through the spinning-wheel.
The Vijapur activity is also a kindred activity. Could I trouble you to
interest yourself in this matter and if you are satisfied about the facts
presented by me, could you please order transfer of the land in the
name of the above-mentioned trustees? At the present moment this
land is given by the State for a nominal sum for benevolent purposes.
But I would like to buy it right out if the State has no objection. It was
offered before. I may add that we have buildings on this land which
have cost over Rs. 12,000. Through the institution we are supporting
several poor women of Vijapur by giving them spinning work and we
are supporting a colony of weavers and carders. The institution
engages in no other activity. I am sorry to have to trouble you over a
matter which may appear to be trifling. But it is not so to me as a
guardian of the several interests entrusted to my care.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
V. T. KRISHNAMACHARYA, E SQ.
DIWAN OF BARODA
BARODA
From a photostat : S.N. 17030

53. LETTER TO BOYD TUCKER
BORSAD,

May 5, 1931
MY DEAR BOYD,

I was delighted to have your letter and to find that you were
having a little respite from the heat of India’s plains. Of course there
is no truth in the rumoured visit to America. But as soon as the
rumour went abroad, I got a peremptory cablegram signed by Mr.
Page, Dr. Sherwood Eddy, Rev. Holmes, Dr. Ward and others warning
me against going to America.1 They say emphatically that I would be
exploited if I went there and that I would serve the cause better from a
distance than by appearing in the midst of the people of America. All
this, mind you, in the cablegram. And by this mail I have received a
letter from an unknown American friend who, whilst appreciating my
work and message, pleads with me not go to America. I do feel
1

Vide also “Notes” sub-title A Cry in The Wilderness”, 14-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

41

exactly like these friends. Therefore even if I went to London and
could spare a few weeks I should not care to go in the teeth of these
warnings from friends whose opinion I respect. Would not yours
coincide1 with theirs after further reflection?
Now about London. There is no probability of my going there
so long as the Hindu-Muslim problem remains unsolved. Even if I
went there, whilst I should value your society, I do not know of the use
I could make of your services. Andrews is already there and as you
know he will take possession of me body and soul. I have a letter from
him in which he takes my London visit for granted, has appointed
himself as my chap-rasi, tells me where I should stay. There is again
Henry Polak who was in my office in South Africa for years. Then
there is Muriel Lester. Therefore if you went with me to London you
would not go as Secretary. Then I must not forget Mira. She will of
course be with me. But of course everything is premature. I felt that
you should now all about the appointments should the visit come
forth. I was glad you were with me in Karachi. I was only sorry that I
was not able to have long chats with you. That you continually lost
your things was certainly bad but that would be no disqualification for
taking you with me. I could have much better use for you than to
make you keeper of my belongings.
BOYD TUCKER, ESQ.
C/O POSTMASTER
SRINAGAR (KASHMIR )
From a photostat : S.N. 17031

54. LETTER TO RAJENDRA PRASAD
BORSAD,

May 5, 1931
DEAR RAJENDRABABU,

In order to save time I am dictating this letter. I have sent copy
of your letter addressed to the Secretary, All-India Congress
Committee, as also your two statements to the Government, and I
expect to go to Simla next week where I shall discuss the Bihar affairs
1

42

The source has “Would you not coincide”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

together with the others. I shall therefore write to you after a visit to
Simla. I hope you are keeping good health. How is Brijkishore Babu?
S YT. R AJENDRA P RASAD
S ADAQUAT ASHRAM
DT. P ATNA
From a photostat : S.N. 17032

55. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 5, 1931
This is to write to you about Reginald Reynolds. His address is
Turner’s Court, Benson, Near Oxford. He is disconsolate towards the
Set-tlement. The engagement with the girl whom he was to marry is
broken. His pecuniary condition is bad. My whole heart goes out to
him. I do not think that my reply to his letter in Young India 1 has
given him any satisfaction. I would like him to know that all is well
and that the Settle-ment is not a surrender of principle. I would like
you to go to him, argue out the matter with him and otherwise help
him and draw him out of his seclusion. He is as good as gold and is
very brave. Perhaps all that I have written to you is superfluous and
that you have met him and had already known more about him than I
have told you. But I could not restrain myself and you can sympathize with me having done such things much more often than I do.
Gujarat still absorbs my attention to the exclusion of everything else.
Implementing the Settlement in the teeth of official sullenness,
unwillingness and even opposition is a very difficult business. It tries
even my patience but I hope not to be baffled. The atmosphere is
already somewhat clearer. I expect next week to go to Simla over this
and other matters arising out of the Settlement as also over the Round
Table Conference. We are no nearer Hindu-Muslim solution and till
that barrier is removed there is no question of my going to London.
C. F. A NDREWS, E SQ.
From a photostat : S.N. 17033

1

Vide “An Englishman’s Dilemma”, 16-4-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

43

56. LETTER TO NANIBEHN JHAVERI
BORSAD,

May 5, 1931
1

CHI. NANIBEHN ,

I got your letter. We should be satisfied if you somehow recover
your health. Where is Gangabehn now? How is she?
You have selected a good number of books. Amritlal Maniar’s
books are worth reading.
Pannalal may write to me again and again if his questions have
not been satisfactorily answered.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3112

57. LETTER TO MAHAVIR GIRI
May 5, 1931
CHI. MAHAVIR,

I got your letter. In writing, the case terminations should not be
separated from the stem. The constituent parts of a compound phrase
also should not be written separately. Hence, one should write, not
charan kamal man 2 , but charankamalman. Do you write your daily
diary? Are you learning the Gita by heart?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 6228

58. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
BORSAD,

May 5, 1931
CHI. RAMDAS,

I got your letter. You may by all means go to Almora. But
you will get three hundred rupees only. Ask Manibhai to give the
amount to you and debit it to my account. Show this letter to him. If,
afterwards, you find the amount not enough, write to me. Do not
1
2

44

Wife of Pannalal Jhaveri, manager of the dairy in the Ashram
Literally, ‘at the lotus feet’
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

spend much on warm clothes. There also, it is not so cold in this
season. Moreover, you will get some warm clothing even there. Some
warm thing to cover yourself with will suffice. I may have to go to
Simla next week.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy : Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

59. MESSAGE TO PEOPLE OF BHUTAN1
BORSAD,

May 5, 1931
I am glad to meet you. I hope the people of Bhutan will fully
understand the message of truth and non-violence and act according
to it.
The Bombay Chronicle, 6-5-1931

60. MESSAGE ON KHADI2
BORSAD,

May 5, 1931
People ask me why I am khaddar-mad. There are seven lakhs
of villages. A large number of these villages are living in a condition of semi-starvation. There is no employment for them for
nearly six months in the year. It is necessary to find for them some
supplementary occupation. We must give them an occupation they are
used to. Such an occupation is hand-spinning. If hand-spinning is to
be introduced in the villages, it is but natural that we should be
expected to wear khaddar. Hence it is that I have become khaddarmad.
The Bombay Chronicle, 6-5-1931

1

It was given in Hindi when the brother of the Kind of Bhutan presented
Gandhiji with two small boxes of gold and silver and a few pieces of hand-woven
cloth.
2
Given to an Indian film company first in Hindi and then in English
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

45

61. TELEGRAM TO FRAMROZE B. GARDA1
BORSAD,

May 6, 1931
S ARDAR F RAMROZE GARDA
NAVSARI
RECEIVED

SURPRISING

AGREEMENT.

HAVE

WIRE.

ASKED

DO

YOU

I

UNDERSTAND YOU

NATURE

REPUDIATE

HARASSMENT

CONCRETE

CASES.

GANDHI
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-C, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and

Library

62. TELEGRAM TO SIR COWASJI JEHANGIR
[May 6, 1931] 2
S IR C OWASJI JEHANGIR
NEPEAN S EA R OAD
BOMBAY
SARDAR
VAGUE
SPECIFIC

GARDA
CHARGES

WIRES

PRACTICALLY

REPUDIATING

CONTINUING HARASSMENT. HAVE

INSTANCES. PLOUGHING

SEASON

AGREEMENT

ON

ASKED HIM GIVE

APPROACHING.

GANDHI
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-C, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and

Library

63. LETTER TO HARIBHAU UPADHYAYA
BORSAD,

May 6, 1931
BHAI HARIBHAU,

I get your letters. But I have not yet got your acknowledgement
of the telegram I sent you. 3 You should have sent one. The telegram
only stated that I would not be able to wire to someone in Udaipur as I
knew no one there, and suggested that Malaviyaji or Jamnalal might
do so. You have written to Ram at any rate. That was good. I do not
even know where Manilal is. I had addressed a telegram to him, to
which there has been no reply.
1

In reply to the addressee’s telegram which read : “Sorry nothing can be done
in the matter. Behaviour of people even after negotiations most harassing.”
2
Vide the preceding item
3
Vide “Letter to Haribhau Upadhyaya”, 2-5-1931

46

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You are put in a difficult situation. It is possible that the State
may pay no attention to your complaint. Though Trench1 will not be
able to appreciate the letter which you have written to him, you did
well in writing it. It will do no harm. If the people’s grievance has not
been redressed you should, since you have accepted their leader-ship,
cross the border and court imprisonment. If the peasants remain truly
non-violent, they are bound to win. Of course the question will remain
how far non-violence can be observed in taking possession of
land.What will the people do when the State police come to dispossess
them of the land? Will they oppose them? Will they remain there
squatting? Several questions arise here. I have found that the nonviolence observed in such cases is merely physical. Do what you think
right in the light of the circumstances prevailing there, no matter if
what you believe to be non-violence appears to me violence. We can
do nothing more than act sincerely according to our lights. If
everything was as clear to me as daylight I would not have thrown on
you the responsibility for deciding. From what is happening in the
States, for similar things are happening in the other Indian States too
and in British India, it seems to me that the effect of all that happened
during the last struggle was only temporary and not enduring. That
experiment in non-violence was on a mass scale, but it was not, or did
not remain uniformly pure in quality. Our non-violence was the nonviolence of the helpless. I do not feel unhappy about this. Nothing
more than that was possible. The foregoing criticism has no other aim
but to help us to understand the real facts about the nature of the
struggle.
I understand what you say about Tyagbhumi and also about
advertisements. Do what is possible.
Ramnarayan ought to go somewhere and take complete rest. See
that he gives up work. Perhaps he will have fewer difficulties if he
goes to Almora. Wherever he goes he may be sure that he will get
some opportunity for service.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Immediately after the morning prayer.
From Gujarati : C.W. 6073. Curtesy : Haribhau Upadhyaya
1

Revenue Commissioner of Udaipur State

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

47

64. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
BORSAD,

May 6, 1931
1

MY DEAR BHRRR ,

I have not received your letter sent to the Vidyapith. I suppose it
will come to me in due course. I am delighted that you have had a
successful operation. I hope this will be the last. How long will they
keep you in the hospital? I am in BORSAD up to Monday at least. I
might then have to go to Simla.
I have now got your Vidyapith letter. I am writing to the
Gaikwar. I wonder if it will be too late. I must not go to Baroda just
yet.
Yours,

BAPU
S JT. A BBAS TYABJI
K.E.M. HOSPITAL
BOMBAY
From a photostat : S.N. 9575

65. LETTER TO YOUSUF HUSSAIN
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 6, 1931
DEAR YOUNG FRIEND,

I was delighted to receive your letter of 10th March. You will
forgive me for not having acknowledged it earlier. I have been so
busy and constantly on the move. Young students can certainly do a
great deal for the country. First of all they can wear khadi and thus
support the poor people who spin and weave in their own homes.
They can also do hand-spinning and carding themselves. They will
thus add to national wealth and, when they have finished their studies,
become competent village workers. Young students can also promote
goodwill between the two communities by making friends with one
another and doing all kinds of mutual service and, at times of tension,
1

A form of greeting used between Gandhiji and the addressee whenever they
met or wrote to each other

48

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

risking even their lives in serving and saving those who may be in
danger.
Yours sincerely,

YOUSUF HUSSAIN, E SQ.
MUSLIM UNIVERSITY
ALIGARH
From a microfilm. S.N. 17035

66. LETTER TO H. HARCOURT
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 6, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. You will forgive me for sending
you a belated reply but I was helpless. I am not able to say that the
Round Table Conference has established lasting goodwill between the
two nations. But it can do a great deal of good if the representatives of
both the nations are determined to come to an agreement. I am quite
aware and I am thankful that I have a very large circle of unknown
friends in the British Isles.
Yours sincerely,

H. H ARCOURT, E SQ.
LONDON S.E. 19
From a photostat : S.N. 17036

67. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 6, 1931
Here is a letter from Chinnapavu of Coimbatore. He refers to
you in his letter. Please tell me all about him and his activity. I would
like you to deal with this letter by writing to him. Can it be true what
he says about the treatment of Adi-Dravidas in Singanallur?
Encl. 1
S JT. C. R AJAGOPALACHARI
TIRUCHENGODU (S. I NDIA)
From a photostat : S.N. 17037

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

49

68. LETTER TO H. RUNHAM BROWN
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 6, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter of 4th February. You will excuse me
for not acknowledging it earlier. It was practically impossible to do so.
I think that Prof. Einstein’s suggestion is sound. And if it is right for
those who do not believe in war to refuse war service, it follows that
they are entitled at least to the sympathy of war resisters even if the
latter are too weak to follow the example of those who suffer for their
conscience’s sake.
Yours sincerely,

H. RUNHAM BROWN, E SQ.
11 ABBEY R OAD, E NFIELD
MIDDLESEX, (E NGLAND)
From a photostat : S.N. 17038

69. LETTER TO KHAN CHAND DEV
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 6, 1931
DEAR LALA KHAN CHAND,

I have your letter. I am in correspondence with the Government
in all these matters and I am likely to go to Simla to discuss every one
of them. At the present moment, therefore, I can only advise you to
keep me informed of what is going on there. I would advise you also
not to start picketing and even stop picketing if absolute peacefulness
cannot be ensured. There should be no rowdyism. I do not now what
truth there is in the Punjab Governor’s charge that there has been wild
speaking. Are you able to control the Punjab Press? I know that there
is often violent writing. I would not like anybody connected with the
Congress to speak or write violently. Our case is weakened by such
writing or speaking.
Yours sincerely,

LALA KHAN C HAND DEV
P UNJAB P ROVINCIAL C ONGRESS C OMMITTEE
BRADLAUGH HALL, L AHORE
From a microfilm : S.N. 17039

50

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

70. LETTER TO GULZARI LAL NANDA
BORSAD,

May 6, 1931
MY DEAR GULZARI LAL,

You should firmly tell Mr. Gidney that there is absolutely no
coercion used. But you have the right of fixing conditions of membership. What the Settlement requires is that picketing shall be
absolutely peaceful, which it admittedly is. And in no case can the
Government connive at direct breaches of liquor laws. I am likely to
have to go to Simla next week in connection with the breaches of the
Settlement alleged to have taken place on the part of the Government
as well as of the people. Please therefore give me all the particulars. I
have got the sections you have sent me.
S JT. G ULZARI LAL NANDA
TEXTILE LABOUR ASSOCIATION
LABOUR OFFICE
LAL DARWAZA, A HMEDABAD
From a microfilm : S.N. 17040

71. LETTER TO KONDA VENKATAPPAYYA
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 6, 1931
MY DEAR VENKATAPPAYYA,

Plesase read the enclosed. Tell me all you know about Needu1 or
enquire and let me know. Is he responsible for all this misfortune
himself? I am anxious to help him if only for the memory of Annapurna 2 . But you have to guide me.
Encls. 2
S JT. K ONDA VENKATAPPAYYA
GUNTUR (MADRAS P RESIDENCY)
From a microfilm : S.N. 17041

1
2

Maganti Bapi Needu; vide the following item.
Needu’s wife who had died in 1927; vide “A Good Servant Fone”, 27-10-1927

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

51

72. LETTER TO MAGANTI BAPI NEEDU
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 6, 1931
MY DEAR NEEDU,

My whole heart goes out to you in your trouble though, if you
will take it calmly and correctly it will be your making. It is not
prosperity but adversity that makes a man. Prosperity spoils him.
And after all, if you belong to the starving group, you are one of the
many millions. But I know that this philosophy, however correct it is,
will bring you no solace. Before therefore I can make a concrete
suggestion, you must let me know what your minimum requirements
are, and in fixing this, do not think of what you have been materially
but think of what you should be.
In fact in doing this you will have to be courageous and even
apparently heartless. You are telling me you have to support your own
people and Annapurna’s. This is absurd. You have to support those
who may be physically maimed and therefore incapable of doing
anything for themselves. You have no such in either family. Nor must
they be pampered. They must all, men and women, work for their
living and if they will do so, you will find that the problem is
satisfactorily and honourably solved. Now you know what I want from
you. Give me a letter full of particulars and it shall receive prompt
attention.
Yours,

BAPU
S JT. M AGANTI BAPI NEEDU
ELLORE (WEST GODAVARY DT.)
MADRAS P RESIDENCY
From a photostat : G.N. 8826; also S.N. 17042

52

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

73. LETTER TO K. KELAPPAN NAIR
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 6, 1931
MY DEAR KELAPPAN,

I have your letter. Please continue to send me full report of
whatever irregularities you may notice. I might have to go to Simla to
discuss all these things. Meanwhile you must use all the tact you are
capable of using.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. K. KELAPPAN NAIR
KERALA P ROVINCIAL C ONGRESS C OMMITTEE
MATHRUBHUMI BUILDINGS
C ALICUT
From a microfilm : S.N. 17043

74. SPEECH AT BOCHASAN
May 6, 1931
I thank you all for giving me the honour of laying the foundation of this Vidyalaya. This institution has been named “Vallabh
Vidyalaya” and hence it has become the duty of all—the present and
future managers of the Vidyalaya and those who will receive
education here—to imbibe Vallabhbhai’s virtues and to teach others
to do the same. Vallabhbhai is an embodiment of sacrifice; Vallabhbhai is synonymous with courage; Vallabhbhai stands for heroism, for
removal of distinctions between high and low. Vallab-hbhai does not
regard Patidars as high and the others as low because they are
Bhangis, Baraias and Patanwadias.1 To disprove these distinctions, the
laying of the foundation has been entrusted to me.
Bhai Narahari has stated in his speech that for the most part the
children of Dharala Thakores, and Patanwadias will receive education
in this Vallabh Vidyalaya. I put aside my work and came here only to
meet the Dharala Thakores. Ever since I made your acquaintance, I
have recognized you as Thakores [leaders]. Those brothers among
you who attended the mammoth meeting at Vadtal 2 will remember
1
2

Names of certain beckward communities in Gujarat
Vide “Speech at Public Meeting, Vadtal”, 19-1-1921

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

53

that I had described you all as Dharala Thakores. Just as Kaliparaj 1
became Raniparaj, the Dharalas became known as Thakores. You have
only benefited from the great struggle, even though some of you
purchased the lands of others, proved faithless to the people, and
vacillated. But, can one forget the fact that in Bochasan the Baraia
brethren are with the people? That way, no one can claim that the
Patidars are a hundred per cent on the side of the people. If all
Muslim brothers here did not stand by the people, they have done so
in other parts of the country.
There is element of compulsion or force in our struggle, it is a
voluntary fight. Hereafter whenever we have to fight, all will join in. I
wish the temporary Truce with the Government to become permanent.
Let the Truce end in our winning complete swaraj. Complete swaraj
means a government in which we can run our own administration. If
the dream entertained by Sardar Vallabhbhai, my many comrades and
myself comes true, then that government will belong to the Patidars,
the Dharala Thakores and the Bhangis also. It will belong to the
Muslim brethren too. That government will not belong to any one
community, but to all the men and women, boys and girls, of India.
That alone is to be called complete swaraj. A government other than
this is no government. None should hope that the government should
be his and not of the Muslims and the Bhangis. That will indeed be
the government of the thirty crores of people of India. If all of them
do not receive a fair deal, that will not constitute swaraj at all.
Therefore the Vidyapith thought that the job would be only half done
if they did not serve the backward classes. Dharala Thakore brethren
come to see me. They cannot even sign their names. But I do not care
if they do not know how to sign their names, they should know what is
swaraj. You ought to know what our duty to the people is, why we
should spin, why we should wear only khadi and why we should not
wear cloth made even by mills in our country. What a sad and
shameful thing it is if you do not know all this! If you do not know
this, how can our administration run? The Dharala Thakores, the
Bhangis and all other communities can participate in our administration. It is for this that Shamalbhai is here. You may say that the
Patidars have exploited you to the uttermost limit. Perhaps there may
1

54

A Scheduled Tribe in Gujarat
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

be some truth in it. There may not be unity between the Patidars and
the Dharala Thakores in all matters. But an organization of youths has
arisen from among the Patidars themselves which has deemed it its
duty to serve you. They believe in serving others first and themselves
afterwards.
You few Dharala Thakore brothers who have come here, please
carry my message to everyone in his home. The Patidars and we are
not adversaries. If you have considered them as your enemies, forget
it. The Patidars and the Dharalas are both brothers. Only just now I
was introduced to a brother who had presented yarn to me. He used
to drink liquor and even offer it to others—but he has given it up
and is making others follow suit. Everyone ought at any rate to give
up liquor and also thiev-ing and looting. Have you ever seen a thief
becoming a million-aire? None has become a rich man through theft.
And even if anyone has done so, ultimately he has remained a beggar
only. One cannot, like the merchant, become a millionaire through
theft. Nothing is to be gained through theft, l ooting, violence, etc.
But if we want to live in t his world cleanly and thus present ourselves
at God’s court, take it for certain that our hands, legs, eyes, ears and
hearts ought to be pure. Else we would not be fit to remain in His
court. In order to make all this possible, the Vallabh Vidyalaya has
been established. It is my hope that Shamalbhai will complain to me
that there are so many children of the Patanwadias and Dharala
Thakores that the school is too small to accommodate them. In this
Vidyalaya, those who have no money are going to be fed and clothed.
But none should take wrong advantage of it. It is my desire that those
who have money should study even by paying fees and there will
come a time when I shall have to say that I shall set up as many
schools as you require. You may know that we have a plentiful supply
of teachers and we shall get them from anywhere. We shall teach boys
and by and by even girls. But all that depends on the extent to which
you give encouragement to the Vallabh Vidyalaya.
You have asked for my blessings. Them you certainly have. But
you have them on the condition that you impart lustre to this
Vidyalaya and its name. The Patidars also should benefit by it and
should disgrace neither the Vallabh Vidyalaya nor my name. I do not
care for the sort of Vidyalaya which may prove a millstone round my
neck and be a burden to me. Education liberates us, frees us from
bondage, helps us to shine, adds to the country’s wealth, enriches
character; our boys and girls become smart and intelligent thereby.
This Vidyalaya has been established with this end in view. May this
end be realized. I express gratitude to all those who have given
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

55

donations for this Vidyalaya and have offered lime, labour and other
types of help. What we build with our own money will shine forth
better than what we do with money got from the rich men of Bombay.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 10-5-1931

75. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
BORSAD,

May 6, 1931
Interviewed by the Associated Press correspondent regarding the resolution
passed by the Manchester Royal Exchange, Mahatma Gandhi said :

The resolution of the Manchester Royal Exchange is partly
based on misapprehension. There is no hostility towards Britain in
the present movement but, on the countrary, the Congressmen are
trying against heavy odds to promote goodwill as far as it is possible
under the present circumstances. It is not sufficiently realized what
trem-endous step the Congress had taken in lifting boycott of British
goods.
The boycott of foreign cloth should not be mixed up with
British goods. It is a misnomer to call boycott of foreign cloth as
boycott. That name therefore has been intentionally omitted from the
Delhi Settlement. I use the word boycott even for the exclusion of
foreign cloth because it has become a current popular expression.
Nobody, however, mistakes its purpose. The exclusion of foreign
cloth does produce political conse-quences but it is a predominantly
economic and social proposition and an economic necessity for the
semi-starved millions. Instead therefore of agitating against the
permanent movement of economic uplift, if the leading men in Lancashire will find out ways and means of disposing of their manufactures in other countries where they are wanted, they will save much
time and really promote goodwill between the two countries.
I regard the attempt to suppress peaceful picketing as fruitless.
Surely Lord Irwin did not accept peaceful picketing of foreign cloth
and liquor shops without sound reasons and anyone who studies this
question as patiently as he did cannot but come to the same conclusion as Lord Irwin.
The Hindustan Times, 8-5-1931

56

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

76. NOTES
S OLD LANDS1

To sell a farmer’s land and that for a song is vivisection. The
sale of forfeited lands in Gujarat was such an operation. The clause in
the Settlement about these lands was for Sardar Vallabhbhai the
biggest bite to swallow. But he swallowed it because ultimately he
shared my faith that the lands could not long be withheld by the
buyers from the original owners and in any case they were bound to
be restored when the full settlement was attained. It must be said to the
credit of the buyers that they are one by one realizing the necessity of
restoring the lands they made the mistake of buying. The reader
already knows how through the kind intervention of Sir Cowasji
Jehangir, Syts. Nariman, Vimadalal and Modi, Sardar Garda has
agreed to restore to the original holders the lands bought by him in
Bardoli Taluka and how Syt. Cowasji of Kukadbeda and Thakur
Khumansing of BORSAD have returned lands bought by them without
asking for a refund of money paid by them. The latest instances are
those of Sheth Virchand in Bardoli and Thakore of Dehvan in BORSAD.
The Thakore would not think of having even the price paid by him
returned to him. He had paid Rs. 1,200 for nearly 120 acres of good
land. Three poor Dharalas too returned eleven acres which they had
bought for Rs. 48 stating in their letter addressed to me that they were
sorry that being poor they had to ask for the refund of the actual
amount paid by them although they recognized that they should not
ask for it. It reflects credit on all these buyers for their having
patriotically returned the lands. I say patriotically for there was no
pressure save that of silent public opinion brought to bear upon these
buyers. Their friends certainly approached them but there was no
threat or coercion employed by anybody. Healthy public opinion has
an influence of which we have not realized the full significance. But
we are not yet out of the wood. There are yet tough buyers who have
not come forward. But I have little doubt that if the workers don’t lose
patience and the Settlement does not otherwise break down, they will
also respond to the influence of that opinion. Public opinion becomes
intolerable when it becomes violent and aggressive.
I am happy to be able to inform the reader that otherwise too
the things in Gujarat seem to be moving, though very slowly,
towards a settlement. How we are implementing the Truce in Gujarat
1

A similar note also appeared in Navajivan, 3-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

57

on behalf of the Congress is partly told by Mahadev Desai in his
weekly letter.1
At this juncture, it is necessary for me to add that it is not
dharma for a satyagrahi to harass anyone. He should wish well even to
those who hate him. Sardar Garda is afraid that the farmers may
harass him. He was even complaining of harassment. I have told him
that I would look into the matter if he sent me the details of any
specific complaint, and I have also assured him that no satyagrahi will
harass him. I have no doubt that the farmers will fully honour this
assurance which I have given on their behalf. If we wish to win swaraj
without delay, it is our dharma to live amicably with everyone and win
everyone’s heart. It should not be forgotten that this includes the
official class as well.
POLICE TYRANNY

A correspondent asks: “Do you advise taking legal proceedings
against the police or other officials for their lawlessness during the
struggle?”
Whilst this is provided for in the Settlement, I cannot advise such
proceedings except where the lawlessness persists in some shape or
other and where it is possible to produce conclusive evidence of the
past lawlessness. But generally speaking, we must, in view of the Settlement try to bury the dead past and hope and work for a lasting
settlement.
IN THE NAME OF ‘CASHMERE’

Sjt. Kotak of the A. I. S. A., Kashmir, writes:2
People have by now begun to know real khadi from the base imitation.
Fine woollen things come only from Kashmir, and so it has become the
fashion nowadays to palm off foreign woollens as cashmere, i.e., fabrics
hand-spun and hand-woven in Kashmir.
Can you not do anything to stop this fraud?

Let those who go in for fine wollens and silks take note of the
warning. One moral is to trace every article to its source. This can
only be done by confining one’s sales to things manufactured in
one’s own neighbourhood. But this is not always possible. The next
thing therefore is to buy from certified stores or from those whose
managers are personally known to us. Swadeshi dharma like every
1
2

58

The paragraph that follows is from Navajivan.
Only extracts are reproduced here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

other dharma is difficult to observe. Lovers of swadeshi must never
therefore mind the trouble of knowing the history of every piece of
cloth and for that matter every article they use. While khadi is both the
centre and the circumstance of swadeshi, there is much else to fill in
the intervening spaces. A person who, using khadi, gives himself or
herself the license to buy everything else foreign does not know the
spirit behind khadi and discredits it.
Young India, 7-5-1931, and Navajivan, 3-5-1931

77. POWER OF AHIMSA 1
A correspondent writes a Gujarati letter of which the following is
a translations2 :
If I have anywhere referred to India haivng received the fullest
support from world opinion, it should be set down as an unconscious
exaggeration. I should like to be shown such a statement of mine if I
have made one. For myself I have absolutely no idea of having made
any such statement.
The correspondent, by comparing the condition of unarmed
India pitted against the British military power to that of a defenceless
woman thrown at the tender mercy of a ruffian, has done an injustice
to the strength as well of non-violence as of woman. Had not man in
his blind selfishness crushed woman’s soul as he has done or had she
not succumbed to ‘the enjoyments’ she would have given the world
an exhibition of the infinite strength that is latent in her. What she
showed in the last fight was but a broken and imperfect glimpse of it.
The world shall see it in all its wonder and glory when woman has
secured a equal opportunity for herself with man and fully developed
her powers of mutual aid and combination.
And it is wrong to say that a person is unarmed in the sense of
being weak who has ahimsa as his weapon. The correspondent is
evidently a stranger to the real use or the immeasurable power of
ahimsa. He has used it, if at all, only mechanically and as an
expedience for want of a better. Had he been saturated with the spirit
of ahimsa, he would have known that it can tame the wildest beast,
certainly the wildest man.
If, therefore, the world’s blood did not boil over the brutalities
1

A similar article also appeared in Navajivan, 3-5-1931 under the heading
“Why Did Not Their Blood Boil?”
2
Not reproduced here
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

59

of the past year, it was not because the world was brutal or heartless
but because our non-violence, widespread through it was, good
enough though it was for the purpose intended, was not the nonviolence of the strong and the knowing. It did not spring from a living
faith. It was but a policy, a temporary expedient. Though we did not
retaliate, we had harboured anger, our speech was not free from
violence, our thoughts still less so. We generally refrained from violent
action, because we were under discipline. The world marvelled even at
this limited exhibition of non-violence and gave us, without any
propaganda, the support and sympathy that we deserved and needed.
The rest is a matter of the rule of three. If we had the support that we
received for the limited and mechanical non-violence we were able to
practise during the recent struggle, how much more support should we
command when we have risen to the full height of ahimsa? Then the
world’s blood will certainly boil. I know we are still far away from
that divine event. We realized our weakness at Cawnpore, Benares,
Mirzapur. When we are saturated with ahimsa we shall not be nonviolent in our fight with the bureaucracy and violent among ourselves.
When we have a living faith in non-violence, it will grow from day to
day till it fills the whole world. It will be the mightiest propaganda that
the world will have witnessed. I live in the belief that we will realize
that vital ahimsa.
Young India, 7-5-1931

78. DANGERS OF DEMOCRACY1
There is no human institution but has its dangers. The greater
the institution the greater the chances of abuse. Democracy is a great
institution and therefore it is liable to be greatly abused. The remedy
therefore is not avoidance of democracy but reduction of possibility
of abuse to a minimum.
The Congress has become a vast democratic body. It reached a
high water-mark during the past twelve months. Without being
technically on the register millions took possession of it and added
lustre to it. But goondaism also entered the Congress to a much larger
extent than hitherto. It was inevitable. The ordinary rules prescribed
for the selection of volunteers were practically set aside during the last
1

Navajivan, 3-5-1931; also published an article on the same subject, under the
title “A House Divided Cannot Stand”.

60

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

stage of the struggle. The result has been that in some places goondaism has made itself felt. Some Congressmen have even been
threatened with disaster if they will not give the money demanded of
them. Of course, professional goondas may also take advantage of the
atmosphere and ply their trade.
The wonder is that the cases I have in mind are so very few
compared to what they might have been, regard being had to the
great mass awakening. My conviction is that t his happy state is due
to the Congress creed of non-violence, even though we have but
crudely followed it. But there has been sufficient expression of goondaism to warn us to take time by the forelock and adopt preventive
and precautionary measures.
The measures that suggest themselves to me are naturally and
certainly a scientific and more intelligent and disciplined application
of non-violence. In the first place if we had a firmer faith in nonviolence than we have shown not one man or woman who did not
strictly conform to the rules regarding the admission of volunteers
would have been taken. It would be no answer to say that in that case
there would have been no volunteers during the final stage and
therefore there would have been a perfect failure. My experience
teaches me to the contrary. It is possible to fight a non-violent battle
even with one satyagrahi. But it, i.e., a non-violent battle, cannot be
fought with a million non-satyagrahis. And I would welcome even an
utter failure with non-violence unimpaired rather than depart from it
by a hair’s breadth to achieve a doubtful success. Without adopting a
non-compromising attitude so far as non-violence is concerened, I can
see nothing but disaster in the end. For, at the critical moment we may
be found wanting, weighed in the scales of non-violence, and may be
found hopelessly unprepared to meet the forces of disorder that might
suddenly be arrayed against us.
But having made the mistake of indiscriminate recruiting how
are we to repair the mischief in a non-violent way? Non-violence
means courage of the highest order and therefore readiness to suffer.
There should therefore be no yielding to bullying, bluff or worse,
even though it may mean the loss of a few precious lives. Writers of
threatening letters should be made to realize that their threats will not
be listened to. But at the same time their disease must be diagnosed
and properly treated. Even the goondas are part of us and therefore
they must be handled gently and sympathetically. People generally do
not take to goondaism for the love of it. It is a symptom of a deeperVOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

61

seated disease in the body politic. The same law should govern our
relations with internal goondaism that we apply in our relations with
the goondaism in the system of government. And if we have felt that
we have the ability to deal with that highly organized goodaism in a
non-violent manner, how much more should we feel the ability to deal
with internal goondaism by the same method?
It follows that we may not seek police assistance to deal with
the disease although it is open, during the Truce, to any Congressman to seek it precisely in the same manner as any other citizen.
The way I have suggested is the way of reform, conversion, love.
Seeking police assistance is the way of punishment, fear, want of
affection if not actual disaffection. The two methods therefore cannot
run together. The way of reform appears at some stage or other to be
difficult but it is in reality the easiest.
Young India, 7-5-1931

79. FOR ‘FOLLOWERS’
A friend sends me the following:
It will be very helpful if you will kindly guide your followers about their
conduct when they to engage in a political controversy. Your guidance on the
following points is particularly needed:
(a) Vilification so as to lower the opponent in public estimation.
(b) Kind of criticism of the opponent permissible.
(c) Limit to which hostility should be carried.
(d) Whether effort should be made to gain office and power.

I have said before in these pages that I claim no followers. It is
enough for me to be my own follower. It is by itself a sufficiently
taxing performance. But I know that many claim to be my followers. I
must therefore answer the questions for their sakes. If they will follow
what I endeavour to stand for rather than me they will see that the
following answers are derived from truth and ahimsa.
(a) Vilification of an opponent there can never be. But this does
not exclude a truthful characterization of his acts. An opponent is not
always a bad man because he opposes. He may be as honourable as
we may claim to be and yet there may be vital differences between
him and us.
(b) Our criticism will therefore be if we believe him to be guilty
of untruth to meet it with truth, of discourtesy with courtesy, of bullying with calm courage, of violence with suffering, of arrogance with
62

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

humility, of evil with good. ‘My follower’ would see not to condemn
but to convert.
(c) There is no question of any limit to which hostility may be
carried. For there should be no hostility to persons. Hostility there
must be to acts when they are subversive of morals or the good of
society.
(d) Office and power must be avoided. Either may be accepted
when it is clearly for greater service.
Young India, 7-5-1931

80. FOREIGN MISSIONARIES AGAIN
DEAR MAHATMA,

. . . A friend of mine gave me a copy of the Madras Catholic Leader of the
26th March, and it is there that you are reported to have given expression to
the . . . remarks. . . . “Every nation’s religion is as good as any other. Certainly
India’s religions are adepuate for her people. We need no converting
spiritually.”
I am a Christian, but I certainly am against Christianity being brought as
an instrument of Imperialism. But as a message of love and fellowship, who
will deny it a place in Indian life? In this great struggle for swaraj, are we not
fighting for liberty, liberty to worship our God as we please, liberty to
convince our fellows who are willing to be convinced by us, liberty to be
convinced by our fellows who can convince us? . . . Is India so bigoted as to
think that within her are confined all the riches of the world, all the treasures
of knowledge and human experience? . . .
Religion, I deem, is a matter between an individual and his own
conception of right conduct. Religion belongs to the great realm of thought
and personal experience which knows neither boundaries nor nations. . . . But
I would like to know, if you made those remarks, what you meant by them, or I
confess they are a mystery to me.
ST. XAVIER ’ S

I remain,

NUWARA ELIYA , CEYLON

Yours respectfully,

11th April, 1931

J AMES P. R UTNAM

I do not know that in reply to this letter I need do more than
refer the writer to my article in Young India.2 It might be as well to
add that in mentioning Hinduism, Islam, Zoroastrianism, etc., as
India’s religi-ons, I had no desire to claim them as India’s exclusively
1

1
2

Of which only excerpts have been reproduced here.
Vide “Foreign Missionaries”, 23-4-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

63

or to exclude Christianity. The issue was Christianity on the one hand
claimed as the one true religion and other religions on the other being
regarded as false. In joining issue I contended that the great world
religions other than Christianity professed in India were no less true
than Christianity. It was thus neither relevant nor necessary for me to
assert before Christian missionaries and their protagonists that
Christianity was true. Moreover, with my known partiality for the
Sermon on the Mount and my repeated declarations that its author
was one of the greatest among the teachers of mankind I could not
suspect that there would be any charge against me of underrating
Christianity. As for Christian, Indians, I count among them many
warm friends and I have had no difficulty whatsoever in establishing
friendly touch with the Christian masses wherever I have gone. Nor is
there any fear of my estranging even the foreign missionaries among
whom I claim many personal friends. The attack against me has
therefore surprised me not a little especially because the views I have
now enunciated have been held by me since 1916, and were
deliberately expressed in a carefully written address read before a
purely missionary audience in Madras and since repeated on many a
Christian platform. The recent criticism has but confirmed the view,
for the criticism has betrayed intolerance even of friendly criticism.
The missionaries know that in spite of my outspoken criticism of their
methods, they have in India and among non-christians no warmer
friend than I. And I suggest to my critics that there must be something
wrong about their method or, if they prefer, themselves when they will
not brook sincere expression of an opinion different from theirs. In
India under swaraj I have no doubt that foreign missionaries will be at
liberty to do their proselytizing, as I would say, in the wrong way; but
they would be expected to bear with those who, like me, may point out
that in their opinion the way is wrong.
Young India, 7-5-1931

64

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

81. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 7, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

I thank you for your letter of the 30th. 1 I can fully understand
what Sir Malcolm Hailey says and nothing would please me better
than to find that my visit to him is rendered unnecessary by the
cultivators getting the relief which they need.
I thank you too for your enquiry about my health. There is
now nothing wrong with it. I still need some rest which I am taking as
far as possible in the circumstances.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
H. W. EMERSON, E SQ.
HOME S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
S IMLA
Home Department, Political, File No. 33/XI & K.Ws 1931 p. 170. Courtesy :
National Archives of India

82. LETTER TO R. M. MAXWELL
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 7, 1931
DEAR MR. MAXWELL,

I thank you for your letter of the 4th instant. I shall await your
further letter. May I however remind you that your receipt of a copy
of the revised notice referred to in your letter will only enable His
Excellency to deal with one matter whereas my original letter2 covers
several matters out of which unlicensed liquor selling is becoming
more and more urgent daily because it seems to be increasing. His
Excellency will perhaps agree that this is a manifest breach of the
Settlement.
There is one other matter which I wish to add. There is the
1
2

Vide “Letter from H. W. Emerson”, 30-4-1931
Vide “Letter to R. M. Maxwell”, 22-4-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

65

Young India press1 still undelivered. The district officer suggests that
the Manager should himself remove the press from where it is lying, I
believe, in Bombay and a portion in Ahmedabad. The district officer
in Kaira suggests a like procedure for a motor and a bicycle lying
somewhere in Kaira. Cl. 16(a) of the Settlement clearly contemplates
the return of movable property seized in connection with the
movement. It does not say that the seized property is to be taken on
application by the person but it is to be returned, and if it is not
irrelevant to mention it here, I may inform you that the word
‘returned’ was chosen after discussion. I may also add that, whilst I do
not know anything about the condition of the Young India press and
other seized property, I do know that the motor-car, and the bicycle
seized in Kaira are admittedly in a broken-up condition. It is also
common ground that, when they were seized, they were in good order
and condition. The district officer in Kaira in reply to my letter in
connection with these articles says as follows in his letter :
Reference the delivery of a motor-car and cycle. Government have issued
orders that ordinarily the owner of property attached under the ordinance
should be asked to remove the property from the place where it is and that
Government cannot undertake to undergo expenditure in restoring it. I have no
funds to which I could debit the cost of towing the car—I understand it is not in
running order—to Nadiad. I shall be in Kaira tomorrow morning and suggest
that the owner should have it removed from my office there. If he thinks he has
a right to recover from Government the cost of removal and reconditioning, he
should send in his bill to Government and no doubt Government will call for a
full report on the whole circumstances, and the matter can be thrashed out, but
at present there is a which statemate results in the car still suffering
depreciatin.

I venture to suggest that these articles should be returned in the
same condition in which they were at the time of seizure. I do not
know that the officials of the Government had any authority or right
to use these articles. But even if they had and if they broke them, at
the time of return they should be in good order and condition. I
would like the Government to give these two matters prompt attention.
Unlicensed liquor is causing daily havoc amongst those who are
gradually being weaned from the drink habit and the detention of the
1
Which had been forfeited during the Civil Disobedience Movement of 1930
for non-payment of security under an ordinance of 27th April, reviving the powers of
the Press Act of 1910. Vide also “Letter to H. W. Emerson”, 2-6-1931.

66

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

seized articles which are of daily use is causing a loss and inconvenience to the owners.1
Yours sincerely,
R. M. M AXWELL, E SQ.
P RIVATE S ECRETARY TO H.E. THE GOVERNOR OF BOMBAY
MAHABALESHWAR
A.I.C.C. File No. 4, 1931 Part I, pp. 27-8. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library

83. LETTER TO G. V. KETKAR 2
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 7, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. In order to enable me to give a decisive
opinion I should certainly like to have Shankar Rao’s version also.
But subject to that reservation I have no hesitation in agreeing with
you that all parties should be represented on Congress Committees by
agreement or there should be an open honest election without any
1

In his reply dated May 13, Maxwell stated : “You have suggested that the
word “returned” in clause 16(a) of the Agreement should be interpreted to mean “taken
back to the place where the property was seized”. In the absence, however, of any
such explana-tion in the terms of the Settlement itself, the Government are unable to
attach to the word in question any but its ordinary meaning, viz., “given back”, and,
while they are ready at any time to carry out the agreement in this sense, they do not
feel justified in throwing On the taxpayers the expense of transporting the articles
from the places where they now are. I am to say that your further contention that the
Government are responsible for delivering such articles in the same condition in
which they were seized, does not appear to be warranted by anything in the terms of
the Settlement. On the contrary clause 16(c) of the Settlement expressly says that
“compensation will not be given for deterioration”. I am to add that under section
4(3) of Ordinance IX of 1930 even property seized but not forfeited may be used in
such manner as the Magistrate may direct. The motor-car and cycle now in question
were, however, actually forfeited and had they been sold or destroyed, the original
owners would have had no further claim to them, since clause 16(a) of the Settlement
agrees to the return of seized moveable property only if it is still in the possession of
Government. I am therefore to express the hope that you will now make arrangements
to take delivery of these forfeited articles without more delay, since it will not be
possible for Government to be responsible for their custody indefinitely if those
interested do not choose to avail themselves of clause 16(a) of the Settlement.
2
Grandson (daughter’s son) of Lokamanya Tilak
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

67

wire-pulling. You should show your letter and my reply to Shankar
Rao and let him say whatever he likes in opposition to my opinion if
he wants to oppose it. I would like to see the happy relation established in Maharashtra between the two parties1 not only to continue
unbroken but to grow in strength.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S RI G. V. KETKAR
THE KESARI AND THE MAHRATTA OFFICE
568 NARAYAN P ETH
P OONA C ITY
From a photostat : G.N. 7962. Also C.W. 981. Courtesy : G.V. Ketkar

84. LETTER TO KHAN CHAND DEV
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 7, 1931
DEAR LALA KHAN CHAND,

Here is copy of a complaint received by me from the Central
Government. Will you please make a detailed enquiry and let me
know the result as early as you can?
Yours sincerely,

Encl. 1
LALA KHAN C HAND DEV
BRADLAUGH HALL, L AHORE
From a microfilm : S.N. 17058

85. LETTER TO G. RAMACHANDRAN
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 7, 1931
MY DEAR RAMACHANDRAN,

It was a perfect pleasure to receive a letter from you after such a
long time. I did indeed enquire about you from so many persons by
1

68

Responsivists and Non-co-operationists
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

word of mouth as also through letters. I did know that you were
resting in some prison. Do come and see me whenever you wish and
can.
S JT. G. R AMACHANDRAN
NARAYANATH HOUSE
TAIKAD
TRIVANDRUM
From a microfilm : S.N. 17059

86. LETTER TO H. W. B. MORENO
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 7, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I shall certainly deal with the subject in the
pages of Young India 1 as you desire and therefore need not give you
a detailed reply. The original of which you have enclosed a copy was
never received.
Yours sincerely,

H. W. B. MORENO , ESQ.
GENERAL P RESIDENT
THE ANGLO-INDIAN LEAGUE
9 M ARSDEN S TREET, C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm : S.N. 17060

87. LETTER TO K. S. NAGARAJAN
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 7, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

Your letter of the 11th March has been on my file all these long
weeks but the delay was inevitable.
If you are really free from any animal passion, you have a right
to retain that freedom. You should share your opinion and your
condition with your wife. If she on her part cannot restrain her animal
appetites, seeing that there has been no consummation of marriage,
she should be free to rgard the present marriage as no marriage at all
1

Vide “Anglo-Indians”, 14-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

69

and to marry where she likes. If she is afraid of public opinion you
should offer to help her to defy public opinion and in every way
make her way smooth and easy. I am satisfied that in no case are you
called upon to share the bed with your wife if you have really no
desire.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. K. S. N AGARAJAN
233 L OYOLA HOSTEL
C ATHEDRAL P.O., M ADRAS
From a photostat : S.N. 17062

88. LETTER TO JAIRAMDAS DOULATRAM
BORSAD,

May 7, 1931
MY DEAR JAIRAMDAS,

This letter1 is for your information. If you have anything to say
you will please guide me.
Yours sincerely,

GANDHI

Encl. 1
S JT. J AIRAMDAS DOULATRAM
S WARAJ ASHRAM, B ARDOLI
A.I.C.C. File No. 273, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

89. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
BORSAD,

May 8, 1931
It is astonishing how ignorant responsible Englishmen, like
Mr. Grey2 , are as to the real condition. I have to impute ignorance to
Mr. Grey as I could not bring myself to believe that he was wilfully
distorting the real condition. The Delhi Agreement tabooed threats,
intimidation and coercion of every form in connection with picketing
1

From Vatan G. Gidwani, President, District Congress Committee,
Mirpurkhas (Sind). He had mentioned that one Thakurdas, who had styled himself as
Secretary of the Congress Committee, was inciting cloth merchants to revolt against
the Congress decision to boycott foreign cloth.
2
Acting Chairman, Master Cotton Spinners and Manufacturers’ Association

70

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

which has to be absolutely peaceful. I insisted that this condition was
carried out and it is being carried out in a vast majority of cases. If a
bona-fide case of intimidation, coercion or threat is made out I will
have no hesitation in every such case in advising and insisting on
suspension of picketing. I know how important it is from our own
stand-point to carry out the Agreement in the strictest manner
possible.
The Bombay Chronicle, 9-5-1931

90. TELEGRAM TO COWASJI JEHANGIR (JUNIOR)
BORSAD,

May 8, 1931
S IR C OWASJI JEHANGIR (JUNIOR)
NAPEAN S EA R OAD
BOMBAY
THANK

YOU

FOR

EXHAUSTIVE

TELEGRAM 1 .

MAKING

IMMEDIATE

INVESTIGATION. CAN GIVE YOU DEFINITE ASSURANCE NO [HARM] WILL BE
DONE TO SARDAR GARDA OR HIS MEN.

GANDHI
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-C, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

91. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
After Morning Prayers, Friday, [May 8, 1931] 2
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I got you letter.
Do not grieve over the death of Kaku’s 3 brother. Such tragedies will always occur in this world. The body is rightlycompared to a
glass bangle. It takes less time for the body to perish than for a glass
1

This read : “Garda complains harassment since Agreement. On twentyseventh his men abused while taking cotton vakharias gin. On tweny-eighth Babla
people scared away labourers threatened to burn huts and inmates. On twenty-ninth
stones thrown from back of his bungalow Navsari same time lorry full of men threw
stones from front proving concerted action. His son jeered hooted at Sabsorn
showing militant attitude. Wiring Garda to send further specific instances. Earnestly
request that if allegations true such harassment should immediately stop. Letter
follows.”
2
From the reference in the last paragraph to his forthcoming visit to Simla
3
Purushottam D. Saraiya, addressee’s grandson
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

71

bangle to break. If we preserve such a bangle with care, it will remain
intact for thousands of years, but the body never lasts for more than a
hundred years. And it is rarely that one lives even that long. Kaku’s
brother may have passed away, but the soul which dwelt in his body
has not perished. It had no brother, or rather all were its brothers.
When, therefore, there are deaths among relations, instead of letting
ourselves be swayed by ignorance we should cultivate greater capacity
for endurance, greater disinterestedness towards the world and greater
knowledge . . .1 (This death has no connection whatever with the fact
of Kaku having strayed from the path of dharma. Do not remind
Kaku of what he did). Let Kaku remain there now and work and earn.
He may take up voluntary work if and when he feels inclined to do so.
I shall leave for Simla on Monday. Come and see me before
that. I see no need for you to go to Bombay, but you may certainly
go if you cannot restrain yourself.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—6 : G. S. Gangabehnne, p. 53. Also C.W. 8774.

Courtesy :

Gangabehn Vaidya

92. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
C AMP BORSAD,

May 8, 1931
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I had your telegram and now I have your letter of 30th ultimo
but not the previous letter. There is certainly no urgent need about
your returning. From your telegram I have gathered that you were all
A1 in spite of the chill of which you write to me in your letter. What
you read in the papers about a break-down was not without
foundation but just now in Gujarat there is no immediate danger of a
breakdown. I am going to Simla next week to confer with Mr. Emerson about several outstanding matters and he says in his letter that
incidentally there would be meeting with the Government about the
Round Table Conference. He expects me also to go to Nainital on or
about the 18th. I do not know how things are progressing in the U.P.
just now. But it will be as well for me to go to Nainital. Of course you
were quite right in writing to me on the Hindu-Muslim question as
1

72

Omission as in the source
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

frankly as you have done. I should have felt hurt if you had done less.
You have a perfect right to unburden yourself without the least fear of
being misunderstood by me. Of course I do not plead guilty to your
charge. I have always taken good care to say that I was speaking for
myself. So long as we have not evolved a concrete policy how could I
help expressing my own personal views? But the occasions have not
been many when I have let myself go. I quite agree with you that Dr.
Ansari’s proposal about arbitration consisting of the many names he
suggests is highly unpractical. Nothing of course has come out of it.
Dr. Mahmud’s fear is absolutely baseless. I did see Bhopal at the
latter’s instance and when he discussed the Hindu-Muslim question I
naturally said that he might call in Shaukat Ali and his other friends
and then summon me to Bhopal if he thought that there was anything
to be done. I could not say to him that he was not to move at all. That
same day Mrs. Naidu brought Shaukat Ali to Mani Bhuvan and I
related the conversation I had with Bhopal. Nothing more has
happened. I have made no movement and have written not one single
line beyond saying that I was praying, which I am literally doing. I
wrote last week as much to Dr. Mahmud1 when he complained that I
had broken the pact that I was to be dumb. When you return
completely restored, we must have a meeting of the Working
Committee and if we can evolve a formula for the guidance of all
Congressmen, nothing will please me more. Personally I think that we
shall not be able to evolve any formula just now and I am more and
more driven to the idea I adumbrated before you on the day of your
departure or the day previous. When you reach Bombay of course
you will first of all seek me out wherever I am. It is highly likely that I
shall be by that time in BORSAD or Bardoli.
No going to London without Hindu-Muslim unity.
Love to you all.
BAPU
P ANDIT JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
NUWERA ELIYA
C EYLON
From Gandhi-Nehru papers, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library.

1

Vide “Letter to Dr. Syed Mahmud”, 4-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

73

93. LETTER TO DARCY LINDSAY
S ABARMATI,

[A S AT] May 8, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter of the 24th April. The matter you
refer to is very delicate. There is a romance around the life of Bhagat
Singh. He was no coward. From all enquiries made by me I find that
he was a man of spotless character and of great daring. He exercised
also great influence on some young men. Somehow or other he had
developed a belief that political assassination had its use. It was
impossible not to notice the execution, I believe quite unwise, of
Bhagat Singh and his comrades, whom the execution made martyrs. I
have no doubt whatsoever that the execution has surrounded these
lives with a halo which they would not otherwise have had. The only
thing therefore that was possible and that the Congress was bound to
do was to pass a resolution1 condemning murderous deeds as also the
execution and at the same time appreciating the bravery and sacrifice
underlying such deeds. I however quite agree with you that there is
undoubtedly a great deal of thoughtless approval of political murder.
But many of us are doing everything we can to counteract the growth
of the violent revolutionary movement. Whilst it is being held under
check, I fear that the spirit that is at times breaking out in violence will
not altogether die till India comes to her own. I am not publishing
your letter because the end both you and I have in view is not likely to
be served thereby.
Yours sincerely,

S IR DARCY LINDSAY
MANDELIEU C ANNES, A.M.
[FRANCE]
From a microfilm : S. N. 17064

1

74

Vide “Resolution on Bhagat Singh and Comrades”, 29-3-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

94. LETTER TO LIVINGSTON & DOULL
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 8, 1931
DEAR SIR,

With reference to your letter of the 3rd March last, I enclose
herewith power of attorney from duly signed by me in favour of Mr.
Doull.
Yours faithfully,

Encl. 1
MESSRS LIVINGSTON & D OULL
S OLICITORS & N OTARIES
DURBAN, N ATAL
From a microfilm : S. N. 17065.

95. LETTER TO ABDUR RAZZAQ MALIHABADI
[AS AT] S ABARMATI,

May 8, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I was delighted to receive your letter. Of course I wish the
Egyptians full independence and all the prosperity that their ancient
and fertile land deserves. I do not know the precise nature of the
boycott movement in Egypt and therefore you will excuse me for my
inability to express any opinion on it.
Yours sincerely,

ABDUR R AZZAQ MALIHABADI, E SQ.
304 NEW C IRCULAR R OAD, C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm : S. N. 17066

96. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
May 8, 1931
CHI. KUSUM,

I got your two letters. If you were not satisfied with those letters,
neither was I. I did not understand what you wished to say. But I will
not harp on the subject. I understood something and I will content
myself with that.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

75

See that your picketing does not become mechanical. If you are
convinced of what I said, act upon it. Through your picketing, enter
the homes of addicts. How long will you go on working like an
automaton?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I shall be leaving this place on Monday.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 1821

97. LETTER TO PANNALAL JHAVERI
May 8, 1931
CHI. PANNALAL,

My letter to Nanibehn must have been given to you to read. I
don’t think that the Vidyapith course is for persons like Nanibehn
and Gangabehn, though I see nothing wrong in their desire and would
let them satisfy it without raising any objection. They lack selfconfidence and long to acquire something more, but do not know
what. If they go on trying like this they will discover one day what it
is, for their hearts are pure. On Monday I shall leave this place for
Simla.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI P ANNALAL
THEOSOPHICAL C OLONY
JUHU, S ANTA C RUZ, B OMBAY
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 3113

98. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
BORSAD,

Friday, May 8, 1931
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I got your letter. I feel like writing to Jayaprakash about you. It
will be good if you have a frank talk with him once. As long as you
have not completely recovered, you ought to stay with me. The state
of your health from time to time is closely connected with that of
your mind. If you stay with me, probably both your body and mind
76

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

will grow strong and then you may be fit enough to live with selfconfidence anywhere. Do what seems best to you.
I will leave this place on Monday and proceed to Simla. You
don’t require my address while I am there. If you write only my name
on the letter, it will reach me the soonest. If you address it C/o the
Congress Committee, the letter may be delayed a little. I am likely to
stay in Simla for five days.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 3409

99. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BORSAD,

May 8, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your two letters.
I felt a weight off my mind to know that you approved of my
suggestion regarding Lakshmi. Kaka and Vallabhbhai are also of the
same opinion as yours. I have yet to hear from Vinoba and Kishorelal. I was not at all pleased by Dwarkanath’s bill. I have kept it back
and written to him strongly about it. I will let you know after I hear
from him. You need, therefore do nothing about it for the present.
The general suggestion you have made concerning such bills does not
require to be acted upon immediately.
I understand what you say about Shankarbhai. I wholly agree
with your decision. Don’t mind what Bhagwanji thinks about it. You
will have to pay Rs. 35 to that Punjabi vaid1 . All of them charge their
fees in this way. If all the patients improve, the fee charged by him
will not seem excessive. All the same, we should know on what basis
he charges his fee.You, therefore, did right in writing to Chandrashankar about it. Don’t put too many persons under his treatment at a
time. Watch how he treats each case and then proceed further. I shall
be leaving for Simla on Monday. No address is necessary for writing
to me there. I have replied to Pragji. Rukhi2 and Benarsi3 have arrived.
1
2
3

Physician practising the Ayurvedic system of medicine
Rukmini, Maganlal Gandhi’s daughter
Benarsilal Bazaj, Rukmini’s husband

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

77

The latter is returning today. Rukhi will stay on today at any rate. I
may send her by some train tomorrow.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./I

100. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
BORSAD,

May 8, 1931
CHI. JAMNADAS,

I have the Doctor’s telegram : “Since Jamnadas and Nanalal are
looking after Ratilal, he should stay at Rajkot till he gets well and may
then go to Sabarmati. I am sorry that Champa was beaten.” I wonder
how the Doctor came to think that you and Nanalal look after Ratilal.
Tell this to Nanalalbhai too. It is likely he sent a telegram to Nanalal.
Tell me in detail in what circumstances Champa was beaten.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I am leaving this place on Monday evening for Simla.
From a copy of the Gujarati : C.W. 9321. Courtesy : Jamnadas Gandhi

101. LETTER TO KISHORELAL MASHRUWALA
May 8, 1931
CHI. KISHORELAL,

Do not be in a hurry to get up and walk so long as the wound is
not healed. The diet should be such as would give you clear motions.
I intend to marry Dudabhai’s1 Lakshmi to Maruti who has been
brought up by Lakshmidas 2 . I consider it my duty to do so. A girl
brought up in the Ashram from her childhood must not be married to
an antyaja.
Blessings from

BAPU
1

Dudabhai M. Dafda
Lakshmidas P. Asar. The marriage of Lakshmi and Marutidas, a South Indian
orphan boy, took place on March 14, 1933; vide also “Message on Wedding of
Lakshmi And Maruti”, 8-3-1933
2

78

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[PS.]
Gangabehn gave the news of Manu’s1 sudden death.
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 10718. Courtesy: Gomatibehn Mashruwala

102. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
BORSAD,

May 8, 1931
CHI. MRIDULA,

I do hope that you will find time to go to Simla for a few
days. Both Papa and Mummy were of course anxious and hoping that
you would go and be with them at least for a week.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11180. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

103. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
BORSAD,

May 8, 1931
CHI. JAMNALAL,

Tell the people of Karnatak2 that they have already contributed
much to the struggle; they must also now take part in the constructive
work. Much still remains to be done for khadi; the boycott of foreign
cloth is for the sake of khadi. Had the boycott not had the purpose of
serving the poor, at least I would not have been as absorbed in it as I
am now.
Some friends from Karnatak are possessed with the idea that
Karnatak should form a separate province. Why do they worry ? The
Congress has already formed a province of Kannada-speaking people,
it will come into being when we have purna swaraj.
1

Manu Damodar Saraiya, Gangabehn Vaidya’s grandson; vide also
“Statement to T. B. Sapru and M. R. Jayakar”, 5-9-1930.
2
The sixth Karnatak Provincial Conference commenced on May 26, 1931 at
Hukeri, District Belgaum, under the presidentship of Jamnalal Bajaj; for the text of
the message, vide “Message to Karnatak Provincial Conference”, 18-5-1931
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

79

I am happy that Lingayats and others have come together. It is
as it should be.
MOHANDAS

[From Hindi]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, pp. 73-4

104. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
BORSAD,

May 8, 1931
Regarding the report published in a Bombay paper about the refusal by Sardar
Garda to return the confiscated lands purchased by him in Bardoli Taluk, Mr. Gandhi,
interviewed, said that the report was correct, but added that so far as he knew there was
no obstruction deliberate or otherwise on the part of men who had strict instructions
not to interfere with those who might be removing crops from the fields in question.
He had undertaken to enquire into every complaint that might be made by Sardar
Garda. He had asked for specific instances and not one was supplied to him. He was
therefore pain- ed and surprised at Sardar Garda’s attempt to evade or repudiate the
agreement which after full deliberation he had entered into. Mr. Gandhi had at ready
brought the matter to the notice of Sir Cowasji Jehangir 1 who was the principal
negotiator.
Asked whether Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel had asked the people of Bardoli Taluk
not to pay unauthorized arrears, Mr. Gandhi said it was not a question of Mr.
Vallabhbhai Patel asking people not to pay arrears. It was a question of inability on
the part of people to pay. The fact was it was really difficult to pay even the current
year’s dues in many cases. In affected areas of both Surat and Kaira districts, they were
obliged to ask for suspension even in some cases in respect of current year’s dues.
The chief thing to aim at was not insisting on pound of flesh but to see that the
political movement for non-payment of taxes was discontinued in a bona-fide
manner and people paid whatever they could under the circumstances.

The Hindu, 9-5-1931

105. MESSAGE TO HINDUSTANI SEVA DAL
[Before May 9, 1931] 2
Camping for Congress volunteers should mean greater dedication, greater self-purification, greater service of the poor, greater
1
2

80

Vide “Telegram to Sir Cowasji Jehangir”, 6-5-1931
The report was published on this date.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

skill in hand-spinning and carding, greater skill in dealing with repairs
to various machines required for spinning, ginning, carding, etc.; and
above all, greater regard for truth and ahimsa. A Congress volunteer
in camp should mean cleaning up of surrounding villages.
M. K. GANDHI

The Bombay Chronicle, 9-5-1931

106. MESSAGE TO LABOURERS, KARACHI
BORSAD,

May 9, 1931
I am clear that the movement initiated by Mr. Gajadhar is
mischievous and unpractical and therefore must not be encouraged.1
The Hindustan Times, 11-5-1931

107. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL SHAH
BORSAD,

May 9, 1931
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

Can you say positively that cod-liver oil has benefited Sharda
visibly ? You can ascertain by nothing her weight, etc. I have heard
doctors praise cod-liver oil with great enthusiasm, though I have not
come across much evidence of its value.
You should send for Annapurna when you can summon
courage to do so. Remain in contact with her through letters. The only
fear can be lest she should turn out to be a bad type. Even if you have
such fear, you should not be guided by it provided you can get proof
that at present she is all right. That way, there is risk in all things.
According to Bhartrihari, the only state in which one can live free
from fear is that of non-attachment. True non-attachment is that
taught in the Gita, and it is cultivated by giving up interest in the
fruits of action. In the present case too, if your duty lies in letting her
come and in discarding all fear about the result of such a course, you
should shed that fear and do the duty.
1

Vide also “Danger Looming”, 14-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

81

If Shakribehn remains absorbed in work, she will be able to
recover peace of mind.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 24371

108. THE PROBLEM OF FOUR LAKH DHARALAS
With this heading, someone has written the following letter 1
under the pseudonym, “A Dharala” :
This letter certainly is full of bitterness, even after I have cut
out certain sentences which were very venomous. The handwriting is
very well formed and the language is very sophisticated. Hence I
guess that it has not been written by a Dharala Thakore but by a
person who has an animus against Patidars. Be that as it may, the letter
calls for some clarification.
DHARALA THAKORES2

Although the letter has a good deal of venom towards the
Patidars, nevertheless there is some truth in the complaints listed in it.
The failing which is found all over India is also there among the
Patidars, viz., those who are more knowledgeable and richer enjoy a
superior status and misuse it vis-a-vis those who are ignorant and
poor. The feeling of superiority and inferiority is certainly involved in
this. The greatest barrier to our progress, to our attainment of swaraj,
is the fact that those who are better off do not become the protectors
of those who are not so well placed. However, having admitted this
with regard to the Patidars, I must say that there is much exaggeration
in this letter. Some years ago, about fifty thousand Dharalas had
assembled in Vadtal and the Patidars had helped this effort. It was
these who since then made the Dharalas known as Thakores. Today at
all places in Gujarat the Patidar youths are destroying the idea of
superiority and inferiority and many aged Patidars are helping them
in it. Young Patidars are engaged in many kinds of service. They do
not recognize any distinctions between Patidars and others. Their field
of action is as wide as India.
1
2

82

Not translated here
The source consistently has “Thakars”, which is evidently a misprint.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

S HRI R AVISHANKAR’S S ERVICES

The correspondent had to admit that Shri Vithalbhai,
Durbarsaheb Gopaldas, Shri Dadubhai and others looked upon the
Dharala Thakores with a feeling of equality. Even a little child knows
that to the Sardar all are equal. He wishes to serve all who are poor,
whether they happen to be Brahmins or Bhangis, Gujaratis or
Madrasis, and it is because the people have recognized this virtue in
him that he has been made the Congress President. This correspondent regards Shri Ravishankar’s services as nominal. I do not
know who renders true service if this very incarnation of sacrifice
renders merely nominal service!
VALLABH VIDYALAYA

Although the above has been founded, I admit that much still
remains to be done for the Dharala Thakores and such other
communities. However, as the spirit of service grows, the unity
among the various communities will become greater day by day.
The school whose foundation stone was only recently laid in
Bochasan1 and which has been named as Vallabh Vidyalaya—this too
is for the sake of the Dharala Thakores.
Hence I would request the above correspondent not to add to
mutual bitterness but rather seek and suggest ways which would
promote friendliness among all. From the manner in which he wields
his pen, it seems that he has the ability to do so. I invite him to put it
to good use.
P ATIDARS

A few words to the Patidars. They should look deep within
themselves and rid themselves of any impurity which may be there.
They have shown great courage and sacrificed much. They should
find out any failings which they may still have and get rid of them.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 10-5-1931

109. NOTES
HYPOCRISY DURING ELECTIONS

Only a handful voted at the elections to the Provincial
Committee held in Bulsar. The elections had to be held because there
1

Vide “Speech at Bochasan”, 6-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

83

were factions. Voters have to be habitual wearers of khadi. Now a
friend writes thus about the kind of khadi-wearers these voters were :1
How great is the disrespect towards the Congress if after a year’s
fierce struggle and after knowing how important a place khadi
occupies in the boycott of foreign cloth, and ordinary rule of the
Congress is violated in this manner! How will these members of the
Congress fare during a crisis? Such hypocrisy sullies the fair name of
the Congress. How are the elections so important that voters have to
pretend that they abide by this rule? And however important they may
be, how can work of any value be done throught the practice of
untruth?
It is likely that at other places in Gujarat also and in the whole
country, wherever there are many candidates and keen rivalry, similar
practices may have been resorted to. If there are such laxity and such
hypocrisy in regard to the reputation of the Congress, it can be
guessed with the help of the three how much this will increase on
attainment of swaraj. In the elections following swaraj, there will be
greater temptations because money will be involved then. I believe
that such conduct is shameful and harmful for us. It will benefit
neither us nor the country.
If we are averse to wearing khadi, if we do not believe in the
necessity of khadi, why should we not start a movement for getting the
clause regarding khadi deleted from the Congress regulations ? If the
khadi clause remains, we should abide by it. It that clause meets with
disapproval or if many members of the Congress are not willing to
respect it, they should try to get it removed through an agitation.
KHADI AND THE DESH S EVIKA S ANGH OF NADIAD

Shrimati Kashibehn and Shrimati Gangabehn have written the
following to the Taluka Committee on behalf of the Nadiad Desh
Sevika Sangh.2
Whatever injustice has been done to the women of Nadiad
through my article should be removed. Along with it, let me draw
their attention to one matter. The correspondents say in their letter
that fifteen women have been using pure khadi in the past and still
continue to do so while working for the Congress. If this is the case,
1

The letter is not translated here. It had described how voters wore borrowed
khadi clothes at the time of elections.
2
The letter is not translated here. It denied the accusation in Gandhiji’s note
on “Women Volunteers and Khadi”, 26-4-1931

84

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

how many women wear khadi regularly? For those who believe in
khadi, it is not a dress to be worn only on certain occasions—not a
uniform, but something which should be habitually worn. Swaraj
cannot be secured or the poverty of the starving masses cannot be
removed by a few persons wearing khadi on certain occasions. That
can be achieved only when khadi takes root in every home. Hence I
hope that not only Nadiad but also all other towns will take to wearing
khadi exclusively.
TWENTY-FOUR C APS AND THREE S HIRTS

What would we say of a man who believes that crores of Indians
are starving and half-naked and who at the same time somehow puts
on twenty-four caps on his head and three shirts, one on top of the
other? Should we not say that, although he is compassionate, his
kindness is misguided?
Despite this, we come across many such persons. On reading this
sentence, hasty persons will burst out laughing and some will think me
a fool. However, there is no reason either to laugh or to think me
stupid.
Let us consider the Kathiawari dress. It consists of a dhoti, a
long shirt, a short shirt and a turban. In view of the climate there, so
many clothes are not at all needed.Two short shirts can easily be made
out of a single long shirt. Twenty-four caps can easily be made out of
a twelve yard turban. Hence it cannot be regarded as an exaggeration
but is rather the bare truth to say that such a person is wearing twentyfour caps and three shirts. Those reasonable Kathiawaris who understand this straightforward matter and who are kind-hearted will
suggest a remedy for my perplexity.
This question is not directed towards politicians. They will
defeat me with many arguments, namely, that they have to attend at
the ruler’s court, etc. Neither is this question meant for employees of
the agencies. Like Drona and Bhishma, they will point to their
stomachs and may even go so far as to sing the lines of Shamal1 :
Stomach it is that makes us slaves
Who dance to the tune the piper plays.
This question is addressed to those who are free of such bondage. They should either give me a satisfactory answer or spare those
twenty-three caps and two shirts for the poor.
1

A seventeenth-eighteenth-century Gujarati poet

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

85

MARRIAGE C ONDITIONS

The common custom in regard to marriage in the Anavil
community is that the bride’s father has to pay a handsome sum to
the birdegroom’s father. In the Bardoli swaraj Ashram, there is a
gentleman named Shri Dayalji Gulabbhai who lives under the care of
Shri Lakshmidas. He had married once and had lost his wife. That was
some time ago and he has no children. He thought of marrying again.
He felt, however, that he should not marry during struggle. When the
Settlement came about, he was inclined to yield to desire. A father was
prepared to marry his daughter to Shri Dayalji by paying him a sum
of Rs. 800. He may have been momentarily tempted, but was later
able to overcome the temptation. He will now marry a seventeen-year
old girl named Shantabehn. As the conditions on which this marriage
is to take place are both worth knowing and worth copying, I give
them below :
The dowry will be accepted in the form of yarn instead of cash. And that
yarn weighing eight and a quarter pounds should be spun exclusively by
members of the family.
Not more than twenty-five persons in all consisting of fifteen persons
from the bride’s side and ten from the bridegroom’s side (including men,
women and children) should be invited and all of them must be clad in khadi.
Everyone should eat food cooked in a common kitchen and the meal
should consist only of dal, rice and vegetables. As it is summer, there would be
no harm in taking buttermilk. They would stop the custom of offering ghee to
Brahmins.
Whereas no gifts in the form of cash from relations or as dowry will be
accepted, giving of religious books will be permitted.
After the marriage takes place, those present will be allowed to take
fruits or sherbet instead of betel-leaves and areca-nuts. Tea will not be served
at all.
By way of dowry, only such things as a spinning-wheel, carding-bow,
takli, or carpet or something to sit upon should be given.
Such edible items as sweet balls and puris or any such articles of food
should not be accepted in any form.
At the wedding ceremony, the bride and the bridegroom will wear
garments made of yarn spun with their own hands. No clothes will be bought
for this purpose. Likewise, if anyone wishes to make a present, he would be
permitted to give only yarn spun by him.
At the time of the wedding, the bride will wear no ornament other than a
single piece of each item symbolizing her state of married happiness. Later,
she may accept anything, which anyone wishes to give.

86

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The interval between arrival and departure for the wedding will be three
days during which the ceremony will be performed.
Bangles made of hand-spun yarn should replace those made of gold.
The marriage ceremony will be in accordance with Ashram practice.
Gandhiji’s articles on the shastrik rites regarding marriage vows and his
speeches will be read out. The officiating priest too will be clad in pure khadi
and will accept no fee.
No band will be played and, while devotional songs may be sung, no
vulgar wedding songs will be allowed.

Shri Dayalji and the bride’s father are signatories to this. The
wedding will take place on the 13th. Even ordinary marriages in the
Anavil community involve large expenses, hence it is no small matter
that in this marriage only the religious ceremony has found a place
and khadi is compulsory for the bride and the groom as well as for
the guests present to bless the couple and the priest. Dhardhaman
implies dowry. The bride’s father provides all household articles by
way of dowry; whereas in this marriage only the implements needed
for spinning may be given, if so desired. Let us hope that this example
will be copied and such marriages will become a common practice
among all communities and that the couples, united under such
auspicious circumstances, will turn out to be true servants of the
country.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 10-5-1931

110. KHADI IN KAIRA
Shri Gopaldas Purushottam Desai sends the following account
of khadi activity in Patlad—Nadiad:1
Some corrections are required in the above note and figures.
Where information has to be given regarding the actual state of affairs
and where the figures are not beyond our capacity to get, no
conjectures should be made. No meaning can be deduced from the
sentence, “about 50 to 75 spinning-wheels are being plied”. The
number may be below 50 or it may exceed 75. It is likely that the
figure is actually below 50. Hence where the number can be easily
counted, the exact figure should be given and neither one more nor
1

The letters are not translated here.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

87

one less. Moreover, the various qualities of khadi produced in
Patlad—Nadiad should be mentioned as also the count of the yarn.
Mention should also be made of how much khadi has been received
from other places. There should be a comparative statement of figures
showing yarn spun for a living and that spun for becoming selfsufficient. Amongst the latter kind of spinners, there should be a
break-up of the number of men and women. How much yarn thay
spin on an average should be indicated. Do they spin only for
themselves or for others as well? Alongside the statement that the
workers numbered 151, how much they had earned should also have
been mentioned. There should be sub-divisions even amongst them.
All this accounting without details cannot be regarded as scientific and
no conclusions can be drawn therefrom.
With regard to the above figures, it may be noted that the
figures for Petlad and Nadiad are given separately. It may be said in
general that the figures for Nadiad are about half of those for petlad.
It is for Nadiad to say why this is so.
Let me now turn to Limbasi. Shri Vithaldas writes from there as
follows:1
Along with this, the names of those in whose homes the
spinning-wheel is being plied have been mentioned. In regard to this
report also, the above criticism should be regarded as applicable to the
extent it is relevant. The reference to a dearth of spinning-wheels
should put us to shame. At every place, we should develop the capacity to make spinning wheels. One or two samples should be obtained
from Bardoli and spinning-wheels should be made everywhere.
Moreover, this recommendation is far more applicable to places where
inmates of the Ashram happen to be living. What kind of wood should
be used for making spinning-wheels and other information should be
obtained from Bardoli. All should remember that the workshop there
is not meant for earning money but is a training centre. Hence
everyone can get the necessary information from there. A time will
come when people will demand spinning-wheels and taklis in every
home. If even then we continue to depend on Bardoli, Satyagraha
Ashram and such other places, our work will certainly come to a
stand-still. Even the largest single factory cannot provide crors of
spinning-wheels. This is neither necessary nor desirable. The meaning
of the khadi movement and its special feature is that every process
1

88

The letters are not translated here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

involved in its production can be carried out in every village. Khadi is
not an enterprise that supports a single activity, but it feeds many
activities. Hence every one of its limbs should blossom forth in every
village.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 10-5-1931

111. LETTER TO SHANTA PATEL
May 10, 1931
CHI. SHANTA,

I got your letter. The fact that you find the rules and the work
there too much for you shows that, when you were living outside, you
did not lead a disciplined life. Your desire to remain like a child is
certainly good, but being like a child does not mean remaining lazy, it
means being innocent and pure in mind. You are certainly not pure in
mind. Are you innocent? If you are not, you should strive to be. It is a
dangerous thing that you like very much to mix with boys, and not
with girls. This will some day bring about your fall. Have a look at the
world around. If all the girls wished to live as you wish no girl would
have the company of another girl. Do you think you can jump about
and play with boys as freely as you can with girls? It is dangerous for
you to wish to cross the bar which God has created. Think over this
and try to understand it. Show this letter to Premabehn and discuss it
with her, and then reply to me. Obey her and help her in her work.
Your letters will not be read by anyone by whom you do not
wish them to be read. Anandi will not accompany me. She is still at
Bardoli.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 4059

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

89

112. LETTER TO GANGASHARAN SINGH
BORSAD,

May 10, 1931
BHAI GANGASHARAN SINGHJI,

I have your letter. Success must come where Rajendrababu is the
leader. Boycott of foreign cloth, propagation of khadi and the boycott
of liquor and other intoxicants are of the utmost importance for us
today.
Yours,

MOHANDAS GANDHI
S HRI GANGASHARAN S INGH
C ONGRESS C OMMITTEE, A MAHRA
P.O. NIHATTA, D IST. P ATNA, B IHAR
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 11008

113. LETTER TO LAKSHMINARAYAN GADODIA
May 10, 1931
BHAI LAKSHMINARAYANJI,

I have your letter.
I saw the letter from Alexander Drew. Your reply is pertinent. I
regard this loss as gain. The condition of the Congress committees is
everywhere poor.
There is much risk in picketing the ships bringing foreign cloth.
We shall see what is possible and proper if the struggle is renewed.
The best work is to work among the masses.
I am proceeding to Simla tomorrow (Monday). The halt at
Delhi will be for about three hours. Jamnalalji will be accompanying
me.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 5621

90

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

114. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 11, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

I am writing this letter at midnight at Bardoa station. Champa
came and saw me here. I think Ratilal will not come at present. I shall
be in Simla for about five days; and then in Nainital for five days. I
expect to return to Borsad round about the 25th.
Buy the land at Bidaj. I was sorry to hear about Hanumansingh.
Can you tell me how his condition became what it is? Keep him
mostly on fruit.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U/I

115. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
May 11, 1931
CHI. MRIDU,

I am writing this at the Baroda station after midnight. So do not
expect a full reply.
I shall try to follow your suggestion with regard to the mills.
Nobody has prompted me regarding your going to Simla. When
I was at Ahmedabad the matter was discussed. He had told me that
you would not accompany him but might go subsequently. You have
been constantly in my eyes. So I felt like writing to you and am
writing. I do hope you will go. We may meet there if you come early.
Khurshedbehn should also go there if she can make it.
Nargisbehn has already advocated her case to me. Perinbehn came
later on and she also mentioned the matter. Pass on this message on
my behalf.
If there is need to write more I shall write later provided I find
the time. I do not have your letter with me right now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11111. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

91

116. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[On or after May 11, 1931 ] 1
CHI. NARANDAS,

Since you are not likely to feel the burden, I have no worries on
that account. I see that you will continue to have guests and visitors.
See that those who come are well looked after. Try to dissuade people
who may wish to accompany me.
Shri Malik is the Municipal Engineer there. He will visit the
Ashram in a day or two and advise you how to pump more water.
Take him to see chandrabhaga too. I have talked to him about Parnerkar. Cultivate Shri Malik’s acquaintance and introduce Parner-kar
also to him.
How is Purushottam? Has he agreed to go for a change of
air? If he had been in better health, I would have certainly, taken him
with me. You may write to me for my opinion on any matter if you
think it necessary to do so.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—9 : Shri Narandas Gandhine, Pt. I, p. 273. Also C.W. 8189.
Courtesy : Narandas Gandhi

117. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
May 13, 1931
Asked by the Associated press representative for any ‘story’, Mr. Gandhi
remarked:

You can write about the flowers and garlands that you see in the
car.
At the octroi post, the car stopped for a minute when a letter from Mr.
Emerson, Home Secretary, was handed to Gandhiji.
Gandhiji, interviewed by a representative of the Associated Press of India who
stood on the running board of his car, stated that he had received no invitation from
the Viceroy but from the Home Secretary. He would stay in Simla for two or three
days, possibly longer, and then proceed probably to Nainital.
1

From the reference to Gandhiji taking Purushottam with him, most probably

to Simla

92

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Q.

Will you be going to London?

A.

I cannot say yet.

Q.

What about the prospect of communal settlement?

I have been far too absorbed in affairs in Borsad and
therefore could not tell you.
A.
Q.

You might have known of the proceedings of the Conference at

Bhopal? 1
A.

No.

Q.
Do you expect to attend the informal meeting in Simla of Indian
members of the Federal Structure Committee?
A.

I have no notion.

The Hindu, 14-5-1931

118. NOTES
‘A CRY IN THE WILDERNESS’

I take the following passage with slight changes from a
communication in my file :
Protection of indigenous cloth by exclusion of foreign cloth and foreign
yarn from the country—this is vague and gives room for suspicion. The
starving millions living in the villages cannot be fed by the Indian mills. For
the last four months the demand for khadi has been going down steadily and
that for mill-cloth is increasing. The reason is that Congress organizations
are supporting the Indian mill-manufacture. Gandhiji’s cry of boycott through
khadi is a cry in the wilderness. Therefore the real position of the Congress
with regard to khadi must be made clear.

I have had a similar complaint from other sources too. There is
no doubt that the Congressmen think that because the Congress is
having help from and dealings with mill-owners, Congressmen are
free to use mill-manufactures in the place of khadi or at least to use
either optionally. Such however is certainly not the case. The Congress policy in this matter remains unchanged. The Congress expects
everyone under its influence to use hand-spun and hand-woven khadi
to the exclusion of all other cloth. Any laxity in this observance is not
only bound to harm khadi and therefore the villages but it is also
bound to harm boycott of foreign cloth. It will be found that in the
end the boycott will be possible only through khadi. The success
1
On May 10 and 11. The Nawab of Bhopal had invited the leaders of the AllIndia Nationalist Muslim Party and the All-India Muslim Conference to work out an
agreed formula on the question of electorates.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

93

hitherto obtained is due to khadi. This is not to say that the
indigenous mills have played no part in the campaign against foreign
cloth. But it is contended that the mills came in when the owners
realized that khadi was doing it, that khadi had shown the way, that
khadi had brought about the psychological change. What is however
the most important to remember is that boycott of foreign cloth will
not be worth the tremendous energy that has been put into it if it was
designed merely to stimulate the dividends of a few hundred thousand
shareholders. It is a national necessity only because through khadi the
crores of money saved through boycott of foreign cloth will be
distributed among the millions of villagers. It is therefore necessary
for men and women belonging to the Congress not to slacken their
effort for khadi.
R UMOURED AMERICAN VISIT

An American friend says in the course of a letter 1 dated 6th
April that
. . . This evening an Associated Press despatch from New Delhi, as given
in the Boston Transcript, reports that ‘Mahatma Gandhi is considering a visit
to the United States, etc,. . . .
The soul of India has greater tasks than can be performed through
physical presence in the United States at this time. . . .

Whether I represent the soul of India or not is a debatable point.
But with reference to the American visit I have felt exactly like my
correspondent. The work in India, if it has any spiritual value, will
affect America and every other country outside India far more than
the physical presence. Indeed when the spirit is free the physical case
often becomes a hindrance rather than a help. The invisible effect of
the spirit free must be a million times greater than that of the spirit
limited by the earthly tabernacle. Much therefore as I should love to
visit America, the voice within warns me against feeding the wish.
Happily other friends like Rev. Holmes, Mr. Kerby page, Dr.
Sherwood Eddy, Dr. Ward sent me a cable2 about the same time the
above letter was posted warning me against the visit. They thought that
I would be exploited without serving the cause at the present juncture.
I feel sure that these friends are right. Those friends therefore who
have been pressing me to go to America would please excuse me till
the time is ripe, if it ever is for me to go to their great country.
1
2

94

Of which only extracts are reproduced here
Vide also “Letter to Boyd Tucker”, 5-5-1931.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Meantime let them dispel, if they will, the ignorance and the misrepresentations that prevail in abundance about Indian affairs in their land.
Young India, 14-5-1931

119. DANGER LOOMING1
The public know little of what took place in Karachi the other
day. A half-cracked man like me by name Gajadhar Shau from
Central Provinces but as little known there as in Karachi took it into
his head that he could establish swaraj in a few days. He collected all
the unemployed and other labourers, promising them two them two
rupees per day and delivered an ultimatum to the merchants and
moneyed men that they should stop export and import business, stop
the manufacture of mill-cloth, collect one crore rupees in a fortnight
and utilize it for giving employment to all who were in need at a level
wage of two rupees per day through the spinning-wheel and the like.
Meetings were held and fierce resolutions were passed. Keys of safes
of were demanded. The indefatigable Mayor of Karachi met the men
and in a lucid moment Sjt. Gajadhar said he would stop his activity if I
disapproved of it. This was good enough for Sjt. Jamshed Mehta and
his friends and Sjt. Gajadhar who by this time had become a Mahatma
came to me as also later Sjts. Sidhwa and Isherdas. I recognized in Sjt.
Gajadhar an old correspondent who always tried my and my coworkers’ patience by sending long letters and even wires. We became
friends on sight. I had to give him nearly two hours I could scarcely
spare. The upshot of it all was that he promised to stop his activity
though I did not carry conviction to him. Whether he will carry out
his promise remains to be seen. Even if he does not, the workers of
Karachi will be able to deal effectively with any crisis that may arise.
But the incident of Karachi is a portent. If the acts of Congressmen are not firm and absolutely correct, there is every danger of
the Congress and all other healthy activities being swallo-wed up by
the onrushing floods for want of the necessary embank-ment of
discipline. Storms and floods there always will be. But discip-line is to
disorder what bulwarks and embankments are to storms and floods.
The awakening of the masses hitherto drugged into sleep by
ignorance and despotism can easily prove their own undoing together
with a wreckage of the social structure. The attempt of the Congress is
1

Vide also “Messagge to Hindustani Seva Dal”, 9-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

95

to reform the social structure, remove abuses and at the same time
help the masses to occupy the position of which they have been long
deprived.
Behind the crazy demand of Sjt. Gajadhar Shau there was a
substratum of truth. Unemployment there undoubtedly was and still is
in Karachi as elsewhere, as throughout the 7,00,000 villages of India.
No society can long endure that harbours or creates an army of
unemployed. There is something wrong in such society. There must
therefore be some occupation always available for those who will
work. The Karachi scheme asked for employment through the
charkha. Unfortunately the author knew no more perhaps about the
charkha than the name. But I do believe that in its extensive meaning
so as to include all the cotton processes from picking to weaving and
washing, colouring and tailoring, it does provide permanent and unlimited occupation for the city-dwellers as well as the villagers. This
does not exclude other occupations. But this one thing may be
adopted anywhere and everywhere.
One thing we must rigidly guard against and that is free
kitchens. Free kitchens are a dangerous institution designed to manufacture paupers. Public kitchens may be run wherever they are a felt
want. Everyone can work for a meal and be sure of getting a cheap
clean meal in healthy surroundings. It is necessary for us to learn that
it is a sin to give a free meal to one who is fit to do any remunerative
work at all.
Young India, 14-5-1931

120. ‘NO CHANGE OF HEART’
This heading has no reference to change of heart among the
rulers. It refers to absence of change of heart among ourselves
according to the following impeachment1 of a Sindhi correspondent.
I believe that the complaint about foreign cloth is substantially
correct. There is not in the cities at least that real change of taste such
that the people will not touch foreign cloth whether it comes from
England, Japan, France or elsewhere. Though the intellect admits the
desirability of abjuring foreign cloth, the heart yearns after the
1
Not reproduced here. The correspondent had complained that the old love for
foreign cloth was still alive and blamed Gandhiji for having a soft corner for the millowners. Vide also “Foreign Cloth and Other British Goods”, 23-4-1931

96

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

fineries which only come from foreign countries. Love of self predominates over love of the country or rather love of the semi-starved
millions.
Picketing of foreign-cloth shops has but a limited use. The real
thing is the education of the masses in these matters. Better even than
education is the example of workers and better still is teaching the
people how to produce cheap khadi through self-spinning. In practice
all the three methods will go together.There must be therefore
imparting to the people a knowledge of the economics of boycott
through khadi. People should know from well-chosen illustrations
how khadi can bring and has brought prosperity to the villages.
People should come in touch with sincere workers who are habitual
wearers of khadi and should be enabled to know how to prepare their
own khadi in their own villages. Congress workers should therefore
have a competent knowledge of the boycott and khadi literature, they
must be honest wearers of khadi and they must know the cotton
processes sufficiently so as to be able to instruct those who would
know how to gin, card, spin or even weave.
Those therefore who realize that boycott of foreign cloth and
manufacture and use of khadi are permanent institutions of the
highest economic value will welcome the Settlement which enables
them to know how far the people have been converted to the national
ideal. Our real strength must lie in the people doing in normal times
the things they did in abnormal times under the severe pressure of
public opinion or worse.
One word as to the mills. I have no tender spot in me for our
mills. They are well able to take care of themselves. They have still
many limitations to overcome. They have not yet put the national
interest before that of the agents, owners and share-holders. But after
having said all this I would like the correspondent to test the trut of
the fact thath they have striven this time to respond to the national call
be it to ever so small an extent. And this apart from the financial aid
they might have given to the movement. I should count that help of
no import, if they did not regulate prices and production. I believe
that they made an honest attempt in that direction.
Much however has yet to be done by them. They have not yet
frankly recognized the premier place khadi has in national economy.
They have not net organized the foreign cloth merchants for change
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

97

of their trade to swadeshi, they have not yet learnt the inestimable
value of regarding themselves as trustees for the whole nation
including the mill-hands. But this change will come if the Congressmen will play the game. conversion, not coercion, must be the aim.
Young India, 14-5-1931

121. ANGLO-INDIANS
Dr. H. W. B. Moreno writes :1
I can noly say that every community would be on a par with
every other under the swaraj Constitution. I invite the attention of all
the minorities concerned to the Fundamental Rights Resolution2 of the
Congress. So far as the Working Committee could, it took care to see
that the rights of minorities were fully secured under that Resolution.
That Resolution is now before the Congress Committee with a view to
strengthening it. All those who have useful suggestions should send
them to the Committee for consideration.
But I know that this is not what Dr. Moreno wants. He wants to
know where the Anglo-Indians will come in specifically. My answer is
they would come in where their merit would take them. There would
most decidedly be nothing to prevent them from occupying the
highest position that any other Indian may be capable of occupying.
The fact however is that the AngloIndians as a class have occupied or
attempted to occupy the position of rulers. They have not as a class
taken part in the national movement. They have isolated themselves in
their favoured position. Under swaraj there will be no favoured position for anybody. Hence like the Englishmen whose cry for equality
means retention of favoured position the Anglo-Indians may feel
aggrieved that they would be at a disadvantage under swaraj if they
did not have the present favoured position guaranteed.
I hope however that Dr. Moreno has no such favouritism in
view. If I know him correctly, I expect he seeks information about the
sub-merged Anglo-Indians. Of them I can say with confidence that I
should be surprised if they did not in common with the submerged of
the other communities find themselves in a better position than they
1

The letter is not reproduced here. The correspondent wanted to know what
the position of the Anglo-Indian community would be under the new constitution for
India.
2
Vide “Resolution on Fundamental Rights and Economic Changes”,
31-3-1931

98

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

are in today. Anyway, there are enough Congressmen who are
pledged to the abolition of all unjust privileges, all unnatural inequalities. If the condition of the masses is found to undergo rapid
improvement under swaraj, the Anglo-Indian poor must share it to the
fullest extent possible. The Congress aims at swaraj for the whole
nation and not a section. And it will fight on till that end is achieved. I
therefore invite all the minorities to join the national movement and to
hasten the advent of the happy day. Let it not also be said of any of
them that in the hour of the nation’s trial, they stood aside and came
in to enjoy their share of the happiness. They will get the share but
they will not relish it even as a man who has not toiled for his meal
cannot enjoy it though it is placed before him.
Young India, 14-5-1931

122. THE ALLAHABAD CONGRESS HOSPITAL :
AN APPEAL
In June last year Pandit Motilal Nehru visited Bombay and saw the
good work that the Congress hospital was doing there. He was impressed by
this and, on his return to Allahabad, he expressed a desire that a similar
hospital be started in Allahabad also. . . . Largely owing to the generosity of
friends in Bombay, some funds and material were collected for the proposed
hospital. On pandit Motilalji’s discharge from prison, the hospital was
formally started in a wing of Swaraj Bhawan. . . .
The limited funds collected have now been exhausted and the committee
had to consider whether it should continue the hospital or not. . . .
This appeal for financial assistance is therefore being issued in the hope
that there will be a generous response to it. The question of having a
permanent hospital in Swaraj Bhawan has not been decided yet. But the
committee would like to have sufficient funds for the carrying on of the
hospital for at least three years. The estimated expenditure on the hospital, if
it is run on its present limited scale, is rupees one thousand a month. . . .

KAMALA NEHRU
MOHANLAL NEHRU
R AMAKANT MALAVIYA
May 11, 1931

I hope that the foregoing appeal1 will receive a quick response from the public. It has been purposely not signed by any
except those who are connected with the management of the
hospital, because it is not to be in any way considered as a national
1

Of which only extracts are reproduced above

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

99

memorial. But the appeal is not the less important on that account.
Thirty-six thousand rupees to carry out a wish of Pandit Motilal
Nehru is a paltry sum. I hope, therefore, that there will be no delay
and no hesitation in responding to the appeal made by Shrimati
Kamala Nehru and her co-signatories. The reader should know that
from the commencement of the hospital she has been its soul. The
public may wonder why the appeal treats the hospital as a temporary
thing. The idea is to watch how the institution works and by actual
experience to know what will be the real need. Moreover, whilst
everything is in the melting pot, it was thought that the wisest course
would be for the time being to be satisfied with meeting the daily
need.
Young India, 14-5-1931

123. FOR THE DANDI PILGRIMS
All the fellow pilgrims who undertook the march to Dandi on
12th March 1930 1 being scattered all over and not being in constant
touch with me, it is necessary to remind them through these columns
that they are still under the same discipline and vows that they took
before beginning the march and after. They are therefore expected to
keep an accurate diary of the day’s work from day to day, to attend to
the two prayers, to keep their wants as low as possible and therefore to
keep their diet as simple as possible and to dothe daily sacrificial
spinning. Those who are living in villages can conduct village schools,
teaching the children in addition to a knowledge of the three R’s,
hand-spinning and other processes of cotton,insisting on their attending to personal hygiene and village games and athletics, doing
village cleaning themselves, seeking at the same time the assistance of
the villagers and their children and collecting and tabulating all the
necessary information about the villagers. The workers would also
find out those using foreign cloth and intoxicating drinks and drugs
and try to wean them from both by paying them friendly visits and
otherwise creating public opinion in the villages in these matters. They
will wherever possible and necessary organize peaceful picketing. Of
course they would seek to remove untouchability. The workers should
send to Sjt. Chhaganlal Joshi a report every month of their work
including an abstract from their diary. Needless to say they are
1

Vide “Persons who Accompanied Gandhiji on the Dandi March”,
12-3-1930“Letter to Malcolm Hailey”, 23-5-1931

100

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

expected to keep an accurate account of every pice they may spend
and receive.
While these instructions are meant for and binding on the original pilgrims, they may serve as a guide for all the national workers as
well in cities as in villages. There will be naturally some changes in the
cities. There is no Hindu-Muslim quarrel in the villages but national
workers in cities have to add this essential service to the others.
Young India, 14-5-1931

124. HOW THEY ARE TAUGHT
A correspondent who gives his name and address writes from
Wilmington, North Carolina.1
The newspapers tell of your efforts together with many others of your
nation for momplete independence, which is good in itself, but they also give
accounts of Indian life and that show that you lack understanding what freedom
really is and upon what it rests in the beginning. . . .
India is trying for independence by her very endeavour from God’s Rule
as well as from a Christian nation, whereas the greatest enemy of India are the
majority of Indians, who neither thoroughly understand God’s Holy Will or
even her Christian neighbour, England.
Just as it was an act of charity and goodness on the part of God to prvide
more ample clothing for the fallen and erring parents of ours, mine as well as
yours, so is the endeavour of England and others to provide for India more
cloth only as an act of Christian charity and goodness. . . .
India should first of all seek ample clothing and education on the Holy
Will of God as narrated in Holy Scripture as a base to obtain independence. . . .
The greatest enemy of India causing the most oppression and suffering
is ignorance on your own part and that of the people, not England. . . .

I have made hardly two alterations in the text for easier reading.
The correspondent addresses me “Dear friend in Jesus Christ”. His
sincerity is as clear as his ignorance. The reason why I publish the
letter is to show how even in the enlightened West people can be mistaught. In this letter there is ignorance of history and, if I may venture
to say so, ignorance even of the Bible. This letter represents teaching
of one type.
A correspondent from New York the other day sent me cuttings
1

Only extracts are reproduced here.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

101

showing how events in India were misreported and misrepresented.
The correspondent warned me against being deceived by the attention
paid to me by American Pressmen here into believing that the whole
of America was bubbling with enthusiasm for us. He implied that for
one sympathetic message or article there were ninety-nine prejudiced
articles or reports belittling everything Indian.
Reginald Reynolds cites a third variety. He thinks that the
English people from their infancy have no chance of knowing the
truth about India. False history is dinned into the ears of boys and
girls. The table talk too about India is no better. Of this type of
teaching we here have also some experience. We know what history we
learn in schools and what we have to unlearn by bitter experience. We
are taught to imagine the blessings and virtues of British rule; we
learn, as we grow, to know the contrary. Our greatest enemy is therefore ignorance spread often wilfully to prejudice us. It is true that we
have also to clean our own stables but not in the sense and the manner
suggested by the Wilmington correspondent.
Young India, 14-5-1931

125. ‘JUDGE LYNCH DECIDES’
A correspondent writes :
I am taking the liberty of enclosing herewith a small cutting from the
Literary Digest which will speak for itself. I wonder what you think of the
whole shameful affair? I dare say you meet many an American visitor or
interviewer who often demand of you a message to their country or invite you
to their continent. Would it be too much to ask of you to give them a message
to see that such atrocities as lynching of a hapless and coloured race are put a
stop to?

The cutting he referred to has the above heading and reads as
follows:1
This does make sad reading. If we had no faith in the ultimate
Good, we would lose all hope. I have faith and therefore hope that this
lynching will yield place to proper justice. I do not pretend to the
influence over American opinion that the correspondent credits me
with. But I have no doubt that the people of that continent are fully
alive to the evil and are trying their best to remove this blot on
American humanity.
Young India, 14-5-1931

1

102

The report is not reproduced here. It described how a Negro was lynched.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

126. LETTER TO SYED AZMATULLAH
May 14, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter 1 . I can only give you my assurance
that I shall do my best to promote Hindu-Muslim unity. What I am
striving for is a heart unity. The solution of the constitutional question
rests in many other hands than mine.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat : S.N. 17034

127. LETTER TO HENRY NEIL 2
May 14, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your characteristic letter 3 . Only I am not going to
America in the near future.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat : S.N. 17072

128. LETTER TO S. RANGOO RAM
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 14, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. It is not at all certain that I am going to
London. The odds are that I am not. But if I do, personally I would
like to accept the offer of Miss Muriel Lester who has an institution of
hers somewhere in the East End. But as I do not know the ins and outs
I have simply left it with Mr. C. F. Andrews who is fortunately now
there and who knows all about me. Naturally I would love to accept
your offer also but I have already told Miss Lester that if the political
1
The addressee had written : “If only you make it known to the Muslims that
you would accept the other thirteen points of Mr. Jinnah, if separate electorates are
given up, I assure you the Muslims would adopt a more accommodating attitude and
agree to joint electorates. . . .”
2
Judge Henry Neil, founder of the Centenarian Club
3
The addressee had written : “I would like to be of service to your campaign for
freedom. Especially if you should come here.”

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

103

exigencies do not come in the way and if any reception committee
that might be formed also does not come in the way and the choice
rests with me, it shall be to live in her institution. Now you know my
inclination. You will do what you like in consultation with Mr. C. F.
Andrews or the committee that may be formed.
Please do not ask me to send anything for your magazine if
only because I do not know what it is to be like. But you must forgive
me also because I hardly get time to cope with the regular correspondence. I do not therefore like to take up even small things that
may occupy only a few minutes because it is an aggregate of few
minutes that makes a cycle.
Yours sincerely,

S. R ANGOO R AM, E SQ.
INDIAN S TUDENTS C ENTRAL ASSOCIATION
LONDON S.W. 3
From a photostat : S.N. 17073

129. LETTER TO SURESH CHANDRA BANERJI
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 14, 1931
MY DEAR SURESH,

I have your letter. I do not see anything on the horizon to
warrant the hope that peace will be established as a result of the Round
Table Conference. On the contrary, as I have said openly, nature
seems to be against us. I hold it to be impossible practically to get the
constitution we want without a heart unity amongst the different
communities. That unity is not likely to be forthcoming in the near
future. There are many other things too that are against us. But as
God confounds man’s hopes and out of his disappointments brings
forth hope, it is difficult to say precisely what is going to happen. My
business-like answer to you therefore is you should hope for the best,
prepare for the worst, but a satyagrahi’s preparation for the worst and
the best is always the same. You would still be spreading the gospel of
the wheel. You would still be nursing the needy sick. You would still
be looking after the pauper children and things of this kind are the
best preparation for civil disobedience and the like when they come.
Have I made myself quite clear to you? If not, tackle me again. Your
104

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

own particular business is to become well. I have the extra Rs. 1,000 in
mind. About the rest you will discuss with Jamnalalji when he comes
to Calcutta which he will do some time or other. I am likely to be back
in Borsad at the end of the month.
DR. S URESH C HANDRA BANERJI
ABHOY ASHRAM
C OMILLA (BENGAL)
From a photostat : S.N. 17074

130. LETTER TO HARIBHAU UPADHYAYA
F IRGROVE, S IMLA

May 14, 1931
DEAR HARIBHAU,

Bapuji has received your letter of the 10th. He has already expressed his
opinion about writing to Bhopal. As far as I remember the letter he wrote you was
posted on 6-5-31 from Borsad 1 . But your letter does not contain even an
acknowledgement. I too had written to you a separate letter. In that letter I had
suggested that you should inform Bapu of the latest and up-to-date position in regard
to repression in princely states. That too you have disregarded. What does all this
mean?
Your letter of the 10th was shown to Jamnalalji as per Bapu’s instructions. On
persuing it he remarked that Bapuji had already written regarding Bhopal, that he does
not consider it proper for him to write to Nawabs and Rajas about such matters in the
present circumstances. But Jamnalalji himself had written to Bikaner and he will do
whatever else is necessary.
About satyagraha, he does think that it was launched in haste but now it
cannot be remedied. He wishes to repeat the warning that we should guard against any
kind of mistake or violence on our part.
Yours,
PYARELAL
From the Hindi original: Haribhau Upadhyaya Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

1

Vide “Letter to Haribhau Upadhyaya”, 6-5-1931.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

105

131. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, SIMLA
May 14, 1931
You will like to hear why I have come to Simla and what talk I
am having with the Government. I cannot tell you everything, but I
can tell you that I came to hold consultation with regard to the
complaints on our side as well as on the Government side with regard
to the Settlement arrived at between Lord Irwin and the Congress.
These consultations still continue. What I have to emphasize is that if
you are Congress sewak1 and want to serve Hindustan, then it is your
duty to observe that Agreement irrespective of whether the Government observes it or not.
After we have fulfilled our obligation, and if after that we find
the Government has not fulfilled it we can take whatever step we like.
We know that whatever settlement has been arrived at is conditional,
but if we can use the settlement for some work, we should do it.
As a satyagrahi, if we get an opportunity for service as a fesult
of understanding, we should welcome it. That opportunity came your
way through the Settlement.
The Karachi Congress practically unanimously adopted it. Now
our duty is what I have described. Do not think that after this
Settlement we have to go to war. We should, on the other hand, do
everything to see that we are not led to war and that the Settlement
should become permanent, so that we may get purna swaraj.
You know the conditions that have been imposed by Congress
on such of your delegates as will go to London to attend the Round
Table Conference. But if, as the result of settlement, we cannot get
complete swaraj, it is our ill-luck, and if our efforts towards a
permanent settlement fail, we should be ready for a fresh struggle.
But there are two points more which I wish to emphasize
besides the Settlement. If we wish to achieve what we want at the
Round Table Conference, we must be properly equipped :and that
equipment is that all the people of India—people who are born here
and have made India their home, whether Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs,
Christians, Parsis and others—should unite in the demand for swaraj.
Unless we bring about such an understanding among ourselves my
going to London is useless. Therefore we should all make such efforts
as would make for unity among all communities in this country.
1

106

Volunteer
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

But I do not want unity on paper. If we write out a pact on
paper, unity is not thereby achieved. The unity I want is the unity of
heart and for that unity I always pray. And when that unity is achieved
you will gain such strength as will give us success.
I am afraid my voice is not reaching you all and that you are
feeling upset by rain. Let me pray to God that we may be saved a
second struggle and that this Settlement may lead to final success.
As regards work, you have the Congress resolution before you
and you have every scope for work in respect of the spread of
khaddar and boycott of liquor. I thank you all.
The Hindustan Times, 16-5-1931

132. HOMAGE TO K. T. PAUL
S IMLA,

May 15, 1931
I had the privilege of knowing Mr. K. T. Paul. The nearer I
came to him the more I respected him. His Christianity appeared to
me to be broad and tolrant. It not only did not interfere with his being
a thorough nationalist, on the contrary, in his case it seemed to have
deepened his nationalism. And in nationalist circles it will always be
remembered, to the credit of the deceased, that he stoutly opposed the
demand for any special concessions for Christian Indians in the
forthcoming constitution, believing as he did that character and merit
would always command not only proper treatment but respectful
attention. His death especially at this time in the life of the nation is a
distinct loss to the country.
From a photostat : S.N. 17075

133. CABLE TO “EVENING STANDARD”
[May 15, 1931 ] 1
Replying to The Evening Standard’s question whether he is coming to London, Mr. Gandhi has cabled that it is contingent on certain circumstances, two of
which are a satisfactory working of the Settlement and the solution of the communal
question.
Young India, 21-5-1931, and The Hindu, 16-5-1931

1

Reported from London on this date

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

107

134. LETTER TO S. SATYAMURTI
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 15, 1931
MY DEAR SATYAMURTI,

I have your letter. So far as I know there is no chance of my
going to London. Several things have to happen before I could
consent to go.
Yours sincerely

M. K. GANDHI
From the original: S. Satyamurti Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library

135. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
S IMLA,

May 15, 1931
Mahatma Gandhi said his conversation was healthy and good and he was not
seeing the Viceroy again in Simla. He would be seeing Mr. Emerson, the Home
Secretary, again tomorrow and leaving Simla for Nainital positively on the 17th,
Sunday. 1
Mahatma Gandhi refused the answer the question if he was more optimistic
regarding his going to London and the general political situation, and added :

Fro any further information you must go to the Viceregal Lodge.
While walking towards Sir Fazl Hussain’s residence, he was asked whether he
would favour Simla as the seat of the Swaraj Government. He replied:

We must go down five thousand storeys to the plains, for
government should be among the people and for the people.
The Hindustan Times, 17-5-1931

1

For the report of the interview with H. W. Emerson, vide “Note by H. W.
Emberson on Interview Between Himeself and Gandhiji”, 18-5-1931

108

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

136. TELEGRAM TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
S IMLA,

May 16, 1931
S ARDAR VALLABHBHAI
BARDOLI
IF

YOU

MEETING
FIT.

HAVE

HEARD

NINTH

FROM

BARDOLI

PROCEEDING

JAWAHARLAL

OR

NAINITAL

ANY

OTHER

SUGGEST
PLACE

YOUR

YOU

HOLDING

MAY

THINK

TOMORROW.

BAPU
A.I.C.C. File No. 273, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

137. LETTER TO KHAN CHAND DEV
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 16, 1931
DEAR DR. KHAN CHAND,

I was glad to receive your exhaustive note and it came just in
time. There will be difficulty about the release of the ramaining
prisoners. I must now ask you to give me copy of judgment and
evidence in each case if it is at all possible or have a note prepared
there on each case showing why you consider that the prisoners concerned fall within the Settlement. You must give me also a full
description about the cases still pending.
Yours sincerely,

DR. K HAN C HAND DEV
BRADLAUGH HALL
LAHORE
From a microfilm : S.N. 17082

138. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 16, 1931
DEAR SATISBABU,

I have your two letters. Hemprabha Devi’s condition makes me
feel anxious. Please keep me informed.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

109

Your description of the squabbles 1 there makes one sad and
your reading of Subhasbabu sadder still. I am glad you are entirely
keeping out of party affairs. The Mussalman cutting has not given me
satisfaction. The translations of Rashtravani are good. I think you
ought to add salt to your food. I had long chats here with the
authorities on matters arising out of the Settlement. They are fairly
satisfactory. I am now going to Nainital and then reach Borsad about
the end of this month.
S YT. S ATIS C HANDRA DAS GUPTA
KHADI P RATISHTHAN
S ODEPUR (BENGAL)
From a photostat : S.N. 17083

139. LETTER TO A. FENNER BROCKWAY
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 16, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your cablegram which has been redirected
to me here. I am not replying by cable as my opinion remains the
same as I explained to you in a previous letter. I gave you only one
reason preventing me from going to London. But I should have
mentioned another also namely the work of the Settlement. Though I
am receiving help at the centre, local authorities are giving great deal
of trouble in implementing the Settlement and they are accusing local
Congressmen of breach on their part. I have ample evidence and I am
investigating every case of breach on the part of individuals, but in the
vast majority of cases Congressmen have fully implemented the Settlement. I am making no mention whatsoever of breach on the part of
the authorities whilst I am still negotiating with them and in the hope
that things will be put right in the near future. But this thing practically takes away all my time and keeps me in India.
Yours sincerely,

F ENNER BROCKWAY, E SQ.
R ICKMANSWORTH
HERTS. (E NGLAND)
From a photostat : S.N. 17084

1
Between Subhas Chandra Bose and J. M. Sen Gupta over the affairs of Bengal
Provincial Congress Committee; vide footnote to “Telegram to J. M. Sen Gupta”,
4-6-1931.

110

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

140. LETTER TO RAMLAL SINGH
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 16, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. Perhaps you do not know that I am under a
vow1 not to live at the Ashram until a full settlement is made and India
has got what she wants. If you would stay at the Ashram notwithstanding this fact, I would like you please to write to the Manager of the
Ashram and I have no doubt that he will admit you for the few weeks’
stay.
Syt. Vithalbhai Patel’s address is: C/o Thomas Cook & Son,
London.
Yours sincerely,

THAKUR R AMLAL S INGH
KANTIT ESTATE
P.O. BIJAIPUR (MIRZAPUR)
From a microfilm : S.N. 17085

141. LETTER TO K. NATARAJAN
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 16, 1931
DEAR MR. NATARAJAN,

You will please excuse me for the delay in acknowledging your
letter. You know the reason why. The statement imputed to me is a
pure invention. The conclusion that the British regime is an evil was
arrived at after laborious studies fortified by painful experiences. I
have set forth the whole process in Hind Swaraj as also in My
Experiments with Truth. It was good of Mr. Bittman that he refused to
believe the report without verification. I may add that I do not even
remember the meeting with Bishop Azariah. I return Mr. Bittman’s
letter.
Yours sincerely,

Encl. 1
S YT. K. N ATARAJAN
“INDIAN S OCIAL R EFORMER” OFFICE,
BOMBAY
From a microfilm : S.N. 17086

1

Vide “Speech at Prayer Meeting, Sabarmati Ashram”, 11-3-1930

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

111

142. NOTES
HOW TO END DARKNESS?

A graduate asks:
This is partly true. In a letter which is lying along with the
above, I find the following: “Amongst us, the expenses incurred on
the death of a person have been completely stopped, there is less of
weeping and wailing, marriages are becoming simpler, and less expensive.”This is not surprising. Such reforms ought to come about at the
end of a great sacrifice. What, however, is surprising is that despite the
sacrifice, despite correct understanding of the situation, untouchability
has not been totally uprooted. At many places the untouchables are
still prohibited from drawing water from the village well, their children
cannot freely attend all public schools, caste distinctions and considerations of high and low still persist, mutual quarrels still take place,
girls continue to be sold, young men continue to expect to receive
cash from a girl’s father.
What is the reason for this?
Our attention is directed outwards, we do not look within oursleves. We find it exciting to fight the Government. We adopt those
reforms which are absolutely necessary for carrying on that struggle
and continuing it. But we find no excitement in fighting against ourselves, in carrying on a peaceful war against society, or we find it less
exciting to do so.
Who will end this laxity?
Volunteers, graduates of the Vidyapith, women volunteers and
vanarsena 2 “But if the salt hath lost its savour, wherewith shall it be
salted?” The volunteers—both men and women—find this work
uninteresting. They do not realize that swaraj cannot be won if these
tasks are not done, or even if it is won, it cannot be preserved. It is
clear as daylight that swaraj is nothing but the development of all
sections of the people. Hence if the rural workers now come forward
in large numbers and carry out these tasks silently and with determination and diligence, darkness will disappear and dawn will break.
1

1

The letter is not translated here. It had complained that the people continued
to be ignorant in spite of a year of struggle.
2
Literally, “monkey-army”—name given to volunteer bands of children
during the Civil Disobedience Movement.

112

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

BHAGINI S EVA S ANGH

Shri Karsandas Chitalia and Shrimati Surajbehn Manilal have
jointly decided to set up an organization under this name. Thanks to
the efforts of Shri Karsandas, the Bhagini Seva Mandir was built and
opened in Vile Parle. He has now issued a pamphlet for the establishment of the Sangh. Whoever wishes to read the whole of it should
obtain a copy from Shri Karsandas. It gives the following information about the Sangh:1
Women who have the following qualifications can join it:2
The pamphlet concludes as follows:3
I wish Shri Karsandas success in this enterprise.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 17-5-1931

143. OPINION UNCHANGED
Commenting on the article entitled “A Twentieth-Century Sati
(?) 4 ”, Shri Mathuradas Devram writes as follows :5
I have published this letter for the sake of fairness. My opinion
re-mains unaltered even after having known all these facts. The facts
as they were published have been corroborated and so my grief is all
the greater and my opinion has been strengthened. This is an example
not of love but of strong emotion. What does man not do when
overcome by emo-tion? If that very woman had survived, she could
have perpetuated her husband’s memory by her dedicated life.
Having died, she did not accom-pany her husband. It is an error to
believe that the relationship ends as soon as the body perishes. But
even if that were at all true, she could not preserve that relationship.
Just as her husband’s body was reduced to ashes, hers too was reduced
to ashes; hence along with the departure of the one, the other too
followed suit. In this pathetic incident, I find noth-ing at all praiseworthy. I hope that even this woman’s relatives do not consider this
suicide as the act of a sati. Rather than teach women to love their
1

These excerpts are not translated here.
Ibid
3
Ibid
4
Vide “A Twentieth Century Sati (?)”, 21-5-1931.
5
The letter is not translated here. It had described and justified the action of
the woman who had burnt herself on the pyre of her husband.
2

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

113

husbands blindly, we should liberate them and show them through our
conduct that the soul in a woman has equal rights with the soul in a
man.
Now about Shri Mathuradas’s last question. In the sentence “A
woman who is a sati will participate in the function of procreation
within limits,” the phrase ‘a woman who is a sati’ has been used to
denote a woman of good character whose husband is alive. My ideal is
to make husbands and wives practise total celibacy. If that is not
possible, my purpose was to say that both should, within limits,
participate in the function of procreation. That is to say, sexual union
between the two should be permitted only for the sake of this function
and that too for the limited number of children that both desire. This,
in my opinion, is limited self-restraint.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 17-5-1931

144. PUBLIC EXPENSE1
No province in India has enjoyed such privileges in the matter
of public funds as Gujarat. The Gujarat Provincial Congress
Committee has never found its exchequer empty. Nor have its district
or taluk branches ever been left to want the funds that they needed. It
has been my conviction for years that such affluence cannot be good
for any public institution. There comes a point in the life of every
institution that has a prestige in public, when it experiences this
plethora of funds and all the risks and dangers attendant on it. At that
time, if it does not take care and does not spend like a miser, it is
bound to come to grief. Because an institution happens to have plenty
of funds it does not mean that it should anyhow spend away every pie
that it possesses. The golden rule is not to hesitate to ask for or spend
even a crore when it is absolutely necessary and when it is not, to
hoard up every pie though one may have a crore of rupees at one’s
disposal.
I am afraid that this golden rule has not been always followed
by the Gujarat Committees. In fact I should not be surprised if I
discovered the existence even of a certain laxity in this respect. I
would therefore suggest to every Taluka and District Congress
1

The original Gujarati of this was published in Navajivan on May 17. This is
a translation by Pyarelal.

114

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

committee in Gujarat to hold a close scrutiny into its accounts and to
relentlessly apply the axe wherever it is found to be necessary. We
may not build a pucca building when a thatched cottage would do. We
may not use a motor-car when a bullock-cart would serve the purpose
and we must avoid the bullock-cart when the journey can be made on
foot. Similarly the rigidest economy should be exercised in regulating
the expenses of feeding the workers. The best course would be for all
Congress organizations to get their account books inspected by some
experienced person who knows how to economize public expenditure
and to invite criticisms and suggestions from him for future guidance.
Ten years ago there used to be a golden rule in Gujarat that every
District, Village or Taluka Congress Committee was expected to raise
sufficient funds at least for its needs and to deposit them with the
Provincial Congress Committee. The practice remained in force for
some years and then fell into abeyance. Now all district organizations
draw upon the Provincial Committee for funds. This is a dangerous
situation. What guarantee is there that the exchequer of the Provincial
Congress Committee will always remain brimful? Nor is it right for the
Provincial Congress Committee to entertain such an ambition. It is
therefore high time that the good old rule were revived. We may rest
assured that funds will automatically come when there is good work
done and there is need for them. Only we shall have to cultivate
sufficient self-confidence and faith in our mission. It would be worth
while to draw attention here to the rule laid down by the Congress in
this connection. The All-India National Congress does not supply
funds to the provinces; it is the latter that are required to contribute
ten per cent of their income to the central organization. Why should
not this rule apply to the provincial organizations as well? And why
should not the districts be made to contribute ten per cent or a fair
proportion of their income to provincial organizations? It is simply
ridiculous for the provinces to be required to finance district
organizations. In fact it is almost like a person trying to walk on his
head instead of naturally on his feet. Such topsyturvydom cannot last
for long.
“But what about times of emergency?” some doubting reader
will perhaps, here, ask. “Do these rules of economy prescribed by
you apply even when the country is in a state of war?” My reply is :
“Certainly they do, even more when war is going on than when all is
safe and well.” God forbid, but should fighting have to be resumed,
we shall need to have the capacity to carry on with the minimum of
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

115

funds or even without funds. It is a fundamental principle of satyagraha that the tyrant whom the satyagrahi seeks to resist has power
over his body and material possessions but he can have no power over
the soul. The soul can remain unconquered and unconquerable even
when the body is imprisoned. The whole science of satyagraha was
born from a knowledge of this fundamental truth. In the purest form
of satyagraha there should be no need for conveyances, carriage fare
or even of doing Hijrat1 . And in case Hijrat has to be performed it will
be done by journeying on foot. The Hijratis would have to be satisfied with whatever hard fare falls to their lot and keep smiling when
even that fails. When we have developed this ‘be careful for nothing’
attitude, we shall be saved from many a botheration and trouble and
freedom will dance attendance upon us. Nor should one suppose that
a ‘careful for nothing’ person shall have always to be starving. God
that provides the little ant its speck of food and to the elephant his
daily one maund bolus will not neglect to provide man with his daily
meal. Nature’s creatures do not worry or fret about tomorrow but
simply wait on tomorrow for the daily sustenance. Only man in his
overweaning pride and egotism imagines himself to be the lord and
master of the earth and goes on piling up for himself goods that
perish. Nature tries every day by its rude shocks to wean him from his
pride but he refuses to shed it. Satyagraha is a specific for bringing
home to one the lesson of humility. We have travelled so much
distance during the last year, we have gone through so much suffering
and had so many rich experiences that we ought to have sufficient
faith in us to be able to feel that if we throw ourselves upon God’s
mercy untroubled by doubt or fear, it would be well with us.
Young India, 21-5-1931

145. LETTER TO BHUPENDRA NARAYAN SEN
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 17, 1931
MY DEAR BHUPEN,

I have your letter. You will see the use I have made of your
reference to Habu’s mother 2 . Why have you not got her name? You
should have known her age also and had a snapshot. Just now my
1
2

116

Emigration enjoined on Muslims when faced with religious persecution
Vide “A Woman’s Sacrifice”, 21-5-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

movement has again become uncertain. I do not know when I shall go
to Bardoli. But as soon as I am fixed up somewhere for some time,
both of you may certainly come and stay with me.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. B HUPENDRA NARAYAN S EN
KHADI MANDAL
C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm : S. N. 17087

146. LETTER TO A. SUBBIAH
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 17, 1931
MY DEAR SUBBIAH,

I got your letter just as I was moving from Borsad. Since then
there has been no time before now. I understand your difficulties. I
am therefore sending your letter to Rajaji and asking him to relieve
you as soon as he can. This is unfortunate but it is inevitable. I agree
with you that you must be with Seshan and you owe a duty to Lalita
also. Your indifferent health is an additional reason for relieving you.
I shall be in Borsad about the end of this month. We are leaving Simla
this afternoon to go to Nainital which we reach tomorrow, Monday. If
your health permits, you will not leave Rajaji till he is otherwise suited
and you should leave him with the intention of returning to him
whenever you are free and he needs you.
S YT. A. S UBBIAH
GANDHI ASHRAM
TIRUCHENGODU (S. I NDIA)
From a microfilm : S. N. 17089

147. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 17, 1931
Here is a letter from Subbiah. I think you should relieve him at
the earliest opportunity. The question is what you will do.
Somebody had sent Mr. Emerson your printed circular of
instructions. He was most enthusiastic about it and asked me specially
to congratulate you on his behalf. I had a very busy time here, also
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

117

profitable but exasperating. Local Governments have responded only
up to a point. Evidently they have not liked the Settlement. To get
them to implement the Settlement is therefore like drawing the lion’s
teeth. All the grace is therefore lost.
With Lord Willingdon we exchanged courtesies, renewed the old
acquaintance and the work being finished I am now off to Nainital to
meet Sir Malcolm Hailey over the U. P. troubles. More from Mahadev
if he has been writing to you. Do write if you have the time, but not
otherwise.
Encl. 1
S YT. C. R AJAGOPALACHARIAR
GANDHI ASHRAM
TIRUCHENGODU (S. I NDIA)
From a microfilm : S.N. 17090

148. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
May 17, 1931
Mahatma Gandhi stated that he was on the whole satisfied with his visit and he
was able to understand that so far as the Central Government was concerned they were
trying to give effect to the terms of the Delhi Pact. He reiterated his attitude that he
would go to the London Conference if the communal question was solved and if there
was a satisfactory working of the Pact throughout India.
As for the communal problem itself he recognized there was a good deal of
mistrust but after Bhopal discussion; he was more optimistic.

QUESTION. Supposing you or the Congress do not attend the Round Table
Conference and the Conference produces a constitution which is approved by
Parliament. What would be the attitude of the Congress?

ANSWER. I may speak on behalf of the Congress that it will
examine the scheme and if good, will certainly work it.
Q.

Do you believe in self-determination?

A.

Yes.

Would you allow any province to exercise self-determination and
separate herself from India?
Q.

A.
I shall fight through reason but shall not impose my will by
force of arms.

Pressed regarding his views on the communal problem, he reiterated his
position that if the Sikhs and Mohammedans presented agreed demands, he would
accept them unhesitatingly1 .
1

118

What follows is from The Statesman.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

When asked whether he did not think it a pity that nation-wide progress should
wait for local settlements, he said:

Well, if we can look after the pennies, we can look after the
pounds too. Why do I insist on this? These local settlements are like
the straws which show the way the wind is blowing, and that wind may
turn the weather-vane even of the Round Table Conference—even
perhaps veer it right round.
Q.

The Bombay Chronicle says: “Need we repeat that the most effective

method speeding up the work of the Round Table Conference and making it
completely successful, is to intensify the boycott of foreign cloth?’ That obviously
means that The Bombay Chronicle regards the boycott as a political weapon and as a
discriminatory weapon, because a boycott of Japanese cloth could hardly speed up the
work of the Round Table Conference. Don’t you think that that sort of talk is
inconsistent with both the spirit and the letter of the Delhi Agreement?
A.
I have not seen the article from which you have quoted.
But I can say broadly that it would be inconsistent both with the
spirit and the letter of the Pact to think of the foreign-cloth boycott
as a political weapon. Foreign cloth includes Japanese cloth just as
much as British cloth, if not much more at present, for the simple
reason that it ousts khadi and Indian mill cloth far more effectively
than British cloth. The economic and social reasons for the boycott
are all-sufficing.
Q.
How far are you prepared to go to conciliate the British Conservatives’
anxiety about safeguards?

To the utmost extent, consistent with the interests and
honour of India.
A.

In answer to the question whether he thought the local difficulties in respect
of the Agreement would be removed, say by July, Gandhiji replied:

That I can’t say. But of course, I hope so, and I have hopes that
they will.
Q.

And the Hindu-Muslim question? What do you think of the steps taken at

the Bhopal meetings of Muslims?

They are encouraging, and both the Muslim parties are
evidently doing their best to arrive at unity among themselves. But, of
course, when I speak of the Hindu-Muslim question I mean the entire
communal question. When the Hindu-Muslim side of the matter is
brought up, the Sikhs, for instance, will have their say. There will be
difficulties. I hope that they will not prove insurmountable.
A.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

119

Q.
So you will really go to Round Table Conference, whether early or late,
when those two problems are out of the way?
A.
Yes, certainly. And I shall be very pleased to go, because I
hope that when I get to England I shall find the British people not
uninterested in what I have to say and open to conviction by what I
tell them. Or, at the worst, I hope I shall persuade them that I am only
a harmless lunatic.
Q.

And Lord Rothermere?

A.

Oh yes. . . . even Lord Rothermere.

The Hindustan Times, 20-5-1951, and The Statesman, 19-5-1931

149. MESSAGE TO KARNATAK PROVINCIAL CONFERENCE 1
[May 18, 1931 ] 2
The resolution on fundamental rights is the most important
resolution of the Congress. It shows what kind of swaraj the Congress
wants to achieve. That swaraj is the poor man’s swaraj or Ramarajya.
Rama symbolized justice and equity, Rama symbolized truth and
charity.
The resolution insists on religious toleration, which means, that
no one will be prevented from discharging his religious obligations,
and the State shall favour no religion.
Justice and equity mean the establishment of just and equitable
relation between capital and labour, between the landlord and the
tenant. The landlord and the capitalist will cease to exploit the tenant
and the labourer but will studiously protect his interests.
Not that these things will be there as a matter of course as soon
as we get the powers. I only mean that they will follow as the natural
consequence of truth and non-violence if swaraj is achieved by those
means. The question is whether we are following truth and nonviolence. Ramarajya cannot be the result of truth and non-violence
followed as a mere temporary expedient or policy. Ramarajya can
only come out of truth and non-violence pursued as a creed. Could a
son ever fulfil his filial duties as a policy? Policy is essentially a
temporary expedient which one might alter as circums-tances altered.
1

Vide also “Letter to Jamnalal Bajaj”, 8-5-1931
According to Mahadev Desai, Gandhiji wrote this message “last Monday”.
May 18 was a Monday.
2

120

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

It is easy enough to follow truth and non-violence so long as no
sacrifice or suffering is involved, but he who adheres to them in all
circumstances even at the cost of life follows them as a creed. It is time
truth and non-violence were a creed and not policy with us
Congressmen.
Let us therefore find out what parts of the resolution we can
enforce even now. If we do not enforce the things that can be
enforced today, swaraj will be meaningless, for we will not suddenly
do after swaraj things which we can do but will not do today.
The resolution states that there shall be no untouchability under
the swaraj constitution. Have we cast out the canker of untouchability? The resolution says under the swaraj constitution there shall
be no facilities for the licensing of liquor and drug shops. Have we
cast out the drug and drink evil from our midst? The resolution goes
on to say that under swaraj all foreign cloth would be banned from
India. But have we given up our infatuation for foreign cloth and
become khaddar clad? Similarly under swaraj, according to this
resolution, Hindus and Mussalmans and Christians will live together
like true blood brothers. Have we cleansed our hearts of distrust and
suspicion of one another? Under swaraj, which the resolution pictures,
there shall be no hatred or ill-will between the rich and the poor. Have
the rich identified themselves with the poor, and have the poor ceased
to have ill-will toward the rich? Under the swaraj constitution we want
the maximum monthly emoluments of officials not to exceed Rs. 500.
But do those who are getting more today devote the balance to
philanthropic purposes? Have our millionaires adjusted their standard
of living to this scale of payment?
It is difficult to give a decisive reply to these questions today.
We are today slowly groping our way towards our ideal of Ramarajya
or the Kindgom of Righteousness. This resolution is intended to keep
this goal constantly before our eyes and to stimulate our endeavours
to attain it.
Young India, 28-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

121

150. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKAR PATTANI
May 18, 1931
SUJNA BHAISHRI,

I got your letter. Your complaint is entirely justified. I have
written to Bhai Fulchand. Need I give you a time to see me? If fact
you do not come at all. You have a right to come and see me wherever
I may be and whenever you may wish to. I am going today from here
to Nainital, and from there I shall go to Borsad, where I shall reach by
the 27th instant. You may come here. The air and water of the place
are good and the accommodation also may be said to be fairly good.
Vandematram from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5916. Also C.W. 3231. Courtesy :
Mahesh Pattani

151. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
May 18, 1931
CHI. SHARDA,

I have your letter. Do not spoil your handwriting. Read the
translation of a poem on handwriting by Ramdas Swami which I had
sent. Send me a copy of it. I shall publish it in Navajivan some time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati : C. W. 9901. Courtesy : Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

122

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

152. TELEGRAM TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL1
NAINITAL,

May 18, 1931
TO

S ARDAR VALLABHBHAI
BARDOLI
SUGGEST YOUR SEEING COLLECTOR ALSO COMMISSIONER. AM WIRING
SIMLA. HOPE REACHING BORSAD ABOUT TWENTYFIFTH

BAPU
A.I.C.C. File No. 273, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

153. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
NAINITAL,

May 18, 1931
CHI. JAMNADAS,

We have just arrived here. Prabhudas and Dhiru have come with
me. I got your telegram. If Prabhashankar agrees to take Ratilal under
his care and Ratilal is willing, where is the need to consult me in the
matter? We have of course to think how to meet his expenses. Discuss
the matter with Nanalal and then write to me. I understand from
Champa that at present she obtains the money she requires for her
expenses from Nanalal. Did you write a detailed letter to the Doctor?
The problem is becoming more and more complicated. Have a talk
with both Ratilal and Prabhashankar and then write to me. I expect to
reach Borsad about the 25th inst.
Blessigns from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : C.W. 9322. Courtesy : Jamnadas Gandhi

1

In reply to the addressee’s telegram which read : “Harassment peasants Valod
Mahal continues. Pending cases not withdrawn still. Confiscated lands not returned in
spite offer current year revenue. Yesterday police posted several places prevent
peasants entering their fields. Wire programme.”
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

123

154. LETTER TO V. A. SUNDARAM
NAINITAL,

May 18, 1931
MY DEAR SUNDARAM,

I had no time to give you a letter for the Austrian friends. Here
is the letter now as also a hundi 1 for Rs. 1000 on Jamnalalji’s firm in
Bombay. If you do not go to Bombay you can cash it anywhere. You
need not pay any discount. If it is demanded you should return the
hundi to me and tell me where you whould have the money.
When will you be going? The money is earmarked for the
European visit and no other purpose.
BAPU
From a photostat : G.N. 3203

155. LETTER TO DUDABHAI
NAINITAL,

May 18, 1931
BHAI DUDABHAI,

I have decided to give Lakshmi in marriage to a non-Antyaja. It
seems necessary to me to do that. Let me know what you think in the
matter. It will do if you send your reply to the Ashram.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3243

156. LETTER TO MAHAVIR GIRI
May 18, 1931
CHI. MAHAVIR,

I got your letter. I am glad that you have changed your mind.
You should remain where you are and learn to study. Take the help of
Shivabhai and others whenever it is available. Write to me from time to
time. Tell me how you have planned your study. One should learn to
study by one’s own effort. If a person has sufficient zeal to incre-ase
his knowledge he finds out for himself what and how to study.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 6229
1

124

A bill of exchange or draft
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

157. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
NAINITAL,

May 18, 1931
CHI. PREMA,

I liked your letter very much indeed. I see that during the
journey you had observed things intelligently. I should like Kisan also
to send me a description of her experiences. She may write either in
English or Marathi.
Take great care of Lakshmi. My idea is to marry her to a nonAntyaja. She should be able to take her place in such a family. She
should know cooking and also how to run a home. She should know
how to keep accounts. It would be excellent if she knew a little Sanskrit. Even if she does not know Sanskrit she should be able to recite
the prayer verses and verses from the Gita with correct pronunciation.
All girls should know this. We ought not to neglect their education. Write to me in detail. Let me know your experience regarding
Lakshmi.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10254. Also C. W. 6702. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

158. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
May 18, 1931
CHI. VASUMATI,

Though there is no letter from you, I am writing this letter as
today is my silence day. Have you started working among the people
of Nagarwada and other places? I suppose you are now required to
report yourself only once to the police station. I hope to reach Borsad
about the 25th instant.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9323. Also C. W. 539. Courtesy:
Vasumati Pandit
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

125

159. LETTER TO FULCHAND K. SHAH
NAINITAL,

May 18, 1931
BHAI FULCHAND,

Pattani Saheb writes to tell me that at the Bhavnagar session you
had resolutions passed on the policy of the Jamnagar State, and also
indulged in criticism of that State. This is against our policy. If you
agree with this view, you should write in the matter to Pattanji. Bhavnagar gives us many facilities and I do not wish that they should be
misused.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 2843. Courtesy: Shardabehn Shah

160. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
NAINITAL,

May 18, 1931
CHI. LILAVATI,

I have your letter. Khurshedbehn will certainly want to have
you, but I think it is better that you remain at the Ashram for the
present and get trained. Your mind will become steady only when you
find some quiet atmosphere at the Ashram. Take care of your health
Profit from Premabehn’s company. Abide by the instructions of
Narandas. Be sure that it will be to your benefit.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

126

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

161. TELEGRAM TO JAIRAMDAS DOULATRAM1
NAINITAL,

May 19, 1931
JAIRAMDAS DOULATRAM
HYDERABAD (SIND)
ABSOLUTELY PEACEFUL PICKETING ORIGINAL SHOPS MAY CONTINUE
BUT NOT FOR FINES.
GANDHI
From a photostat: S. N. 17103

162. LETTER TO N. R. MALKANI
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 19, 1931
MY DEAR MALKANI,

I have your letter. I know nothing about the proposal to appoint
you Secretary of the Sind branch of the A. I. S. A. Shankerlal does
not worry me over the working of the Association. When he needs any
opinion from me he writes. I am glad you have overhauled the
Hyderabad Khadi Bhandar. I do not understand the opening of a
central bhandar at Karachi. Are there not two or three going even at
present including the one on behalf of the Meerut Ashram by
Kikibehn? If there are these bhandars going on, would it not be an
interference with the existing bhandars? You will do what Shankerlal
suggests. If the Karachi project falls through or even if it does not, I
would certainly like your settling down in a village. I attach far greater
importance to it than to city work. But you can settle down in a village
only if Syt. Choithram and Jairamdas agree. I have always felt that
house to house propaganda is far more effective than picketing if the
former is done systematically and persistently. I wish I could read and
understand your translation.
BAPU
S YT. N ARAINDAS R. M ALKANI
C/ O THE S IND P ROVINCIAL C ONGRESS C OMMITTEE
HYDERABAD (SIND)
From a photostat: G. N. 898
1

In reply to the addressee’s telegram in which he had described how in
Mirpurkhas seals had been broken and fresh foreign cloth had been surreptitiously
introduced and had asked for telegraphic instructions whether “under above
circumstances original shops may be picketed also if picketing permissible for
recovery fines”. Vide also “Letter to Jairamdas Doulatram”, 7-5-1931
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

127

163. LETTER TO QUMER AHMED 1
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 19, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. I would welcome anything that will
remove the present deadlock. But what I notice is that the heart is
lacking.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G. N. 5119

164. LETTER TO DENNIS C. TROTH2
NAINITAL,

May 19, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter for which I thank you. I am very sorry to
inform you that I have no time to write the article you want.
Yours Sincerely,
From a microfilm: S. N. 17003

165. LETTER TO SAILENDRA NATH GHOSE
NAINITAL,

May 19 [1931] 3
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. I appreciate your anxiety for me to
visit America but I cannot summon enough courage for the visit as yet
and you will have observed that many friends dissuade me from sucha
visit. You must have seen even my going to London is an uncertainty.
Yours Sincerely,
From a photostat : S. N. 17013

1
2

The name of the addressee is supplied from the G. N. register.
Professor of Education and Psychology, State College, Pennsylvannia,

U. S. A.
3

The year is inferred from the contents of the addressee’s letter in which he had
written: “What America may mean to the coming negotiations between you and the
British Premier will be understood by you only when you will come to this country.
The importance of America can be judged from the fact that all the biggest guns of the
British—Churchill, Baldwin and a host of lesser figures will be coming to this
country next fall to speak on India. . . . For the success of your negotiations—for the
interests of India—it is absolutely desirable that you make up your mind to come to
this country after the London Conference. . . . ”

128

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

166. LETTER TO DURGA PRASANNA CHATTERJEE
NAINITAL,

May 19, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter 1 . I have no power to help you in the matter
referred to by you. But let me point out to you that to gain
representation is surely not the way to deal with the undoubtedly
critical economic situation in Bengal.
Yours Sincerely,
From a microfilm: S. N. 17071

167. LETTER TO GULSHAN RAI
NAINITAL,

May 19, [1931] 2
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter 3 and the cuttings which I shall read
with attention.
Yours Sincerely,
From a photostat: S. N. 17076

1

The addressee had written to Gandhiji for “directions as to the best course the
poor Bengali merechants should adopt in their utter helplessness so far as their
position is concerned in relation to the ensuring Indian Constitutional Reform
measures, Franchise Committee and the Second Round Table Conference. . . .” He
felt that “the absence of a competent representative from Bengal. . . has put the
Bengali mercantile community in a sad plight. . . .”
2
The year is inferred from the addressee’s letter which is dated 15-5-1931.
3
The addressee had enclosed for Gandhiji’s perusal his articles published in
The Tribune on the separation of Burma, Dismemberment of the Punjab, and the
Minority or Communal Problem. He had written. “It is my conviction that the
communal problem in the Punjab and Bengal will never be solved unless effective
majority is assured to the Muslims in these two provinces. It would be better under
the circumstances to constitute Chittagong, Dacca, and Rajshahi Divisions of
Bengal in to a separate province. In that ase Muslims will be about 70% in East
Bengal, and Hindus will predominate in West Bengal. Similarly if Ambala Division
is separated from the Punjab, the Muslims population in the rest of the Punjab would
be raised from 56% to 65%. If the Muslims got effective majority in the newly
constituted provinces of Punjab and East Bengal, I am sure they will have no
difficulty in accepting joint electrorates.”

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

129

168. LETTER TO DR. GOPICHAND BHARGAVA
NAINITAL,

May 19, 1931
DEAR DR. GOPICHAND,

I have your letter 1 of 16th instant. I had to discuss a similar
question with Mr. Emerson. I found that under ordinance 9, there was
no question of compensation. I am afraid therefore that there is no
prospect of getting any compensation.
Yours Sincerely,
From a microfilm: S. N. 17078

169. LETTER TO BODHRAJ
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 19, 1931
2

DEAR LALA BODHRAJ ,

I have your letter 3 about Lala Lok Nath. Could you send me a
copy of the full record of his case. I shall then see what can be done.
Yours Sincerely,
From a microfilm: S. N. 17079

1

The addressee had passed on to Gandhiji the information received from the
manager of Peshawar Khadi Bhandar that in 1930 the Government had confiscated all
the goods, cash registers and cash box containing Rs. 198 and personal effects of the
manager and that even after the Settlement only onefourth of the goods and the
broken cash box had been returned. He had requested Gandhiji to take up this matter
with Emerson.
2
President, Congress Committee, Multan city
3
The addressee had informed Gandhiji about the continued in carceration of
Lok Nath of Multan who had refused to give a bond of good behaviour while Sham
Dass convicted in an identical case had been released after the Settlement.

130

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

170. LETTER TO M. I. DAVID
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 19, 1931
DEAR MR. DAVID,

I have your letter of the 14th. I see that you are pushing forward
your programme of goodwill. You know that you have my sympathy
in your laudable endeavour and just now I feel that I can best serve
the common purpose by saying nothing in Young India that might in
any way hamper you. The letter to Lord Irwin of young Europeans, I
am ashamed to have to confess, I had not seen. I am therefore thankful for the copy you have considerately sent me. It is undoubtedly a
good letter. Lord Irwin”s reply is worthy of him.
The proposed manifesto is still, I suppose, a private document.
The reference to fair trade and living conditions requires a closer
examination. I suppose you are aware that Indians in great Britain do
not enjoy the rights 'the manifesto assumes they do enjoy. There can
be no comparison between the Indian demands in South Africa and
the European demand in India. The Indian in South Africa suffers
from social, commercial and legal disabilities and is treated as an
inferior being. The Indian demand therefore is to rise to a status of
equality. The European in India enjoys in every walk of life a position
of privilege and his demand for equality is tantamount to the retention
of the privileged position. When, therefore, India comes [in] to her
own, Europeans are bound to feel the pinch if they are not satisfied,
that to be just, the position of privilege must be surrendered. Apart
from this the European in Free India has not only nothing to fear but
his resourcefulness and his ability will always make him a desirable
citizen.
Yours Sincerely,

M. I. DAVID, ESQ.
F ORT, B OMBAY
From a photostat: S. N. 17095

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

131

171. LETTER TO SUKHENDUBIKAS CHAUDHURI
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 19, 1931
Can I make public use of your letter? Can you prove the facts
related?
S YT. S UKHENDUBIKAS C HAUDHURI
P ATIYA, D T. C HITTAGONG
From a microfilm: S. N. 17096

172. LETTER TO C. VIJAYARAGHAVACHARIAR
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 19, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

Though your postscript tells me that you expect no
acknowledgment to your letest letter, as I have a few moments I want
to say that you ought not to be distressed by what you think is want of
regard for you on the part of either myself or the other members of
the Working Committee. What really is the case is that they do not see
eye to eye with you on the things that are today agitating the country.
And how shall you blame those who cannot see eye to eye with you
even though they may wish to do so?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S YT. C. V IJAYARAGHAVACHARIAR
F AIRYFALLS VIEW
KODAIKANAL OBSERVATORY P.O.
From a photostat : S. N. 17098

132

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

173. LETTER TO KIRBY PAGE
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 19, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. I deeply appreciated the cable sent
by you and other friends. Without the cable too I had no intention of
going to America just yet 1 . But of course your cable and the letters
since received have shown that my disinclination was well-grounded.
Yours sincerely,

KIRBY P AGE, E SQ.
NEW YORK (U.S.A.)
From a photostat : S. N. 17099

174. LETTER TO BOYD TUCKER
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 19, 1931
MY DEAR BOYD,

I have your letter. I understand more fully the reason for your
wanting to accompany me to London should I go there. At the
present moment however there is neither any prospect of going to
London nor to America, to America much less. I shall certainly
publish your letter2 regarding missionary enterprise.
BOYD TUCKER, E SQ.
C/ O P OSTMASTER
S RINAGAR (KASHMIR)
From a photostat : S. N. 17100

175. LETTER TO K. T. MATHEW
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 19, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. I do remember having received the
letters and documents mentioned by you. I made no original sugges1
2

Vide also “Notes”, sub-title A Cry in the Wilderness”, 14-5-1931
Vide “Christian Missions”, 28-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

133

tion. Members of the rival organizations saw me and I certainly
approved of the idea of amalgamation of the two. Whether it was to be
under the auspices of the Congress or not was a matter for the Amalgamation Committee to decide. There seems to me to be nothing in
your letter to warrant a different opinion.
Yours sincerely,

K. T. MATHEW, E SQ.
GENERAL S ECRETARY
ALL INDIA S TATES S UBJECTS’ C ONFERENCE
KUNNAMKULAM (COCHIN S TATE)
From a microfilm : S. N. 17101

176 . LETTER TO NIRANJAN PATNAIK
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 19, 1931
MY DEAR NIRANJAN,

I have your letter. I hope you will soon be free from your
pecuniary troubles.
There is just now not even a prospect of my going to London,
still less the idea of building up a secretariat. Nor have I pictured to
myself the number of secretaries to be taken with me. I do not recall
the remark imputed to me by you and if I did, it must have been more
by way of a joke than anything else. What could an Utkal Secretary
do in London? The real redistribution will take place here and not in
London.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. N IRANJAN P ATNAIK
C/ O UDYOGA MANDIR
BERHAMPUR, B.N.RLY.
From a microfilm : S. N. 17102

134

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

177. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
NAINITAL,

May 19, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

I have received the enclosed account of a lathi charge in
Ludhiana1 from a member of the Ludhiana Congress Committee. Of
course it has been given to me for publication. Although it has no
direct connection with the Settlement I feel that its spirit should prevent such occurrences. If you agree with me, you will please enquire. I
shall await your reply before publishing the details. An eye-witness
came all the way from Ludhiana to Kalka to describe the whole scene.
Yours sincerely,

Encl. 1
H. W. EMERSON, E SQ.
S IMLA
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library.

178. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
NAINITAL,

May 18/19, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

We have just arrived at Nainital. But, today being my silence
day, I have some peace. I am, therefore, trying to attend to part of the
correspondence which has accumulated. I read Purushottam’s letter. I
should know who the lawyers are. Are you sure that connections with
them have not been broken off in haste? I cannot judge from here. I
suppose whatever is necessary has been done about Purushottam’s
demands.
Keep me informed about the success or failure of the Punjabi
vaid.
I think we shall return to Borsad some time about the 25th. I
shall know more definitely on Wednesday.
Prabhudas and Dhiru have arrived. Rambhau is yet to arrive.
Blessings from

BAPU
1

On May 16, 1931; vide, “Is It Crumbling ?”, 9-7-1931.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

135

[PS.] 1
Rambhau arrived yesterday evening.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—9 : Shri Narandas Gandhine, Pt. I, pp. 252-3. Also C.W.
8161. Courtesy : Narandas Gandhi

179. LETTER TO MADHAVJI V. THAKKAR
May 20, 1931
CHI. MADHAVJI,

I got your letter, and also Surendra’s. The news is painful, but
cases like this are bound to occur at a time of awakening such as the
present. We cannot inform the authorities, as that might lead to the
punishing of innocent people. Informing the authorities would have
been a breach of trust, and I cannot, at the moment at any rate, think
of any case or example in which breach of trust becomes a duty. It is
one thing when a man puts confidence in us and confesses a crime,
another when we come to have indirect information regarding anybody’s crime. In certain circumstances it may be our duty to make
use of the information indirectly received, but no such duty arises in
this case at all. Hence your job at present is to bring about a reformation, by whatever means, among those now engaged in terrorism.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I will leave for Gujarat in two or three days, or it may be even
tomorrow.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 6815

180. SPEECH AT NAINITAL
May 20, 1931
Replying to the address Mahatmaji referred to his interview with the
Governor2 and said that at such a time as this a man in his position could not say as
much as the public might be expecting from him. He further said that non-violence
was their duty so long as the Congress did not decide otherwise. He further asked the
citizens what they had done towards the propagation of khaddar which they had
1
2

136

This was added on May 19.
Vide “Sir Malcolm Hailey’s Note on discussions with Gandhiji”, 20-5-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

promised to do two years before. He urged upon them the importance of khaddar
towards helping the attainment of swaraj, without which, he said, India could not be
free. He impressed upon them that by merely going to the Round Table Conference he
could not achieve all that the Congress was fighting for unless the people stuck to
their duties which is the precedent condition for the attainment of swaraj.

The Hindustan Times, 22-5-1931

181. CONGRESS VOTERS
A correspondent asks :
At the time of elections to Congress Committees
1.
Can a Congress candidate register original Congress members and
himself pay the four-anna fee ?
2.
In order to obtain votes can a candidate send conveyances at his own
expense to the voters ?
3.

In order to influence voters can a candidate give feasts to voters?

4.
Can a voter take part in voting although he is not a habitual wearer of
khadi?

These are very relevant questions. My answer to the first three
questions is that although the practice would be very reprehensible, I
very much fear that there is nothing in the consti- tution and there are
no bye-laws preventing it. My answer regarding the fourth is an
emphatic ‘no’. Thus therefore though a candidate can, if he wishes,
pay the registration fee on behalf of the members and send them
conveyances and give them feasts in order to induce them to vote for
him I do hope that for their own sakes and for the sake of the
Congress and the country candidates will refrain from resorting to any
practice that might amount to bribery or an improper inducement. I
have never been able to understand this craze for membership of
Congress Committees, and Congress Committees formed in such a
manner instead of being instruments of service can easily become
those of mischief and disservice. So far as the habitual wearing of
khadi is concerned there is no doubt that the rule is more often
broken than observed. It is a remarkable phenomenon that habitual
wearers of khadi, and they are thousands, do not care to appear on the
Congress register and those who are on the Congress register do not,
in many cases, take the trouble of wearing khadi. One reason for the
laxity is that partisans are brought in at the eleventh hour nominally to
become members and to disappear from view as soon as the elections
are over. New lists are made at new elections or even bye-elections. In
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

137

spite of this tragic fact, the Congress is daily growing in power. It is
becoming more and more popular. It attracts more and more crowds.
Its mandates find ready acceptance from the vast mass of people. This
phenomenon can only be explained on the supposition that though
the Congress has indifferent representatives, somehow or other it
represents and voices the wants and aspirations of the people who
remain unaffected by the improprieties of the representatives and
support the Congress merely for what it stands for without looking
into or caring for the quality of its representatives. If my analysis is
correct, the moral is obvious. The Congress will cease to be the power
it is if the reprehensible practices referred to by the correspondent do
not cease. Congress workers will not always be indifferent.
Young India, 21-5-1931

182. NOTES
P ICKETING

Congressmen should know that the Government of India have
been receiving complaints from the provincial Governments that
picketing is not always peaceful. I do not know how far these complaints are justified. But we cannot be too strict in the observance of our
part of the Settlement irrespective of how the authorities implement
their part of it. Let us realize that the stricter we are, the greater will be
our prestige and strength. I therefore repeat what I have said before:1
1. There should be no coercion direct or indirect.
2. There should be no show of intimidation, hence not more
than say five pickets should work at one and the same place at a time.
3. There should be no more than courteous entreaty and
distribution of literature.
4. There should be no fine levied by Congress Committees
for breach of promises by foreign-cloth dealers.
5. There should be no hooting of purchasers of foreign cloth.
6. There should be no cordons formed to surround the
would-be purchasers.
7. There should be no lying down to block the passage of
customers or trolleys carrying foreign cloth.
If there are those who think that picketing under such
restrictions will be of no avail, they may give it up and run the risk of
1

138

Vide “My Notes”, sub-title To Workers
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

foreign cloth being sold under their noses. It is better that foreign
cloth is sold than that, in order to prevent its sale, we should break the
letter or the spirit of the Settlement.
Boycott of foreign cloth will ultimately succeed only when the
Congress message has penetrated the masses and the khadi spirit permeates them. The real work of propaganda and production lies in the
villages.
We should remember too that boycott of foreign cloth is
pursued for its great economic and social consequence. And it is just
as necessary to boycott Japanese or Italian cloth or yarn as it is to
boycott British cloth or yarn. Indeed it is more necessary to boycott
Japanese cloth because it offers greater competition both tokhadi and
indigenous mill cloth. We have no ill-will against Japan. We pursue
foreign-cloth boycott because it is an economic necessity for the
nation.
What I have said about the method of picketing applies equally
to liquor picketing. That too depends for its ultimate success in
penetration into the home of the drinkers.
S ETTLEMENT P RISONERS

I have been receiving complaints from many provinces saying
that there are still unreleased prisoners covered by the IrwinGandhi
Settlement. These are claimed by the Governments concerned as not
covered by the Settlement. The only way relief can be obtained in
such cases is to study the records of each case. I would therefore ask
all Committees who have sent me lists to examine the cases themselves
and where they are satisfied that the record shows violence (not
merely technical, or incitement thereto), they should for the time
being omit their names. Where the local examination shows that there
is no violence or incitement proved, they should send the record to me
and I shall go through such records myself and wherever necessary
obtain the opinion of some philanthropic counsel and press for their
release. Let it be remembered that according to the strict interpretation
of the relevant clause of the Settlement we shall have to go simply by
the record although those who know may be certain of the innocence
of any particular prisoner. Of those against whom the record gives no
proof of violence, we can demand release. Such was Sjt. Rajwade’s
case.
The other prisoners and their friends may derive satisfaction
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

139

from the assurance that in the event of a final Settlement their release
is a certainty and in the event of a breakdown in spite of all efforts,
they will find their old companions returning to them. For the result
they will not have to wait long.
P OORMAN’S S ALT

I regret that as yet the public do not know how the salt law relief
clause of the Irwin-Gandhi Settlement is being worked. I have
suggested to the authorities that they should issue definite instructions
so that the people concerned may know where they stand. My suggestion has been accepted by the authorities. The public therefore may
expect publication of the instructions in the near future.1
THAT AMERICAN VISIT2

Dr. Harry Ward writes
May I add a word to the cable which, with others, I sent you today. First
let me emphasize the fact that the reason I previously gave against your
coming to this country still holds now, and with increased force. Our papers
have become increasingly sensational and you would be misrepre- sented by
them, as well as exploited by the sensation-hunting section

of our

population. Thus your power to help us toward a better way of life would be
seriously diminished, if not defeated. But the other reason

against your

coming is more important. I am sure that it would injure and not help the cause
of India in your negotiation at London. There is under the surface a deep
English resentment against the United States. This is due to her economic
decline and our position of financial dominance. This feeling quickly seizes
upon any utterances about British policy as a means for its expression. Thus a
perfectly harmless appeal that some of use signed to MacDonald last year to
meet with you face to face and seek an adjustment, was the occasion of much
criticism of those who signed it, and of America in general, from British
ministers of religion. Also there has been much complaint in British papers
concerning our sympathy with the nationalist cause. Because British
propaganda no longer dominated the situation here we have been told that we
were only the victims of clever propaganda from nationalist sources. You can
see at once, therefore, that any manifestation of sympathy with India which
your presence here might evoke, would work strongly against you at London.
1
2

140

Vide “Salt”, 28-5-1931
Vide also “Notes” sub-title Remoured American Visit”, 14-5-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

HOW HE S PENT HIS GOOD F RIDAY

Father Elwin writing to Mirabehn says :
I thought I might tell you how I spent my three hours on Good Friday. I
did not go to Church but spent the time in my cell spinning. I am sending a
little of the yarn—very poor I am afraid—but it is a token. While spinning I
meditated on the crucifixion. It seemed to fit in very well—the cry of
desolation of God’s poor stretched on the cross of exploitation, the age-long
“I thirst” of those to whom the charkha with its message of love can bring
relief, the wonderful patience of the poor—“Father, forgive them for they
know not what they do.” The charkha then seemed to be the dual symbol of our
union with the poor and our union with God. It would be very good if people
would generally keep Good Friday in this way. It was a real experience of
purification.

I have examined the yarn sent by Father Elwin. It is by no
means poor in quality as he thinks. It is quite weavable. The count is
somewhere near 20. Nevertheless, I agree that it is poor for the sprit of
love and dedication that lay behind the sacrificial act. But no amount
of love or dedication can make up for the want of regular and long
practice. If therefore I have agreed with the self-abasing verdict of
Father Elwin I have done so not by way of criticism but to tell those
who might be induced to turn to the spinning-wheel that they will not
be satisfied with merely drawing the thread, for the thread thus drawn
will not be yarn, even as any angle drawn will not be a right angle. Just
as all right angles must be 90 degrees so must all yarn be even and
strong enough to be easily weavable. The count does not matter. A
spinner who draws an even and strong thread will automatically draw
at least a six count and if his wheel is good and his spindle straight
and fine, he will draw without difficulty anything between 10 and 20
counts. I commend Father Elwin’s experience to all who love and
would identify themselves with the semi-starved millions of India.
Young India, 21-5-1931

183. A NOTE
NANITAL,

May 21, 1931
It is my firm view that Rani Vidyavati should not involve herself with the editorship of any paper.
From the Hindi Original: Rani Vidyavati Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi National
Museum and Library

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

141

184. IN 1828
Sjt. Satis Chandra Das Gupta of the Khadi Pratishthan is editing
a Bengali newspaper called Rastravani. He recently unearthed a letter
addressed to the Editor of Samachar Darpan which was published in
Bengali in the twenties of the 19th century. As the letter was of great
importance showing how the charkha was being slowly destroyed and
how it was valued by women in those days, he has published it in his
paper and sent me its translation. I am sure, it will be read with
interest by all who are at all interested in the khadi movement. Here is
the letter :1
The representation of a spinner
To the Editor, Samachar
I am a spinner. After having suffered a great deal, I am writing this letter.
Please publish this in your paper. . . .
When my age was five and a half gandas (22) I became a widow with
three daughters. My husband left nothing at the time of his death. . . . I sold
my jewellery for his shraddha ceremony. At last as we were on the verge of
starvation God showed me a way by which we could save ourselves. I began to
spin on takli and charkha. . . .
The weavers used to visit our houses and buy the charkha yarn at three
tolas per rupee. Whatever amount I wanted as advance from the weavers, I could
get for the asking. This saved us from cares about food and cloth.
In a few years’ time I got together seven ganda rupees (Rs. 28). With
this I married one daughter. And in the same way all three daughters. . . .
Now for 3 years, we two women, mother-in-law and me are in want of
food. The weavers do not call at the house for buying yarn. Not only this, if
the yarn is sent to market still it is not sold even at one-fourth the old prices.
I do not know how it happened. I asked many about it. They say that Bilati 2
yarn is being largely imported. The weavers buy that yarn and weave. I had a
sense of pride that Bilati yarn could not be equal to my yarn, but when I got
Bilati yarn I saw that it was better than my yarn. I heard that its price is Rs. 3
or Rs. 4 per seer. I beat my brow and said, “Oh God, there are sisters more
distressed even than me.” I know that all men of Bilat are rich but now I see
that there are women there who are poorer than me. I fully realized the poverty
which induced those poor women to spin. They have sent the product of so
much toil out here because they could not sell it there. It would have been
1
Only extracts are reproduced here. Concerning a doubt raised as to the
authenticity of the letter, vide “Letter to Satis Chandra Das Gupta”, 2-6-1931
2
Foreign

142

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

something if they were sold here at good prices. But it has brought our ruin
only. Man cannot use the cloth out of this yarn even for two months; it rots
away. I therefore entreat the spinners over there, that, if they will consider
this representation, they will be able to judge whether it is fair to send yarn
here or not.
SHANTIPUR
A representation from a
suffering spinner
Samachar Darpan

The reader will not fail to observe the nobility of the writer who
in her blissful ignorance felt that yarn was spun by the hands of her
Bilati sisters poorer than herself and therefore felt for them. Alas, her
belief was baseless. She could have stood her own if the foreign yarn
had been hand-spun. She could have stood her own even against the
foreign yarn, if behind it there had been no policy of determination to
capture the Indian trade and kill the national village industry.
Young India, 21-5-1931

185. A WOMAN’S SACRIFICE
During the great awakening that took place last year amongst
women there were heroines whose mute work the nation will never
know. Now and then however one gets information of such village
work. Here is one such sample sent by a friend:1
When our Congress camp was declared illegal and locked up by the
police we shifted to the hut of a poor Mahishya woman—Habu’s mother of
Baradongal. We have read of Gorki’s mother. We saw her incarnate in Habu’s
mother. Night and day she used to cook for us workers. She nursed the sick
amongst us. She consoled those that were troubled in heart and thus became
real mother to us who would other-

wise have felt motherless. We had

graduates and M.A.s amongst us proud of their educational gifts but all of us
were compelled to call Habu’s mother our own. Her sacrifice and great devotion
to duty commanded that homage from us.

Young India, 21-5-1931

1

Vide “Letter to Bhupendra Narayan Sen”, 17-5-1931.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

143

186. TELEGRAM TO CHAMPABEHN
NAINITAL,

May 21, 1931
C HAMPABEHN
C ARE R ASHTRIYASHALA
R AJKOT
VERY SORRY ABOUT RATILAL. AM ARRANGING ABOUT SPECIALIST GOING
RAJKOT SEE RATILAL.

BAPU
From a microfilm : S. N. 17108

187. TELEGRAM TO DR. MEHTA
NAINITAL,

May 21, 1931
DOCTOR MEHTA
C ARE S IR MANUBHAI
S IMLA
RATILAL SON DOCTOR MEHTA OF RANGOON COMPLETELY

DEMENTED

BOISTEROUS UNRULY. HAS TO BE KEPT IN CHAINS. HE IS IN RAJKOT. IF
YOU KNOW ANY SPECIALIST AND
HIM PROCEED RAJKOT EXAMINE
WIRE

REPLY

THINK

RATILAL.

WORTHWHILE
HIS

FEES

PLEASE

WILL

BE

ASK
PAID.

NAINITAL.

GANDHI
From a microfilm : S. N. 17115

188. TELEGRAM TO SECRETARY, CONGRESS COMMITTEE
CHITTAGONG
NAINITAL,

May 21, 1931
S ECRETARY
C ONGRESS C OMMITTEE
IMPOSSIBLE

GIVE

OPINION

WITHOUT

KNOWING

FULL FACTS.

GANDHI
From a microfilm : S. N. 17116

144

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

189. LETTER TO DR. SYED MAHMUD
C AMP NAINITAL,
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 21, 1931
DEAR DR. MAHMUD,

I know you are doing most valuable work. I am not going to
discuss with you how mass work can be most effectively done if only
because I hardly scrape together a few minutes to attend to correspondence. I shall therefore reserve it for discussion when we meet.
As you see, I am writing this from Nainital where I saw the
Governor yesterday. No final conclusion was reached about the revenue matters.
I leave for Gujarat in two or three days if not earlier. The earliest
we shall meet, I suppose, will be when the Working Committee meeting takes place early next month. But of course you can anticipate
that date and meet me whenever you like. You need no appointment.
Do you?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
DR. S YED MAHMUD
BAR-AT-LAW
C HANRA (DT. S ARAN)
From a photostat : G. N. 5109

190. LETTER TO MOHAMMED ISMAIL KHAN
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 21, 1931
DEAR NAWAB SAHEB,

I thank you for your letter of 19th instant. I have not seen the
report you refer to in your letter. But I may state my position thus:
So far as I am concerned I should endorse without hesitation
any solution that Mussalman friends as a whole may present but that
by itself would not solve our difficulties. Our difficulties could only
be solved by either Hindus and Mussalmans settling with the Sikhs or
Hindus settling both with Mussalmans and Sikhs. But so far as I am
personally concerned I should endorse any solution presented by
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

145

Sikh friends as a whole as I would the Mussalman claim. But if there is
a conflict between the Sikh and the Mussalman claim, then my
endorsement of the claim of each would be of little value. I have
therefore assumed that whatever Mussalman friends or Sikh friends
present as a final claim would take note of the other party. If you find
any flaw in this, you will not hesitate to let me know. All I want is an
honourable settlement wholly satisfactory to the Mussalmans, to the
Sikhs as also to all other communities who may wish a communal
solution.
As to your other question supposing that I survive the future
constitution and am allowed to have any hand in its working I would
have no solution on any but strictly national lines and I would so work
the constitution that I should disarm all suspicion.
So far as the Europeans are concerned, the question is not what
privileges they should get by reason of their being in a minority but
what privilges they will surrender so as to be on a par with us. Am I
clear?
I would ask you to believe me to be the same man whom you
were good enough to have as your guest in Meerut in those days when
for the moment we had begun to think that we were but children of
the same mother having the same aspirations and having full trust in
one another.
Yours sincerely,

NAWAB MOHAMMED ISMAIL KHAN S AHEB
MUSTAPHA C ASTLE, M EERUT
From a photostat : S. N. 17107

191. LETTER TO MAHARAJ KUMAR OF VIZIANAGRAM
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 21, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. As I expect to deal with the subject
discussed by you in the pages of Young India I need not send you a
detailed reply.
Yours sincerely,

MAHARAJ KUMAR S AHIB OF VIZIANAGRAM
VIZIANAGRAM P ALACE, B ENARES
From a microfilm : S. N. 17108-a

146

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

192. LETTER TO SECRETARY, CONGRESS COMMITTEE,
CHITTAGONG
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 21, 1931
THE S ECRETARY
C ONGRESS C OMMITTEE
C HITTAGONG
DEAR SIR,

In reply to your telegram I have sent you the following:
Impossible give opinion without knowing full facts.

Subject to any change that might have to be made after knowing
further facts I can say that punitive tax imposed for anything done
since Settlement would be no violation thereof. Nor refusal to pay
such tax will necessarily be violation of Settlement. But those who will
embark upon no-tax campaign will do so after fullest consideration
and on their own sole responsibility.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S. N. 17109

193. LETTER TO S. G. VAZE
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 21, 1931
MY DEAR VAZE,

You never failed to send me the usual anniversary notice and I
have ever failed to attend the function. The fact however that I have
never been able to attend the function, I am sure, will not be
interpreted by any of the members to mean that I have ceased to be
one of you. Though our views may be as poles asunder, though we
may not seem to be working together on the same platform, I have
always felt that we are at heart one, being disciples of the same guru.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. S. G. V AZE
S ERVANTS OF INDIA S OCIETY
P OONA
From a photostat : S. N. 17111

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

147

194. LETTER TO KRISHNA DAS
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 21, 1931
MY DEAR KRISHNA DAS,

Your old familiar handwriting shows that you have made
remarkable progress. You will not be in a hurry to regain original
strength. You must have no temperature at all. At the end of this
dreadful sickness you should be stronger than you were before.
Continue to write to me regularly. We all leave here for Borsad at the
latest on Sunday.
S YT. K RISHNA DAS
S HAKTI ASHRAM
P.O. R AJPUR
(DT. D EHRA DUN),
From a microfilm : S. N. 17112

195. LETTER TO JAIRAMDAS DOULATRAM
AS AT BORSAD,

May 21, 1931
MY DEAR JAIRAMDAS,

You will see the enclosed. Do the needful and tell me who the
writer is. Can the allegations be true?
S YT. J AIRAMDAS DOULATRAM
S WARAJ ASHRAM
BARDOLI
From a microfilm : S. N. 17113

196. LETTER TO A. FENNER BROCKWAY
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 21, 1931
DEAR MR. BROCKWAY,

Evidently you have made up your mind that I am coming to
London. But as yet I see no sign on the horizon warranting even the
hope that I shall be with you soon. But if I am, of course I should love
148

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to be with the members of your society and to engage in an informal
heart to heart conversation.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
A. F ENNER BROCKWAY, E SQ.
126 S HEPHERD’S BUSH R OAD
LONDON W. 6
From a photostat : S. N. 17114

197. SPEECH AT POLITICAL SUFFERERS’ CONFERENCE
KUMAON,

[May 21, 1931] 1
You must have seen the resolution regarding the declaration of
fundamental rights passed by the Congress. There are a few items in it
such as the reduction of military expenditure to one half, which
cannot be achieved before swaraj, but there are other items such as
compulsory primary education, ban on foreign cloth, equality of
rights and opportunities, for which we should not wait till the establishment of swaraj. We should establish these conditions just now and
this will bring us nearer swaraj. We can open schools in every village,
manufacture and encourage khaddar and make wars on untouchability.
(Here Mahatmaji referred to each item in the declaration of rights as published
in an old issue of Young India seriatim.)
Referring to the maximum pay of the public servants, Mahatmaji said as
follows :—

You should not think that this proposal is meant to remain on
paper. This will be enforced when swaraj is obtained. This was added
to the declaration of rights after full and careful consideration. I am
old and even if I die, Jawaharlal is certain to enforce it. But it is unjust
to suppose that old people die before young men, because it is not
God’s law. Let me assure you that this proposal will be enforced. In
Japan, which is an independent country, the maximum pay of public
servants is Rs. 500.
Ours is a country where the average income per individual is
about Rs. 40 and this includes crores of millionaires. So anyone who
1

From the Hindu, 21-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

149

lives on more than Rs. 500 lives on loot. We regard this amount as
insufficient because seeing the exploitation of the foreigners and the
life they lead, we want to copy them.
It is said that lawyers and industrialists will earn more than Rs.
500 per month. I say they should not earn more than Rs. 500 per
month. If they do so in a country like ours they will be living on loot.
They should pay the surplus back to the country.
The Hindustan Times, 31-5-1931

198. TELEGRAM TO VICEROY
Important [On or before May 22, 1931] 1
I am grateful for your telegram of 21st received through His
Excellency the Governor of the United Provinces then directly. I
should be . . . 2 to visit London even upon this subject and explain to
responsible statesmen that whilst insisting upon making India free,
Congress wishes to live on friendliest terms with the English people.
But for reasons given to Your Excellency I am unable to take part in
the Round Table Conference. Though open to conviction, I still retain
the opinion that I could not usefully serve on the Conference unless
communal settlement is reached. Moreover, being directly responsible
for the settlement between Government and Congress I could not
leave India whilst anxious difficulties are exprienced regarding its
working. I still remain the sole representative on behalf of Congress.
GANDHI
From a photostat : C.W. 9367. Courtesy : India Office Library

199. TELEGRAM TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
TAKULA, N AINITAL,

May 22, 1931
JAMNADAS GANDHI
R AJKOT
DOCTOR KADAM OF THANA WILL REACH RAJKOT EXAMINE
DO NEEDFUL. ESTABLISH COMMUNICATION WITH HIM.

RATILAL

BAPU
From a microfilm : S. N. 17122
1
The telegram was quoted by the addressee in his telegram of May 22, 1931 to
the Secretary of State for India.
2
Omission as in the source

150

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

200. TELEGRAM TO RAMBHOROSELAL
TAKULA, N AINITAL,

May 22, 1931
R AMBHOROSELAL
C ARE ARATHDHAR
BURDWAN
SEND

FULL

PARTICULARS

PANDIT

GOVINDBALLABH PANT.

GANDHI
From a microfilm : S. N. 17123

201. TELEGRAM TO MOHANLAL SAKSENA
TAKULA, N AINITAL,

May 22, 1931
MOHANLAL S AKSENA
C ARE C ONGRESS
LUCKNOW
HUNGERSTRIKE

SEEMS

WHOLLY

UNNECESSARY.

RIGHT

OR

WRONG

EVERYBODY SHOULD SUBMIT DECISION SUPERIOR COMMITTEES.

GANDHI
From a microfilm : S. N. 17125

202. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
NAINITAL,

May 22, 1931
In the course of an interview to the Associated Press today, Mahatma Gandhi
declared that he was unable to make any statement yet regarding his plans for going
to London. 1 His views in respect of the Federal Structure Committee meeting in
London on the 29th June were in the hands of the Government of India and there the
matters stand.

The Hindustan Times, 24-5-1931

1

The other delegates, including the princes, had agreed to sail on 13-6-1931.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

151

203. CABLE TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI1
TAKULA, N AINITAL,

May 23, 1931
S ASTRI
C ARE KALOPH2
LONDON
YOUR

KIND

JOINT

CABLE.

IN

ABSENCE

QUESTION HERE HAVE NO CONFIDENCE
CONFERENCE.

MOREOVER

SOME

SOLUTION

ATTENDING

LOCAL

ROUND

GOVERNMENTS’

SETTLEMENT MAKES MY LEAVING INDIA DIFFICULT

COMMUNAL
TABLE
ATTITUDE

IF NOT IMPOSSIBLE BUT

IF SATISFACTORY WORKING SETTLEMENT CAN BE ATTAINED AND IF I AM
INVITED FOR DISCUSSION
GLADLY

AND EXPLAINING CONGRESS POSITION WILL

SAIL ON SHORT NOTICE.

GANDHI
A.I.C.C. File No. 273, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library.

204. LETTER TO MALCOLM HAILEY
TAKULA, N AINITAL,

May 23, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have now completed my summary investigation. I have had
the benefit of the advice of those taluqdars who were able to come
to Nainital. I feel and perhaps you will agree that I must give some
guidance to the kisans 3 . I could not tell them to accept as sufficient the
relief proposed to be given by the Government. Everything I have
examined goes to show that it is wholly inade-quate to meet the
exceptional situation that faces the kisans. I propose therefore to do
the next best thing possible. In the absence of response by the
Government to any of the proposals made by me, I propose to tell the
kisans what in my opinion is the least that they should pay, throwing
1
This was in reply to a joint cable from V.S.S. Sastri, C.F. Andrews and
H.S.L. Polak saying : “. . . If communal minorities problem insoluble immediately
India we urge it be brought here where atmosphere better. Failing everything else in
last resort impartial arbitration still possible. We therefore convinced prompt
announcement affirmative decision your earliest arrival urgently desirable. . . ”
2
Telegraphic address of H.S.L. Polak
3
Peasants

152

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the responsibility upon them of paying more wherever it is possible
for them to do so. I have accordingly drafted a manifesto 1 which I
enclose herewith. If you think that its publication will in any way
embarrass the Government and if Your Excellency will show me a
better way I shall gladly adopt it if it is at all possible for me to do so.
And if you will have me to wait upon you in this connection I would
gladly do so.
I have arranged, unless you have me to do otherwise, to leave
Nainital this afternoon at 3 p.m.2
I remain,
Yours sincerely,

Encl. 1
HIS EXCELLENCY S IR MALCOLM HAILEY
GOVERNOR OF U.P., NAINITAL
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-E, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

205. TO THE KISANS OF THE U.P.
NAINITAL,

May 23, 1931
During the late struggle, in some districts, the non-payment of
taxes was being organized as part of Civil Disobedience for the
attainment of purna swaraj. But by reason of the Settlement between
the Congress and the Government Civil Disobedience was discontinued and therefore also the non-payment of taxes.
But there was then deep economic distress among you. Bad as
your condition was even in normal times, the unprecedented fall this
year in the prices of the crops usually grown by you made it infinitely
worse. And Congress workers reported that many of you were utterly
unable to pay in full the rents due by you. In several districts inquiries
were made in a few hundred villages disclosing a serious state of
affairs. It was found that the price of your gross produce had fallen
to such an extent that the sales were not enough to pay the rents. It
was in this connection that I came to Nainital to see H. E. the Governor. His Excellency gave me a patient hearing and we fully discussed
the situation. He was sympathetic. I told him that some Congress
1
2

Vide the following item.
For the addressee’s reply, vide “Letter from Sir Malcolm Hailey”, 23-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

153

workers had assured me that the relief hitherto announced by the
Government of the U.P. was hardly equal to the actual distress. And I
submitted certain proposals which he kindly promised to consider.
I was bound meanwhile to tender you such advice as it was in
my power to do. I have passed many an anxious hour discussing the
situation with many co-workers. I have had the benefit of a frank and
free discussion with important talukdars who were good enough to
respond to my invitation to see me. I am gald to be able to say that
they were in general agreement with the proposals suggested here
under.
Concentrated work was done in the following among other
districts: Agra, Muttra, Allahabad, Rai Bareily, Gorakhpore, Cawnpore,
Lucknow, Pratapgarh, and Etawah. And for these it has been found
that there should be a remission for the year 1338 Fasli of eight annas
in the rupee in the case of statutory and non-occupancy tenants and
four annas in the case of occupancy tenants. This general formula
should be subject to variation as may be required by local conditions.
I have been told that in some districts the tenants are in a
position to do with less reduction. Some districts again were hard hit
by local calamities. The suggested reduction would naturally therefore
not apply to the districts that might be able to pay more than what is
suggested here, nor to those whose condition may be under the level
found in the foregoing districts. Indeed even in the districts mentioned those of you who are able to pay more ought to do so. The
Congress expects every tenant to pay as early as possible all the rent
he can, and in no case as a general rule less than eight annas or four1
annas as the case may be. But just as even in the same district there
may be cases in which a larger payment is possible, it is equally
possible that there may be cases in which less than eight annas or four2
annas can only be paid. In such cases I hope the tenants will be
treated liberally by the zamindars.
In every case you will see that you get against payment a full
discharge from your obligation for the current year’s rent.
I understand that several tenants were ejected during the struggle
and others have been ejected since. Not to restore these to their holdings would be clearly against the atmosphere sought to be created by
the Settlement. I have every hope, therefore, that against payment on
1
2

154

A slip for ‘twelve’; vide “A Correction”,11-6-1931
ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the scale suggested here the ejected tenants will be fully restored
without any penalty.
I am hoping that payment will begin at once. It may be that you
are not able to pay the full eight annas at once. In that case I trust you
will get suspension, and that no coercive processes will be issued whether for the unpaid balance or for arrears if any, till the next harvest.
I would like to suggest to the Government, in view of the loss
that your inability to pay the rents in full will cause to the zamindars,
that they get a proportionate reduction in the revenue payable by
them to the Government.
Lastly let me warn you against listening to the advice, if it has
reached you, that you have no need to pay the zamindars any rent at
all. I hope that you will not listen to such advice, no matter who gives
it. Congressmen cannot, we do not seek to injure the zamindars. We
aim not at destruction of property. We aim only at its lawful use.
It has been suggested that you will listen to the Congress when
Congressmen tell you not to pay anything at all, but you will not listen
to the Congress when it asks you to pay according to your ability.
The opportunity has now come for you to falsify the calumny.
You have complained of very harsh treatment by or on behalf
of some landlords. The Congress is trying and will try to investigate
all your complaints, plead with the landlords and even addvise legal
relief where such becomes imperative. But let it be also owned that
sometimes some kisans too have gone astray and committed murderous assaults. These acts spoil the fair name of kisans, harm their
cause and impair the usefulness of the Congress for service. For in
the ultimate end you are the Congress. The Congress is incomplete in
so far as it represents you insufficiently.
Please remember that the Congress aims at reaching purna
swaraj through Truth and Non-violence. And it will fail in so far as the
kisans fail to observe these two cardinal principles. You are milli-ons.
When millions become untruthful and violent, it will mean selfdestruction. You will therefore suffer injury without retaliation. You
have now perhaps learnt that the best way of resisting injury is never
to injure the injurer, but ever to refuse, no matter how much suffering
the refusal costs us, to do his will when we know it to be wrong.
I am,
Your friend and servant,

M. K. GANDHI

Young India, 28-5-1931
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

155

206. LETTER TO MALCOLM HAILEY
May 23, 1931
DEAR MR. HAILEY,

With reference to the Etawah case wherein the Congress Secretary was supposed to have circulated after the date of the Settlement
notice amongst tenants advising them not to pay any rent at all I have
made full inquiry and find that such notice was circulated in February
last, but none after the Settlement. On the contrary a general notice
withdrawing the notax agitation was circulated throughout the
province on behalf of the Provincial Congress Committee. This matter
was brought to the notice of Pt. Govind Ballabh Pant by the Chief
Secretary and on the day that he received the intimation he made
inquiries. The Secretary, Babu Gaya Prasad, immediately wrote in
reply giving the information above mentioned. Moreover he is no
longer occupying position of General Secretary of the Local
Committee in Etawah. It would be perhaps interesting to know how
the police came by the notice and came to the conclusion that it was
being circulated after the date of the Settlement.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
A.I.C.C. File NO. 16-E, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

207. SPEECH AT ZAMINDARS’MEETING, NAINITAL2
[May 23, 1931 ] 3
The Congress will stand by you certainly. But you will have to
make your life correspond to your surroundings. In Bengal some
years ago I was the guest of a zamindar who served me my milk and
fruit in gold bowls and plates. The good host naturally thought that he
was doing me the greatest honour by placing before me his costliest
plate He could not know what was passing through my mind. ‘Where
did he get these golden plates from?’ I was asking to myself, and the
answer I got was:‘From the substance of the ryots’. How then could I
1

In his reply dated 29-5-1931, Hailey confirmed these facts and regretted the
inconvenience caused by his wrong report.
2
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
3
From the Hindustan Times, 25-5-1931

156

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

reconcile myself to those costly luxuries? I would not mind your
using gold plates provided your tenants were comfortable enough to
afford silver plates, but where their life is one long-drawn-out agony,
how dare you have those luxuries? You will remember, how, fifteen
years ago, on the occasion of the opening of the Hindu University, I
shocked the Rajas and Maharajas by a refere-nce to their glittering
pomp and glory, and raised quite an uproar.1 My views are the same
today; only experience and life among the humble folk have confirmed them all the more.
Young India, 28-5-1931

208. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
[After May 23, 1931 ] 2
MY DEAR BROTHER,

I had your touching cable. I have sent you a reply to soothe
you. I am not shirking the R.T.C. But it is not possible through a
letter togive you an idea of the difficulties that face me. Provincial
governments are trampling the Settlement under foot. Repression is
raising its spiked head. If you have the patience to follow the pages
of Young India you can learn something of what I mean. I have published as yet not one tenth of what is happening. The question then
may be: Can I leave India when trouble is brewing here? But I am in
touch with Simla.
Letters of Srinivasa Sastri, p. 215

209. NOTES
R EGARDING P ICKETING

I extract the following questions from two letters :
1.
Can fasting be resorted to while picketing those who break the seals of
cloth which has been sealed?
2.

Does fasting have a place in peaceful picketing?

3.
If those against whom peaceful picketing is being carried on do not
listen to reason, can social boycott be practised against them?
4.
Can picketing be called off if a person promises not to import fresh
foreign cloth and his old stock has already been sold out?
1
2

Vide “Speech at Benares Hindu University”, 6-2-1916
Vide “Cable to v. S. Srinivasa Sastri”, 23-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

157

5.
Should there be picketing against those who sell both foreign and
Indian cloth?
6.
Should we boycott those who have sealed up their stock of foreign cloth
and promised to pay a certain fine if they break the seal? Shold we sit a
dharna 1 before them?

The answers to these questions would be as follows :
1. Fasting can be resorted to only in regard to those who are
closely associated with the person picketing, who have given a pledge
out of the love resulting from that relationship and then broken it.
2. The reply to this is contained in the rule mentioned above.
3. Social boycott, which would imply denying the individual
the services of the dhobi, the barber, the vaid, etc., should not be
practised. But one is permitted to cut off relationship with such
individuals by way of going to their homes for feasts on occasions
such as marriages, and indeed one should do so. In short, they should
not be harassed. The pain which they feel when we do not go to their
homes for meals cannot be regarded as harassment.
4. It is our dharma to withdraw picketing if we are sure about
the pledge.
5. Certainly.
6. We cannot resort to picketing if someone does not pay the
fine, but we can do so if he sells foreign goods.With regard toboycott,
refer to reply No. 4 2 . Dharna does not mean self-torture to press
one’s point.
ONE ADVANTAGE OF BOYCOTT

I take the follwing extract3 from letters received by me:
I hope that these women have given up foreign cloth and started
wearing khadi. Whether they have started doing so or not, the basic
fact is that they have learnt simplicity along with the boycott of
foreign goods. Everyone has got the experience that our craving for
enjoyment increases with the acceptance of foreign goods and the
idea gains ground that clothes are meant for adornment rather than
for the purpose of covering our body. Our newspapers are not yet full
of items on fashion but if we glance at English newspapers, we shall
1

Squatting and fasting for the redress of a grievance
This should perhaps be 3.
3
Not translated here. It described the simplicity of women in a particular
household.
2

158

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

see every day under the heading “fashion” pictures of new types of
dresses together with alluring descriptions of them.
Hence, along with the giving up of foreign cloth we also rid
ourselves of the glamour for false fashion and for this very reason
khadi though expensive becomes inexpensive. A woman who used to
wear separate saris while she is at home, while going out, while paying
social calls, while visiting the temple, or who thus has four or five saris
for daily wear now makes do with a single khadi sari and, therefore,
easily saves a lot of money. When a person wearing a turban made of
twelve yards of mulmul 1 starts wearing a khadi cap made of half a
yard, however expensive khadi may be, he would easily save some
money.
DISHONESTY OF BUSINESS MEN

An experienced gentleman makes the following compliant:2
There is nothing in this that is not well known. If business men
had thought only of the good of the country, they would never have
imported foreign cloth at all. To a large extent, dishonesty is implicit
in all business. Merchants dealing in foreign cloth catch the eye
because their business it widespread and, like a huge serpent, it has
coiled itself around India and is gradually crushing her. No one can
escape from that grip. We have now become conscious of how we are
being crushed and hence we have started criticizing merchants dealing in foreign cloth and that is only proper.This awakening provides a
remedy for the abovementioned and many other similar dishonest
practices. Picketing is the ready remedy. The true remedy lies in
reaching the villages. All such question as, for in-stance, whether a
particular cloth is Indian or foreign, whether it is made in a mill which
is boycotted or not, whether this khadi contains warp which is millmade or hand-made, etc., will automatically disappear when the
villagers spin yarn in their own homes, get it woven by their own
weavers and start using such khadi. And hence I tell you for the thousandth time that the remedy for all deceit lies in khadi that is woven
from yarn spun by yourselves. Just as adding jaggery makes a thing
sweet, likewise, if we spin fine yarn, we get finer and cheaper khadi.
1

Thin variety of plain muslim
The letter is not translated here. It reported various ways in which foreign
cloth was passed off as Indian cloth.
2

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

159

There can be no other cloth which is as cheap or cheaper and, if there
is such cloth, it deserves to be discarded as it is stained with the blood
of the poor.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 24-5-1931

210. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 24, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

I have just arrived at Muttra and have to wait for the Frontier
Mail for a about five hours. Local People have given me a version of
what happened in a village called Bijhari near Muttra on 20th instant.
I en-close herewith a copy of the statement they have given me. 18
men were arrested under warrant. The gravamen of the complaint
however is that the police acted far in excess of their authority. There
is no complaint against the warrant itself. It was perfectly right for
the authorities to arrest the men if in their opinion they had done
anything wrong.
I am going to Bardoli and I am likely to be there for at least two
or three days.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

Encl. 1
H. W. EMERSON, E SQ.
HOME S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
S IMLA
Home Depatment, Political,

File No. 33/9, 1931.

Courtesy : National

Archives of India

160

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

211. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON

1

AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 24, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

I enclose herewith a copy of the report2 received from Lala Duni
Chand of Ambala, who is a prominent pleader in that part of the
world. I would esteem a line from you even by wire as to whether you
propose to take any action in the matter. Duty perhaps demands that I
should take public notice of this action on the part of the Magistrate
unless it is possible for you to get some relief. If the facts are as stated
by Lala Duni Chand, the action on the part of the Magistrate denoted
by these facts is surely against the spirit of peace which it was the
prime object of the Settlement to establish.
Yours sincerely,

Encl. 1
H. W. EMERSON, E SQ.
S IMLA
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

212. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 24, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

I have your three letters forwarding me extracts from reports
received by you from Surat, Assam and the U. P. They are having
attention.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
H. W. EMERSON, E SQ.
Home Department, Political, File No. 33/9, 1931. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
1

Vide also “Letter to H. W. Emerson”, 19-5-1931
In which Duni Chand had stated “. . . I proceeded to Ludhiana on the
afternoon of 18th May, 1931, to enquire into the happenings of the 16th May which
had been reported to you at Kalka, . . . I am sorry to say that most of the officials at
Ludhiana probably consider the Irwin-Gandhi Settlement as a scrap of paper. . . In my
opinion there should be an independent enquiry by the representatives of the
Government and the public not only into the happenings at Ludhiana but also into
the general policy of the local authorities that has been hitherto pursued. . .”
2

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

161

213. LETTER TO GOSIBEHN CAPTAIN
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 24, 1931
I am waiting at Muttra Junction for the Frontier Mail to take
me to Surat and thence to Bardoli. I have received your letter here.
Did I say that even sewn pieces will be taken up? I do remember
having said so about cut pieces. But let me have the number of people
who want to get rid of cut pieces or sewn pieces together with the
quantity and the market price.
I am glad the two sisters have at last gone to Panchgani for a
little bit of rest and pure air. What about yours?
I reach Bardoli tomorrow noon.
MRS. G OSIBEHN C APTAIN
78 NAPEAN S EA R OAD
MALABAR HILL, BOMBAY
From a microfilm : S.N. 17138

214. LETTER TO HORACE G. ALEXANDER
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 24, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter for which I thank you. Of course I passed on
your cable to Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan as soon as I received it.
Now that I know more about what you meant you may depend upon
my doing all I can. One thing I am going to do is to put myself in
correspondence with Capt. Barnes.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
P ROF. H ORACE G. ALEXANDER
144 OAKTREE LANE
BIRMINGHAM
From a photostat : G.N. 1410

162

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

215. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 24, 1931
DEAR SATIS BABU,

I have your sad letter about Bholanath Sen1 I have read all about
the murder. I knew that both the picture and the writing were wholly
inoffensive. But the complaint was that there was any portrait of the
Prophet printed at all. Or course it is a silly complaint but anything is
good enough to inflame the simple minded Pathan. In the face of
such tragedies I know nothing so efficacious as prayer and utter
silence when we can present no visible remedy. If the Hindu heart can
be melted, the thing becomes easy. But before it can melt, you and I
and perhaps thousands like us will have to give our lives and in order
that they may become a pure sacrifice, we have to endeavour to
become purer day by day, or better put, less impure day by day.
Your description of the Bengal state of affairs is also sad. I am today
in Muttra waiting for the Frontier Mail taking me to Surat. Most probably Subhasbabu will travel as far as Surat. I have not yet seen him.
This is being dictated at the station. I am going to Bardoli on the
Sardar’s orders. My destination is Borsad but when I shall be able to
go there I do not know.
Subhasbabu is with me on the train.2
Love.
BAPU

SYT. S ATIS

C HANDRA DAS GUPTA

KHADI P RATISHTHAN
S ODEPUR (NEAR C ALCUTTA)
From a photostat : G.N. 8033

216. LETTER TO CAPTAIN BARNES
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 24, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

Prof Horace Alexander writes to me a long letter with reference
to the troubles, he says, you are having in your work in Peshawar.
1
A book-seller who was murdered in Calcutta on 7-5-1931 for selling the
book Prachin Kahani.
2
This line is in Gandhiji’s hand.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

163

Prof. Alexander tells me that you and Mrs. Barnes are real friends of
India, but that things take place in your district which are not all as
they should be. I would like you, if you could, to tell me all you know
personally, not for publication, but for my private use and guidence.
You will take my word when I tell you that the whole of my effort is
directed towards establishing real peace in the land and in making
people see that the way to progress lies not through bluster and
violence but through quiet work and non-violence.1
Yours sincerely,

C APT. BARNES
P ESHAWAR
A.I.C.C. File NO. 16-C, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

217. LETTER TO NIRANJAN PATNAIK2
May 24, 1931
MY DEAR NIRANJAN,

I have your telegram about Syt. Narasinha Sahu. You must
give me full particulars about him including record of trial.
From a microfilm : S.N. 17105

218. LETTER TO PERCY LACEY
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 24, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your message received on my arrival at Muttra.
I have purposely refrained form sending you a wire for there was no
hurry about dealing with your message. Should I go to London I
would certainly make it a point to visit Lancashire and demonstrate to
the people of Lancashire that I personally and the Congress have no
ill-will against Lancashire and that the Congress would do all in its
power to help Lancashire. I would therefore naturally avail myself of
and esteem the powerful help Of the Manchester Guardian in
facilitating my work in Lancashire. You will please keep the contents
1

Vide also “Letter to Captain Barnes”, 19-6-1931.
In reply to the addressee’s telegram which read : “Of Vizagapatam Agency
State prisoners in Rajahmundry jail Narasinha Sahu released rearrested interned
Bimlipatam Agency Regulation.”
2

164

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of this letter from the Press but you are at liberty to show it to friends
and undoubtedly pass it on to the Manchester Guardian.
Yours sincerely,

P ERCY LACEY, E SQ.
HOTEL C ECIL
S IMLA
From a photostat : S.N. 17128

219. LETTER TO PREMNATH BAZAZ
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 24, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. What young men can do is to make up their
minds to marry only widows and if they cannot secure widows in the
Pandit caste, they should travel outside if only by way of satyagraha.
But if they are desirous of restricting themselves to their caste they
should reason with the caste elders and give them notice that they
would go outside the caste if they did not merely permit but
encourage widows to remarry.
Yours sincerely,

P T. P REM NATH BAZAZ
C HONDHPORA
S RINAGAR (KASHMIR)
From a photostat : S.N. 17129

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

165

220. LETTER TO WALTER B. FOLEY
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 24, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter and the two articles.
I would indeed be delighted to meet you if it is at all convenient
for you to go to Surat or Anand. Generally I am to be found between
Borsad near Anand and Bardoli. I received your letter while waiting
for the Surat train at Muttra Junction. I am not likely to be anywhere
between Lahore and Calcutta in the course of next month.
Yours sincerely,
1

WALTER B. F OLEY , E SQ.
3. M IDDLETON S TREET
C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm : S.N. 17130

221. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 24, 1931
Here is another letter for you to read and deal with. I would like
you to answer it directly. I have not acknowledged it. Please let me
know whether there is any truth in the statement made.
Encl. 1
S YT. C. R AJAGOPALACHARIAR
GANDHI ASHRAM
TIRUCHENGODU (S. INDIA)
From a microfilm : S.N. 17131

222. LETTER TO JOHN BITTMANN
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 24, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. If I visit London I would love to
visit Denmark and other places, but I am not sure when I shall be able
to do so. I am sorry to hear about Menon’s misfortunes. But Esther
1

166

Editorial Secretary, the Methodist Episcopal Church, Calcutta
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

ought not to worry about his failure. Please tell her with my love that
I expect greater faith and therefore greater pluck from her and please
ask her to write to me.
Yours sincerely,

JOHN BITTMANN, E SQ.
P T. 55, G RONDALSVEJ
C OPENHAGEN
From a photostat : S.N. 17132

223. LETTER TO ATUL PRATAP SINHA
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 24, 1931
MY DEAR SINHA,

I thank you for your letter offering your service should I come
to London. At the present moment I see no chance of my coming but
if I do, you will seek me out. I am sorry I cannot recall the incident
narrated by you in your letter.
Yours sincerely,

ATUL P RATAP S INHA, E SQ.
VICE-PRESIDENT, I NDIAN S TUDENTS C ENTRAL ASSOCIATION
BROMPTON R OAD, L ONDON S.W. 3
From a photostat : S.N. 17133

224. LETTER TO CARL J. BRUNSKOG
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 24, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

My answer to your question is:
One way to promote world peace is to help India to attain her
own through truth and non-violence.
Yours sincerely,

C ARL J. BRUNSKOG
LILLA NYGATAN 4
S TOCKHOLM
From a photostat : S.N. 17134

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

167

225. LETTER TO J. N. SAHNI
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 24, 1931
MY DEAR SAHNI,

I have heard that you had published a report of that interview. I must confess that I was grieved. Of course the proper thing for
you was not to assume or receive consent either from Malaviyaji or
Anasuyabehn because it was a matter in which I alone could have
judged. I do not think that any very great harm has been done. But
these little mistakes repeated by so many newspapers make up a heavy
indictment and betray bad taste. These domestic conversa-tions do not
admit of reporting. They lose their weight and influence by reporting.
Anasuyabehn has also written to me about it. She is deeply grieved
and she tells me that there are many mistakes. But I do not think that
anything is to be gained by publishing corrections. The best thing
therefore is to forget all about it and the amends you can make is not
to repeat such a mistake not only in connection with myself but in
every case. I think the mistake will have been well made if the point
I have made is quite clear to you.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. J. N. S AHNI
“HINDUSTAN TIMES”, DELHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 17136

226. LETTER TO ISHWAR DAS NAYYAR
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 24, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. As I am continuously travelling I cannot
encourage you to see me. Staying with me is out of the question. But
you can certainly stay at the Ashram for some time and feel your way
there. If you accept my suggestion, You should write to the Manager
and receive his permission before going there.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. I SHWAR DAS NAYYAR
HOUSE P ROPRIETOR
P URANA BAZAR
GUJARAT1
From a microfilm : S.N. 17137
1

168

A town in West Punjab (Pakistan)
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

227. LETTER TO SHANTA PATEL
BARDOLI,

May 25, 1931
CHI. SHANTA,

I got your letter. I had the same thing in mind that you now
explain to me. But I still advise you to try to mix with girls and be
satisfied with playing with them. Be as much as possible with Premabehn and secure a good certificate from her. Help younger girls, teach
them, for instance. Pay attention to Pushpa’s diet. She should eat less
rice than she does.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 4060

228. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BARDOLI,

May 25, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

I arrived in Bardoli this morning. I had intended to go to
Borsad, but came here. How can a mere servant have this way ? You
may not perhaps have read the accompanying letter from Bhagwanji.
What is Hariyomal’s complaint? It seems that we have not, after all,
been able to cultivate contact with the thieves. How could we do that
since we have not gone into villages? Whenever thieves trouble us, I
feel sorry about our failure to do so It seems the Punjabi vaid’s treatment has not benefited Kusum and others.
I have sent a wire to Rajkot advising that Ratilal should be
removed to Thana. I shall be here for a few days at any rate.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Is Valji still in Bombay? And in a hospital?
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./I

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

169

229. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
BARDOLI,

May 25, 1931
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

I had got your long and beautifully descriptive letter at
Nainital and the one about Sahni1 in Mathura. Now matters cannot be
remedied, but norms of discretion were violated in publishing the
report. Our newspapermen have still not learnt that such things ought
not to be reported. I have written to Sahni.2 But it will be better if you
write the following:
“DEAR LADY WILLINGDON,

“Perhaps you have not seen the enclosed garbled report of the
pleasant meeting between you and Mrs. Gandhi. I hasten to assure
you that I had no hand in the publication. I know the writer. He is
now sorry for the bad taste shown in publishing a private conversation
of a domestic nature. Without my knowledge that he was a newspaperman, he overheard the conversation I was having with Pandit
Malaviyaji about our meeting of which I shall always have pleasant
recollections.
“The sari you want is being made and will be sent to you early.
I am,
yours sincerely,”3

She would like it if you wrote along these lines. If you want to
make any changes in the draft, then do so. I am returning the clipping.
It was a good thing that you were able to accompany Ba yourself. That is how it was in Nanital. Lady Chinubhai4 (Junior) had
escorted Ba.
I have reached Bardoli. From here I shall go wherever the
Sardar or Fate takes me. Has Mridula arrived?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 32796

1

J. N. Sahni of The Hindustan Times
Vide “Letter to J. N. Sahni”, 24-5-1931
3
The draft of letter to Lady Willingdon is in English.
4
Wife of Sir Girijaprasad Chinubhai
2

170

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

230. LETTER TO MANAGER, OXFORD UNIVERSITY
PRESS, BOMBAY
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 26, 1931
R. E. H AWKINS, E SQ.
MANAGER, O XFORD UNIVERSITY P RESS
NICOL R OAD, BOMBAY
DEAR SIR,

Owing to my journeys and preoccupations I have not been able
to reply to your letter of the 7th May earlier. The suggestions made
in your letter, I like. I have personally never copyrighted any of
my publications. I left Mr. Andrews free to do what he liked with
his condensation.But if there is any permission to be had from
Mr. Andrews or his publishers you will please get it from them. I
note what you say about the royalty. When you have actually
decided to publish the proposed book in accordance with your letter,
I would expect the manuscript for inspection and revision where
necessary.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat : G. N. 5686

231. LETTER TO COWASJI JEHANGIR 1
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 26, 1931
DEAR SIR COWASJI,

You will please forgive me for not having sent you an earlier
reply. I returned to Bardoli only yesterday from Nainital where and
at Simla I was so overwhelmed with local work that I had no time to
frame my reply to you or to Sardar Garda. I am now sending you a
copy of my reply to Sardar Garda 2 which will speak for itself. I am
sending you also a copy of his letter to me. At best his allegations
are vague and even these are really denied by the people. But the
complaint he could legitimately make could only be about matters
happening after his promise to restore the land. That should be after
1

In reply to the addressee’s letter in which he had mentioned certain specific
complaints of Sardar Garda and pleaded with Gandhiji that “all kind of harassment
shall immediately stop . . . ”
2
Vide the following item.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

171

the receipt of Rao Bahadur Bhimbhai’s letter or so after the 25th
April when we had the first conversation. If we were to take the 25th
April as the date you will see that there is only one paragraph devoted
to the happenings thereafter. It says : “On 28th April Babla people
again scared away our labourers and cartmen that came from my bet.
So also a Rajput family on the 3rd instant. With other threats they
were told that their abodes would be burnt down together with the
inmates.”
These allegations I have carefully enquired into and I have
statements on oath made by the people concerned repudiating them.
If, however, this investigation does not satisfy you, I am quite willing
that you should nominate someone on your behalf who would
investigate these two complaints.
As to Bhikhabhai who is said to have refused to take up his
bungalow, I understand that he denies having made the statement
ascribed to him. But even if he did not, how could we interfere in
such matters?
With reference to the other complaint in your letter I was
painfully surprised to find this sentence: “I desire to draw your attention to other cases of harassment of Parsis which have been brought to
my notice.” This presupposes that you have taken the harassment of
Sardar Garda for granted and you have generalized from two
incidents yet unproved an indictment, I do not know against whom,
for harassment of Parsis as a class. As a matter of fact throughout the
last 12 years of intense political work the relations between the
Congress and the Parsis have been of the happiest character. How can
there be then any question of harassment of Parsis? And even if it
can be proved, should the harassment of the lady 1 whose case you
have mentioned affect Sardar Garda’s promise of restoration of land
which on his own showing he bought for a song. I am however anxious to give you all the satisfaction I can that there is no desire
whatsoever on the part of Congress organizations to harass Parsis. In
the lady’s case there is an impeachment of Syt. Bharucha who has
investigated the matter. In view of the fact that there are two contrary
allegations by two Parsis of position, I can only ask you to name some
person who would make the investigation and report to you. Pending
1

Miss. Contractor who had foreign and country liquor shops at Thana and
Ghatkopar.

172

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

receipt of your letter on this point, I am staying any further investigation into the lady’s complaint.
Yours sincerely,

Encls. 2
S IR C OWASJI JEHANGIR
R EADYMONEY MANSION
C HURCHGATE S TREET
F ORT, BOMBAY
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-C, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

232. LETTER TO FRAMROZE B. GARDA 1
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 26, 1931
DEAR SARDAR GARDA,

I am sorry that owing to my absence from Gujarat and other
preoccupations I was not able to reply to your letter earlier. You will
notice from your complaint that except two, the other complaints refer
to times prior to your decision to restore the land to the original
owners. With reference to the two incidents which you mention as
having happened on the 28th April and 3rd instant. I have enquired
into your allegations and the people point blank repudiate them.
You have again mentioned some other cases before the 25th April
which are before the courts. The rest I have enquired into. Although
they are alleged to have happened before the 25th April, the allegations are denied by the people concerned. Of course you do not
hold Congressmen responsible for things that may happen to your
land in the Baroda territories through your tenants with whom Congressmen have no dealings of concern.
As a matter of fact it was up to you to have withdrawn the
cases which are before the courts after the settlement with you. I
cannot help therefore saying that you have shown absolutely no
reason for going back upon your plighted word. In any case I
suggest that your proper course was to seek redress for any wrong
done to you after your promise of restoration by means of arbitration or other-wise but not to repudiate the promise made after the
fullest deliberation.
Yours sincerely,

S ARDAR F RAMROZE GARDA
NAVSARI
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-C, 1931.
Library
1

Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and

Vide also “Letter to Framroze B. Garda”, 6-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

173

233. LETTER TO U. GOPALA MENON
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 26, 1931
MY DEAR GOPALA MENON,

I have your letter. I know all about the case of M.P. Narayana
Menon. I had a letter addressed to Lord Irwin by some missionary
friend given to me to be delivered to Lord Irwin which I gladly did
and asked him to endeavour to secure Narayana Menon’s release. I
have no doubt about the justice of the case. Unfortunately the talk
with Lord Irwin took place only two days before he left Delhi. It is
highly likely therefore that he was able to do nothing. Now as you say
Sir. C. P. Ramaswami Iyer knows the case well you have to knock at
his door continually.
I cannot give you any definite opinion upon the proposed
Temple Entry Satyagraha unless I know what the other side has to say.
The objection you have raised is certainly worthy of consideration.
Beyond this I do not feel able to go.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. U. G OPALA MENON, B.A., B.L.
C ALICUT
From a microfilm : S. N. 17143

234. LETTER TO JUGAL KISHORE
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 26, 1931
MY DEAR JUGAL KISHORE,

I have your letter of the 14th instant. On my way back to
Bardoli I had to pass nearly five hours in Muttra and I saw the
friend who was with you. What is his name Both he and I after discussion agreed that I should take no public notice of your appeal till
you were ready with the programme for making the Mahavidy-alaya
self-reliant by a definite date not distant. But I gave him a letter
addressed to the Trustees in accordance with the terms we had
discussed before.
I missed you at Muttra.
P ROF. J UGAL KISHORE
P REM MAHAVIDYALAYA
BRINDABAN
From a microfilm: S. N. 17144

174

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

235. LETTER TO MAGANTI BAPI NEEDU
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 26, 1931
MY DEAR NEEDU,

I have your touching letter. You are unnecessarily despondent.
There is no occasion for despondency. I could see that you will have
to support your father, mother and child. I therefore suggest your
going to Sabarmati Ashram. Rs. 33 per month will be paid for these
dependents. You won’t have to pay anything for your boarding and
lodging at the Ashram. If you take to teh Ashram life your problem
is easily solved, and of course you serve the country by the mere fact
of your living at the Ashram for the simple reason that the whole of
the Ashram activity is national activity. If you do not know what
Ashram life is in detail you should ask Narayana Razu who lived
there, I think, for over a year. So many other men also from Andhra
Desh have off and on lived in the Ashram.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. M AGANTI BAPI NEEDU
ELLORE (WEST GODAVARI DT.)
From a microfilm : S. N. 17145

236. LETTER TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 26, 1931
Here is a letter from Patiya, Chittagong District. I telegraphed1 to
the writer to ascertain whether I could make use of his name and
whether he could vouch for the facts. The telegram was not delivered
for want of sufficient address. I wrote 2 to him also, but there is no
reply as yet. If the facts mentioned in the letter are true, the matter is
serious. But you can inquire and take such action as it is necessary. I
hope you had a nice time in Ahmedabad.
S YT. S UBHAS C HANDRA BOSE
C/ O BENGAL P ROVINCIAL C ONGRESS C OMMITTEE
C ALCUTTA
From a photostat : S. N. 17146

1
2

Vide “Telegram to Secretary, Congress Committee Chittagong”, 21-5-1931
Vide “Letter to Secretary, Congress Committee Chittagong”, 21-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

175

237. LETTER TO L. R. GURUSWAMY NAIDU
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 26, 1931
MY DEAR GURUSWAMY,

I have your letter describing the difficulties of picketing. If
you have correctly described your picketing there seems to me to be
nothing wrong about it and that the action of the authorities was not
only contrary to the terms of the Settlement but in my opinion also
illegal Please continue to give me information about any further
development I would like you also to keep in touch with Syt.
Rajagopalachari to whom I have sent your letter.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. L. R. G URUSWAMY NAIDU
P RESIDENT, T ALUQ C ONGRESS C OMMITTEE
KOILPATTI (Madras P RESIDENCY)
From a microfilm : S. N. 17147

238. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 26, 1931
Here is a letter from L. R. Guruswamy Naidu of Koilpatti Taluq
Congress Committee. I enclose also a copy of my letter1 to him. You
should vigorously move in the matter if the facts are correctly set
forth in Guruswamy’s letter.
I expect to see you in Bombay on the 9th.
S YT. C. R AJAGOPALACHARIAR
GANDHI ASHRAM
TIRUCHENGODU (S. INDIA)
From a microfilm : S. N. 17148

239. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 26, 1931
MY DEAR SHANKERLAL,

With reference to the suggestion of Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya
advising purchase of the site and building at Masulipatam I agree to
1

176

Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the proposal if the purchase price is anywhere between five and six
thousand rupees.
S YT. S HANKERLAL BANKER
MIRZAPUR, A HMEDABAD
From a microfilm : S. N. 17149

240. LETTER TO DR. M. A. ANSARI
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 26, 1931
DEAR DR. ANSARI,

I have your telegram. I thought that you had agreed that if
the communal question was not solved the Congress should not be
represented at the Round Table Conference. Why do you now
agree with the suggestion made by Sastri, Andrews and Polak? 1 But
whether you do or not, you have to consider my own want of confidence in myself if I went without the solution. What can I ask and
what strength can I put forth in the national demand if we are a house
divided against itself? But I have in my reply to the cable said that if
I was invited to go to London to discuss things apart from the Round
Table Conference I would gladly go if the Settlement was being
properly worked.
Have you seen the announcement made by Maulvi Mohammad
Yakub? I do not know what the papers have reported about my statement about the necessity of the Sikhs joining any solution that might
be arrived at. Do you see any escape from it?
There was much left over to talk about at Simla. I am looking
forward to the 9th June when we should be able to resume the
conversations.
Dr. M. A. Ansari
1 Daryaganj
Delhi
From a photostat : S. N. 17150

1

Vide “Cable to V. S. Srinivasa Sastri”, 23-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

177

241. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 26, 1931
I have your cheerful letter. I returned to Bardoli yesterday on
Sardar’s orders and under those orders I am here at least for a few
days. About the 3rd or 4th June I may be still here or in Borsad unless
I am suddenly called away somewhere else. You see I am not my own
master. There is the Sardar as also the Sarkar and between the two I
am having a fine time.
I never received even an acknowledgement of my letter to the
Maharaja.Do you suggest my writing to him again? If you do, please
let me know his address. Why don’t you see the Dewan yourself? I am
glad Rehana has gone to Matheran. She must benefit by the rest.
S YT. A BBAS TYABJI
C AMP BARODA
From a photostat : S. N. 17151

242. LETTER TO SECRETARY, INDIAN ASSOCIATION, IRAQ
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 26, 1931
THE S ECRETARY
INDIAN ASSOCIATION IN IRAQ
P. B OX NO. 71, R ESIDENCY R OAD
BAGHDAD
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your printed letter of 28th April last. I do not know
anything of the previous ones. They were probably received whilst I
was in jail. I wish your Association every success. Will you give me
some idea of the number and the profession of Indians resident in
Iraq and will you also tell me whether the relations between you and
the Arabs are perfectly cordial?
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S. N. 17152

178

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

243. LETTER TO HARDAYAL NAG
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 26, 1931
DEAR BABU HARDAYAL NAG,

Although you are perhaps the oldest member of the Congress
you are proving your youthfulness now and again by favouring me
with letters. Your latest I do not propose to publish. The communal
question is there whether we like it or not. And if we cannot settle it I
cannot put forth the national demand with the strength that a solution
of the communal question would give me. Do you not see this
fundamental objection to participation by the Congress in the Round
Table Conference? If there is to be a Swaraj Constitution there has to
be a solution of the communal trouble.
I hope you are retaining the same vigour as before.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. H ARDAYAL NAG
C HANDPUR (BENGAL)
From a photostat : S. N. 17154

244. LETTER TO L. J. BURGESS
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 26, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. Though I should perhaps word the
third proposition differently I have no hesitation in endorsing the
general tenor of all the three propositions. I have never said that other
nations’ religion is as good as any other. I am trying to send you the
two numbers of Young India which contain my views on the question.
There never was any question of legal interference on my part with
religious liberty.
Yours sincerely,

L. J. BURGESS, E SQ.
S ALT HILL
DARJEELING
From a photostat : S.N. 17155

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

179

245. LETTER TO RAGHUBIR SINGH
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 26, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. My answer to your first question is that if
your mind really hankers after the degree or the knowledge that the
college course gives you in physics you should rejoin the college.
As to the help to your friends I think that you are entitled to and
even bound to help them if they are starving but not to further their
aims. In no case [may] even you disclose their names to the police.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. R AGHUBIR S INGH
C/ O BENGALI S AREM
C OLLECTOR’S OFFICE
MEERUT
From a microfilm : S. N. 17156

246. LETTER TO M. G. DATAR
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 26, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. If I omitted the Tilak Vidyalaya in my speech
in Ahmedabad the omission was certainly not intentional. 1 I simply
took the names as they came to me. I do know the contri-bution of
the Nagpur Tilak Vidyalaya. My purpose was not to single out a
particular national organization but to emphasize the fact that national
educational organizations were the real thing.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. M. G. D ATAR
HEADMASTER, T ILAK VIDYALAYA
NAGPUR
From a microfilm : S. N. 17157

1

180

Vide “National Universities”, 18-6-1931.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

247. LETTER TO SURENDRA SINGH
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 26, 1931
DEAR SARDAR SURENDRA SINGH,

You will pardon me for not having acknowledged your letter of
the 30th April earlier. It will be difficult for you to convince me that
the present administration really guarantees protection at critical
times. I am at one with you in deploring the decline of spirituality in
the national life. And I am quite at one with you that we cannot have
too much of selflessness or discipline. I am trying all I can to secure
these.
Yours sincerely,

S ARDAR S URENDRA S INGH
LAHORE
From a photostat : S. N. 17158

248. LETTER TO MANMOHANDAS P. GANDHI
May 26, 1931
BHAI MANMOHANDAS,

I am helpless. I have not been able so much as to glance at
your book 1 , thanks to constant travelling and pressure of other work.
1. How much cotton is imported from foreign countries for
fine-count cloth?
2. Is it necessary to import that cotton?
3. Does the import harm the interests of indigenous cotton?
4. Does the growing of cotton harm or benefit the soil?
5. Would it be better to grow food crops instead of cotton?
6. Would it improve the soil?
Think over these questions and let me have your replies.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 13

1

Pardeshi Kapadni Same Harifai Kem Karvi, a Gujarati translation by the
author of his English work; vide “Preface to “Pardeshi Kapadni Same Harifai Kem
Karavi” “, 25-2-1931
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

181

249. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
BARDOLI,

May 26, 1931
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I could not write to you from Nainital, but I did get your letter.
I understand your difficulty. In what manner do you serve father-inlaw? It would be very good indeed if he lets you serve all the time.
That will keep your mind engaged and if, in consequence, the fainting
fits stop, your health will improve. I completely forgot to write to
Narandas about sending money to you, though of course he knows
about it. Has there been any difficulty about the matter? Write to
Narandas and request him to send you any sum you require. For
some time I shall be staying in Bardoli.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 3413

250. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
BARDOLI,

May 26, 1931
CHI. VASUMATI,

I had your letter. Let me know about the effect of the vaid’s
medicine. What does he give you by way of medicine? For what is
Maitri being treated? Tell Mahavir and Maitri to write to me. When is
Gangabehn expected to come? For the present I shall have to stay
here. Ramdas and Nimu have reached Almora. Rambhau has returned
to the Ashram.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S. N. 9324. Also C.W. 570. Courtesy :
Vasumati Pandit

182

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

251. LETTER TO LAKSHMIBEHN KHARE
BARDOLI,

May 26, 1931
CHI. LAKSHMIBEHN,

I suppose Rambhau has returned there. Don’t get angry with
him or beat him. Let him follow his own inclinations. If he does not
like to study, he may do some manual work or learn some craft.
There will be no harm either if he concentrates on cultivating his gift
for music. Try to discover the bent of his mind and let him do what
he chooses. No one else will be able to look after him or reform him
better than you can. Be patient with him. Let me know what he
decides to do.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C. W. 278. Courtesy : Lakshmibehn Khare

252. LETTER TO FIROZABEHN TALEYARKHAN
BARDOLI,

May 26, 1931
DEAR SISTER,

It was only yesterday I came here. I have your letter. You may
come over whenever you wish. I shall spare some time [for you].
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS GANDHI

PS.
The train to Bardoli starts from Surat.
S MT. F IROZABEHN TALEYARKHAN
C UMBALLA HILL
BOMBAY
From Gujarati : C.W. 9774

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

183

253. TELEGRAM TO PRABHASHANKAR PATTANI
BARDOLI,

May 27, 1931
S IR P RABHASHANKAR P ATTANI
BHAVNAGAR
THANKS

WIRE.

COME

BARDOLI

WHENEVER

YOU

CAN.

GANDHI
From a photostat : G.N. 5915. Also C.W. 3230. Courtesy : Mahesh Pattani

254. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BOMBAY,

Silence Day [Before May 28] 1 , 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

I remember your asking me to write to you on silence day and
that is why I am writing this letter. Otherwise I really have no time.
Tell the inmates of the Ashram that they should not be very
eager to receive letters from me. I have talked and reasoned much
and what I taught I have practised as well as I could; let them assimilate as much as they can. We have with us those three shields to
protect us, the Anasaktiyoga, the Bhajanavali and the Ramayana. I
believe, and I want you all to believe, that the constant reading of these
with faith will be a greater source of strength than letters from me or
than living with me.
If the Punjabi vaid succeeds in his treatment of Jamna and
Kusum, we shall have made a discovery. If he does indeed, we should
put Radha and Anandi, too, under his treatment.
How does Santok keep now ?
I have still not been able to find time for writing about the swadeshi vow.
Blessings from

BAPU

1

From the reference to the discourse on the swadeshi vow, despatched on May
28; vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”,29-5-1931

184

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[PS.]
I have received a request from Rajkot that I should arrange for a
companion for Ratilal who would look after him. Can you think of
anyone? The person will of course be well paid.
I am leaving for Borsad today. For the present, therefore, write
to me there.
BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro— 9 : Shri Narandas Gandhine, Pt. I, p. 250

255. TO THE U.P. ZAMINDARS
In another column will be found my manifesto to the U.P.
Kisans.1 I know that H. E. the Governor does not quite like it
inasmuch as it goes beyond the relief given by the U.P. Government.
But the advice given to the kisans in the manifesto is an honest attempt
to express their capacity for payment. I am hoping, therefore, that if
the kisans pay according to the suggestion made in the manifesto, the
zamindars and the local Government will accept the payments in full
discharge of the kisans’ liability. But under the land revenue system
prevalent in the U.P. the brunt will in the first instance fall upon the
zamindars. I am hoping that the Government will grant proportionate
relief to the zamindars who accept the tenants’ terms.
To the zamindars I can give my assurance that I endeavoured to
study the rural condition as much as it was possible for me to do.
With the authoritative figures before me, it was impossible to offer
better terms. Here are the two tables of prices :
Index Nos. of the prices of the Principal Food-grains (Wheat,
Barley, Gram, Rice and Bajra) on the basis of 1873=100
Year
Prices
Year
Prices
1880
118
1906-10
195
1881-85
100
1911-15
194
1886-90
119
1916-20
272
1891-95
128
1921-25
294
1896-1900
166
1926 300
1901-05
136
1931 (May, U.P.)
132
1

Vide “To the Kisans of the U. P. 23-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

185

TABLE II

Price per maund
Year
Priceper maund
Year
in Rupees
in Rupees
1880
1.5
1906-10
3.56
1881-85
1. 68
1911-15
3.31
1886-90
2. 08
1916-20
4.63
1891-95
2. 22
1921-25
4.73
1896-1900
2. 75
1926-28
4.9
1901-05
2. 34
1931 May
2.3
They show that from 1915 there is 50% drop in the prices of
staples. These prices go back to 1886. That means that within living
memory they have never been so low as now. And if one were to go to
the level of rents in those days, the tenants would have to pay much
less than 8 as. or 12 as. as under the manifesto. It is admitted that the
condition of the tenants has at no time been prosperous during recent
years. Indeed an inquiry made in over three hundred U.P. villages in
the eastern province shows that the price of the produce at the present
rate does not even cover the rents payable. This makes no allowance
for the cost of cultivation. I am prepared to admit that the inquiry was
not made by experts. It therefore lacks scientific precision. But such
as it is, it is revealing enough to make one pause and think.
Mr. Hooper, once a Settlement Officer, is said to have given the
following landlords’ definition of the U.P. tenant :
One who is ready to live on one meal a day, and in native phrase to sell
his wife and children to pay the highest possible rent for his holding, who
submits to any cesses it may please his landlord to demand, and who is always
willing to work for him without payment, to give evidence for him in court
and speaking generally, to do any conceivable thing he is told.

The description is not flattering to the zamindars. But since
Mr. Hooper’s time the zamindars’ ideas have undergone revolution.
Many of them are sympathetic to their tenants.They try to make
common cause with them. But the process has to be much faster than
it has been. With the great awakening among the kisans there must
be growing dissatisfaction with their lot, and a growing assertion of
their rights.
I would like the zamindars to recognize the correctness of the
kisans’ positio and make a corresponding change in their own
outlook. The present crisis will be somehow tided over. But it would
be wrong to go to sleep after it is over.
186

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The zamindars would do well to take the time by the forelock.
Let them cease to be mere rent collectors. They should become
trustees and trusted friends of their tenants. They should limit their
privy purse. Let them forgo the questionable perquisites they take
from the tenants in the shape of forced gifts on marriage and other
occasions, or nazarana on transfer of holdings from one kisan to
another or on restoration to the same kisan after eviction for nonpayment of rent. They should give them fixity of tenure, take a lively
interest in their welfare, provide well-managed schools for their
children, night schools for adults, hospitals and dispensaries for the
sick, look after the sanitation of villages and in a variety of ways make
them feel that they, the zamindars, are their true friends taking only a
fixed commission for their manifold services In short they must
justify their position. They should trust Congressmen.They may
themselves become Congressmen and know that the Congress is a
bridge between the people and the Government. All who have the true
welfare of the people at heart can harness the services of the Congress.
Congressmen will on their part see to it that kisans scrupul-ously fulfil
their obligations to the zamindars. I mean not necessarily the statutory, but the obligations which they have themselves admitted to be
just. They must reject the doctrine that their holdings are absolu-tely
theirs to the exclusion of the zamindars. They are or should be
members of a joint family in which the zamindar is the head guarding
their rights against encroachment. Whatever the law may be, the
zamindari to be defensible must approach the conditions of a joint
family.
I like the ideal of Rama and Janaka.They owned nothing against
the people. Everything including themselves belonged to the people.
They lived in their midst a life not above theirs but in correspondence
with theirs. But these may not be regarded as historical personages.
Then let us take the example of the great Caliph Omar. Though he
was monarch of a vast realm created by his great genius and amazing
industry, he lived the life of a pauper and never considered himself
owner of the vast treasures that lay at his feet. He was a terror to those
officials who squandered people’s money in luxuries.
Young India, 28-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

187

256. NOTES
MAHARAJA S AHEB OF MAHMUDABAD1

The untimely death of the Maharaja Saheb of Mahmudabad
removes one whose wisdom was needed at the present juncture in
the life of the nation. He was genuinely anxious to promote HinduMuslim unity, and could be relied upon to give sound advice on
national matters. I tender my respectful condolences to the deceased’s
family.
P OISONOUS JOURNALISM

I have before me extracts from journals containing some
gruesome things There is communal incitement, gross misrepresentation and incitement to political violence bordering on murder. It is
of course easy enough for the Government to launch out prosecutions
or to pass repressive ordinances. These fail to serve the purpose
intended except very temporarily, and in no case do they convert the
writers, who often take to secret propaganda, when the open forum of
the Press is denied to them.
The real remedy is healthy public opinion that will refuse to
patronize poisonous journals. We have our journalists’ Association.
Why should it not create a department whose business it would be to
study the various journals and find objectionable articles and bring
them to the notice of the respective editors? The function of the
department will be confined to the establishment of contact with the
offending journals and public criticism of offending articles where the
contact fails to bring about the desired reform. Freedom of the Press
is a precious privilege that no country can forgo. But if there is, as
there should be, no legislative check save that of the mildest character,
an internal check such as I have suggested should not be impossible
and ought not to be resented.
NAVAJUVAN BHARAT S ABHA

A member of this Sabha asked me at Muttra Junction whether I
had suggested that no Congress member should be a member of that
body or vice versa I told him that so far as I knew I had never expressed any such opinion. He immediately announced the purport of
my reply to the young men on the platform, and said that some
Congress member had ascribed such opinion to me, that it was wrong
and that now every Congressman was free to join the Sabha as every
1

188

A leading nationalist Muslim who died on May 23
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

member of the Sabha was free to join the Congress. That I had
expressed no such opinion as was ascribed to me did not certainly
imply that all Congressmen should or were free to join the Sabha.
Every Sabha has its own rules. And I should be sorry to find Congressmen joining any of these Sabhas or for that matter any other
institution without first ascertaining the condition of membership, the
men composing it and the methods of its working. Certainly no one
can be bullied into joining an institution. The Navajuvan Bharat Sabha
will flourish if it shows a record of constructive service of the nation,
never otherwise.
R IVAL C ONGRESS C OMMITTEES

Whilst at Nainital I heard of rival Congress Committees in the
U.P. and elsewhere. I heard too of election disputes in several places.
This is a bad sign. There must be something wrong in a place where
such unhealthy rivalries take place. The hunt for office in Congress
Committees is also a very ugly sign. A Congress office is or should be
an opportunity for service. And where service is the motive, there can
be no unhealthy rivalry. A man or a woman can easily do service
without needing, or hunting for office. Wise servants of the nation will
find it more profitable to stand out than to enter into unhealthy
competition. Nor need one form a separate organization for the sake
of service. Why do I, for instance, need an organization, if I want to
teach the children of my village or street, or to sweep it, or to nurse
my neighbours, to carry on khadi propaganda or to do kindred acts,
all of which promote national well-being and keep me going the
whole time?
C ONGRESS AND C OMMUNALISM

A correspondent asks whether a Congressman who openly identifies himself with communal conferences, and other communal propaganda can hold any office under the Congress organization.
I do not think there is any rule prohibiting the election of any
Congressman to any office because of his communalism. But if the
Congress is to remain a purely national organization, and is to be
absolutely just to all and guardian of weak minorities, Congressmen
will never elect those who are known for their communal bias or
tendency.
Young India, 28-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

189

257. CHRISTIAN MISSIONS
I gladly publish the following from Rev. B. W. Tucker:1
I am in full agreement with you in your protest against the methods
employed by Christian missions in their efforts to gain proselytes through education, medical services and the like. Education when used for such purposes is
really no education at all, but merely the perpetuation of the present substitute for
education initiated by the Government, which no honest missionary, familiar with
educational experimentation in the lands from which he comes would tolerate for a
minute if his primary interest was education rather than proselytizing. While not
denying the right of the sick to relief from their sufferings, it might not be altogether
unfair to presume, that it has been proselytizing zeal rather than lack of intelligence
that has caused missionary doctors to specialize in hospitals of healing to the neglect
of preventive medicine and health work. All humanitarian work must necessarily
suffer if men are not dealt with with a single eye to their welfare and development as
personalities, and this cannot be the case when they are looked upon merely as
candidates for conversion into another social ro religious grouping.
. . . It is the spirit of the age, that one’s devotion to religion and God should
find an immediate return in increased material prosperity, which is the negation of all
spiritual religion. . . .

In fact the whole Christian community have had their

character vitiated by this sort of thing, . . . In no walk of life can the principle be
justified that the end justifies the means, but least of all in religion where sincerity
must reign supreme.
. . . Jesus had the same passion for social solidarity that has ever characterized
Hindu religion at its best. While he was a devout Jew, he was never a communalist,
and set his face sternly against everything, which hindered men from realizing their
universal brotherhood. For this reason he was opposed to the nationalism of his
day, even as you have been opposed to the current tendency towards a divisive
nationalism in India. I believe that if modern Christian missions are to be true to
their Lord and Master,

they will eschew all efforts to proselytize and thus tear men

away from their social

order with the consequent lack of the sense of responsibility

for the advancement of that social order.
. . . This Government has demanded that the non-British missionary not only
remain neutral in such vital matters as the economic and political evils of this
country, but has compelled him to give a pledge, which the Government has interpreted to mean that the missionary shall actively support the Government. . . In my
1

190

Only extracts are reproduced here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

own case they objected even to my attending political meetings as a visitor, frankly
admitting that they had no charge of moral obloquy to make against me, but that the
Government interpretation of the pledge I had given would not allow me even this
privilege. It is a standing indictment of the alliance of Christian missions in India
with the world’s greatest collective evil, imperialism, that they have acquiesced in
this arrangement.
It is for this reason that I am pleased that you have signified that you would
not perpetuate this evil in a swaraj government by creating any legal enactment
compelling missionaries to withdraw if they failed to give up their proselytizing
activities. No government can afford to abridge freedom of religion in this way. . . .
While I am sympathetic with your criticism of the exclusive claim of
Christianity as the superior religion, I must protest against the implications of your
statement that the religions of India are adequate for her. . . .

I can have nothing to add to this letter. But I must adhere to
the statement to which Rev. Tucker takes exception and which is,
“Religions of India are adequate for her.” This surely means nothing
more than that she does not need to change them. But as the context
of the article in which the statement occurs shows, it does not mean
that the professors of the respective faiths have nothing to learn. If
there is sympathetic contact established between the various faiths and
no evil designs suspected, each can gain a great deal from the rest.
What is resisted is the idea of gaining converts and that too not
always by fair and open means.
Young India, 28-5-1931

258. PANCHAYATS
Panchayat has an ancient flavour; it is a good word. It literally
means an assembly of five elected by villagers. It represents the
system, by which the innumerable village republics of India were
governed. But the British Government, by its ruthlessly through
method of revenue collection, almost destroyed these ancient republics, which could not stand the shock of this revenue collection.
Congressmen are now making a crude attempt to revive the system by
giving village elders civil and criminal jurisdiction.The attempt was
first made in 1921. It failed. It is being made again, and it will fail if
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

191

it is not systematically and decently, I will not say, scientifically, tried.
It was reported to me in Nainital, that in certain places in the
U.P. even criminal cases like rape were tried by the so-called
Panchayats. I heard of some fantastic judgments pronounced by ignorant or interested Panchayats. This is what comes to me from far off
Assam:
It has been ascertained that the Congress Committee at
Chaparmukh has set up a sort of rival administrative machinery
there for the trial and disposal of civil and criminal cases.
There are a few branch offices in the neighbourhood of
Chaparmukh which dispose of similar business. At Chaparmukh
office regis-ters are being maintained for civil and criminal
cases. It is understood that fines are imposed in criminal cases,
and decrees are passed in civil suits, and that in a few cases
attachments of property have been made or attempted in
execution of decrees.
This is all bad if it is true. Irregular Panchayats are bound to
fall to pieces under their own unsupportable weight. I suggest
therefore the following rules for the guidance of village workers:
1. No Panchayat should be set up without the written sanction
of a Povincial Congress Committee;
2. A Panchayat should in the first instance be elected by a
public meeting called for the purpose by beat of drum;
3. It should be recommended by the Tehsil Committee;
4. Such Panchayat should have no criminal jurisdiction;
5. It may try civil suits if the parties to them refer their
disputes to the Panchayat;
6. No one should be compelled to refer any matter to the
Panchayat;
7. No Panchayat should have any authority to impose fines,
the only sanction behind its civil decrees being its moral authority,
strict impartiality and the willing obedience of the parties concerned;
8. There should be no social or other boycott for the time
being;
9. Every Panchayat will be expected to attend to;
192

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

The education of boys and girls in its village;
Its sanitation;
Its medical needs;
The upkeep and cleanliness of village wells or ponds;
The uplift of and the daily wants of the so-called untouch-

ables;
10. A Panchayat, that fails without just cause to attend to the
requirements mentioned in clause 9 within six months of its election,
or fails otherwise to retain the goodwill of the villagers, or stands selfcondemned for any other cause, appearing sufficient to the Provincial
Congress Committee, may be disbanded and another elected in its
place.
The disability to impose fines or social boycott is a necessity of
the case in the initial stages. Social boycott in villages has been
found to be a dangerous weapon in the hands of ignorant or unscrupulous men. Imposition of fines too may lead to mischief and defeat
the very end in view. Where a Panchayat is really popular and
increases its popularity by the constructive work of the kind suggested
in clause 9, it will find its judgments and authority respected by reason
of its moral prestige. And that surely is the greatest sanction any one
can possess and of which one cannot be deprived.
Young India, 28-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

193

259. SALT
Simla has issued the following welcome communique:
Since the conclusion of the Settlement between Lord Irwin and Mr. Gandhi, the
Government of India have been engaged in settling the details of arrangements and
regulations in various districts to give effect to clause 20 of the Settlement, which
related to the collection and manufacture of salt by local residents in villages
immediately adjoining the areas where salt could be collected or made. These deatails
in all cases are now practically completed, and the general manner in which effect is
to be given to the arrangement may be stated as follows:
1.
Clause 20 is intended to benefit the poor classes. It will be open,
therefore, to those in villages adjoining the salt areas to make or collect salt for
domestic use and sale in their respective villages.

NOTE : Domestic use shall include use for manure, cattle or fishcuring by
individual fishermen.
2.

For this purpose villagers may make salt pans or beds.

3.
There should be no sale of salt for purpose of trade outside the villages.
It follows, therefore, that such salt an be carried only on foot and not in carts or such
other conveyances.
4.
Wherever manufacture of salt under the foregoing clauses is permitted,
salt pans will not be directed or otherwise interfered with by Government officers, and
regular watches will be withdrawn.
5.

The concession will be withdrawn from the villages where it is found

that it is abused. Wherever it is discovered that salt is manufactured or collected in
quantities above the requirements of a particular village, the abuse of the concession
will be presumed.

I hope that workers will understand and carefully explain these
instructions to the villagers, so that the limits are not overstepped.
Young India, 28-5-1931

260. TO DESHSEVIKAS
May 28, 1931
When I was in Bombay, I wished to meet the deshsevikas. I tried
to find time to do so, but I could not meet all of them. Finally, the
women contented themselves with writing a letter signed by all. Till
today, I have not been able to write even a few lines to express my
194

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

gratitude to them. It is true that I was unnable to find time to write
while travelling, but the fact is that I also forgot to write when I could
have done so. I hope these women will forgive me. Some account of
the work done by the deshsevikas did appear in the newspapers and,
as I received two or three newspapers while in prison, I could get some
idea of their work. My heart used to dance with joy on reading about
their ceaseless service and their fearlessness. It is my hope that, with
the very same enthusiasm, these women will do hereafter the more
difficult constructive work and bring credit to themselves and to the
country. The world has certainly been astonished at what Indian
women have achieved in the past twelve months. But their task does
not end there. This is merely the beginning.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 31-5-1931

261. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
May 28, 1931
CHI. PRABHA,

I got your letter. If the marriage cannot be celebrated before
the end of June, you should come away just now and return afterwards
for a week for the marriage. According to me, every day should be
treated as an auspicious day on which a marriage can be celebrated.
If, however, the marriage cannot be celebrated soon and if Father and
Mother willingly permit you to come away, you shold do so immediately. But you may stay on for the whole of June if they are likely to
feel hurt. You may go to Sitabadiyara, too, and stay there for some
time and do your duty to the family. If you have to stay on, you
should write to uncle1 , Babaji and Vinoba about it and get their permission. I, on my part, will also speak to them. You alone know all the
relevant circumstances for deciding whether you should stay on there;
you should, there-fore, do what seems best to you in the light of the
circumstancs there.
Write a strong letter to Jayaprakash in regard to the pain from
which he suffers. If you stay on there, take an opportunity to meet
him.
Keep up some study.
Gangabehn gave birth to a daughter. The child lived for a day
1

Jamnalal Bajaj, according to Bapuna Patro—10: Shri Prabhavatibehnne

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

195

and died.
Amtulsalaam feels rather unhappy. I cannot say whether she will
continue to stay here till you return.
Why have you asked for slivers to be sent to you from here? Of
course I will send them, but you yourself ought to card cotton. If the
effort gives you pain in your hand, you should teach some others to
card. Is there no one even in Chhapra who spins? And if a person
spins, cannot he card? Wherever we stay, we should do our best to
obtain slivers locally.
What is your weight?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I will leave on the 29th and return on June 3.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3412

262. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BARDOLI,

May 28, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter. Write to Hanuman Singh’s relations and tell
them that his death has both grieved me and made me happy. His
body had wasted away and it is good that it has perished. The soul
which dwelt in that body is immortal. Since I knew him personally, I
was bound to feel grieved at his passing away, but such grief ought to
be suppressed. I, therefore, felt the pain only for a moment. Let the
relations, too, feel in the same way. Translate this into Hindi and send
it to them along with a copy of the Gujarati. Who is the Shankarrao
who was bitten by a snake? How is he now? How did he come to be
bitten by a snake? Did it get under his foot in the river or did it bite
him unprovoked?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./I

196

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

263. LETTER TO V. G. DESAI
BARDOLI,

May 28, 1931
BHAISHRI VALJI,

Did you in any way benefit from your stay in the hospital? Or,
are things just as they were? Don’t let your constipation remain. If
you come over here as soon as you get this letter, we will banish your
constipation altogether.
I have written to Bhai Mohanlal about your article.
It seems that the Foreword did not reach you after all. Here is
another :
“These eleven points have been explained so clearly that
everybody may understand them. If every reader, having understood
these points, immediately starts acting upon as many of them as he
finds practicable, how very near would swaraj be?
MOHANDAS GANDHI”

Though I send you this Foreword, I wonder whether the eleven
points have not become twenty now. Why won’t you write about all
of them? But in this matter you know better.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 7414. Courtesy : V. G. Desai

264. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
BARDOLI,

May 28, 1931
CHI. JAMNADAS,

I have your letter of the 22nd; but the earlier one has not
yet reached me. I fail to see why you are reluctant to write to the
Doctor. Why should you feel any hesitation in explaining the facts as
they are? I see nothing odd in your wish to ask Lallubhai to accompany you when you take Ratilal to Thana. He must be a strange
man who, though he has enough money, refuses to spend it at such
a time. For whose sake should he hoard and save? I did get the telegram about Anna, and I replied to say that he would not be able to go.
It is possible, however, that he want on his own.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

197

How is the State being ruled? What happened to that petition in
regard to drinking?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
At present I am here only.
From Gujarati : C. W. 9323. Courtesy : Jamnadas Gandhi

265. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
BARDOLI,

May 28, 1931
CHI. LILAVATI,

Received your letter. Do come if you can get leave, I am going
to be at Bardoli for the time being. You have to find peace by your
own efforts. Do not mistake for real the peace you get through hectic
activity.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

266. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
BARDOLI,

May 28, 1931
Interviewed in connection with the report appearing in a Bombay paper
saying that an ugly situation was again developing in and around Bardoli, Gandhiji
declared :

I urge upon the public to disbelieve all sensational statements
and be unruffled by them. It is news to me that the peasants have no
intention to pay the land revenue. I do know that the peasants have
been paying to the utmost of their ability all the time and are still
paying. I hope to be able shortly to make a public statement to show
how punctiliously correct Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel and other workers
in the Civil Disobedience Movement have been in implementing the
Delhi Settlement.
The Hindustan Times, 30-5-1931
198

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

267. LETTER TO R. M. MAXWELL
BARDOLI,

May 29, 1931
DEAR MR. MAXWELL,

I thank you for your several letters which I hope to deal with as
fast as time permits me. But I must make time to reply to your latest,
i.e., of the 25th instant and the previous one, i.e., of the 24th instant.
I do not know what there can be in the prabhat pheris t o
object to. Though they took from during the Civil Disobedience
campaign they were in themselves quite innocent. I do not know how
far they dis-turb the peace of citizens. During my recent travels, I
found them more or less in vogue in the other cities too. I can
understand prohibition of inflammatory songs. But I do not know that
the Government will be right in interfering with this innocent and
beautiful institution which reminds citizens of their duty towards their
Creator in early morning.
With reference to the Seva Dals the practices they go through
are not new. They have for years been going through them without
any interference. If there is anything specific that is objected to, I
would like it to be specified. I am unable without further information
to endorse the suggestion that ‘these camps do not wholly reflect the
spirit of the Settlement and that they are calculated in some degree to
delay the restoration of normal conditions and feelings’.
As to the other letter, i.e., about liquor sales it comes upon me
with painful surprise.
If whilst liquor picketing is recognized as legitimate, the
Government counteract it through several practices even considered
illegal, and contend that such practices are not in contravention of the
Settlement, I venture to suggest that nothing that the Government may
do or may not do need be deemed to be in contravention of it.
But your letter tells me that the present practice of sale out of
ordinary hours and outside ordinary places of sale is perfectly legal.
This I must confess is a revelation for which I was wholly unprepared.
It means that the Collectors are guided by no legal restrictions or
regulations that the public need know. Indeed if such is the condition
of liquor law or rather if the sale of liquor is governed by no law save
the will of Collectors, the sooner the public is informed of the fact the
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

199

better for it. And it will be a serious matter for the Congress Working
Committee to consider.
His Excellency will permit me to say that he is evidently
unaware of the fact that picketing in Ahmedabad has been accepted
by the previous District Officer and the Superintendent of Police as
the most peaceful and inoffensive. His Excellency is also evidently
unaware of the fact that the picketing was started by the Labour Union
in the interest of labour long before the Civil Disobedience campaign
was inaugurated. It has been admired by strangers from the West who
have visited Ahmedabad.
His Excellency will pardon me for saying that the opening of
the last paragraph of your letter betrays amazing ignorance of the
working of picketing in Ahmedabad. I state here for his information that the Labour Union including the drinkers are thankful for
this watch and it is the Union that has borne the expenses. It was
surely His Excellency’s duty to be sure of his facts on which
undeserved reflections upon the conduct of an honourable body of
men and women are based.
The suggestion contained in the last sentence that such picketing
cannot be peaceful implies a reflection on Lord Irwin who negotiated
the Settlement which reflection I am sure His Excellency could never
have intended.
In conclusion I repeat my humble opinion that if the practice of
liquor sales now going on in Ahmedabad continues, the continuation
will be in breach of the spirit if not the letter of the Settlement.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G ANDHI
A.I.C.C. File No. 4, 1931, part II. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

268. LETTER TO GANGABEHN JHAVERI
May 29, 1931
CHI. GANGABEHN,

Chhaganlal informs me that you have come to Nadiad. I also
hear that you wish to see me. You may come whenever you wish. I
shall not be required to go to Borsad for some time. Send the
accompanying letter to Navin wherever he is.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3114

200

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

269. LETTER TO PADMA
BARDOLI,

May 29, 1931
CHI. PADMA,

I met your father in Nainital. Do you write to him? How is your
health now? Write to me and give me all the news about yourself.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 6119. Also C.W. 3471. Courtesy :
Prabhudas Gandhi

270. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
BARDOLI,

May 29, 1931
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

You must have received my letter. For some days, I could get
no time to wirte to you. I did write to Narandas, however, about sending you money. I shall most probably be in Bardoli up to 7th June.
Writte to me here and give all details. My health is good. The diet
remains the same, milk and fruits.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—10 : Shri Prabhavatibehnne, p. 48.

271. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BARDOLI,

May 29, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

I sent yesterday an article1 for Navajivan on the swadeshi vow.
It will be one of the discourses on the Ashram vows, that is, the
discourses included in the series Mangalprabhat. With this is a letter
for Dahibehn Sonabhai. She was a member of the Stri Swaraj Sangh,
1

Vide “The Law of Swadeshi”, 18-6-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

201

Udwada Bazaar, but had asked for permission to resign from it. She
may not, therefore, be in Udwada. Send the letter to her, wherever she
is.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I had sent from jail a translation of Ramdas Swami’s couplet 1
about handwriting. If you can find it, send it to me. I am not
enclosing Dahibehn’s letter. She is at Udwada.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./I.

272. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
BARDOLI,

May 29, 1931
CHI. MANGALA,

I had your letter. But I can write only when I find time, is that
not so? I shall search for the poem of Ramdas Swami2 and publish it
in the Navajivan. You must then write as instructed in it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11094. Courtesy: Pushpa Naik

273. LETTER TO SUMANGAL PRAKASH
BARDOLI,

May 29, 1931
CHI. SUMANGAL,

I had your letter, but have so far never had time to answer it. I
came to know afterwards that the two of you had come to the station
at Moradabad to see me. But I was then asleep.
It will be good if Kanta can be admitted to Dakshinamurti. It
will also be good if she studies at home and sits for the examination of
the Karve Institute.
1
2

202

Das Bodha, XIX. 1
Maharashtrian saint-poet
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

It was difficult to have the ban lifted from the proscribed
books. . . 1 It seemed to be going beyond propriety to mix with the
matter things which were to be decided in a matter of months.
I do hope you are now getting Young India and Navajivan.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Are you now fully recovered in health?
From a photostat of the Hindi: Sumangal Prakash Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
memorial Museum and Library

274. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
BARDOLI,

May 29, 1931
CHI. KANTA,

I have your letter. I have written about you to Brother and so I
will not repeat it here. You should never worry about my health. It
isall right. Keep to me. How is your health?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

275. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
Silence Day, [After May 29, 1931] 2
CHI. MANGALA,

I have your letter. Your handwriting is passably good. But there
are too many blotches. Do you remember Ramdas Swami’s song I
sent you in this connection?3
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : C. W. 11103. Courtesy : Pushpa Naik

1

Omission as in the source
From the contents; vide “Letter to Mangala S. Patel”, 29-5-1931.
3
For Gandhiji’s references to Ramdas Swami’s stanzas on the importance of
good handwriting, vide “Letter to Hari-Ichchha Desai”, 10-8-1930 and “Letter to
Vinodbala”, 27-9-1930
2

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

203

276. LETTER TO K. F. NARIMAN
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 30, 1931
MY DEAR NARIMAN,

I enclose herewith a copy of the latest from Sardar Garda and
my reply. Unless you still think there is any use negotiating please
follow up the suggestion made by you in your letter to Sardar
Vallabhbhai Patel about legal procedure. If there is no cause of
action and if there is to be no further negotiation, let us forget the
matter at least for the time being.
Yours sincerely,

Encls. 2
S YT. K. F. N ARIMAN
C/ O BOMBAY P ROVINCIAL C ONGRESS C OMMITTEE
C ONGRESS HOUSE, G IRGAUM BACK R OAD
BOMBAY
From a pbotostat : S.N. 17165

277. LETTER TO F. KOTHAWALA
BARDOLI,

May 30, 1931
DEAR MR. KOTHAWALA,

I now send herewith a note on allegations against Patel Jehangir
of Varad. If an impartial open inquiry is held, full evidence will
be led before the tribunal in support of all the allegations. There
is no objection on the part of the people to the inquiry being entirely
open.
Moreover, according to my information, Patel Jehangir holds
a liquor license which, in my opinion, should be an effective bar
against the holding of a Patelship. As the allegations made against
this Patel are serious and as complaints about his high-handed
treatment of the villagers continue to come in I request an early
public investigation or an early removal from the office he holds.
I must add that the question of undesirability is raised without
prejudice to the general question, namely, that the temporary
appointments, no matter of what duration, are, in my opinion, only
temporary in terms of the Settlement and in no sense permanent,
204

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

especially when it is known that these appointments are for so many
years or until further orders.
Yours sincerely,

Encl. 1
F. K OTHAWALA, E SQ.
C OLLECTOR OF S URAT DT.
BARDOLI
A.I.C.C. File No. 16C-1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

278. LETTER TO FRAMROZE B. GARDA
BARDOLI,

May 30, 1931
DEAR SARDAR GARDA,

I have your letter. If you will not accept arbitration in the
matter of your complaints, I do not know how to give you satisfaction.
The matter must now pass into lawyers’ hands and if they advise that
the letter written by you undertaking to restore the lands in question
to the original holders against the consideration named by you gives
sufficient cause of action, law must take its course.
Yours sincerely,

S ARDAR F RAMROZE GARDA
NAVSARI
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-C, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

279. LETTER TO RATILAL
BARDOLI,

May 30, 1931
BHAI RATILAL,

I got your letter. Work patiently and overcome your difficulties.
Do have a discussion with Narandas about weavers.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 7166

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

205

280. LETTER TO FULCHAND K. SHAH
BARDOLI,

May 30, 1931
BHAISHRI FULCHAND,

I have learnt about the Dhrol1 incident. My own view is that you
should now forget all about the demand for the national flag. If you
like, two or three of you may come to see me. It seems to me that
many things are being done in haste. On your side, the right course at
present is to apply yourselves exclusively to the boycott of foreign
cloth through propagation of khadi, and to the campaign against
drinking. Besides, there is no dearth of social reforms which need to
be brought about.
Take every step after careful thought.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 9193. Also C.W. 2844. Courtesy :
Shardabehn Shah

281. LETTER TO NARAYAN MORESHWAR KHARE
May 30, 1931
CHI. PANDITJI,

I got your letter.
As for the boys and girls living in the Ashram who have joined
the Vidyapith, I have already communicated my views to Kaka.
Briefly, they are as follows : Though there is not much to justify the
view that the students who had joined the movement should not return
to the Ashram I would not oppose it either. The question is, what can
they do if they cannot work elsewhere? Ordinarily, the Vidyapith
would be the only choice. But we got alarmed when others, too,
began to give up manual work and go away. It may also have
happened that, under the pretext of excercising self-control and not
returning to the Ashram, the students satisfied their desire for joining
the Vidyapith. But we cannot hold back a flood. So I let the students
do what they liked. There is a long history behind all this. It is
difficult to say how far the students’ action is inspired by their desire
to join the Vidyapith and how far by a clear sense of duty. Ask me if
1

206

A town in Saurashtra
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you fail to follow anything in this. Show this leter to those who had
doubts in the matter.
Write to me from time to time and inform me how Rambhau is
faring.
I have followed what you say about Chi. Gajanan. There is no
harm in letting him satisfy his love of painting. It is very good indeed
that, at the same time, he also does spinning, etc.
I was eager to revise the draft of Mananvishi while I was in jail.
But I was released before I could do so, and found myself again in the
thick of affairs. Now print the thing off as it is. I have already given
you one “meditaion’ to be added.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 215. Courtesy : Lakshmibehn Khare

282. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
BARDOLI,

May 30, 1931
CHI. GANGABEHN,

Why do you feel so unhappy? After all, no great tragedy has
struck you down. There is no law that no one shall die young.
Moreover, you and I have not one child, but countless children. Some
of them will die and others will be born to take their place. Why, then,
keep count of who dies and who lives? We should do our best to serve
those who happen to be near us. It will then be the same to us that
someone lives and another dies.
If the secretary has made the necessary arrangements, we need
not think about the matter any further.
Cultivate non-attachment.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro – 6 : G. S. Gangabehnne, pp. 53-4. Also C.W. 8775. Courtesy :
Gangabehn Vaidya

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

207

283. LETTER TO KASTURBHAI LALBHAI
BARDOLI,

May 30, 1931
BHAISHRI KASTURBHAI,

The delay in implementing the resolution of the Swadeshi Sabha
to take over the foreign goods lying with the merchants of Ahmedabad seems to me dangerous. Cannot the matter be settled soon? I
am writing a letter to somewhat the same effect to Chimanlal also.
Vandemataram from

M OHANDAS
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33145

284. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
BARDOLI,

May 30, 1931
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I saw your letter to Mahadev. You have sent the correct reply to
Polak. I had sent an almost similar reply 1 to the cable from those
gentlemen. Even now I hold that my going would be pointless until
the Hindu-Muslim problem is resolved. But, to go to meet the members of the Cabinet and other people is another thing.
Subhasbabu met me again and we had a long talk. But it is
difficult to say anything; I saw Sen Gupta’s letter in the newspapers
yesterday. Let us see what happens on the 9th. I have asked
Subhasbabu too to come over.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From a copy of Hindi : C.W. 7886. Courtesy : G. D. Birla

1

208

Vide “Cable to V. S. Srinivasa Sastri”, 23-5-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

285. TELEGRAM TO WILLIAM SHIRER 1
[On or after May 30, 1931 ] 2
WILLIAM S HIRER
C ECIL HOTEL
S IMLA
YOUR

WIRE.

ALL

REPORTS

TELLEGENT

ANTICIPATION.

COMMUNAL

QUESTION

TABLE

CONFERENCE.

SETTLEMENT
FROM

TABLE

CONFERENCE

PRESS
OF
I

AM

HERE

MY

WAY

AND
BUT

IMMEDIATE
I

TAKE
AM

BRITAIN

I

HAVE

PERMANENT

TOLD

PEACE

FUNDAMENTAL POSITION

FRIENDS

LONDON.
BY

IN

ROUND

IRWIN-GANDHI

INDIA DIFFICULT.
ROUND

SHARE DELIBERATIONS

TO LONDON

RESPONSIBLE STA-TESMEN

UNIN-

ABSENCE

ANXIOUS ATTEND

TO

AND
I

IS

PUBLIC

NEGOTIATION

I

AM

AND
OUT

IS

OVER

EXPLAIN

SHOULD

SHORT

WAY

QUESTION

DIFFI-CULTY

TO

PROCEED

AND

LEAVING

COMMUNAL

POSITION
READINESS

SEE

THEREFORE SEEKING

IF

PROCEED

BEING

CAN

PARTICIPATION

AM

FULL

SETTLEMENT

TO

I

SITUATION

DIFFICULTIES

AND

REQUIRED

BLOCKS

DEMAND.

DIFFICULTY.

SOLVED

AS

MY

THESE

CONGRESS

FAR

DELICATE

MAKES

APART

UNAUTHORIZED

SO

NOT

AND

IF

CONGRESS
IN

HOLD
ANXIOUS

CONSISTENTLY

GREAT
MYSELF
SECURE
WITH

CONGRESS.

From a photostat : S.N. 17167

286. THE LAW OF SWADESHI3
Swadeshi is the law of laws enjoined by the present age. Spiritual laws, like Nature’s laws need no enacting; they are selfacting.
But through ignorance or other causes man often neglects or disobeys
them. It is then vows are needed to steady one’s course. A man who
is by temperament a vegetarian needs no vow to strengthen his
vegetarianism. For, the sight of animal food, instead of tempting him
would only excite his disgust. The law of swadeshi is ingained in the
basic nature of man but it has today sunk into oblivion. Hence the
necessity for the vow of swadeshi. In its ultimate and spiritual sence
swadeshi stands for the final emancipation of the human soul from its
1

Correspondent of Chicago Tribune
The addressee’s telegram, to which this is a reply is dated May 30.
3
The Gujarati original of this appeared in Navajivan, 31-5-1931. This is a
translation by Pyarelal.
2

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

209

earthly bondage. For, this earthly tabernacle is not its natural or
permanent abode, it is a hindrance in its onward journey, it stands in
the way of its realizing its oneness with other lives. A votary of
swadeshi therefore, in his striving to identify himself with the entire
creation seeks to be emancipated from the bondage of the physical
body.
If this interpretation of swadeshi be correct then if follows that
its votary will as a first duty dedicate himself to the service of his
immediate neighbours. This involves exclusion or even sacrifice of
the interests of the rest but the exclusion or the sacrifice would be
apparent only. Pure service of one’s neighbours can never, from its
very nature result in disservice to those who are remotely situated,
rather the contrary. ‘As with the individual so with the universe’ is
an unfailing principle which we would do well to lay to heart. On the
other hand a man who allows himself to be lured by ‘the distant
scene’ and runs to the ends of the earth for service, is not only foiled
in his ambition but fails in his duty towards his neighbours also. Take
a concrete instance. In the particular place where I live I have certain
persons as my neighbours, some relations and dependents. Naturally,
they all feel, as they have a right to, that they have a claim on me and
look to me for help and support. Suppose now I leave them all at
once and set out to serve people in a distant place. My decision would
throw my little world of neighbours and dependents out of gear while
my gratuitous knight-errantry would more likely than not disturb the
atmosphere in the new place.Thus a culpable neglect of my immediate
neighbours and an unintended disservice to the people whom I wish to
serve would be the first fruits of my violation of the principles of
swadeshi.
It is not difficult to multiply such instances. That is why the
Gita says: “It is better to die performing one’s duty or swadharma,
but para-dharma, or another’s duty, is fraught with danger.” 1 Interpreted in terms of one’s physical environment this gives us the law of
swadeshi. What the Gita says with regard to swadharma equally
applies to swadeshi also, for swadeshi is swadharma applied to one’s
immediate environment.
It is only when the doctrine of swadeshi is wrongly understood
that mischief results, e.g., it would be a travesty of the doctrine of
swadeshi, it to coddle my family I set about grabbing money by all
1

210

III. 35
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

means fair or foul. The law of swadeshi requires me no more than to
discharge my legitimate obligations towards my family by just means,
and the attempt to do so will reveal to me the Universal Code of
Conduct. The practice of swadeshi can never do harm to anyone and
if it does it is not swadharma but egotism that moves me.
There may come occasions when a votary of swadeshi may be
called upon to sacrifice his family at the altar of universal service.
Such an act of willing immolation will then constitute the highest
service rendered to the family. “Whosoever wants to save his life will
lose it, and whosoever loses his life for the Lord’s sake will find it,”
holds good for the family group no less than the individual. Take
another instance . Supposing there is an outbreak of the plague in my
village and in trying to serve the victims of the epidemic I, my wife
and children and all the rest of my family are wiped out of existence,
then in inducing those dearest and nearest to join me I will not have
acted as the destroyer of my family but on the contrary as its truest
friend. In swadeshi there is no room for selfishness, or if there is
selfishness in it, it is of the highest type which is not different from
the highest altruism. Swadeshi in its purest form is the acme of
universal service.
It was by following this line of argument that I hit upon khadi as
a necessary and the most important corollary of the principle of
swadeshi in its application to society.‘What is the kind of service,’ I
asked myself, ‘that the teeming millions of India most need at the
present time, that can be easily understood and appreciated by all, that
is easy to perform and will at the same time enable the crores of our
semi-starved countrymen to live, and the reply came that it is the
universalization of khadi or the spinning wheel alone that can fulfil
these conditions.
Let no one suppose that the practice of swadeshi through khadi
would harm the foreign mill-owners. A thief who is weaned from his
vice or is made to return the property that he has stolen is not harmed
thereby, on the contrary he is the gainer consciously in the one case,
un-consciously in the other. Similarly if all the opium addicts or the
drunkards in the world were to shake themselves free from their vice,
the canteen keepers or the opium vendors who would be deprived of
their customers could not be said to be losers. They would be the
gainers in the truest sense of the word. The elimination of the ‘wages
of sin’ is never a loss either to the individual concerned or to society;
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

211

it is pure gain.
It is the greatest delusion to suppose that the duty of swadeshi
begins and ends with merely spinning so much yarn anyhow and
wearing khadi made from it. Khadi is the first indispensable step
towards the discharge of swadeshi dharma twoards society. One often
meets men who wear khadi but in all other things indulge their taste
for foreign manufactures with a vengeance. Such men cannot be said
to be practising swadeshi. They are simply following the fashion. A
votary of swadeshi will carefully study his environment and try to help
his neighbours wherever possible by giving preference to local
manufactures even if they are of an inferior grade or dearer in price
than things manufactured else-where. He will try to remedy their
defects but will not give them up because of their defects and take to
foreign manufactures.
But even swadeshi like any other good thing can be ridden to
death if it is made a fetish. That is a danger that must be guarded
against. To reject foreign manufactures merely because they are
foreign and to go on wasting notional time and money to promote
manufactures in one’s country for which it is not suited wuld be
criminal folly and a negation of the swadeshi spirit. A true votary of
swadeshi will never harbour ill-will towards the oreigner, he will not
be moved by antagonism towards anybody on earth. Swadeshism is
not a cult of hatred. It is a doctrine of selfless service that has its roots
in the purest ahimsa, i.e., love.
Young India, 18-6-1931

287. LIMITS TO FREEDOM
Some Digambar1 Jains have asked the Sardar how, in the face of
the Congress resolution passed at Karachi regarding fundamental
rights and duties, assuring religious freedom under swaraj, anyone can
object to Digambar Jain sadhus roaming about naked in accordance
with their religion. The Sardar had replied that religious freedom
could not imply that an act which appeared indecent to many or hurts
their feelings was permissible. And he had said it was his opinion that
despite being sadhus, if they went about naked, it was bound to hurt
people’s feelings.
I feel that the Sardar could have possibly given no other reply.
I myself believe that the ideal state for all human beings is nakedness.
1

212

Literally, those who regard the sky as their garment
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

But an ideal human being would always be innocent and free of
passions or desires. Without such innocence, anyone roaming about
naked would be regarded as a sinful man.
There is no reason to conclude that because Digambar sadhus
are known as sadhus they would necessarily be free of all passions.
Even if they are so, it is their dharma to keep within the bounds of
social decency. A few Jains may understand the state of these sadhus.
But society by and large will fail to comprehend it and its feelings will
be hurt. These naked sadhus have no need to visit cities. It they have,
they should observe the minimum bounds of decency prescribed for
citizens. Instead of doing that if they insist upon entering cities in a
naked state, or if the shravakas1 insist upon this, in my opinion it
would be regarded as adharma2 . I myself am fond of the state of
nakedness. If I were living in a lonely forest I would remain in that
state, but in this world full of passions, there is little likelihood of this
becoming the commonly accepted practice. For the preservation of
morality even great men of every persuasion have to cover their private parts; it is their dharma to do so. Freedom, both individual and
religious, has always had and will always have many limits. Religion
does not hanker after rights, it hungers for restraints and restrictions.
Anyone who knows religion and practises it does not think in terms of
his rights. Nudity cannot be one’s duty. It is one’s duty to abandon
all possessions. That is a dharma of the mind. If anyone puts any
burden on me, that is not possession. But is becomes so if I start
enjoying that burden. The sadhu who bears the burden of the loincloth for the preservation of the social order does not violate the
principle of non-possession but rather exercises selfcontrol.The sadhu
who insists upon going about naked without worrying about the
feelings of society is self-willed. The following dictum of the Gita is
pertinent in this context: “For me there is naught to do in the three
worlds, yet I am ever in action. If I were not to perform my task, these
worlds would be ruined; I should be the cause of chaos and of the end
of all mankind.” 3 Sadhus should not do anything which would harm
the people. Let society never encourage them to do so.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 31-5-1931
1
2
3

Lay followers of Jainism
Violation of dharma
III. 22-24

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

213

288. NOTES
DISTINGUISHING S WADESHI FROM F OREIGN GOODS

The following question1 has been received regarding this
subject:
No royal road has been found for distinguishing foreign from
swadeshi cloth. A picketer should acquaint himself well with this
distinction. And hence the general advice is that no one should
purchase from uncertified shops. These certificates are of two kinds:
Those issued by the All-India Spinners’ Association in regard to
khadi and those issued by the Swadeshi Sabha in respect of cloth
manufactured by Indian textile mills. I do not know if this second
type of certificate has yet been issued. But khadi exclusively is the
simpler way out. Where falsehood has become almost universal, the
sentiment for khadi alone will stand the people in good stead.
Untruth has entered even the domain of khadi, or, in other words,
deceit is being practised with regard to it also; yet there is minimum
room for deceit in it. Moreover, those who spin at home have nothing
to fear.
Then the question will arise as to what a picketing sevika 2 should
do. If she shares my faith in khadi, she would regard picketing as a
means for carrying on propaganda for khadi and, while turning the
customers away from shops selling foreign cloth, she would direct
them towards those selling khadi. If the latter do not take this course,
she will remain patient and have faith that there is no other way to
boycott foreign cloth. And even if there is one, it is futile; moreover,
it is also well worth remembering that there is no special merit in
boycotting foreign cloth. Such boycott is both useful and necessary
for khadi propaganda. The woman picket who realizes this basic truth
will not be insulted—because she will not feel insulted—or perplexed.
She has somehow to carry on khadi propaganda for the sake of the
poor. Other activities involve fear, insult, dishonesty and result in no
benefit to the poor.
BUYER’S OBSTINACY3

The answer to this question should be regarded as having been
1

Not translated here
A woman volunteer
3
This was in reply to a question how to satisfy a customer who insisted on a
particular kind of khadi only.
2

214

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

included in the above. If the customer is obstinate, we should be a
hundredfold so. The customer’s obstinacy has no ground, ours has a
strong one. “The khadi that he wants” cannot mean that he should
get khadi as soft as satin made in Paris at the very same price.
Anyone who wears khadi has no other alternative but to wear khadi
whether coarse of fine. We should remember that we cannot satisfy all
people. It is not our job to satisfy everyone; rather, everybody should
suit himself to the needs of the poor, that is, be satisfied. Khadi alone
is the refuge of the affcted. We should be patient even with those who
disregard it.
S UCH P ICKETS ARE TOO F EW1

If the number of women pickets is five and there are five
hundred shops, let them deal with only five shops or even with only
one. Propaganda for khadi is a matter of dharma and not policy.
Hence regardless of whether there is only one picket or many, that
dharma must be performed. It will be good even if only one
shopkeeper relents. It is not as if in this matter an individual
shopkeeper did not have to act till all shopkeepers acted and gave up
selling foreign cloth. Even if only one gives up, the five women
should continue picketing, thinking that the work has progressed to
that extent. Seeing them picketing, other women will come forward.
If their picketing produces an effect on one merchant, there is a
likelihood of its having an effect on the others also. If this does not
hap-pen, the merchant who relented will have no cause for regret. If
trading in foreign cloth is a sin, although others may continue to be
sinful he who has realized that this practice is sinful will give it up. It
has always been thus. If I had waited for everyone, propaganda for
khadi could never have been done. A Herculean task calls for
Herculean courage.
“It is because of his courage that Columbus discovered a new
world,” says a poet. But Columbus’s courage was exhibited for his
own pleasure. It was not intended to serve anyone. Underlying it was
his desire to discover a new world and to amass the wealth to be found
in it. In order to do so, he navigated the seas; then how much more
courage shold we show in order to cloth the crores of naked people of
1

This was written in reply to a correspondent who had observed that picketing
was going to prove infructuous from the practical point of view.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

215

India? The sevika who shares Columbus’s faith and has his patience
will continue her work even if she is alone. Day by day she will gain
new strength and new faith, and will think of new ways of doing her
work or, the “Kindly Light” will point out new paths to her.
Meanwhile, she would sing:
“One step enough for me.”
P OOR MAN1

This question implies disparagement of khadi or one may say it
implies ignorance of the importance of khadi. Has it been raised
because it is supposed that producing khadi is an easy job or one for
which only a few persons are needed? Khadi work is a great science
which has so far been imperfectly studied. Let as many people,
young and old, as may wish, take up this work; there cannot be too
many of them. How many men will be required in order to meet the
needs of seven hundred thousand villages? Khadi work is so vast that
even if a hundred thousand men give eight hours a day to it, some
work will still remain undone. In this very issue, there is a brief
account of the production and sale of khadi in Gujarat alone. A
glance at this should give everyone an idea of how many men are
required for khadi work.
But I am aware that there is another question behind the above
questio, viz, khadi work is all very well, but if a man finds it
uninteresting, what should he do? Such men should remove the
filth in villages; they should insted of making speeches for
that purpose, take up a broom and clean up roads and latrines, stop
garbage heaps from forming and spread rules of sanitation among the
people. Although the women will do picketing, they will need much
help in doing so; that help should be given by men; if the men are
competent enough, they should sit under trees in villages and without
any books run schools for children as also start night schools for
adults. For anyone who is bent on serving, the field is limitless. And
everyone should realize that, when the time for launching the struggle
comes again, the strength for it will be generated only through such
activities.
1
This was in reply to a question whether, during the Truce period, since women
were assigned the work of boycott of foreign cloth and prohibition of liquor, men
were expected to do any other work besides producing khadi.

216

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Even the violent soldiers of the world have acted in this manner
and continue to do so. It is only the mercenary soldier who, when not
engaged in fighting, becomes a drain because he eats bread which he
has not rightfully earned. He is therefore a nuisance as he is busy
seeking pleasures and is a burden to the earth. We have seen from
history that Garibaldi and his soldiers tilled the land when they were
not fighting. The Boers were farmers by profession and when the time
for fighting came, right from General Botha down to the poorest Boer,
they gave up their plough shares and showed such courage on the
battlefield that it astonished the world—this I have seen with my own
eyes. If soldiers who believe in violence preserve their fighting
strength by doing such constructive work, I cannot understand why
the non-violent soldiers of India in this age should find it difficult to
do constructive work. Every reader should remember that a great deal
of penance and constructive work lay behind the enthusiasm which
was generated last year.
IF P OISON IS MIXED WITH MILK?1

Just as milk in which even a drop of poison has fallen is fit to be
shunned, so, in my opinion, should we have nothing to do with a shop
selling foreign cloth along with Indian cloth. Just as a person who
drinks pure milk at a brewer’s shop will be regarded as a drunkard, so
too a customer who buys swadeshi cloth at a shop selling foreign cloth
will be misunderstood. Is there any dearth of shops dealing only in
swadeshi cloth? Even if there are only a few such shops and those are
not in our neighbourhood, we should go to these wherever they are
located. For those who are picketing, the way is straightforward: they
should warn people who approach shops selling foreign cloth and
turn them away, if possible. I have recently received even this
question whether swadeshi goods can be bought at a liquor shop if
they are being sold there. I didn’t hesitate to reply immediately that
the answer was in the negative.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 31-5-1931

1

This was in reply to the question whether customers could be asked to abstain
totally from buying cloth from shops which sold both foreign and Indian cloth.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

217

289. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
May 31, 1931
MY DEAR AMTUL,

If you are not keeping well, you should live on only milk and
fruit. I can understand your delicacy of feeling about money matters.
I am writing to Narandas about this. Do continue to write to me and
pour out your heart to me. I want you to grow mentally, morally and
physically in the Ashram.
BAPU
From a photostat : G.N. 239

290. LETTER TO M. REBELLO & SONS
May 31, 1931
GENTLEMEN,

I have your letter of 22nd instant 1 . I have no copyright in my
portraits but I am unable to give the consent you require.
Yours faithfully,
From a microfilm : S.N. 17120

291. LETTER TO ALLEN W. SAYLER
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 31, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

Mirabai has shown me your letter to her. I see several difficulties
in your coming to the Ashram. A passport is necessry and it is highly
likely that conditions will be attached to your passport. Therefore my
advice to you is for the present to suspend the idea of coming to India
to settle down with me but to follow the rules of the Ashram there and
live the life as close to the Ashram life as possible in the circumstances. It is highly likely that then the way will be open for you to
come to India without restrictions of any kind whatsoever.
If you are not getting Young India there you can look up the
file in the University office.
Yours sincerely,

ALLEN W. SAYLER, E SQ.
C HICAGO, ILLINOIS
From a photostat : S.N. 17168
1

The addressee had asked Gandhiji’s permission to use his photo as their trade
mark for roofing tiles.

218

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

292. LETTER TO KIRAN SANKAR ROY
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 31, 1931
DEAR KIRAN BABU,

I have your letter. The Working Committee will go into the
whole of the affair as Subhasbabu has lodged a formal complaint.
You may depend upon my taking my full share in the investigation
and assisting the conclusions of the Committee. I am not writing
separately to Sisir Babu who has sent me a separate letter.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. K IRAN S ANKAR R OY
44 E UROPEAN ASYLUN LANE, C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm : S.N. 17169

293. LETTER TO ANAND KISHORE MEHTA
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 31, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter of the 27th instant which you have marked
“ Reminder”. I am not aware of the receipt of a previous letter. I am
sorry to have to tell you that I cannot sympathize with the object of
your memorial, much less give my name to he Committee. If I had
any influence over the Committee I should advise its disbandment.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. A NAND KISHORE MEHTA
GENERAL S ECRETARY, T HE ALL-INDIA
BHAGAT S INGH, R AJGURU, S UKHADEV
MEMORIAL C OMMITTEE
ANARKALI, L AHORE
From a microfilm : S.N. 17170

294. LETTER TO SHRIRAM SHARMA
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 31, 1931
DEAR SIR,

I have your letter. You do not tell me why the Congress workers
were arrested. In any case there is nothing in the Settlement to prevent
Government from undertaking prosecutions for offences, fancied or
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

219

real. If the offence alleged was not committed, it is open to the
arrested workers to be defended by pleaders.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. S HRIRAM S HARMA
GENERAL S ECRETARY
DISTRICT C ONGRESS C OMMITTEE
R OHTAK (PUNJAB)
From a microfilm : S.N. 17171

295. LETTER TO R. S. RAJWADE
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 31, 1931
Not for Publication
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. I learnt about your release when I
was in Simla. It did cause a great trouble before the authrities could
be moved but it was a pleasure because your case seemed to me to be
so clear.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. R. S. R AJWADE
KARMAYOGI OFFICE
574 SOUTH KASABA
S HOLAPUR
From a photostat : S.N. 17172

296. LETTER TO KRISHAN GOPAL DUTT
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 31, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have not answered your telegram because I did not know how
to. Now that I have got your letter I am able to answer your questions.
(1) Since picketing is to be peaceful free of all coercion, there
is no question of insistence on sealing up the present
stock.
(2) But if a cloth merchant declines to sign your pledge it is
open to you to picket his shop even though it may contain
swadeshi cloth.
220

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

(3) Naturally you would picket the shop of a merchant who
breaks his pledge, but you may not impose any fine.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. K RISHNA GOPAL DUTT
C ITY R OAD, S IALKOT C ITY
From a microfilm : S.N. 17173

297. LETTER TO V. B. HAROLIKAR
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 31, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

Here are the answers to your questions:
(1) Yes, if the purchase is made from certified producers. But
in every case it would be advisable to make large purchases
throuh the all-India agency.
(2) I should consider A.I.S.A. certificate as necessary in every
case.
(3) Congress Committee would relentlessly enforce the khaddar
condition whilst it is part of the constitution.
(4) The relevancy of the fourth question, I do not understand,because it is open to the Congress, if it isnot obligatory, to picket foreign-cloth shops provided of course
that picketing is absolutely peaceful and free of all coercion direct or indirect.
I hope I have answered your question clearly.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. V. B. HAROLIKAR
C ITY C ONGRESS C OMMITTEE
28 SUKRAVAR P ETH
P OONA
From a microfilm : S.N. 17174

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

221

298. LETTER TO C. Y. CHINTAMANI
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 31, 1931
MY DEAR FRIEND,

You are fishing for a compliment but I am not going to
give it to you if only because it would be a repetition of
what I have told you before. But you are quite right in thinking
that I do not read newspapers. Even the local ones I read for a
few minutes and that too grudgingly. Leading articles, as a rule,
escape me. You did well therefore in sending me the Leader
cutting. Aninoffensive paragraph in Navajivan by Mahadev Desai
has been made much of. I can only give you my assurance that I am
not going lightly to declare war. I know what it would mean to Lord
Irwin. The relations between us so developed during the negotiations
that the very consideration that a declaration of war would hurt Irwin
to the quick would alone make me wait a thousand times before
embarking on any such step. But I can tell you in confidence that
many occasions have arisen when, if I was so minded,1 I might have
broken up negotiaions with local authorities. But I have exercised and
am still exercising immense patience. In any case I am not going to
take any step without giving an ample opportunity to the Viceroy to
review the situation and taking the public into confidence. It goes
without saying that I would do nothing without first getting the
sanction of the Working Committee.
So far for the peace or war part of your fears. The communal
question is a horse of another colour. My position was made clear to
Lord Irwin times without number and I made it clearer still at the
farewell interview in Bombay. He greatly sympathized with my position. As you know, the Congress demand is far above what the Round
Table Conference has higherto discussed. If we do not reach a
communal settlement, I could not make the demand with any confidence in myself. But my non-participation in the Conference need
not mean war. Failure to arrive at a settlement cannot be debited to
the British Government though the question at all arises because of
the present system of administraion. But I need not carry the matter
any further. In this matter too I am feeling my way and if I at all can,
I would certainly attend the Conference. I have come to no irrevocable decision. If the way at all opens up before me I will go to
1

222

The source has “easy minded”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

London without the slightest hesitation.
whenever you feel inclined.

Do pleases write to me
Yours sincerely,

S YT. C. Y. C HINTAMANI
C/ O THE “LEADER”
ALLAHABAD
From a photostat : S.N. 17175

299. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
AS AT S ABARMATI,

May 31, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

I enclose herewith copies of the correspondence that has taken
place between the Bombay Government and myself.
Yours sincerely,

Encls.
H. W. EMERSON, E SQ.
S IMLA
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

300. LETTER TO V. G. DESAI
BARDOLI,

May 31, 1931
BHAISHRI VALJI,

Do bring Dudhibehn with you. According to your plan, you
will reach here on Wednesday, that is, on the 3rd. I am scheduled to
leave here on the 7th.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 6415. Courtesy : V. G. Desai

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

223

301. LETTER TO DUDABHAI
BARDOLI,

May 31, 1931
BHAI DUDABHAI,

I got your letter. “A non-Antyaja Hindu” does not mean a
Bhangi, it means a Hindu who is not an antyaja. The man I have
in view is a Brahmin brought up in Gujarat. As the Ashram does
not recognize distinctions of caste and community and as it is
necessary to abolish the class of Antyajas from Hindu society, I
realty think that it would be good if Lakshmi could be married to a
non-Antyaja. I a certainly very glad to know that Laksmi is not eager
to get married just now. I hope I told you bout a house near Amreli.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
The visit to Amreli was prompted by this hope.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3244

302. LETTER TO RUKMINI BAZAJ
BARDOLI,

May 31, 1931
CHI. RUKMINI,

I got your letter. How am I to give you courage? We do not
always get in this world what would satisfy us. We have to live in the
world, but without attachment to anything. In no case should you
think that your troubles are the result of your having married in a
non-Gujarati family. If you have patience, everyghing will surely
adjust itself. You should spend some time with me. I will look for
such an opportunity. Remain calm meanwhile. I shall meet Radha on
the 8th in Bombay, when I shall be able to decide where she should
stay and what she should do. One cause of worry was over with the
news that Santok had recovered her health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 9058

224

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

303. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
May 31, 1931
CHI. PREMA,

Why do Lakshmi and Padma keep falling ill? Do you think that
they are careless about taking mediciness, ect.? If Padma continues to
get fever, she will lose her health. Who is specially responsible for
looking after her? No child in the Ashram should feel the absence of
his or her parents. How is Krishnakumari? Write to me about the
others too.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 10255. Also C.W. 6703. Courtesy :
Premabehn Kantak

304. LETTER TO VITHALDAS JERAJANI
BARDOLI,

May 31, 1931
BHAI VITHALDAS,

Of course you are always in my thoughts. I have been inquiring
after your health too. How did you get this disease? Don’t insist on
returning to work immediately. First get all right. If necessary, go for
a change to a place like Deolali.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 9777

305. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BARDOLI,

May 31, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

Some effective measures should be taken about Lakshmi and
Padma. Request Dr. Kanuga to examine them both. If they do not
recover even under his treatment, we shall have to think further what
to do.
The vaid’s treatment does not seem to have helped Ba much.
She seems to benefit rather by the water and the soda bicarb which she
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

225

takes. She believes that the medicine merely suppresses the cough.
Both the Gangabehns and Vasumati are here for a few days.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I wrote to Mathew yesterday to tell him that if he wished to
come and if he could be spared the Ashram, he might come. Read my
letter to Amtulbehn and explain to her the position regarding her
money.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./I

306. LETTER TO SHARADA G. CHOKHAWALA
S IMLA,

[May-August 1931] 1
CHI. SHARADA,

Have you stopped writing letters to me because I have stopped
writing? I have stopped writing because I am not in prison. I must be
in prison to write letters regularly. Should I go to prison, or will you
write even otherwise ?
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 9960. Courtesy: Sharadabehn G.
Chokhawala

307. LETTER TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
S WARAJ ASHRAM,
BARDOLI,

June 1, 1931
S UBHAS C HANDRA BOSE
WOODBURN P ARK
C ALCUTTA
ADVISE
YOU
SEE
SEN
GUPTA
AND
OFFER
SUBMIT
MATTERS
ARBITRATION IF MUTUAL ADJUSTMENT IMPOSSIBLE. CANNOT ADVISE
COUNTER
PUBLIC
MEETING
OR
PROPAGANDA.
AM
WIRING
SEN
GUPTA SUBMIT
ARBITRATION.

GANDHI
From a photostat : S.N. 17178
1

From the contents. Gandhiji was in Simla in May, July and August in 1931;
vide also letters to the addressee in

226

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

308. TELEGRAM TO J. M. SEN GUPTA
S WARAJ ASHRAM,
BARDOLI,

June 1, 1931
S EN GUPTA
ELGIN R OAD
C ALCUTTA
INTERNAL

DIFFERENCE

MATTERS

ARBITRATION

MUST
IF

BE

MUTUAL

COMPOSED.

PLEASE

AGREE

SUBMIT

ADJUSTMENT IMPOSSIBLE.

GANDHI
From a photostat : S.N. 17176

309. TELEGRAM TO MURARILAL
S WARAJ ASHRAM,
BARDOLI,

June 1, 1931
DOCTOR MURARILAL
C IVIL LINES
C AWNPORE
YOUR WIRE 1 . DEEPLY
SUBMITTING
MATER
OPINION
OFFHAND.

GRIEVED BUT CAN ONLY SUGGEST
ARBITRATION.
CAN
GIVE
NO

PARTIES
OTHER

GANDHI
From a photostat : S.N. 17180

310. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
June 1, 1931
Interviewed by the Associated Press regarding the statement recently made by
Sir Chimanlal Setalvad in connection with Mahatma Gandhi’s attitude towards the
Round Table Conference, Mahatma Gandhi said :

You embarrass me by asking question on anything that Sir
Chimanlal Setalvad says about me. His age and his greatness entitle
him to make statements on insufficient data and yet absolve him from
criticism from one like myself.
1

Which read : “Quarrel between Hindus Muslims over Gandhi Seva Samiti
signboard. Muslims refuse taking procession under it although board too high for
interference with procession. . . Hindus refuse removing it even for few hours. . .
panic all city . . .”
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

227

Moreover, whilst I am carrying on delicate negotiations, I may
not be over-communicative, but I can make a general statement that I
am not conscious of having done anything to endanger the Settlement
or in contravention of it.
Though under given circumstances, I am anxious and willing to
attend the Round Table Conference, there is nothing in the Settlement,
so far as I can read it, to make it compulsory for the Congress to take
part in the Round Table Conference, but that discussion is purely
academic, for the question of non-attendance has not arisen at all.
Asked if it was true that his attitude was undergoing constant change, Mahatma
Gandhi said :

I am not aware of having done such a thing.
Replying to a question whether he would take part in the Round Table
Conference, he said:

If I succeed in attending the Round Table Conference, I should
put forth the Congress demands with all zeal and power I may have
and fully participate in the proceeding and not be a mere spectator at
the Round Table Conference.
Questioned whether there was an impasse in Bardoli, Mahatma Gandhi said :

I have had a happy interview with the Collector along with Mr.
Vallabhbhai Patel and I am hoping that everything would be fixed up
satisfactorily.
Replying to a further question if there was any breach of the Truce terms in
Bardoli or Borsad, he stated:

I would prefer not to answer that question, because negotiations
are still going on for the settlement of outstanding questions both in
Bardoli and Borsad.
The Bombay Chronicle, 3-6-1931

228

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

311. TELEGRAM TO TAMIL NADU CONFERENCE,
MADURA
S WARAJ ASHRAM,
BARDOLI,

June 2, 1931
TAMIL NADU C ONFERENCE
MADURA
WISH

CONFERENCE

DEPENDENT

MORE

SUCCESS.
ON

CONVINCED

KHADDAR

BOYCOTT

THAN

FOREIGN

CLOTH

PICKETING.

GANDHI
From a microfilm : S.N. 17182

312. TELEGRAM TO KOMBRABAIL
S WARAJ ASHRAM,
BARDOLI,

June 2, 1931
KOMBRABAIL
BALMATTI
MANGALORE
MY

OPINION

PERMISSION

CANNOT

BE

GRANTED.

GANDHI
From a microfilm : S.N. 17183

313. TELEGRAM TO J. M. SEN GUPTA
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 2, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

You will recal our conversation about the Navajivan and Young
India press 1 . I wonder if you have got legal opinion. 2 Al l the
opinion that I can gather is that the clause certainly means delivery at
the place from where the property was removed. But I shall be
interested to know what your legal advisers have got to say.
Meanwhile Young India and Navjivan are still labouring under a
1

For Gandhiji’s earlier letter on the subject, vide “Letter to R. M. Maxwell”,
7-5-1931
2
Vide “Letter to Salvation Army, Bombay 14-6-1931
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

229

handicap in spite of the fact that the management own suitable
machinery and other material.
Yours sincerely,
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

314. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 2, 1931
MY DEAR CHARLIE,

I have your two precious letters. I see you are in a hury to have
me in England through the air mail if I would fly. But I can hardly
hop. I see no light before me as yet. My desire is certainly to go
there but the inner voice says ‘no’ and the external atmosphere
confirms the guidence of the inner voice. As you know, the Congress
demands are strung in a high pitch. They could not be otherwise. If
we cannot set our house in order here so far even as the communal
question is concerned I could not speak in London as with one voice.
It therefore does seem to me that if the communal trouble is not
finished and a workable formula is not arrived at by agreement I
should not have the requisite self-confidence to deliver the Congress
message. That is so far as the Round Table Conference is concerned.
But of course if the British Minister require my presence in order to
discuss the Congress position and understand it and if they would
want me to do a little lobbying also I could come whenever required.
But then there is the Delhi Settlement. I am bound to see, as far as is
possible for a single human being, that there is no breakdown. The
Bombay Government has given me cause enough to re-declare
hostilities but if you knew everything you would yourself be amazed
at my patience. In every little thing it is like drawing a live tooth. But
I must not weary you with these troubles of mine. I am taking them
cheerfully and breaking down opposition. Thank God, I do receive
help from the Central Government. I believe Mr. Emerson knows me
and he will play the game. But local governments may produce
situations which neither he nor I can control. I can tell you that so far
as the Congress is concerned, Congressmen are implementing the
Settlement in a manner not even expected by me. Of course there is
overzeal now and again in picketing but it is immediately brought
230

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

under control. You can give this assurance to all who may need it that
I am anxious to attend the Conference and try my utmost to secure
lasting peace and an honourable settlement of the constitutional
question by negotiation. It is only external circumstances which
really detain me. But in any case for reasons unconnected with my
hesitation the Round Table Conference and its Committees stand
postponed. There need be therefore no hurry just now over my
coming unless of course I am required there independently of the
Conference. I have now told you all that you should know.
I am just now in Bardoli fixing up things.
Gurudev seems to be ailing.
Love.
MOHAN
From a photostat : S.N. 968

315. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 2, 1931
DEAR SATIS BABU,

I have your letter. Subhasbabu was here and he had a
formidable list of countercharges. I have now telegraphed to both asking them to submit to arbitration by mutual consent, and if they will
appoint some local men as arbitrators and abide by their decision, this
unseemly squabble might end. In any case I am going to try whatever
is possible on the 9th.
You are having success with the Gita and the Autobiography. I
did not expect you would have any sale for these books.
I am glad you have gained in weight but you have to gain much
more. And I am certain that you should not stint yourself about food
that your system may require. It is quite enough that you deny yourself flesh and fish. You ought to take milk and curds liberally and
take such fresh fruit as is easily available. I have written similarly to
Hemprabha also. She is wrong in denying herself food that her body
requires because Nikhil1 is no more. I feel more and more that this
kind of self-denial not only carries no merit but is a violation of
nature’s laws. Denial of food has merit when it is undertaken for
control of the palate or as a medical necessity.
1

Addressee’s son; he had died in 1928.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

231

Kishorelal Mashruwala raises a doubt as to the authenticity of
the spinner’s letter of 1828 whose translation you sent me the other
day and which I published in Young India. 1 He thinks that the language is much too modern, as also the conception. If I understood your
letter rightly, you had mentioned that the copy of the newspaper in
which the letter appears is in your possession.
Love.
BAPU
S YT. S ATIS C HANDRA DAS GUPTA
KHADI P RATISHTHAN
S ODEPUR (CALCUTTA)
From a photostat : G.N. 8034

316. LETTER TO A. G. BUTT
June 2, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. 2 You can realize the truth of the statement
made by me by prayer, purification, meditation, fasting and diligent
study.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat : S.N. 17164

317. LETTER TO DR. W. J. WANLESS
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 2, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. Whilst I have a very vivid recollection of your personal services3 to me I have long ceased even to think
of rewarding such services materially. I have rendered myself practically incapable of rendering such services. The only service therefore
I have for years rendered for them has been heartfelt thanks, and
heartfelt thanks of a poor man like me take the shape of blessings. I
must confess that I have been the recipient of personal kindnesses
1

Vide “In 1828”, 21-5-1931
The addressee, writting from Simla on 29-5-1931, had referred to Gandhiji’s
article “A Twentieth Century Sati (?)”, 3-5-1931 and said that his assertion about the
soul’s immortality was unconvincing.
3
The reference apparently is to his sudden illness in 1927 during a tour,
during which Dr. Wanless looked after him; vide
2

232

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

from many quarters. Just imagine what would be my state and the
state of rich men whom I only know in public life if I were to ask
them for donations for the enterprise of my benefactors. You will
therefore please excuse me for my inability to respond to your desire.
Yours sincerely,

DR. S IR W. J. WANLESS
1016 MATILIJA R OAD
GLENDALE, C ALIFORNIA (U.S.A.)
From a photostat : S.N. 17188

318. LETTER TO N. G. JOSHI
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 2, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter giving me facts of [the] criminal case of
Nipani. Where there is any allegation of violence the matter rests
with the local government. I am not likely to succeed in any representation I may make. I wold therefore advise that a proper systematic
defence is put up.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. N. G. J OSHI
P RESIDENT, D ISTRICT C ONGRESS C OMMITTEE
BELGAUM
From a photostat : S.N. 17189

319. LETTER TO COWASJI JEHANGIR
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 2, 1931
DEAR SIR COWASJI,

I thank you for your prompt acknowledgement of my letter 1
and the trouble you are still taking with reference to the land in Sardar
Garda’s possesion. It seems to me that he is legally bound to transfer
the property having written the letter concluding the bargin. I have
written to him to that effect2 in reply to his letter. I have been making
1
2

Vide “Letter to Cowasji Jehangir”, 26-5-1931
Vide “Letter to Framroze B. Garda”, 26-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

233

further enquiries and I am able to give you my assurance that there is
nothing in the charges made by him. On the contrary he is becoming
a terror to the people. Youngsters under 12 years of age were arrested
for having helped themselves to mangoes from his land. You do not
know the taluqa. Mango trees are not protected and urchins all over
the land help themselves often to mangoes during the mango season
and nobody worries about them. I am not sure that the urchins whom
he had arrested had touched his mangoes. But even if they had, they
would be under nobody’s control. And yet he would press incidents
like this into service to make up his indictment although these incidents have nothing to do with alleged harassment.
I shall await your letter regading Miss V. Contractor’s complaint.
Yours sincerely,

S IR C OWASJI JEHANGIR
TEMPLE HILL
MAHABALESHWAR
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-C, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and library

320. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
June 2, 1931
CHI. SHARDA,

I have your letter. You seem to be keeping good health these
days. All of you have become lethargic in writing to me, even as I
am.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C.W. 9902. Courtesy : Shardabehn G.
Chokhawala

321. LETTER TO NANIBEHN JHAVERI
BARDOLI,

June 2, 1931
CHI. NANIBEHN,

I got your letter. In staying in the Vidyapith you have done
nothing for which you need apologize. It is not a crime to live there.
You will certainly learn there, and should, therefore, live there
234

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

contented. Improve your health and cultivate the mind. Write to me
from time to time. Most probably, Gangabehn also will go and live
there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3115

322. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
BARDOLI,

June 2, 1931
CHI. MANILAL AND SHUSHILA,

I had the letter you both wrote on board the ship. I also got
news of your having reached there. I will now expect your regular
letter by the next mail. Ba is with me at Bardoli. She was with me at
Simla too. Nothing is certain as yet about my going to England. The
solution of the Hindu-Muslim problem seems to be far away yet.
As for the rest, everything is all right.
I have no time to write more.
Sita—I have forgotten her other name—must have now put on
weight again. The climate there is such that one simply cannot fall ill.
I should be equally happy if Sushila too puts on weight.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 4784.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

235

323. LETTER TO HARI-ICHCHHA DESAI
BARDOLI,

June 2, 1931
CHI. HARI-ICHCHHA,

I got a letter from you after a long time. You should take care
and improve your eyes soon. The remedy is this: Wash the eyes daily
with bearable, warm water after putting a little salt in the water. The
salt should be quite clean and very little in quantity. Sprinkle the
solution on the eyes. If this remedy is likely to benefit you, you will
know it in a day. That is, you will find that the lustre of your eyes
has encreased. At night, bandage the eyes with cotton pads soaked in
milk before going to bed. I am leaving for Bombay on the 9th and
shall return on the 11th.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Do bring the children with you.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 7467. Also C.W. 4913. Courtesy :
Hari-ichchha Kamdar

324. LETTER TO BABALBHAI MEHTA
BARDOLI,

June 2, 1931
CHI. BABALBHAI,

I got your letter.
1. Disobey any order issued under the Foreigners’ Act.
2. If they deport one to one’s native place, one should not
submit to improper restrictions.
3. While in jail, pay no attention to any news about a
settlement which you may hear. The men outside may do whatever
they choose
4. There is no objection to passing a receipt for any order
served on you.
236

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

It is a good thing that you observed the rules while in jail and
are doing so outside.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
The views which I have expressed may change as may be
required by the conditions prevailing at any time. Likewise, you are
free to act as you think fit in given circumstances despite these views.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S. N. 9453

325. LETTER TO NARAYAN MORESHWAR KHARE
June 2, 1931
CHI. PANDITJI,

Thakkar Bapa says in his letter that, though they had invited you
to the gathering o f Bhangis at Dakor, you could not attend it. Is
this true?
How is Rambhau progressing?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C. W. 216. Courtesy : Lakshmibehn Khare

326. LETTER TO RAMBHAU KHARE
June 2, 1931
CHI. RAMBHAU,

You wrote very few letters from Almora. Will you remain
lazy there too? Don’t you think you should now overcome your
laziness?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 289. Courtesy : Lakshmibehn Khare

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

237

327. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 2, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

Can you think of anyone in the Ashram who would come
forward for Antyaja work?
How does Lalji work? Does he work well enough to repay what
is spent on him?
Does anyone live in the red bungalow or sleep in it at night? Is
it true that Giriraj’s mind has become disturbed?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./I

328. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
June 2, 1931
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

Surendra’s letter seems to have confused you. He has mixed up
several issues, with the result that you could not understand my real
meaning. The idea that Surendra should return to the Ashram is
independent of other considerations, and these are the reasons for my
view:
1. It did not seem necessary to me to keep him at Karadi.
2. It is not proper for us, who have taken the vow of
aparigraha, to make a special effort to find out another place and
stay there.
3. In the present circumstances, it would not at all be wrong if
persons like him return to the Ashram.
4. Sardar would certainly prefer that Surendra and other work
ers like him who cannot easily adjust themselves to circumstances
should stay in the Ashram.
The following is the substance of the other po9ints discussed
along with these :
1. Those Ashram workers who were slack in observing the
Ashram rules of discipline and who were unwilling to return to the
Ashram on the pretext that they should work outside should return to
it.
238

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

2. It was the duty of those Ashram, workers who were
required outside the Ashram and who could observe the Ashram rules
to stay outside it and do the required work.
3. It was preferable to have only one public worker in every
village.
4. When there are more workers than one in a village, it is
likely that they will not have enough work to do and that even small
differences of opinion which may arise among them will confuse the
minds of the residents.
5. It is probable that Darbari left the place because he felt,
when he saw three or four Ashram workers there, that he no longer
enjoyed the position which he did.
6. One should run away from a place where the necessity of
one’s services is not self-evident. Before accepting anybody’s version
of what I may have said, you should ask me.
Blessings from
BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—7 : Shri Chhaganlal Joshine, p. 214-5

329. LETTER TO KHUSHALCHAND GANDHI
BARDOLI,

June 2, 1931
TO MY BROTHER, WITH DUE RESPECTS,

I was pained to read your postcard addressed to Narandas.
It was evident from the writing that your hand was shaking while
you wrote it. That is a sign of weakness. I hope you feel
peace of mind now that Narandas is with you. We should be
indifferent whether the body lasts of perishes. Write to me, dictating
the letter to someone.
To both of you,
Humble greetings from

MOHANDAS
From a copy of the Gujarati : C.W. 9220. Courtesy : Narandas Gandhi

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

239

330. LETTER TO RASIK DESAI
BARDOLI,

June 2, 1931
CHI. RASIK,

I got your letter. Blisters are caused by impure blood and can
be cured by living on milk and fruit.
Whether you wish to join the Vidyapith or any other institution,
you should be fit to do so. Anyone who leaves his own tution, you
should be fit to do so. Anyone who leaves his own work to join the
Vidyapith is not fit for it. Nor is one who wishes to join it for
satisfying his desire for study under the excuse that the Ashram does
not provide proper education But one who is required in the
Vidyapith for serving the cause of swaraj and who joins it with that
end in view is fit to join it.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Tell Jayant that I have not written to him as there is nothing in
his letter which calls for a reply.
From a copy of the Gujarati : C. W. 4350. Courtesy : Rasik Desai

331. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
BARDOLI,

June 2, 1931
CHI. HEMPRABHA,

I have your letter. You must have received my last letter.
To reduce food or to abstain from it because a son or a dear one
has died is ignorance. I see no merit in it.Dharma and true shraddha
consist in increasing work of service in the name of the departed one,
recognizing the unity of all souls, and in realizing the transitoriness
of the body. We should reduce food or give up some item of food
only for the purpose of controlling the palate or removing a physical
disorder. The loss of a dear one should have no connection with the
giving up of food. So wake up; forget Nikhil’s death and try to
240

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

improve your body for the cause of service. You need to take milk,
curds and fruit. Tell me if you have any financial difficulty.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 1687

332. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

There is still the fire-arms question to be decided. I do not
know whether you obtained legal advice in the matter. Whatever the
legal advice, I am quite certain of the conversation about this very
matter at the time I suggested the expression “illegal possession”. If
you will look up the original draft, you will perhaps recall the conversation because the original draft excluded fire-arms.
May I remind you about Mathura and Ludhiana incidents.
These are both matters deserving close scrutiny.
Yours sincerely,

H. W. EMERSON, E SQ.
S IMLA
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931.
Library

Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

241

333. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

You will remember we discussed the question of students who
had suspended their studies. From everywhere complaints continue
to pour in. I think that it is highly necessary to take back
these students unconditionally. It is terrible to think that they alone
should be singled out for punishment.1
Yours sincerely,

H. W. EMERSON, E SQ.
S IMLA
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

334. LETTER TO G. V. KETKAR
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter.
Yes, Syt. Rajawade’s case caused me great deal of trouble and
worry.
I have just got the complete file of Syt. Rajah’s 2 case. I am
studying it.
1

Emerson replied on July 2 thatt “. . . the student cannot be regarded solely as
an individual. He is a member of a corporate institution, and in the interests of the
institution, and not with the object of imposing any indignity on the individual, it is
often necessary to make conditions which will secure discipline. These are
considerations to which local Governments undoubtedly attach great weight, and it
may be assumed that had the question been raised twhen the Settlement was under
discussion, they would have taken strong exception to the re-admission of students
without any guarantee for the future and irrespective of the reasons for which they had
left, or been expelled from, educational institutions. In these circumstances the
Government of India do not consider it fair to local Governments to impose on them a
course of action outside the Settlement. . .”
2
H. D. Raja

242

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Nothing can be done in the Chirner case just at present.
Deo did write to me recently.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G ANDHI
S YT. G. V. K ETKAR
THE KESARI AND THE MAHARATTA OFFICE
568 N ARAYAN P ETH, P OONA C ITY
From a photostat : G. N. 7965. Also C.W. 980. Courtesy : G. V. Ketkar

335. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA2
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
MY DEAR KUMARAPPA,

I have Dr. T. Das’s letter which you have sent. I do not know
that we can do anything in the matter.
I expect to see you on the 9th in Bombay.
BAPU
S YT. J. C. K UMARAPPA3
BOMBAY
From a photostat : G. N. 10094

336. LETTER TO S. N. BATLIWALA4
June 3, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter of the 20th ultimo. You will see my
article in Young India entitled ‘Is Boycott an Economic Necessity?’5
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S. N. 17106

1

Gandhiji’s Secretary wrote the following postscript to the letter : “I hope you
will succeed in finding out working formula—Gandhiji’s reply to Shankarrao Deo.”
Shakarrao Deo had written to Gandhiji on the elections of Congress Committees in
Maharashtra.
2
In reply to the addressee’s letter of May 27 (S. N. 17162)
3
The source has “H. Kumarappa.”
4
The addressee had enclosed a copy of his article in the Times of India dated
19-5-1931, on the Indian Economic Crisis Wherein he had argued that masses of India
suffered and only the Indian mills benefited by the boycott of foreign cloth.
5
Vide “Is it An Economic Necessity”, 4-6-1931
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

243

337. LETTER TO WILHELM HEYDORN
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. If I succeed in going to London I
would indeed like to go to various places. But whether such a thing
will be possible, I do not know. If however I do visit places on the
continent I would be delighted to make your acquaintance.
Yours sincerely,

WILHELM HEYDORN, E SQ.
HAMBURG 24 (G ERMANY)
From a photostat : S. N. 17192

338. LETTER TO CHARLES S. FIELD
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I appreciate your letter and I would have made your acquaintance had I gone to America. But as you must have observed, it was a
baseless rumour which created the hope and in some minds possibly
also the fear that I might visit America.
Yours sincerely,

C HARLES S. F IELD, E SQ.
DALLAS, T EXAS (U.S.A.)
From a photostat : S. N. 17193

339. LETTER TO MAHARAJA OF DARBHANGA
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your telegram redirected from Borsad. I have
not seen the landholders’ manifesto referred to by you. If you will
kindly send it to me I shall see what can be done.
Yours sincerely,

MAHARAJA OF DARBHANGA
From a photostat : S. N. 17194

244

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

340. LETTER TO GERTRUDE EMERSON
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

You are quite right in thinking that if I did not get the quiet to
read your book 1 in Yeravda it was not likely that I should have any,
outside that abode of peace. The book was taken away on his
discharge by the prisoner friend who had borrowed it from me and he
returned it on my discharge when I was in the midst of interminable
work. Since my discharge, I have not been able to rest. The work
before me exhausts such energy as I have still left in me.
You will be welcome to the Ashram whenever you come.
Yours sincerely,

MISS GERTRUDE EMERSON
C/ O “ASIA”
468 FOURTH AVENUE
NEW YORK (U.S.A.)
From a photostat : S. N. 17195

341. LETTER TO KONDA VENKATAPPAYYA
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
DEAR VENKATAPPIAH,

I am glad you have given me an exhaustive letter about Bapi
Needu. I have offered to take him in the Ashram and pay the sum
mentioned by him, i.e., Rs. 33 per month, for his dependents.2 But if
you can guide him there and he will accept your guidance do please
give it to him. How is your wife? I was sorry to hear about your
daughter, but really she ought to go to the hills every summer.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. K ONDA VENKATAPPIAH
GUNTUR
From a microfilm: S. N. 17696
1
2

Presumably Voiceless India, published in 1930
Vide “Leter to Subhas Chandra Bose”, 26-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

245

342. LETTER TO K. PANDAR CHETTY
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

With reference to your letter it does not appear that your gun
licence was confiscated because of civil disobedience. Cases not
arising out of civil disobedience are not covered by the Settlement.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. K. P ANDAR C HETTY
C ARDAMOM P LANTER
BODINAYAKANUR (S. INDIA)
From a photostat : S. N. 17197

343. LETTER TO MRS. C. A. HATE
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

Whatever energy I possess is due to regular habits and such
self-restraint as I am capable of exercising. It is quite true that friends
around me too notice my peace of mind. It is an object of envy. It
comes from absolute faith in God and His goodness. That faith enables me humbly to do the task allotted to me without being anxious
for the result.
I believe that indigestion is one thing which everybody can
control and remove. Before I can advise you on your food, it is really
necessary for me to know much more about you than you have told
me in your letter. I should like to know what you feel when you say
you are suffering from indigestion. Are your bowels acting regularly?
How long have you suffered from indigestion? What food are you
taking now and in what quantity and how many times? What exercises
are you taking? How do you pass your days?
Yours sincerely,

MRS. C. A. H ATE
INDU BHUVAN
343 T HAKURDWAR, B OMBAY
From a photostat : S. N. 17198

246

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

344. LETTER TO S. SWAMINATHAN CHETTIAR
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter of the 25th May last 1 . If a chairman deliberately defies any rule of the Congress constitution it is
certainly open to any member present to challenge the decision and to
move a vote of no-confidence or to take such other steps that are open
to members.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. S. S WAMINATHAN
P OTTAMARAI NORTH
KUMBAKONAM
From a photostat : S. N. 17200

345. LETTER TO THE SECRETARY,
INDIAN MERCHANTS’ CHAMBER
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
THE S ECRETARY
INDIAN MERCHANTS’ C HAMBER
BOMBAY
DEAR SIR,

I thank you for your letter of the 19th ultimo advising me
that I was unanimously elected an honorary member of your
Chamber. Please convey my thanks to the Chamber for conferring
on me this honour.
Yours faithfully,
From a photostat : S. N. 17201

1
Stating that the President, Kumbakonam Taluk Congress Committee, had
allowed a lawyer member to participate in its deliberations over ruling the objection
from other members that he was not a habitual wearer of khadi

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

247

346. LETTER TO A. G. SHEOREY
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. If you contend that the D.S.P.’s order is
illegal, you should challenge it in a court of law. If there is any doubt
about it, the procedure you have adopted is the proper procedure,
namely, approaching the Home Member and ventilating the matter in
public.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. A. G. S HEOREY
P UBLICITY OFFICER, P ROVINCIAL P OLITICAL C ONFERENCE
S AUGOR (C.P.)
From a microfilm : S. N. 17202

347. LETTER TO DARCY LINDSAY
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter of the 30th April last. I thought that
the proposition that the Indian is a mere clerk1 in the administration of
the country was not seriously disputed by anybody. Wish that you
could read the minds even of the Indian members of the I.C.S. I
know from personal experience of them that the vast majority of them
do not feel anything more than mere clerks, somewhat glorified if
you like. But when I wrote the passage I had not the few of these
highly-paid Indians in mind but I had the army of actual clerks who,
no matter what their ability may be, can never rise beyond the status
of clerks.
When I said that the Indian at best was a commission agent I
again thought that I was stating what was literally the truth. Take the
largest item of foreign trade. Is not the Indian merely the agent of his
foreign principals? If he makes five rupees for himself, he makes Rs.
95 for his principal. So long as the conditions of trade remain what
they are it cannot be otherwise. If India remains principally a country
exporting raw produce and importing manufactured articles, Indian
merchants must be largely commission agents whether of England,
1

248

Vide “The Giant and the Dwarf”, 26-3-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Japan, America or any other foreign country.
How shall I prove to you the daily humiliating experience of the
Indian who, no matter how wealthy he is, gets no facility whereas his
English rival gets many things done for the asking. Take the case of
the British navigation companies, the concessions enjoyed by Europeans all over India whether in mining, banking or other commercial
pursuits too numerous to mention.
When I say that the English trade is founded upon the ruin of
Indian trade, I have simply written what historians have stated. If it
was merely enterprise and grit that had brought about the state of
things I should not grumble. But I would like you to study the rise of
the East India Co. from the records of the India Office collected, be it
said to their honour, by English historians.
In writing of the levelling process I certainly had not in mind
the Soviet rule of Bolshevism. It is perhaps somewhat shameful that I
have to confess to you that I do not yet know exactly what Bolshevism
is for the simple reason that I have not had time to study the inner
working of the Russian revolution. The levelling process to me simply
means that the system of favouritism on which, as I believe, English
commerce has been built should cease and for that purpose a double
process has to begin. Favouritism should go and young Indian
enterprises should receive State help and patronage.
I know that I must not expect to convert you by argument.
What I would like Englishmen in India to do is to see them [selves] as
the average Indian sees them and ask themselves why it is that the vast
majority of Indians feel as I often write in the pages of Young India.
Can it be that what some English economists have written and what
most Indian economists, historians and administrators have written is
all untrue? The case that I have presented is based upon their testimony and supported by personal experience.
Lastly, however much I may differ from your views, let me
assure you that I appreciate your persistence in trying to convince me
of my error. And if you will not give up the attempt I dare say that if
I am not converted it is possible that in the process of friendly
interchange of communications you might be able to see theother side
of the shield.
Yours sincerely,

S IR DARCY LINDSAY
THE S PORTS C LUB
S T. J AMES S QUARE
LONDON, S.W.
From a photostat : S. N. 17203
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

249

348. LETTER TO VIDYANATH SAHAI
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter.
I certainly think that it is everyone’s duty and especially an
educationist’s to speak the truth at all cost.
Discussion of politics in colleges should carry no stigma.
It was impossible to cover in the Delhi Agreement cases in
Indian States.
I can understand the distinction between those who resigned on
their own free will and those who were dismissed. A dismissal may
take place on valid grounds apart from civil disobedience.
I should be astonished if it was true, that because you were
dismissed from Kashmir State service for the reasons you state, other
educational institutions will not take you up.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. V IDYANATH S AHAI
THE EMPIRE HINDU HOTEL
S IMLA
From a microfilm : S.N. 17204

349. LETTER TO CHARLES F. WELLER
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your warm letter of 17th April. 1933 is a far
cry for me and I could not even make tentative arrangements for that
year. You will therefore have to write to me, if all goes well, towards
the middle of 1932 when I might be able to give a decisive answer. I
am sure you will appreciate my difficulty.
Yours sincerely,

C HARLES F. WELLER, E SQ.
C HICAGO’S F ELLOWSHIP OF F AITHS
C HICAGO (U.S.A.)
From a photostat : S. N. 17205

250

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

350. LETTER TO K. ROY CHATTI
AS AT ASHRAM,

June 3, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

Your enquiry need not be answered through the columns of
Young India. The answer is so obvious. No Congress member can
bid for opium shops.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. K. R OY C HATTI
S EETHANAGARAM,
Via KOVVOOR, EAST GODAVARI DT.
From a microfilm : S. N. 17206

351. LETTER TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
I have your letter. I do not think you should worry the Sadhu.
That he is known to be mad rather appeals to me because of the fellow
feeling between us. Even without his warning, I know that if I have to
go to Europe I put my health in danger. But it does not matter; if I
am destined to do some service there, somehow or other my health
will keep.
S YT. S UBHAS C HANDRA BOSE
1 W OODBURN P ARK
C ALCUTTA
From a photostat : S. N. 17207

352. LETTER TO MRS. V. BANERJEE
AS AT ASHRAM,

June 3, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter and I feel that you have had to undergo many
a trial. I do not know that I need guide you in the choice of service.
There are so many ways open to you. I would therefore advise you to
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

251

follow your own bent in making your choice. I would like to meet
you if I happen to come in your direction.
Yours sincerely,

MRS. V. BANERJEE
LADY HEALTH VISITOR, B ABY C LINIC C OMMITTEE
R AJSHAHI (BENGAL)
From a microfilm : S. N. 17208

353. LETTER TO KRISHNADAS
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
MY DEAR KRISHNADAS,

Your firm hand in your letter of 25th May showed the rapid
recovery you have made. I hope that there has been much more
progress since then. You must not stir out till you are strong and are
able to take fairly long walks without being fatigued. Whilst you are
at it, it is much better not only to regain your original strength but to
build up practically a new body. And all this should be possible after
the terrible crisis which had reduced you to a shadow.
Subhasbabu travelled with me from Mathura and we were
together as far as Baroda. We had long chats. He came again to Bardoli. I have advised him to submit the Bengal disputes to local arbitration.
I go to Bombay on the 9th returning here on the 12th.
S YT. K RISHNADAS
S HAKTI ASHRAM, P.O. R AJPUR (DT. D EHRA DUN)
From a microfilm : S. N. 17209

354. LETTER TO MOHAN LAL VIDYARTHI
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. There is no occasion for you to lose heart.
You should take gentle exercise, increasing in quantity as you gain in
strength. It should consist in a daily walk in the fresh air twice, in the
morning and in the evening. You should eat as much milk as you can
easily digest and fresh fruit. Omit every other food for the time being.
252

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

And you should take a hip-bath at about noon every day sitting in the
tub about 10 minutes going upto 30 minutes if you feel comfortable.
If you do not know what hip-baths are you will find them described in
my Guide to Health1 .
Yours sincerely,

S YT. M OHAN LAL VIDYARTHI
C AWNPORE C ITY
From a photostat : S. N. 17211

355. LETTER TO ANANTA C. PATNAIK
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 3, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

My attending your conference is out of the question. But in
wishing it every success I wish to draw the attention of every
member that a great responsibility rests upon your shoulders in
regard to the Congress session next year. One thing you have to
prepare for from now. Khadi does not grow like the magician’s
mango. You have to make preparations from now for an intensive
programme so that you can show what Orissa is capable of
doing in this most constructive Congress work.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. A NANTA C H. P ATNAIK
P ROVISIONAL S ECRETARY, P URI DISTRICT C ONFERENCE
P URI, P.O. B ALIPATNA, (Vil. ATHANTAR)
From a microfilm : S. N. 17212

356. LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI M. THAKKAR
June 3, 1931
CHI. MAHALAKSHMI,

Have you taken a vow not to write to me? Madhavji remains
somewhat worried about the children, particularly about Chandra.
There is a proposal to send Chandra to the Ashram. Let me know
1
An English translation of a series of Gujarati articles on general know-ledge
about health published in Indian Opinion from January 4, 1913 to August 16, 1913;
Vide

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

253

your view in the matter. Tell me about your daily programme of
work there. I should like you and your sister to come if possible and
see me here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 6816

357. LETTER TO VITHALDAS JERAJANI
BARDOLI,

June 3, 1931
BHAI VITHALDAS,

I was glad to read your letter. The handwriting is as steady as
ever. I would advise you to try mud packs on the head during noon.
Do you lie down in the open during the day? Do you get plenty of
fresh air in the room at night? In a disease like this, proper nursing is
in fact the only medicine. Be in no hurry to get back to work. You
need not worry about the disposal of the khadi stocks.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S. N. 9776

358. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BARDOLI,

June 3, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

You must have returned from Rajkot. Only yesterday I wrote to
respected Shri Khushalbhai 1 . I have also written to Bhagwanji and
told him that, if he feels nothing but an atmosphere of untruth in the
Ashram, he may certainly leave it. Surendra will go to Karadi and
Untadi and then return there. He should start by the 15th. Apte and
Sarja must have arrived there.
Shri Chhotalal Gandhi of Ankleswar writes to inform me that he
had sent to you a sum of Rs. 543-4-0 during the Dandi March. Do
1

254

Vide “Letter to Khushalchand Gandhi”, 2-6-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you have the money there? If you have and if the sum is credited in
the khadi account, return it to him. Tell him that it is to be used for
khadi work only.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Have a talk with Kakasaheb about Vratvichar. If you have a
large number of copies on hand, there is no need to reprint it.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./I

359. LETTER TO KISANSINH CHAVDA
BARDOLI,

June 3, 1931
BHAI KISANSINH,

If you wish to come now, you should come not later than
Sunday.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C. W. 9294

360. LETTER TO PADAMLAL
June 3, 1931
BHAI PADALAJI,

I have your letter. The subjects of States have the right to take
any steps including satyagraha in respect of the hardships they have to
face. But the name of the Congress should not be associated with this
because it will not be able to help them in their struggle; the States’
people should rely on their own strength.
Yours,

MOHANDAS GANDHI

[From a facsimile of the Hindi]
Madhya Pradesh aur Gandhiji, p. 136

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

255

361. CASTE AND COMMUNAL QUESTION
A student who sends his name writes:1
It is not quite correct to say that Hindus and Mussalmans do
not greet one another on their respective sacred days. But one would
certainly like much more frequent and extensive interchange of such
greetings.
As for caste I have frequently said that I do not believe in caste
in the modern sense. It is an excrescence and a handicap on progress.
Nor do I believe in enequalities between human beings. We are all
absolutely equal. But equality is of souls and not bodies. Hence it
is a mental state. We need to think of and to assert equality because
we see great inequalities in the physical world. We have to realize
equlity in the midst of this apparent external inequality. Assumption
of superiority by any person over any other is a sin against God and
man. Thus caste, in so far as it c onnotes distinctions in status, in
an evil.
I do however believe in varna which is based on hereditary
occupations. Varnas are four to mark four universal occupations, —
imparting knowledge, defending the defenceless, carrying on agriculture and commerce and performing service through physical
labour. These occupations are common to all mankind, but Hinduism,
having recognized them as the law of our being, has made use of it in
regulating social relations and conduct. Gravitation affects us all
whether one knows its existence or not. But scientists who knew the
law have made it yield results that have startled the world. Even so has
Hinduism startled the world by its discovery and application of the law
of varna.When Hindus were seized with inertia, abuse of varna resulted
in innumerable castes with unnecessary and harmful restrictions as to
intermarriage and interdining. The law of varna has nothing to do
with these restrictions. People of different varnas may intermarry and
interdine.These restrictions may be necessary in the interest of chastity
and hygiene. But a Brahmin who marries a Sudra girl or vice versa
commits no offence against the law of varna.
Marriage outside one’s religion stands on a different footing.
Even here, so long as each is free to observe his or her religion, I can
see no moral objection to such unions. But I do not believe that these
unions can bring peace. They may follow peace. I can see nothing
1

256

The letter is not reproduced here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

but disaster following any attempt to advocate Hindu-Muslim unions
so long as the relations between the two remain strained. That such
unions may be happy in exceptional circumstances can be no reason
for their general advocacy. Interdining between Hindus and Musslmans does take place even now on a large scale. But that again has
not resulted in promoting peace. It is my settled conviction that
intermarriage and interdining have no bearing on communal unity.
The causes of discord are economic and political, and it is these that
have to be removed. There is intermarriage and interdining in Europe,
but the Europeans have fought amongst themselves as we Hindus and
Mussalmans have never fought in all history. Our masses have stood
aside.
The untouchables are a class apart—a standing reproach to
Hindu-ism. The castes are a handicap, they are no sin. Untouchability
is a sin, a grievous crime, and will eat up Hinduism, if the latter does
not kill the snake in time. Untouchables’ should no longer be the
outcastes of Hin-duism. They should be regarded as honoured
members of Hindu society, and should belong to the varna for which
their occupation fits them.
According to my definition of varna there is no varna in
operation at present in Hinduism. The so-called Brahmins have ceased
to impart knowledge. They take to various other occupations. This is
more or less true of theother varnas. In reality, being under foreign
domination we are all slaves, and hence less than Sudras—untouchables of the West.
The correspondent being a vegetarian finds it difficult to
reconcile himself to dining with meat-eating Mussalmans. But he
should re-member that there are many more meat-eating Hindus than
Mussalmans. A vegetarian may with impunity dine with meat-eaters,
Hindu and others, so long as he has eatable food cleanly prepared and
placed before him. He will always have fruit and milk whereever he
goes.
Young India, 4-6-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

257

362. NOTES
S AVE ME FROM MY ADMIRERS

A correspondent writes from far off Cape Comorin:1
. . . In the car festivals here the Image is placed in the car and taken in
procession. One set of people want that your photo should be placed side by
side with the Image and taken in procession. Another set of riper men say that
you would not like to be treated as God . . .

Another from Mathura sends me a horrible portrait representing
me as lying stretched on the coil of the thousand-mouthed serpent
with the roll of non-co-operation in one hand and the spinning-wheel
suspended on the other arm. My poor wife is massaging my legs.
The other celebrities have also been pressed into service. I must not
violate the reader’s feelings by describing the other features. Suffice
it to say that the picture is a caricature of the Vaishnavite legend
representing Vishnu resting on the coil of Sheshanag.The correspondent who sends the picture asks me to plead with the publishers for
its withdrawal. He rightly adds that though they may not publicly
express their resentment, the picture must hurt the feelings of
orthodox Vaishnavas. I whole-heartedly endorse the sentiments of
both these correspondents. The motive in each case may be quite
good.But this excessive heroworship borders on questionable idolatry,
and is calculated to wound susceptibilities of the orthodox people
without there being any excuse for giving such offence. Such
excesses will defeat the purpose of the blind worshippers. If they have
any regard for my feelings, let the organizers of the car festival who
would put my portrait in the car and the publishers of the offending
picture desist from their activity. There are many other healthy ways
of giving expression to and promoting patriotic sentiment.
R EPATRIATES FROM S OUTH AFRICA

Pandit Benarsidas Chaturvedi and Swami Bhavani Dayal
Sannyasi have prepared a well-reasoned report of an independent
enquiry they held into the condition of emigrants repatriated to India
under the assisted emigration scheme from South Africa. This report
and the Swami’s telegram dated 16th ultimo, asking me to comment
on it, telling me, “Condition worst, many starving, women half naked,
children begging”, have lain with me ever since. I am sorry that I
have not been able to deal with the report earlier. The telegram from
1

258

Only an extract is reproduced here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

which I have quoted is an epitome of the report. The condition of our
people, who find themselves strangers in their own land, is a disgrace
alike to us and to the Government, but more to us than to the
Government. No Government in the world can cope fully with such
cases. Governments can only support to a limited extent voluntary
public effort in such cases. It is really up to the merchant princes and
other employers of labour in Calcutta to take a real interest in the
welfare of such people, and find suitable employment for them.
But the condition of these people is a small consideration,
compared with the cause that has reduced those repatriates to the
condition in which theyfind themselves. There should have been no
agreed repatriation at all, and if there was to be any, there should have
been ample provision previously made to ensure proper occupation
for them, and in any case there should never have been any consent to
the repatriation of colonial-born Indians, of whom there are fully
thirty-three per cent in the Calcutta depot. But it is no use crying over
spilt milk. The labours of the framers of the report will not have been
in vain if at the time of the revision of the Cape Agreement, the rights
of the poor labouring Indian population are not bartered away for
doubtful concessions to the other Indian settlers. The position taken
up by the latter is unassailable, and should depend on its own merits.
The settlers themselves should therefore refuse to be party to any
bargain, which would compromise the rights of their less favourably
situated brethren. South Africa can easily absorb and accommodate
the existing Indian population.
GANDHI ASHRAM, M EERUT

This Ashram, a creation of Acharya Kripalani, has issued a
neat little pamphlet describing its activities. From a tiny thing
which it was when it began life at Benares in 1920, it has now
grown into a big thing with branches and its own premises in
Meerut, the headquarters. It is now a registered charitable association. Its chief activity is production and distribution of khadi, but it
runs free dispensaries and night schools wherever it is possible. Its
production of khadi in 1921 was Rs. 48 and sale Rs. 3,100. The
production in 1930 was Rs. 4,21,490 and sales Rs. 5,32,361. The
price of its khadi 45" in width was Re. 1 per yard in 1921, and Rs. 05-6 per yard in 1930. It has departments of washing, calendering, and
dyeing besides the cotton processes up to weaving. It takes and
teaches apprentices in these departments, and finds work for the poor
women of Meerut by giving them knitting, bordering of bedsheets,
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

259

etc. Who can say that khadi has no future, or that it is not the help of
the poorest in the land?
Young India, 4-6-1931

363. IS IT AN ECONOMIC NECESSITY?
A contribution in the Times of India (26-5-’31) has the
following:
Mahtma Gandhi, in his latest pronouncement 1 concerning the purpose
and procedure of picketig, has reiterated his belief that the exclusion of
foreign cloth is an ‘economic necessity to India’. Perhaps he will explain, in
the next issue of Young India, in what sense he uses that term. The
information required can be supplied by answering certain questions prompted
by the piecegoods situation as it is now developing.
1.
To what extent has the decline of 1,000 million yeards in the
imports of cotton piecegoods in 1930-31 been balanced by the increased
production of indigenous cloth based upon the processes of hand-spinning and
weaving?
2.
To what extent has it been balanced by increase in mill
production?
3.
Will the boycott be persisted in, regardless of the extent to which
imported goods are displaced by hand-made and mill-made goods respectively?
4.
If so, to what extent is the boycott in the interests of Bombay as
distinct from other provinces?
Clearly, if the endeavour to revive the village industry has definitely
failed, as appears to be the case, however reluctant Mahatma Gandhi may be to
acknowledge defeat in a campaign so close to his heart, then the time has
arrived, in the interests of public honesty, to transfer the formal control of the
boycott campaign to the Cotton Millowners’ Associations, acting as
principals, instead of continuing the camouflage of control by Congress,
acting as agents.

The answers to the specific questions are:
1. It is impossible to answer the question in terms of yards
because khadi is not all commercially produced. Home manufacture
of khadi for use by manufacturers themselves is proceeding on an
ever increasing scale, which it is impossible for the poor All-India
Spinners’ Association to measure.
1

260

Vide “Notes” sub-title Pciketing
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

2. The indigenous mills are undoubtedly playing an
important part in making good the deficit.
3. It will be, subject to what follows.
4. The interest of Bombay is the interest of India. The writer
perhaps includes Ahmedabad in Bombay, and evidently ignores the
other important mills scattered all over India.
I have answered the specific questionsfor the satisfaction of the
writer of the article than of myself or the public. The public should
know that I should lose all interest in boycott of foreign cloth, if I
really discovered that khadi was a failure, as the writer is sure it has
proved to be already. I do not know the source of his assurance. But
as the party chiefly concerned in khadi production and propaganda, I
make bold to say that it is not only not a failure but is making sure
though slow headway all over India. I therefore do reiterate the claim
that boycott is an econo-mic necessity for the masses. It may sound
strange, but it is true that it is not in the same sense and to the same
extent an economic necessity for the mills as for khadi. Mills have
undoubtedly flourished beyond their expectations by reason of the
boycott, but they could have, as they were doing, eked out an
existence without the boycott. They could always share with Britain
and Japan the exploitation of starving millions by dumping their
manufactures among the ignorant, famishing millions, who, forgetting
that by using their leisure hours they could manufacture their own
cloth, would buy the flimsy mill calico and thus doubly injure themselves. Boycott cannot therefore be wholly transferred to the mills
even if they wanted it. And If they undertook it, it would fail. The
fact cannot be concealed tht the mills are interested in the boycott
chiefly for their agents’ and their share-holders’ profits. The Congress is concerned with the boycott wholly in the interest of the
masses.
The writer and, for that matter, many others do not know
that the khadi method is a new method in economics as non-violence
is a new method in politics. The khadi method is bound to confound the orthodox economic theories, as non-violence has almost already confounded the orthodox political methods. The
new method lends itself ot the orthodox statistical demonstration
only to a certain extent. It is the khadi spirit that is responsible for the
phenomenal success of the boycott. Boycott itself is no new cry. It is
as old as, if not older than, the Bengal partition period. But he hope
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

261

of success was born with the rebirth of khadi in 1919, and the hope
was partly realized last year when khadi spirit was at its highest. The
real manifestation of the khadi spirit has still to come. And when it
does, as it is bound to come, and that too sooner than most people
expect, there will be neither picketing nor statistical demonstration
required.
The Times of India writer suggests tat the boycott is designed
or calculated merely to benefit the mills to the injury of the masses.
The suggestion would have foundation if there was no khadi behind
the boycott. Let the writer and critics like him remember that the
Congress formula in so many words is ‘Boycott through Khadi’. The
India mills come in to supplement khadi. But the boycott would stand
in spite of the Indian mills if they opposed khadi. Many did oppose it
at one time. Their indiference to khadi was still more marked. But be
it said to their credit that they have somewhat recognized the time
spirit, and even though yet half-heartedly in the majority of cases,
they have made terms with khadi. Some have become thorough
converts to it, and will not even mind losing, if they must, for its sake.
The Indian mills are therefore in no sense of the term principals in
the boycott campaign. they benefit no doubt, and they will, at least
for the time being, increasingly benefit, but the ratio of increse will be
in direct proportion to the correctness of their conduct in their
dealings with khadi.
The writer, as well as the reader, will now understand why India,
that is to say, the masses must benefit in the long run even by the
recent legislative protection given to the mills. The prices of mill
cloth must of course go up. It is for the Congress to carry on ceaseless
propaganda, so as to keep the mills from the profiteering temptation,
and to teach the masses that their economic welfare lies in the
manufacture of khadi in their own cottages through hand-spinning.
When once foreign cloth is out of the way, indigenous mills will
radily suit their prices and production to khadi, or will themselves face
a boycott even like foreign mills.
Young India, 4-6-1931

262

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

364. R. T. C. AND CONGRESS
Had it not been for the necessity of observing reticence for the
sake of the lasting peace, which it is the common object of all parties
to reach, I should have long ago taken the public into confidence
about my proposed visit to London to take part in the R. T. C. I am
now in a position to say the following:
I have made no secret of my opnion, not new but held and
expressed even while negotiations were going on in Delhi, that I
should feel most reluctant to go to London to take part in the
Conference, if we failed to solve the communal problem among
ourselves. I have seen nothing as yet to make me alter the view.
There is another obstacle in the way of my leaving India, whilst
delicate situations continue to arise regarding the Delhi Pact. I should
sacrifice life itself to prevent a breakdown. And I flatter myself with
the belief that my presence is necessary to prevent it.
Let us however hope that both the difficulties will be over by the
time it becomes necessary to leave India for the September meeting.
I can but give my assurance that having entered upon the
Settlement, I am eager for the sake of the good name of the Gongess
to proceed to London and deliver its message to the R. T. C. and the
British statesmen, not excluding even Mr. Churchill. I know that he
and his party do not realize that the Congress is no enemy of Great
Britain. The Congress merely wants for India what he and his
ancestors have fought to secure for Great Britain. I therefore need no
persuasion to take me to London. I have even said to friends that if
the communal tangle was not undone, and I was therefore unable to
take part in the R. T. C. but the working of the Settlement left me free,
I should, if so required, proceed to London for the sake of presenting
the Congress position to the responsible statesmen. My supreme
desire is to attain lasting peace, if it can be had with honour and
without inviting the nation to engage in another fight involving untold
suffering.
Young India, 4-6-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

263

365. PRABHATPHERIS
It was in the Yeravda prison that I read of the inauguration of
prabhatpheris1 . I thought that whoever originated the idea deserved
thanks for it. I felt that apart from their propaganda value, they were
spiritually beautiful. They summoned the sleeping to the call of duty.
They reminded them that it was time to rise to the call of duty. They
reminded them that it was time to rise from their beds and give thanks
to God the first thing in the morning.For I had read that the memmers
of the prabhatpheris sang songs of worship as also of topical public
events. If wisely guided, this institutution can become a great means
of purification as also political education of the right type. But I hear
that songs generating bad passion are also some times sung. I should
be sorry if my information proved true. I would strongly advise the
organizers of these parties to restrict their choice of songs not only
during this time of peace but for all time to those of worship and
those dealing purely with constructive activities such as khadi, liquor
prohibition, communal unity, untouchability and other social reform.
The parties must be trained to sing well and in tune and should keep
to one hour throughout India. I remember the parties in Bombay not
always keeping the same time and in Allahabad keeping a different
time from Bombay. The institution has sprung up anyhow, but it will
be well now for the prime movers, if there are any, to evolve a proper
plan and publish a selection of songs which all, no matter belonging
to what faith or party, can sing. This should be a non-party national
institution. If parties spring up anyhow and begin singing anyhow
and any time, they would disturb the people by their jargon. But
good singing in the morning will be appreciated.
Young India, 4-6-1931

366. ‘AN HONEST DOUBT’ (?)
The now famous Gandhi-Irwin truce terms received an almost unanimous approbation, though not from the entire section of Congressmen in
India, at least from a majority of them. The people and the Press, both in this
country as well as on the continent of Europe, expressed their sincere appreciation of the succes of the peace negotiations, and there was a consensus of
opinion expressed, that honesty of purpose and sincerity in action on both
1

264

Literally, morning processions
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

sides lent sufficient weight to the success of the negotiations. In spite of this,
there was and is still a very strong minority comprising especially the
younger generation, which is totally against the truce terms, and emphatically
declines to put its seal of approval upon them. They are of the opinion, and
we think not without sufficient justification, that the flag of complete
independence as the immediate goal of India, hoisted at the Lahore Congress,
has been lowered by the truce terms, thereby committing the Congress and its
followers to a less severe and entirely different programme of a activities.
No one for a moment seems to doubt the sincerity of purpose with which
Gandhiji, as the one voice on behalf of the Congress, and Lord Irwin, as the
spokesman of the British Government, carried out the peace negotiations to
such a successful conclusion. The left-wingers, under the leadership of Sjt.
Subhas Chandra Bose, had almost planned to oppose the Resolution at Karachi
Congress ratifying the Delhi Pact, but better counsels prevailed with them,
and we are thankful to them for having averted a very serious defection in the
Congress, at a time like the present, when complete unanimity and cooperation mean much. With great reluctance they let Gandhiji have his own
way and try once more his faith in the British Government.
Let us for one moment examine how far the terms of the truce have been
observed since the Settlement. Government on their part have released the
Civil Disobedience prisoners, withdrawn the various ordinances, and declared
the Congress organization a lawful body. The Congress on their part have
called off Civil Disobedience, aggressive picketing, boycott of British goods,
etc., and have also acceded to the cancellation of the enquiry into police
excesses. So much the better for all. But what passes our comprehension is
whether or not the Government have strictly adhered to the princeples
uderlying the terms. Reports of non-release of prisoners in various parts of
the country, promulgation of Section 144 on political meetings, arrests and
convictions for political reasons, and various other happenings, which are
considered a total violation of the Agreement, are pouring into our ears
morning. On the other hand, we are told that the local Governments contend
that the people have not always observed the terms of the truce. Whether or
not both parties are justified in their charges it is not for us to say.
In the light of the above, we honestly doubt if Gandhiji, behalf of the
Congress, was sufficiently justified in having lowered the flag of
independence hoisted at Lahore by agreeing to the truce. We honestly doubt
again if he fully satisfied that there was a real change of heart on the part of the
British Government, so as to commit the Congress to a truce of this sort. We
honestly doubt thirdly, if Gandhiji really thought that the British Government
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

265

would take up seriously the question of Indian independence at the next Round
Table Conference, even if the Congress under his leadership participated.
Fourthly, we entertain an honest doubt if Gandhji thought for one moment that
the British Government would totally abdicate in favour of the Congress after
150 years of continued exploitation of a land which is almost their entire
subsistence and mainstay. Fifthly, we doubt whether he believed that they
would surrender “the brightest jewel in the Crown of the British Empire” to
those from whom no exploitation is possible in future, and thus pave the way
for their own decline. And last but one, we honestly doubt whether Gandhiji
remembered how he has been betrayed on more than one occasion in the past
in his trust in the Government, and considered whether Young India would
allow him to practise his political jugglery on the toiling millions once more
and for ever.
Last but not the least is the honest doubt we entertain whether there is
any ray of hope of success through Congress participation in the coming
Conference. Who knows that once Gandhiji with his team has left India for
London they will be allowed to return to the scene of their activities, in case
the London conversations break down? Who can guarantee to the Indian
delegation a hospitable reception in London during its stay there?
We honestly wonder whether it is not high time for us to present a united
front, and if necessary, to wade through a pool of blood, of course pursing the
creed of non-violence, to attain our one goal and that for now and for ever.

The foregoing has been sent me by “The Youth of India” with
a duly signed covering letter. I have removed certain unnecessary
passages and made some alterations without changing the substance of
the charge. There is truth in the statement that there are charges and
countercharges about breach of the Settlement by the parties
concerned. But I am able to assure the public that so far the difficulties have been removed. The Central Government is anxious to
implement the Settlement as I know the Congess is. And so long as
that condition persists, there is no danger of a breakdown. Beyond
this the public will not expect me to go, whilst the very delicate
instrument is being worked and kept in tune.
As to the Settlement itself, I have no doubt whatsoever that
the Congress would have put itself in the wrong if it had not
entered upon it. And it was certainly patriotic on the part of Sjt.
Subhas Chandra Bose and the young men who were behind
him to have withdrawn their opposition and given their support to the
Settlement Resolution at Karachi. The Karachi Congress did not
266

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

lower the independence flag. The Congress mandate is clear on the
point.
Whether the Congress will be able to make good its position at
the Round Table Conference I do not know. But I do know that it
would be wrong for the Congress to avoid the Conference for fear of
rejection of its demands. The Conference is one way of showing the
absolute justice of the national demand. It would have been foolish
for the Congrss to refuse participation when it was open to it to press
its full demand without reservation.The Congress would have betrayed
lack of courge if it had declined to avail itself of the opportunity,
when it came, of presenting its case at the Round Table Conference.
Therefore I should not hesitate to go to London and attend the
Congerence if I found that I could safely go. My difficulty is fundamental and well known. I should not have the self-confidence to
present the Congress case, if we could not set our own house in order
by attaining a solution of the communal problem. But I am waiting,
watching and praying. As soon as the way is open, I should not
hesitate to go wherever wanted. The other difficulty is less serious, but
none the less important. As the principal party on behalf of the
Congress to the Pact, I should feel most uneasy leaving India, when
serious questions arising out of the Settlement demand attention. I
have pledged my honour to Lord Irwin that I shall leave no stone
unturned to see that the Settlement does not break down. As I have
already hinted, I am having some difficulty with local Governments,
but I am hoping that with patience all will be well. In any case I
believe in all humility that my presence in India is necessary to avoid
a crisis.
As for the other doubts of the wrter or writers of the letter, I can
only repeat what I have said so often. I will not lose hope till I know
that nothing is to be gained from negotiation.Since I believe in human
nature, in spite of previous disappointments, I must trust. I regard it as
practical wisdom. I rely for success upon the inherent justice of the
national cause and the equally just means adopted for its vindication.
I do not believe that the Congress delegation will be insulted in
London. And if it is, the Congress will not lose its prestige. The loss
will accrue to those who will insult. I therefore ask the youthful writers
of the letter not to lose hope, but work with all their might to make
the Settlement a success, and by working the constructive programme
enhance the power of the Congress to vindicate the national position.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

267

For the measure of success at the Conference, if the Congress is
represented thereat, will be in strict proportion to the measure of the
power of the Congress.
Young India, 4-6-1931

367. MISSIONARY METHODS IN INDIA
Gandhiji has given great umbrage to missionaries by his declaration
against the prevailing methods of evangelization, and by challenging the
claim to superiority put forward by them on behalf of Christianity. They
strongly resent his assertion that their modus operandi is open to suspicion
. . . . It was stated in the Indian Census Report for 1911 that the aboriginal
tribes accept Christianity, “in the hope of obtaining assistance from the
missionaries in their difficulties and protection the coercion of landlords.” . .
. In 1821, Raja Rammohan Roy urged in the Brahmanical Magazine that the
superiority of Christianity should not be advocated “by means of abuse and
insult or by affording the hope of worldly gain.”
. . . Mrs. Charles Howard, Secretary, Society for the Education of the
Women of India, Chicago, in a letter to Sr. Virchand R. Gandhi of Bombay,
wrote in 1896: “But I am more concerned for poor India.
Christianity, which is a failure here, be thrust upon India?”

Why should

1

This comes from a retired Deputy Collector. The collection of
quotations from named sources should, instead of offending missionaries, cause an inward search. I have several other similar articles,
some from Christian Indians. The writers will excuse mefor with
holding them. The controversy ought not to be prolonged. The
incautious zeal of reporters, who trusted too much to memory, led to a
discussion2 , which I would fain have avoided.
Young India, 4-6-1931

1

Only excerpts are reproduced here.
Vide “Foreign Missionaries”, 23-4-1931 & “Foreign Missionaries Again”,
7-5-1931
2

268

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

368. TELEGRAM TO JAMES MILLS
S WARAJ ASHRAM,
BARDOLI,

June 4, 1931
JAMES MILLS
C ECIL HOTEL
S IMLA
YOUR

WIRE.

CAN

PLEASE

RENDER

IN

CABLE

HER

INDIA

NONVIOLENT

NEEDS

ALL

EFFORT

HELP AMERICA

FOR

FREEDOM.

GANDHI
From a photostat : S.N. 17213

369. TELEGRAM TO J. M. SEN GUPTA
S WARAJ ASHRAM,
BARDOLI,

June 4, 1931
S EN GUPTA
ELGIN R OAD
C ALCUTTA
THANKS

WIRE1 .

ARBITRATION
ASIDE

IF

THINK

YOU

UNCONDITIONALLY.
FOUND

SHOULD
ELECTIONS

REFER
CAN

ALL MATTERS
BE

SET

IRREGULAR.

GANDHI
From a photostat : S.N. 17214

1

Which stated : “. . . Having regard to Subhasbabu’s wire to you and the
attitude disclosed therein I agree to arbitration. Beg point out that arbitraion may not
be reduced to compromise but should be a decision on matters of principle and fact
arrived at after detailed enquiry. Arbitrator or arbitrators will be expected to give
decision as regards following question of principle. Whether District Congress
Committees shall have the right of printing membership forms as they had formerly
enabling wide enrolment without hindrance whether district Congress Presidents
should not be ex-officio returning officers and when the President is not available
rule number five of the rules for election
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

269

370. TELEGRAM TO VENKATESHNARAIN TIWARI
S WARAJ ASHRAM,
BARDOLI,

June 4, 1931
VENKATESHNARAIN TIWARI
KYDGANJ
ALLAHABAD
YOUR

WIRE.

CORRECTING

LINE

NEXT

FIFTYTHREE 1

OBVIOUS

MISTAKE.

ISSUE.

GANDHI
From a microfilm : S.N. 17215

371. TELEGRAM TO MAQBOOL HUSAIN
S WARAJ ASHRAM,
BARDOLI,

June 4, 1931
HAKIM MAQBOOL HUSAIN
CARE C ONGRESS
C AWNPORE
YOUR

WIRE.

RERER

MATTER2

ARBITRATION.

GANDHI
From a microfilm : S.N. 17216

372. TELEGRAM TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
BARDOLI,

June 4, 1931
CHI. PREMA,

I got your letter. I, too, shall start on Monday. So both of us
will reach Bombay on Tuesday. But I shall be reaching there a little
earlier than you. Drop in on the same day when you get time. I will
then decide if I can spare time for a talk with you.
Your letter was quite full of information. Gangabehn has indeed
many aspirations. You should have long talks with her and should
1
2

270

Vide “Virus of Untouchability”, 11-6-1931
Presumably the Hindu-Muslim tension in Cawnpore.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

also help her. Her capacity for love is boundless and her desire for
service intense.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 10256. Also C.W. 6704. Courtesy :
Premabehn Kantak

373. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
June 4, 1931
CHI. VASUMATI,

I got your letter. I have carefully read Nanalal’s letter. If you
are required to stay at Visnagar in connection with that work, my
advice is against it. The work is full of difficulties. If Nanalal wishes
to speak to me, he is welcome. In this matter I wil trust Krishnadas’s
judgment. Before coming to a decision, you should also know the
views of Budhabhai, Mathuradas and Narandas. If you have to
choose a place outside the Ashram for work, you should choose either
Nadiad or Bochasan. I am inclined in favour of Bochasan, since the
work there has been put on a firm foundation. However, if you are
under a moral obligation to work for that school at Nadiad, you
should certainly do your duty. If you have held out any hope, you
ought to fulfil it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 9326. Also C.W. 571. Courtesy :
Vasumati Pandit

374. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
BARDOLI,

June 4, 1931
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I got your letter. The Ashram is the right place for you. You
cannot leave the girls. You should even take in others who may wish
to join. You can, therefore, serve best in the Ashram.
Vasumati may live in Nadiad if she wishes to do so.
Santa Cruz khadi is very good.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

271

Let me know when you are leaving. Write to me always and tell
me how you think or feel about any matter.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro–6 : G. S. Gangabehnne, p. 54. Also C.W. 8776. Courtesy :
Gangabehn Vaidya

375. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
BARDOLI,

June 4, 1931
CHI. MRIDU,

It is quite all right that you wrote a long letter. You will surely
have benefited from your month-long stay at Simla. You will have
walked a lot. The suggestion that a boycott committee be formed
seems a good one. I am hoping to get something done at the meeting.
Most of our difficulties are due to the fact that we want to achieve the
boycott through khadi. The mills do have a place in the boycott
campaign. That place is secondary to khadi and is automatically
assured through our carrying on khadi work. Giving a special place to
the mills will make the mills lose, khadi lose and the boycott will fail.
Have you understood this key to boycott? If you have not understood,
I wish you would ask me again and again and understand. Read
carefully the article about boycott in the current issue of Young
India. 1
You should never hesitate to write to me whenever you want to.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11181. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

1

272

Vide “Is it An Economic Necessity”, 4-6-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

376. LETTER TO MOOLCHAND AGRAWAL
BARDOLI,

June 4, 1931
BHAI MOOLCHANDJI,

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

I have your letter.
Village sanitation is the duty of the State.
If the State neglects it, the villagers may take it up.
Municipality means the village service society. Villagers can
themselves form such a society.
Scavenging will cost nothing if performed by volunteers.
In a small village even a few dedicated youths can do the
scavenging.
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 758

377. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
BARDOLI,

June 4, 1931
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

Here is a copy of the letter from Sir Darcy Lindsay. Send a
reply with facts and figures. I have already sent one 1 , but a more
informed reply is called for.
I got the wire about the dispute in Bengal. I have wired to Sen
Gupta2 unconditionally to accept arbitration.
BAPU

[PS.]
I shall be in Bombay from 9th to 11th.
From a copy of the Hindi : C.W. 7887. Courtesy : G. D. Birla

1
2

Vide “Letter to Darcy Lindsay”, 3-6-1931
Vide “Telegram to J. M. Sen Gupta”, 1-6-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

273

378. TELGRAM TO G. D. BIRLA
S WARAJ ASHRAM,
BARDOLI,

June 5, 1931
GHANSHYAMDAS BIRLA
C ARE LUCKY
C ULCUTTA
IF

AT

THROUGH

ALL

POSSIBLE

LOCAL

TRY

SETTLE

BENGAL

DIS-PUTE

ARBITRATION.

GANDHI
From a photostat : S.N. 17228

379. TELGERAM TO PRESIDENT, HINDI SAMMELAN,
MADURA
S WARAJ ASHRAM,
BARDOLI,

June 5, 1931
P RESIDENT
HINDI S AMMELAN
MADURA
HOPE

YOUR

NEXT

CONGRESS

LABOURS

WILL

SPEAKING

RESULT

UNDERSTANDING

ALL

DELE-GATES

HINDI.1

GANDHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 17232

1

274

This was read out at the conference on June 7.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

380. TELEGRAM TO KRISHNADAS
S WARAJ ASHRAM,
BARDOLI,

June 5, 1931
KRISHNADAS
S HAKTI ASHRAM
R AJPUR (DEHRA DUN)
YOUR
WIRE.
YOU
NEED
NOT
AM
DOING
EVERYTHING
POSSIBLE

COME
SETTLE

HERE
OR
MATTER1 .

WORRY.

BAPU
From a microfilm : S.N. 17229

381. TELEGRAM TO SADAGOPACHARI
S WARAJ ASHRAM,
BARDOLI,

June 4, 1931
S ADAGOPACHARI
P RESIDENT, T ALUQ C ONGRESS
TIRUTANI
YOUR

TELEGRAM.

SEE

CHAKRAVARTI

RAJAGOPALACHARI.

POST

PARTICULARS.

GANDHI
From a microfilm : S.N. 17230

1

Presumably the Benal Congress dispute; vide “Letter to Mrs. V. Banerjee”,
3-6-1931
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

275

382. TELEGRAM TO FULCHAND K. SHAH
S WARAJ ASHRAM,
BARDOLI,

June 5, 1931
F ULCHAND S HAH
NATIONAL S CHOOL
WADHWAN C ITY
YOUR

LETTER.

RETURN

YOU

CAN

COME

SUNDAY

OR AFTER

BOMBAY.

GANDHI
From a microfilm : S.N. 17231

383. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 5, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

This liquor business is causing a great deal of trouble. The
following extracts from a letter1 from Calicut will show you what is to
be said on the Congress side. I have given you already facts about
picketing in Ahmedabad. It is high time that this matter is settled
finally.
Yours sincerely,

Encl. 1
H. W. EMERSON, E SQ.
S IMLA
A.I.C.C. File No. 16–B, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

1
The letter stated that “. . . with the help of the police and excise officials .
. . liquor which has no sale at the shops on account of picketing is diverted into the
homes of the vendors or their friends, where it is being regularly sold”.

276

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

384. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
June 5, 1931
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I hope you did not lose in S. India what you gained in Ceylon.
If you are fresh and do not mind the journey do come to Bardoli for
Sunday to that we might have a quiet chat here before beginning
operations on Tuesday. I hope Kamala and Indu have profited by the
rest.
Yours,

BAPU
P ANDIT JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
C/ O S JT. J ALBHAI NAOROJI
NAPEAN S EA R D.
BOMBAY
From Gandhi-Nehru papers, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

385. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 5, 1931
MY DEAR KUMARAPPA,

Please go through the enclosed and if you have access to the
necessary literature and leisure also let me have your reply to it.
BAPU

Encl. 1
S YT. J. C. K UMARAPPA
65 E SPLANADE R OAD
BOMBAY
From a photostat : G.N. 10095

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

277

386. LETTER TO P. A. WADIA
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 5, 1931
DEAR PROF. WADIA,

I enclose herewith a copy of a letter from an English friend. I
have sent him a reply but I know that my reply cannot carry the same
weight that a trained economist[’s] can. Will you kindly therefore
send me your considered reply supported by facts and figures?
Yours sincerely,

Encl. 1
P ROF. P. A. W ADIA
WILSON C OLLEGE
BOMBAY
From a microfilm : S.N. 17233

387. LETTER TO EMMA HARKER
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 5, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. How can I remove the ban on foreign cloth
and why? And what is the meaning of the ban? It is merely a method
of persuasion. If people want to wear foreign cloth, there is nothing
to prevent them from doing so. But if there was national government,
the entry of foreign cloth would be surely prohibited as it was in the
time of Elizabeth in England. It is true that the Lancashire workmen
may have to suffer during the transition stage. But can it be any
reason for India’s cottage industry. If in trying to undo the wrong,
Indians cease to use foreign cloth which it is their duty to do
Lancashire has to turn to a less injurious industry. Where is the harm
and where is the wrong? I would like you to work out this problem in
its details and you will find that ban on foreign cloth is a necessary
condition of the life of the millions of villagers of India.
You have evidently not studied the prohibition question in
America. I talked to both who are for prohibition and against prohibition. Whilst it is true that prohibition has given rise to fashionable
crime it has saved tens of thousands of the labouring population of
278

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

America, who, having the temptation put away from them, are now
bringing up sober families. But the conditions in India are infinitely
superior to those in America. In America drink was the fashion and
yet its great men rose against it. We are too near the time to measure
the greatness of America in having undertaken prohibition. In India
drink is considered to be a vice and is confined to only a particular
class of people. Prohibition will be therefore an unmixed good in this
land.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
MRS. E MMA HARKER
6 B ELGRAVE TERRACE
KARACHI
From a photostat : S.N. 17235

388. LETTER TO MADHAVANAR
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 5, 1931
MY DEAR MADHAVANAR,

I have your letter about picketing. At the present moment I
cannot give you better advice than to ask you to discuss the whole
thing with Syt. Rajagopalachari and act in consultation with him. I am
sure that if orders under 144 are passed, for the time being at any rate
you should obey them.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. M ADHAVANAR
MATHRUBHUMI BUILDINGS
C ALICUT (MALABAR)
From a microfilm : S.N. 17236

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

279

389. LETTER TO DR. JOSIAH OLDFIELD
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 5, 1931
MY DEAR OLDFIELD,

You have revived sweet memories of old. I am not going to
England this summer. Whether I shall have to go in September I do
not know. If I do and if I get ill, I might have to seek shelter in your
hospital. Anyway it was good of you to think of me.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
DR. J OSIAH OLDFIELD
LADY MARGARET HOSPITAL
DODDINGTON, K ENT (ENGLAND)
From a photostat : C.W. 4517. Courtesy : Dr. Josiah Oldfield

390. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
June 5, 1931
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I got your letter. It is intolerable that, despite such illnes, you
should compulsorily have to stay there. You should show courage
and find some way. I have written to you a long and detailed letter. I
hope you got it. I need not, therefore, write much in this. I shall be in
Bombay only during 9-11. The address there will be: Laburnum
Road, Bombay. I shall have to stay there for three days only.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3401

280

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

391. LETTER TO LALJI PARMAR
June 5, 1931
CHI. LALJI,

Is Mamasaheb displeased with you? Do you write to him? Have
you been looking for a wife? Are you in a hurry to get married?
Write to me and tell me frankly what your wish is.
I hope you are working hard there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of Gujarati : G.N. 3292

392. LETTER TO NAJUKLAL N. CHOKSI
June 5, 1931
CHI. NAJUKLAL,

I have your letter. If an operation offers the only cure for Moti
have it done quickly. You have done well to take up the job at a
library. What is your salary there?
I have looked into the article about Champaran. That sugar can
certainly be regarded as indigenous. How pitiable is our condition
that if anybody wished to give up eating such sugar, he must stop
eating such sugar, he must stop eating sugar altogether.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 12148

393. LETTER TO NARAYAN MORESHWAR KHARE
June 5, 1931
CHI. PANDITJI,

I did not require such a detailed explanation about the gathering
of Bhangis. You may arrange Rambhau’s programme if he lets you
do so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 217. Courtesy : Lakshmibehn Khare

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

281

394. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BARDOLI,

June 5, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter. You did right in having paid a visit to
Rajkot.
If you go on pleading with the elders through letters, they will
probably listen to your advice regarding khadi.
Some days ago, I had a letter from Mukundrai, which I am
sending on to you. It will help you to a better understanding of the
facts about Mahalakshmi. I did not know that she was related to
Gaurishankar. I should be happy if you can take her into the
Ashram. Chhaganlal is also one of her relatives.
If the other lady is what she seems to you, you can admit her.
You should try to know her husband. If she had such intense aversion
against worldly happiness, why did she marry? How old is she? What
has been her education? To which community does she belong?
What are her husband and father-in-law? What is her father? In
principle, we should admit such women.
If Ratubhai has gone to Bombay, we shall meet. I had indeed
realized, when I went to Rangoon, that the Doctor was unhappy about
Lilavati. But I will have a talk with Ratubhai when he meets me in
Bombay.
The suggestion that Madanmohan should stay with Jamnalalji
seems all right to me. Haribhau was here and I had a talk with him
too. If he stays with Jamnalalji, there will be no need to pay him
anything.
We should let Amtulbehn stay in the Ashram if she is ready to
live in it till the end of her life. She may be permitted to receive
money from outside. If no one sends her any money, we should bear
the expenditure on her account. I think she will recover if she does
very little physical work. You must have got the bill of exchange in
Ba’s name which was received here.
If an inmate of the Ashram lives elsewhere, his expenses should
be borne by the people there. If, however, Chhaganlal desires another
arrangement in regard to any person, do as he suggests. I have written
to Chhaganlal also to this effect.
I have advised Dwarkanath that he should live outside Gujarat
till my suspicion against him regarding arms is removed. He will
282

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

leave in a few days. We have get to decide what to do about his bill.
Chhaganlal thinks that he is innocent. I have written to him and told
him that, if he feels inclined to pay the bill, he may do so. If,
therefore, he writes to you requesting you to pay the bill, please do.
I shall leave this place on Monday and return on the 12th,
leaving Bombay on the 11th.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./I

395. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
June 5, 1931
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

Read the enclosed letter 1 . I have an idea that I have already
written to you in this matter. Whatever the case, I think this institution
deserves to be helped if something can be given from the Raghumal
Trust.
I have today telegraphed that if a settlement by arbitration in the
Bengal dispute is possible, they should try for it. The matter should
not come up before the Working Committee.
I shall be in Bombay from 9th to 11th.
MOHANDAS
From Hindi : C.W. 7888. Courtesy : G.D. Birla

1

From Ramanand Sannyasi, of the institution for the welfare of backward
classes in Delhi, about the meeting of the Raghumal Trust fixed for June 16 or 17.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

283

396. TELEGRAM TO J. M. SEN GUPTA
S WARAJ A SHRAM,
BARDOLI,

June 6, 1931
S EN GUPTA
ELGIN R OAD
C ALCUTTA
YOUR
WIRE.
YOU
PUT
YOURSELF
WRONG
BY
RESIGNING
OR
ABSTAINING.
HAVE
NEITHER
APPROVED
NOR
DISAPPROVED
YOUR
CONDUCT
IF
ONLY
BECAUSE
I
DO
NOT
KNOW
FACTS.
DO
NOT
EVEN
NOW
KNOW
WHAT
SEPARATE
ELECTIONS
MEAN.
HAVE
NO
DESIRE
HUSH
FRAUD
WHEREVER
PROVED.
ONLY
SUGGESTED
DECIDING
ALL
ISSUES
THERE
BY
LOCAL
ARBITRATION
INSTEAD
WORKING
COMMITTEE
HAVING
TO
DECIDE
AND
THIS
FOR
SAKE
BENGAL’S
NAME
AND
EXPEDITION.
SARDAR
AGREES.

GANDHI
From a photostat : S.N. 17243

397. LETTER TO R. M. MAXWELL
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 6, 1931
DEAR MR. MAXWELL,

Reverting to your letter of the 13th May, 1 at practically the
same time that I received your letter in Simla I received the news that
Syt. Rajawade was discharged although the letter under reply left me
no such hope. I was thankful to receive the telegraphic news which
was conveyed to me by Mr. Emerson. I have now received the papers
about Syt. H. D. Rajah and on a persual of the papers I can find no
incitement to violence. The speeches themselves are not before me
because I am told that they are not to be found in the record of the
case, but the evidence of the Crown witnesses and the Judge’s
summing up bring out the most relevant parts of the speeches, which
though highly discourteous and equally seditious, contain no
incitement to violence. On the contrary, the judge himself refers to
the profession of non-violence by the accused but dismisses it as lip
1

284

Vide “Letter from R. M. Maxwell”, 13-5-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

service. In the absence of any direct incitement to violence I cannot
see how it is possible for a judge to infer mere lip service when there is
a direct assertion of non-violence. But I have not relied upon my own
opinion. I put the thing before three legal friends, one of whom has
kindly reduced his opinion to writing, copy of which I enclose
herewith. In the circumstances I request His Excellency to reconsider
his decision and beg to point out that under Cl. 13 of the Settlement
there is no option but to discharge the civil disobedience prisoners
who might not be guilty of offences involving violence other than
technical violence or incitement to such violence. I venture to suggest
that where there is no incitement on the fact of the evidence it is not
open to the Government to deduce such incitement.
Then there is the case of Ratanji Dayaram of Bardoli Taluka. I
have now studied the judgment and evidence in this case. There is
certainly no violence as contemplated in Cl. 13 of the Settlement. It is
also moreover incorrect to say that the accused burnt his tenant’s
crop. The accused burnt his own crop which he owned jointly with
the complainant Devalia Jagla. If the complainant suffered any
damage it was open to him, as it is even now, to bring a civil suit
against the accused. But where, on the evidence itself and the finding
of the judge admitted by the Government, the crop was burnt in order
to prevent the Government officials from collecting revenue from
selling the crop, there was no question of intending to damage the
partner. And may I point out the inconsistency of the Government in
releasing the co-accused, Ranchhod, who had no ownership in the
crop and keeping Ratanji Dayaram who was admittedly joint owner of
the crop. I must, therefore, for the same reason as in the case of Syt.
H. D. Rajah, ask for Ratanji Dayaram’s discharge in terms of the
Settlement.
With reference to your second letter of 30th May last, I can
only say that the position taken up by His Excellency causes me
deep pain. The reasoning given for refusing to return the press
seems to me to be extraordinary. It is giving back and not taking
back. Cl. 16 throws the burden on the Government of returning
and not on the party dispossessed of going to take back. The reasoning given in the third paragraph of your letter causes still
greater pain. I was unprepared for the interpretation that is sought to
be put upon the Ordinance. I cannot question the inter-pretation but I
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

285

do question the propriety of putting an irritating interpretation in
connection with a document of peace. What the Government seek to
do is to justify wanton destruction of property by Government
officials. But in order to bring within the smallest compass possible
points of dispute between the Government and myself as representing
the Congress, I have advised the owners of the motor-car and bicycle
to remove them, if they chose to do so. So far as the press is
concerned I am sorry to say that I must ask for due fulfilment of the
terms of the Settlement. If the Government seriously question my
interpretation I am quite willing to submit the question for decision to
the Chief Justice of the High Court of Bombay or any other impartial
authority.
Yours sincerely,

Encl. 1
R. M. M AXWELL, E SQ.
P RIVATE S ECRETARY TO H. E. THE GOVERNOR OF BOMBAY
MAHABALESHWAR
A.I.C.C. File No. 4, 1931 Part I Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

398. LETTER TO DUNICHAND1
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 6, 1931
DEAR LALA DUNICHAND,

I thank you for your letter. I shall await your analysis of all the
cases.
Why was the meeting dispersed by the Magistrate? What was the
ostensible cause and how was it dispersed?
Please let me know as soon as the Government publish their
opinion about the Ludhiana outrage.
Yours sincerely,

LALA DUNICHAND
ADVOCATE
AMBALA
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931.
Library
1

286

Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and

Vide also “Letter to H. W. Emerson”, 19-5-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

399. LETTER TO K. V. VEL
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 6, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter of the 30th April last. My message is
:
Let Japan study the non-violent movement of India and help
her.
Yours sincerely,

K. V. VEL, ESQ.
P OST BOX 9
AKASAKA, T OKYO (JAPAN)
From a photostat : S.N. 17238

400. LETTER TO JUGAL KISHORE
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 6, 1931
MY DEAR JUGAL KISHORE,

I have your letter. Happily, Acharya Kripalani is in Bardoli at
the present moment. I have consulted consulted him and if you personally approve of the suggestion, he is willing to be nominated by
me in terms of the resolutions. The other name also he has suggested
and I have accepted. It is Acharya Narendra Deva of Kashi Vidyapith.
Both these are seasoned soldiers and have considerable experience in
those matters. In view of these two names it is unnecessary for me just
now to suggest names of experts at least at the present moment.
In the resolution, I suggest for better reading the following
alterations : In the place of “on self-supporting basis” say “in order
to make the institution self-supporting” and after the words “ t o
collect”, add “and disburse”.
Yours sincerely,

P ROF. J UGAL KISHORE
P REM MAHAVIDYALAYA
BRINDABAN
From a photostat : S.N. 17239

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

287

401. LETTER TO URMILA DEVI
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 6, 1931
DEAR SISTER,

I had your telegram and I have now your letter.Things in
Bengal are certainly most deplorable but I do not know what can be
done from here. I thought that arbitration was the only thing that can
relieve the tension. What else could be done either by the Working
Committee or me personally? Subhasbabu came here and gave Sardar
Vallabhbhai a long indictment against Syt. Sen Gupta. Vallabhbhai
has filed it hoping to be able to investigate the complaints when both
the parties were present. Can you suggest any other way out of the
difficulty?
S M. U RMILA DEVI
40/1 RUP C HAND MUKHERJEE’S LANE
BHOWANIPUR, C ALCUTTA
From a photostat : S.N. 17240

402. LETTER TO NILKANTA DAS
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 6, 1931
DEAR NILKANTA BABU,

I have your letter. I can well understand the position but in
cases like the one you mentioned very little can be done just now. I
can only say that if in spite of these provocations, peaceful picketing
cannot be continued it should be suspended for a while. But propaganda of an intensive type should be taken by going to the people in
their own homes.
C H. N ILKANTA DAS
BHUBANESHWAR
From a microfilm : S.N. 17241

288

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

403. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 6, 1931
DEAR SATIS BABU,

I have your letter and cutting from the Amrita Bazar Patrika.
What can be done beyond suggesting arbitration in the place of the
cumbersome procedure that will have to be adopted by the Working
Committee if the matter has to be decided by it. Subhasbabu was here
and gave Sardar Vallabhbhai a long list of complaints against Sen
Gupta. Vallabhbhai could do nothing but said that when the matter
came formally before the Working Committee, he will deal with the
complaint. But when he and I began to receive wires from Bengal, I
suggested local arbitration. Is there any other way besides such
arbitration or decision by the Working Committee when the matter
formally comes before it?
If you are well enough, you should come to Bombay and
discuss the position at the All-India Spinners’ Association Comittee
meeting. I cannot advise Dr. Roy to come to Ahmedabad especially
when several mill-owners are outside Ahmedabad.
If you have not seen the file of the Samachar of 1828 I think
you ought to see it and verify the spinner’s letter1 yourself.
From a photostat : S.N. 17242

404 LETTER TO NANABHAI I. MASHRUWALA
BARDOLI,

June 6, 1931
BHAI NANABHAI,

I have your letter. How can I ever come there? Ba is no longer
fit to travel and visit any place. She gets inflammation of the mouth
repeatedly. But it may be possible to send Swami and Devdas.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 6681. Also C.W. 4326. Courtesy :
Kanubhai Mashruwala

1

Vide “In 1828”, 21-5-1931; also “Letter to Satis Chandra Das Gupta”, 2-6-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

289

405. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
NAINTAL, U. P.

June 6, 1931
CHI. RAMDAS,

I am not able to write to you at all. Do not give whole milk to
Sumitra. Add a measure of water to it. After adding water warm it and
instead of sugar add honey to it. Her stomach should be very lightly
massaged with oil every day. Mothers in these parts vigorously
exercise their children. If Nimu or you do not know it, you should
learn it. It is very useful. Laying the child flat on the back, raise and
bend the legs so that the toes touch the forehead. The knees should
not bend. Do you understand what I mean? The baby should be held
tightly by the feet upside down for a minute or a half. The exercise
should be given while putting the child to sleep or in the morning, on
an empty stomach.
Blessings from
BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Motana Man, p. 60

406. WORKER-VILLAGE RATIO
How many workers would be needed to cover seven lakh
villages? This question requires serious consideration. The British
flag flies in each and every village, that is to say, all of them use the
Government’s currency, and pay revenue in that currency. But the
Congress has not been able to cover all the villages. Even its name has
not reached every village, let alone its message. The Congress can
reach every village through khadi, but we do not have enough interest
in khadi for that purpose.
The reader will be surprised to know that, though the Government’s authority is recognized in every village, every one of them
does not have a Patel, a talati or a constable. All that it has been able
to do is to put a few villages under each talati and Patel. A talati
should be an educated person, for he is supposed to keep accounts.
He has, therefore, more villages under him than a Patel. If the
Government does not have a talati and a Patel for every village, how
can the Congress have a worker for every one of them. I know that
the ratio of workers and villages should be exactly the opposite of that
290

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of talatis and Patels and villages. The Congress should have the
capacity which the Government does not possess. But we must admit
with shame that it is not so. The Government cannot afford to spend
enough money to keep a talati and a Patel in each village. The
Congress does not need to spend money. It can get volunteers but its
name has not reached every corner so that it can have a volunteer in
each village.
In these circumstances, it would be extravagance on the part of
the Congress to have more than one worker per village. We should
group the villages into blocks, each with a radius of ten miles. As our
resources and the number of volunteers increase, we can increase the
number of blocks but at present one volunteer should be able to cover
ten miles from a central point. So the diameter of his working area
would be twenty miles. But the volunteer will never have to walk
twenty miles at a time. There is no rule that he must always sleep in
the central village. Not only may he spend a night in any village
within the limit of ten miles, but it would be actually his duty to spend
a night in each of them by turn. There would be at least ten villages
in such a block with a radius of ten miles. So, according to me, there
would be one worker for every ten villages. Hence we require seventy
thousand men and women volunteers to cover all the villages in the
country. I said women volunteers. But really speaking we should
count their numbers on a different basis. If, in early stages, two of
them stay together then we would require more than seventy thousand
volunteers, or the volunteers would have to be posted in different
manner according to the number of women volunteers included in the
total. It should be obvious that to post more than one worker per
village would be a crime.
Let us now think each worker can do. He can easily :
1. collect children and teach them how to spin on the takli,
card cotton, make taklis, and also teach them the three R’s; for this he
can draw up a modest scheme and plan a curriculum;
2. look after the cleanlines of the villages and himself work to
keep them clean;
3. give medicine to sick persons;
4. if there are quarrels among different groups and parties in
a village, bring them together;
5. relieve the hardships of the untouchables, provide facilities
for drinking water for them if they do not have any;
6. try to make the village self-reliant in regard to khadi;
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

291

7. prepare a census of each village in his block, count the
number of cattle in each under the heads of cows, she-buffaloes,
bullocks, he-buffaloes and male and female calves, calculate average
yield of buffalo’s milk and cow’s milk, prepare a census of the
Antyajas and write a general description of their conditions, find out
the area of each village, its crops, the amount of land revenue paid by
it, its crafts and industries, the number of wells in it and note whether
any fruits and babul trees grow in the villages or in the fields within its
limits. Though I have mentioned this activity last, the volunteers
should take it up first. This work does not require much time. But
the volunteer who has gathered all this informationn would find his
work much easier. He should record all this information in a small
exercise book.
No volunteer should say that he cannot do all this work
unaided in ten villages. Just as a school works only for a few hours
daily, similarly we should not mind if it works only for one day in the
week. It will not matter if the school in each village works on every
tenth day. I have stated a extreme possibility. I actual practice, a
newly-posted volunteer will immediately collect the statistics about
the villages in his block and then train men and women volunteers in
every village and assign them work according to their capacity. In
this way he will become a supervisor-worker. On the days on which
he is not present in a particular village, the local volunteers will carry
on the work.
One quality is essential in such a worker and that is purity of
character. If he is a slave of his eleven senses he will be able to do no
work. These eleven senses are the five of perception, the five of action
and the mind. If the mind is pure, then the ten senses automtically
remain pure. If the mind is impure, then everything else will be
impure. The senses of action are the arms, the legs, the mouth, and
two private organs. The senses of knowledge are the skin, the sense of
touch, the palate, the ear for hearing, the nose for smelling and the
eyes for sight. Anyone who cannot control these should humbly
refuse to become a volunteer. If he has become one and then later on
finds that he is unable to control his senses, he should humbly resign.
This is the right way if we want work to be done.
Some might say that this programme cannot be completed in a
hundred years and we want swaraj just now. This objection has no
force. We shall not have an abundance of workers when we get swaraj.
Those who are workers now will run the country under swaraj. It is
292

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

true that those who run the administration at present will be there
when its control is handed over to the people. If, however, the
Congress does not have the type of volunteers that I have suggested,
then we shall lose control of the administration or it will become
corrupt and there will be anarchy in the country. There is no reason
to suppose that those who are hated now will become godlike
overnight as soon as the control of the administration changes hands.
Hence, as we sow now, so shall we reap. If we get sincere workers, the
programme that I have chalked out can begin today. “Let us first
have seventy thousand volunteers and map out the country into blocks
of ten miles each and then we shall see what work to take up.” This is
not the right way to start work. If we approach the task thus, we shall
succeed in doing nothing.
The right method is this : Gujarat should start immediately. If
work cannot be started in the whole of Gujarat, it should be started in
one or two districts, or even talukas, and if even that is not possible,
then the few workers in the different parts in Gujarat should begin as I
have suggested and leave whatever is not essential or cannot be done
well. They should start whatever they can do. If there are more
workers than one at one place, they should disperse themselves. If
they decide to stay together where they are, they should do so after
considering whether that is necessary. They should not deceive
themselves or the people through mental or physical lethargy.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 7-6-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

293

407. NOTES
HINDUS’ SHAME

In Dakor on 22nd May, 1931, there was a meeting of Bhangis
of which Thakkar Bapa has sent me a report. I give below its
substance :
About 1,500 Bhangis from 150 villages had gathered.
They had crected a mandap 1 of canvas with the ground also
covered with canvas in which they could hold their meetings and
sleep at night. The meetings were held in this mandap during
the day and at night they slept in it. But no one would give them
utensils for cooking and they could not get drinking water. The
water of the Gomati pond is so dirty that there are municipal
signboards at numerous spots warning people not to use it for
drinking. But Bhangis can drink it! How could they drink such
dirty water at a gathering like this? One Muslim gentleman took
pity on them. He gave them utensils, helped them in cooking
and gave them water too.
No Hindu of Dakor, which is a centre of pilgrimage, felt
ashamed at this or took pity on the Bangis. The guests had
come from distant places, but could get no water, no utensils and
no food though there was an abundance of everything in the
town. the women volunteers of Dakor could have cooked for
them. It was the duty of the Mahajan2 in Dakor to supply water
to these people. They failed in this duty and dimmed the lestre
of Hinduism.
“But this sort of thing happens everywhere and no one
cares for Bhangis. Was it the duty of Hindus of Dakor specially on this occasion to do all that?” Yes, it was. The fact
that one’s for efathers have been committing a particular sin gives
one no right to go on committing it. As the days pass, the awakening among the Antyajas increases, this e vil in Hinduism is being
recognized and more and more caste Hindus feel ashamed of
the practice. The person who drafted the report is a Hindu and the
person who sent it is also a Hindu. All of us want to implement the
resolution on rights passed by the Congress. Whatever may have
1

Covered enclosure
Traditional representative body looking after the affairs of a community or a
professional or business group
2

294

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

happened before now, even caste Hindus will not tolerate now the kind
of inustice that was shown in Dakor. There will be no distinction
between Antyajas and others under swaraj. Let us, therefore, wake up.
THINK C AREFULLY OVER THIS

There is a village named Bharthari in Thasara taluka. There a
person named Dhanjibhai, an Antyaja, is trying hard to reform other
Antyajas. From the report that I have received about his work I see
that he silently bears the hardship which he has to suffer because of
his activities. One of the reform which he is trying to persuade the
Antyajas to adopt is to give up eating carrion and to this end to give
up the work of disposal of dead cattle. To persuade them to stop
eating carrion is of course good, but to persuade them to give up the
occupation of disposing of dead cattle seems to me a very harmful
move. I think myself the occupation is sacred, and certainly most
useful. It is sacred because it helps in preserving sanitation. If dead
animals were left unattended, the air whould be polluted,diseases
would spread and the country’s wealth would be wasted. Cattle serve
the people after they die as much a they do while alive. We use their
skin, bones, flesh and guts for many purposes. If we use living cattle
properly and use the hide, etc., of dead cattle scientifically, their value
would increase so much that it would not be profitable to slaughter
them.
I would, therefore, suggest to reformers that they should not
persuade Bhangis and Chamars to leave their occupation but they
should, on the contrary, give them proper knowledge about their
work. This requires training. It is only in our country that this
occupation is considered low. In the West we find even millionaires
engaged in it. If instead of becoming clerks, after graduation, young
men learn the Chamar’s work, learn how to skin dead cattle and how
to make use of the other parts, then the present drain of crores of
rupees to foreign countries because of our ignorance in this matter
would stop and Chamars would no longer look upon their occupation
as low. We shall be able to eradicate untouchability not when the
Chamars give up their work but only when the Hindus realize their sin
and when the Antyajas rid themselves of some evils which have
entered their lives.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 7-6-1931
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

295

408. POOR MAN’S HUNDI
Vithaldashbai complains from his sick-bed that khadi stocks are
accumulating. The workers of Gujarat write to inform me that because
of this they are forced to give less work to spinners. This complaint
regarding khadi is a matter of shame for us. Those who wear khadi
know that by doing so they help women who are among the poorest
in the country. If all of us understand this fact, the demand for khadi
will never go down. As we always get the cash value of a currency
note printed on, it, so we should always be able to get money for
khadi at the price fixed by us. Khadi is a sort of hundi drawn by the
poor. There should be men and women in cities who whould always
accept such hundis. And so long as this hundi is available, no one
should touch any other hundi.
If I can have my way and if people co-operate, khadi will always
be sold at a fixed price. The price of cotton may vary, but if the
women who spin and the weavers are paid at uniform rates in their
respective provinces and the rates of payment for the other proceses
are also uniform, there should be no difficulty in having a fixed price
for every variety of khadi. Since we do not possess the requisite
honesty, efficiency of organization and sympathy for the poor, the
prices of khadi hav been changing. However, anyone who takes the
slightest interest in khadi knows that in every province the prices have
declained from what they were ten years ago. I have already pointed
out in these columns1 that, of the khadi produced in the Meerut
Ashram, where it is manufactured in large quantities, those varieties
which previously cost one rupee now generally cost less than six
annas. This does not mean that the women spinners are paid less. It
only means that the workers have acquired greater skill in all the
processes of khadi manufacture.The quality of spinning has improved
and, in consequence, the weavers’ work has become easier. This has
made it possible to reduce the rate of pay-ment to weavers without
reducing their total earnings. It has been possi-ble to bring about this
happy result of reduction in prices because a philanthropic body is
organizing khadi work. Thanks to this fact, the quality of khadi has
progressively improved and the prices have come down.There is
1

296

Vide “Notes” sub-title Gandhi Ashram, Meerut, 4-6-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

considerable scope for still further improvement in quality and
reduction in prices and this will happen as more and more people
patronize khadi. It is evident that, as the demand for khadi increases,
a larger number of people and more skilled people will take interest in
it and the quality will improve and the prices decrease. The
shareholders in the poor man’s company are not limited to a small
number, but are the thirty crores in the country. Then why should
there be any difficulty in selling khadi? But the difficulty is a fact
and it is, therefore, fruitless to ask that question. It would be wiser to
dicover ways of selling it. The following means suggest themselves :
1. To go round hawking khadi. At all places women should
do this only on fixed days, so that they will not have to go round
every day. It would be enough if they give some hours on some days
in the week. As in the West the wives of millionaires visit hospitals,
etc., on certain days in the week, so the women here should go round
hawking khadi.
2. Leaflets giving a list of the varities of khadi and their prices
should be distributed to every household.
3. Talks about khadi should be arranged in all residential
streets.
I have only given a few suggesions for guidance. But those who
love khadi and have resourceful brains will be able to think out many
other ways of selling the accumulated stocks of khadi.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 7-6-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

297

409. USE ANOTHER NAME
An Antyaja friend writes :1
Such a feeling is natural in this age of awakening. A person
does not like the name which is applied to him in contempt, though its
origin may have been quite innocent. Formerly the name Antyaja was
not felt as expressing contempt. The names Dhed and Bhangi were
disliked. I think the term ‘Dalit’ was first used by the late Swami
Shraddhanand. Now it seems that name also is not liked. This real
explanation is that as long as the poison of untouchability exists in
our society, any name that may be given will probably come to be
disliked after some time. Hence the right thing to do is to get rid of
that poison and for this we need the co-operation of the Antyajas men
and women. It is of course the duty of the Hindus to get rid of this
poison unconditionally. Atonement for one’s sin need not depend on
any condition being fulfilled. But however sincere the efforts of
Hindus to atone for their sin, the evils which have crept into the lives
of the untouchables because of the sin of Hindus can be eradicated
only by their own efforts. They will require the help of caste Hindus
in their efforts. They are getting it slowly and its tempo is likely to
increase. But even after taking all this into account, ultimately the
Antyajas will have to rely on their own efforts. Though it is thus
necessary to attack the root cause, if a better word than Antyaja or
Dalit occurs to anyone he may send it to me.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 7-6-1931

410. A SUPERSTITION
I give below the substance of what one cultured and very pious
mother writes : “After my son’s death I have left off milk and ghee.
I live on rice, dal, roti, and buttermilk. I have lost interest in life but I
pass my time by devoting myself to service in one way or another. I
read Ramayana and other books, but deep inside the memory of my
dear son continues to pain me.”
1
The letter is not translated here. The correspondent had expressed his sense
of humiliation at the word ‘Antyaja’ and requested Gandhiji to coin some new word to
denote his community. For the choice of the word ‘Harijan’, vide “Notes”, 2-8-1931,
sub-title, “Harijan”.

298

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

This mother’s health was already weak and now it has become
weaker. It is not certain even whether she will survive or not. As I
have summarized the mother’s letter, I also give the substance of my
reply to her.1
To mourn the death of either son or husband is meaningless and
shows our ignorance. This should not be dismissed as merely wise
talk; it is a truth to be pondered over till it sinks into our heart and to
be acted upon. Since death is certain for all, the only question is
whether it comes today or tomorrow. Why, then, should we grieve
over anyone’s death? It is only the body which dies. That is its
nature and therefore there is no cause for wonder when it dies. It is
certain that the soul which dwells in the body never dies, it is
immortal. When we know this as certain truth, why should we grieve
over death?
Even if we assume that we are bound to be pained by death,
is fasting or restriction of food a remedy for our grief? Whom
does it help? The one who is dead? And if so, does it help the body
which has perished, or the immortal soul? The body that used to eat is
now ashes or is being eaten up by worms. The soul neither eats nor
drinks. Why then should the mother or the wife restrict her food?
In other words, the mother or wife restricting her food has no
effect on the body or the soul of the dead person. If we desire the
welfare of the departed soul or wish to keep his memory alive for ever,
we shall not be able to fulfil our wish by fasting but shall fulfil both
aims by retaining his virtues in ourselves. We can also contribute to
perpetuating his memory by making donations to worthy causes.
Does fasting or control over food then serve no purpose? In
this case at any rate they serve none. They can be undertaken within
certain limits, either for the purpose of self-purification or for curing
a disease. We shall not discuss the second possibility. Control of the
palate, then, aims at self-purification. Restriction of food or fasting,
therefore, has this limit. Fasting is not the right way of atoning for a
lie. The right way of doing so is to take a vow always to speak the
truth in future, to renounce whatever serves as a temptation to us to tell
a lie. If, however, a person cannot control his palate, the remedy is
fasting or restriction of diet. Anyone who has overcome all cravings
of the palate eats only for keeping his body alive. His diet is restricted
to a few items and the quantity also is measured. Such men and
1

Vide “Letter to Hemprabha Das Gupta”, 2-6-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

299

women take food as medicine. If they practise further self-denial,
they commit a sin because, if they do not eat, their bodies would
become weak. The body is an instrument of service. Anyone who
weakens that instrument is a thief. Such persons number hardly a few
among crores. I have used this illustration only to explain my
meaning.
We ordinary human beings daily indulge our palate. It is,
therefore, necessary that we should occasionally fast and restrict our
diet. But this should be done only to kill the cravings of the palate.
To do it because of someone’s death or for some similar reason is a
form of self-deception and may even be sinful.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 7-6-1931

411. A LETTER
BARDOLI,

June 7, 1931
Sardar Garda met me at Swaraj Ashram, Bardoli, on April 25th
in the company of Sir Cowasji Jehangir, Syt. K. F. Nariman, Sjt.
Vimadalal, Rao Bahadur Bhim Bhai and another Parsi friend. He was
brought by Sir Cowasji Jehagir and other friends in connection with
the forfeited land belonging to Bardoli peasants which he had
purchased during the Civil Disobedience Movement. He complained
about the treatment he had received at the hands of the people. I told
him that whatever complaints he might make I would undertake to
invetigate and give him satisfaction. All the friends persuaded him to
return the said land. He insisted not only on the price he had paid for
the land being returned to him, namely, Rs. 6000 in addition which he
said he had spent on the land. Sir Cowasji assured him that sum also
would be forthcoming. He then said that he would most probably
decide to restore the land for the purchase price plus the said sum of
Rs. 6000, but that he would have to consult his people and the give a
final reply which he would do inside of two days. In the course of the
conversation Sardar Garda said that the land he had bought was fully
worth four lakhs of rupees and that he would not have bought it but
for the pressure that was brought to bear upon him on the part of the
authorities. This, of course, he said in confidence. I asked him then
whether I could announce to the people that most probably he would
300

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

agree to restore the land, and he said “certainly”. Two days after,
Sardar Vallabhbhai received a letter from Rao Bahadur Bhim Bhai
saying that Sardar Garda had passed a note to him to the effect that he
had decided to restore the land for the above sum. The enclosed is a
copy of the letter passed by Sardar Garda to Rao Bahadur Bhim Bhai.
The letter was also published in the papers and the agreement was
duly announced to the people concerned. On May 7th I received a
letter from Sardar Garda as per copy to which I sent a reply hereto
attached. I also attach the further correspondence since passed
between Sardar Garda and myself.
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-C, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

412. LETTER TO K. B. BHADRAPUR
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 7, 1931
DEAR MR. BHADRAPUR,

I write this letter in connection with the present Mukhi1 of Ras. I
discussed the question of his removal and the appointment of the old
Mukhi with Mr. Perry more than once and I had hoped that by this
time at least the Ras Mukhi would have been removed. The this time
at least the Ras Mukhi would been removed. The matter is now
becoming urgent as a deputation on behalf of the non-Dharala
inhabitants of Ras waited on me yesterday and complained that life
was becoming unbearable for them there. I enclose herewith particulars of destruction that is alleged to have gone on in Ras during the
past fortnights. They mentioned also that personal assaults were added
to the injury to property. It is not suggested that the Mukhi himself
has personally done these things but it is suggested that they have
been done with his connivance, if not instigation. It will be readily
admitted that if the statements made in the memorandum hereto
attached are at all true, it won’t be possible for the non-Dharala
population to proceed with the cultivation of their fields as soon as
rains commence. Suggestion has already been made that the
Mukhiship should be divided into three parts, each part being held by
a different person. I need hardly say this will not do. Either the
present Mukhi is an undesirable person or he is not. If he is an
1

Village headman

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

301

undesirable person, in accordance with the terms of the Settlement and
the admission made by the Commissioner, undesirable Mukhis should
be removed. And in view of the fact that there is a conviction for theft
against the present Mukhi of Ras, his removal is surely overdue. This
I ask irrespective of and without prejudice to my contention that
appointments of Mukhis for definite terms are not permanent
according to the meaning of the Settlement. I shall therefore be
obliged if you will kindly let me know as early as possible whether it
is the intention of the Government to remove this Mukhi and protect
the life and property of the inhabitants of Ras.
Yours sincerely,

K. B. B HADRAPUR, E SQ.
C OLLECTOR OF KAIRA DT.
KAIRA
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-C, 1931.
Library

Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and

413. LETTER TO THOMAS B. LEE
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 7, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. As a matter of fact I have got ample
Christian Science literature with me. You will not mind my saying that
somehow or other the message of Christian Science does not appeal to
me. I met so many Christian scientists in South Africa. Their
conversations also failed to convince me. And why do you say that
the discovery that there is really no life or sensation in the body is the
most important discovery of any kind that has ever been made? As a
matter of fact the statement is not a complete proposition. By the
body is evidently meant body without life is without sensation and
every Hindu child is taught that from childhood. But I must not enter
into a discussion. I felt that your long letter was entitled to a reasoned
reply from me.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
THOMAS B. L EE, E SQ.
S TERLING R ADIO C O.
KANSAS C ITY, MO.
From a photostat : S.N. 17248

302

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

414. LETTER TO MADHAV R. JOSHI
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 7, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. A man of God makes no distinction between
individual and individual. He will bestow his affection impartially
upon all, whether wife or sister or mother, brother or stranger, friend
of foe and he will put himself last. After serving everybody he will
serve himself. And this can only be done by having faith in God and
following the light that He may give one in answer to prayer.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. M ADHAV R AMKRISHNA JOSHI
C/ O DISTRICT C ONGRESS C OMMITTEE’S OFFICE
AGRA R OAD, D HULIA (W. K HANDESH)
From a photostat : S.N. 17249

415. LETTER TO THAPPAN NAIR
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 7, 1931
MY DEAR THAPPAN,

I have your letter. You should diligently follow the columns of
Young India. They might help you. So far as your immediate
question is concerned, if you feel that there is no work for you there
you are at liberty to return to the Ashram. Many have done so.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. T HAPPAN NAIR
C ONGRESS C AMP
P ALGHAT (MALABAR)
From a microfilm : S.N. 17250

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

303

416. LETTER TO H. V. HODSON
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 7, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. If I do come to London I hope we
shall meet and if I do not succeed in coming, you will please believe
me when I tell you that the failure will be due not to any want of will
or effort on my part but to circumstances wholly beyond my control.
Yours sincerely,

H. V. HODSON, E SQ.
10 W OOD LANE
HIGHGATE, L ONDON, N. 6
From a photostat : S.N. 17251

417. LETTER TO M. I. DAVID
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 7, 1931
DEAR MR. DAVID,

I thank you for your letter of 9th May. I am most closely
watching your activity not in terms of the newspapers but its reaction
upon the commual spirit. Solution of the communal question may be
beyond the powers of Conciliation Committees, but if they tend to
promote peace it would be a very big step forward. You are also
interesting me in another activity of yours, bee-keeping and honeymaking. I would love to see the industry of bee-keeping becoming
universal in India. The only question is whether it is possible to make
bee-keeping profitable. I tried to make some experiments but I have
failed hitherto. You will deserve the gratitude of people if you can
devise method whereby poor people can take to this industry.
Yours sincerely,

M. I. DAVID, E SQ.
4 Q UEENS R OAD
F ORT, B OMBAY
From a photostat : S.N. 17252

304

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

418. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 7, 1931
After having kept me waiting for many long months you have at
last written to me. What a bad things that Menon has not yet got his
diploma. I had a letter from a mutual friend saying that you were
disheartened over this failure. This is unworthy of you as I have
known you. No failure, no adversity should dishearten you who have
a living faith in God and his goodness. We do not know that every
failure is a matter for sorrow nor do we know that every adversity is an
infliction. Do we not often find that prosperity and success mean the
undoing of people whereas failure and adversity chasten them?
I do not know that I am going to London. If I do, I will of
course love to go to Denmark and if I went there I should not like to
miss you. But it is no speculating on a highly problematical thing.
I do hear from Maria, now and again.
After dictating this I came upon another letter which mentionns
you more intimately. This letter is from Dr. Henning Dalsgaard. In
that letter he says you are cheerful but he asks me concrete
proposition. Have you any such in view? If you have, thing, you
know also you can rely upon my doing it.
MRS. E STHER MENON
M, QUEST HOUSE
S ELLY OAK
N. B IRMINGHAM (ENGLAND)
From photostat : S.N. 17254

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

305

419. LETTER TO DR. HENNING DALSGAARD
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 7, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have read with great deal of interest your note at the back of
the formal letter from the International People’s College. You will see
from my reply to Prof. Manniche that my going to London itself is
problematical and going to Denmark still more so.
I would like you to be more explicit about Menon. But now
that you have mentioned him I am writing to Esther about his
requirements.
Yours sincerely,

DR. H ENNING DALSGAARD
LECTURER IN P OLITICAL S CIENCE
ELSINORE, D ENMARK
From a photostat : S.N. 17253

420. LETTER TO RAMSEVAK SHUKLA
June 7, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. You may send the particulars of your
discovery1 with full explanation.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S.N. 17255

421. LETTER TO SHRI RAM SHARMA
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 7, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. The matters discussed in your letter, you
should really discuss with the Provincial Congress Committee officials in the first instance so that a uniform policy can be adopted. I
can only discuss general principles in the pages of Young India,
1

306

Of a new kind of spindle
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and take concrete cases of injustice to the Government. Beyond that,
you will admit, it is not possible for me to go.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. S HRI R AM S HARMA
GENERAL S ECRETARY, D ISTRICT C ONGRESS C OMMITTEE
R OHTAK (PUNJAB)
From a microfilm : S.N. 17256

422. LETTER TO N. P. RAGHAVAN
June 7, 1931
MY DEAR RAGHAVAN,

I was delighted to hear from you after so long. I hope Titus is
better. Thappan1 says you are all weary there and not wanted. If such
is the case you may return to the Ashram.
Yours

BAPU
S JT. N.P. R AGHAVAN
KHADI VASTRALAYA
P AYYANUR
N. M ALABAR
From a photostat: C. W. 10865. Courtesy: N. P. Raghavan

1

Thappan Nair

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

307

423. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
June 8, 1931
MY DEAR AMTUL,

Never mind your incorrect English. But you must soon write
Hindi. If you write a clear Urdu hand I can read it. You must
cultivate a brief style.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat : G.N. 240

424. LETTER TO PADMA
June 8, 1931
CHI. PADMA,

I have your letter. It is good news indeed to hear that your
health is improving steadily. Have you now given up the idea of
going to U.P.P.? Take plenty of rest and get well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 6120. Also C.W. 3472. Courtesy :
Prabhudas Gandhi

425. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
Silence Day, June 8, 1931
CHI. SHARDA,

Your handwriting may be said to be good this time. You can
still improve it. How can you not think of what to write? Can you not
write about what you did and what you said during the week?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C.W. 9903.
Chokhawala

308

Courtesy : Shardabehn G.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

426. LETTER TO KANTI PAREKH
Silence Day, June 8, 1931
CHI. KANTI,

Here is the reply to your letter. The word ‘love’ has two
meanings : one, ignorant attachment, and, two, non-violence. Love
between man and woman mostly takes the form of ignorant
attachment and, therefore, it is undesirable. It cannot become allembracing love. If a man marries many woman or a woman many
men, the world would be destroyed. Only that love which takes the
form of non-violence can become all-embracing, and anybody who
wishes to cultivate such love must renounce the other love, born of
ignorant attachment, which a man and a woman feel for each other.
The wheel of worldly life is kept moving, and will be kept moving, by
a love which is a mixture of the two kinds. It helps human beings to
satisfy their own needs and also to serve the race. What I have written
pertains to love in its purest form. If we are clear in our minds about
the ideal, it will be possible on its basis to formulate proper norms for
practical life. If we base the ideal on the prevailing practice, we would
lower both the ideal and the practice. If you do not follow anything
in this, ask me again. I am returning your letter herewith.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 6269

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

309

427. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[BARDOLI,

June 8, 1931 ]1
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got three of your letters together. I shall start this evening for
Bombay. Pandit Jawaharlal has come here today to see me. He will
return with me. Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan is still here. Devdas has
written a fine article about him for Young India 2 . Read it. What
happened to Liladhar? If we can help him in any way, we should. As
for Vithal, I will write to him.
Bhagwanji’s problem, we may take it, has been solved for the
present. He is not at peace with himself and remains much excited.
Yes, I have written to Chhaganlal and told him that those who do not
do proper work outside should return to the Ashram. Surendra will
explain to you my letter to him. You may even get a copy.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I will leave Bombay on the 11th and reach Borsad on the
evening of the 12th. If, therefore, you address the 11th post to Surat,
I shall get it there.
Chi. Indu was there, and is now returning. He will arrive there
on the 10th. Take care of him. He is Kanti Parekh’s brother. He is
of an affectionate nature, and also loves fun. He is a straightforward
boy. Exact hard work from him. In any case, see that he studies.
BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—9 : Shri Narandas Gandhine, Pt. I, p. 272

1
The year and month are inferred from the reference in the letter to Devdas
Gandhi’s article on Abdul Ghaffar Khan. Gandhiji left Bardoli on June 8 for Bombay.
2
Of June 11

310

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

428. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
ON WAY TO BOMBAY,

June 8, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

Credit to the khadi account the sum of Rs. 543-4-0 received
from Ankleshwar on 1-4-1930 and send the amount to Shri
Chhotubhai Gandhi at Ankleshwar to be spent on khadi work.
Request him to send an account of how the money is spent.
Chhotubhai’s address : Taluka Samiti.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./I

429. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
Silence Day, June 8, 1931
CHI. MANGALA,

You must always write as neatly as you have written this time. If
all of you improve your handwriting, mine will automatically
improve. And how nice it would be if my handwriting improved!
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 11095. Courtesy: Pushpa Naik

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

311

430. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
June 8, 1931
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I have your letter, as also the letter to Schuster1 . I shall go
through it. The situation is already delicate and it will grow more
delicate still. Some good result can come out of it if we work for the
larger good.
Sen Gupta has agreed to arbitration. He has given up the idea
of postponing the election. Anyway, I am reaching Bombay tomorrow
and trust that both of them2 will come.
BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi : C.W. 7889. Courtesy : G. D. Birla

431. SPEECH AT BOMBAY
June 10, 1931
Prabhat Pheris were resumed this morning. About fifty members assembled at
Choupatty at 5.30 a.m. today and led by Mr. K. F. Nariman, President, Bombay
Congress Committee, went first to Mani Bhavan, Gandhiji’s residence, to receive his
blessings.
Gandhiji addressed the processionists from a balcony. He said that they
should finish their daily rounds before sunrise, singing selected songs of prayer and
devotion to God and the Motherland. He said no objectionable songs, inconsistent
with the Congress creed, should be sung.

The Hindu, 10-6-1931

1
2

312

Sir George Schuster, then Finance Member of the Viceroy’s Council
J. M. Sen Gupta and Subhas Chandra Bose
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

432. NOTES
WHO C AN BE C ONGRESS OFFICE HOLDER?

A Sindhi correspondent asks :
1.

Whether a man dealing in foreign cigarettes and tobacco can be a
president of the Congress Committee?

2.

Whether persons dealing in foreign cloth can be vice-president and
treasurer of the Congress Committee?

3.

Whether a person connected with foreign-cloth dealers can be secretary of
the Congress Committee?

These are bad questions. If the correspondent had said whether
such and such a person should be, I could have given my opinion for
what it might be worth. But when he asks whether a particular type of
person can be officer it betrays ignorance of the democratic character
of the constitution of the Congress. Even a drunkard and a rake can
become president of Congress Committee or a secretary if his
constituents elect him to that office. But one may assume that so long
as the constituents are sober and pure, they will not elect a drunkard
or a rake. Similarly if they are believers in out-and-out swadeshi only,
they will not elect anyone who deals in foreign cloth or such foreign
goods as are now manufactured in India. And so far as things
injurious to the nation are concerned, as for instance intoxicating
drinks and drugs, Congressmen will make no distinction between
foreign and swadeshi goods. All injurious things must be regarded as
taboo whether they are foreign or home-made.
C OARSE MILL C LOTH AS KHADI

Complaints are being received from several quarters, Madras,
Bengal and Bombay Presidencies and elsewhere that coarse mill-cloth
is being sold as khadi and that though since the understanding with
the Congress, khadi labels are not used by mill-owners, in their
invoices and otherwise, coarse cloth is shown as khadi. If the
information is correct, it is clearly a breach of the agreement with the
Congress. Mills ought to be satisfied with the profits they are making
by reason of the Congress campaign, but if they will greedily and
unlawfully appropriate the name ‘khadi’ somehow or other and at
some stage or other for their wares, they will be following the example
of the miser who, in the attempt to get a cocoanut free of charge, lost
his life.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

313

S WARAJ BHAVAN HOSPITAL

Sjt. Mohanlal Nehru writes :1
This is apart from the collections in Nainital which will appear in
this column in due course.
Young India, 11-6-1931

433. MY FAITH
A Bangali correspondent who gives his name and address even
for publication if necessary has written a long letter which I condense
as follows :
Much has been said about Bhagat Singh and his comrades,
yet even now I find great difficulty in appreciating the wisdom
of passing the resolution at the Karachi Congress.
I am afraid it will not be possible for me to explain to you
properly the different peculiar and surreptitious ways in which
your remarks about Bhagat Singh and the Karachi Resolution
extolling him are being exploited here by some interested
politicians to serve their own purpose and under-mine your
influence.
1. They accuse you for the niggardly way in which the
resolution had been worded by you. These people are trying to
impress upon the minds of the young men that you really
had no sincere sympathy for those unfortunate men and that
you gave your support to the resolution and expressed your
admiration for Bhagat Singh and his comrades only being
prevailed upon by the Navajuvanwallas, whose strong agitation
you could not resist, and you wanted to placate Pandit Jawaharlal.
2. They question your integrity and sincerity and try to
belittle you (and your cause) by surreptitiously propagating an
idea in Bengal that while you gave your active support to the
resolution about Bhagat Singh at Karachi you severely criticized
the late Deshbandhu Das for his responsibility in carrying out
an exactly similar resolution at Faridpur Conference praising
1

The letter, containing a list of donors, is not reproduced here. For the
appeal, vide “The Allahabad Congress Hospital an Appeal”, 14-5-1931

314

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Gopinath Saha1 who lost his life on the gallows under exactly
similar circumstances; and in this they say you are not immune
from provincial bias. They are taking every opportunity to
undermine your influence in Bengal by appealing to the
sentiment of local patriotism. They say that many Bengal youths
sacrificed their lives even within this very year for the same
cause for which Bhagat Singh and his comrades died. Among
those who thus died in Bengal there were Benoy Bose and his
comrade, there were the Chittagong raiders—the twenty-one
lads, who died fighting bravely against the British troops on the
Jalallabad Hills whose deeds were much more courageous and
romantic than you would imagine, but how strange—you did
not find romance there : not a word of sympathy passed from
your lips! The insidious appeal made to their sentiment of local
patriotism easily estranges them from you and your path of
non-violence.
I have already expressed my doubts as to the propriety of my
having drafted and sponsored the Bhagat Singh resolution not
because it was wrong in principle but for the misinterpretation it has
lent itself to. But the reader must know that it was neither the fear of
the Navajuvans nor my love for Pandit Jawaharlal that prompted me to
initiate the resolution. Not that I should be ashamed of yielding to
Navajuvans or placating Jawaharlal. I should be foolish if I did not
yield to Navajuvans, if yielding advanced the interest of the country
and involved no sacrifice of principle. And I should go a very long
way to please Jawaharlal and retain his affection which I have the
privilege of posses-sing in abundance. But there was no prompting
required in this case. I had interested myself in the movement for the
commutation of the death sentence on Bhagat Singh and his comrades. I had put my whole being into the task. I had therefore to study
the life of the principal actor in the tragedy. I had to come in contact
with his devoted father and those who were attached to Bhagat Singh
not for his deed but for his character. I was thus drawn to the
resolution in the natural course. I am too sensitive not to be moved
by circumstances demanding sympathy.
Therefore had I found myself impelled to interest myself in any
of the Bengali youths and had fancied myself in possession of
1

Vide “Notes”, sub-title Rabbi May.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

315

influence which I could exercise in their behalf, I should have with
equal zest plunged myself into their case. I regard myself as incapable
of having any provincial bias. Bengal is as dear to me as the Punjab.
And I owe a special debt to Bengal for the inspiration it gave me in
my youth. It is true that Deshbandhu and I differed as to the
emphasis in the matter of Gopinath Saha resolution.
I do not know that my resolution1 on Gopinath Saha differed in
substance from the Karachi Resolution. But the reader should know
that whatever our differences, Deshbandhu and I always remained
friends. Indeed towards the end of his all too short life, we came
much nearer each other even in our ideals and methods of working
towards them.
I should therefore be sorry to discover that there was any secret
propaganda against me in Bengal. I have many precious co-workers
in Bengal. I want the number to grow. I know the value of the cooperation of the youth of Bengal. I need it for their sakes, for the
sake of the country they love so well, but sometimes, alas, blindly.
They must not by their unwarranted prejudice deny themselves the
service of a true friend. If I have any influence over the youth of the
country, it is a treasure I want to use for gaining the freedom of the
motherland. I am therefore glad that my correspondent has given me
the opportunity of stating my position. But whether I retain my hold
on the youth of Bengal or any other province or I do not, I must
proclaim my creed from the house-top. Freedom of India’s starving
millions is attainable only through Truth and Ahimsa.
Young India, 11-6-1931

1

316

Vide “The Acid Test”, 19-6-1924
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

434. A CORRECTION
My attention has been drawn to an unfortunate error that crept
into my advice to the kisans of U.P.1 in Young India 28th May last, p.
127, line 53. The line reads “as a general rule less than 8 annas or 4
annas as the case may be”. It should read “12 annas” instead of “4
annas”. I am sorry for the slip. I hope however no one was misled
by the slip. The preceding lines left no room for dubt.
Young India, 11-6-1931

435. VIRUS OF UNTOUCHABILITY
All lovers of Hinduism will read the following with painful
interest : 2
Sjt. Subanagounder deserves warm congratulations for his
bravery and pertinacity. The only advice I can give him is that he
should take all risks in protecting the untouchables of his village and
yet bear no ill-will to the villagers. He will find in the end that the
villagers will cease to worry him. They will at first mistake his
goodness for weakness and then perceive the strength lying behind his
goodness. For they will soon find their mistake when they see that
whilst he is gentle and forbearing towards them he is firm like a rock
in his action in protecting the untouchables. As time passes, the
villagers will forfeit all sympathy and Sjt. Subanagounder will gain the
active sympathy and help of the public. The only condition is that he
must be prepared to sacrifice everything, suffer even his fields to lie
fallow if the sinful boycott by the villagers succeeds in scaring labour
away from him. It is some consolation that he has four friends who
stand by him. But he should be prepared to carry out his resolution,
even if he loses these friends. For I am sure that he will lose only to
gain. God loses these friends. For I am sure that he will lose only to
gain. God sometimes does try to the uttermost those whom He wishes
to bless.
Young India, 11-6-1931

1

Vide “To the Kisans of the U. P.”, 23-5-1931
This letter is not reproduced here. It described how K. K. Subanagounder of
Coimbatore District was excommunicated and harassed for having allowed two
untouchabled to take water from his well.
2

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

317

436. MEANING OF GRINDING POVERTY
The Deshseva Mandal of Sind has published a little pamphlet on
the economic condition of the Bhils of Sind. It consists of two articles
written by Sjt. Jairamdas Doulatram after a careful study on the spot
of the condition of the Bhils living in Tharparker district of Sind. The
tract is a desert. “The profession of agriculture in the desert“, writes
Sjt. Jairamdas,“is nothing but a stupenduous struggle against nature.”
“The average net yield of cultivation in that tract is not more than Rs.
5 per acre. It is not every year that he (the cultivator) cultivates the
whole area.” “With a sandy soil, low rainfall, locust pest, and cheaply
priced crops, the khatedar1 can rarely keep his head above water.” “I
have come across all types of Bhils, those, very few ones, who are for
the time being out of debt, those who are in permanent debt and live a
semi-starved life and lastly those who are living in hopeless
pauperism. I cannot do better than give to the reader a few hard facts
about specific villages.”2
These men should for years have revenue-free land. It is for
people such as these that I pleaded for free salt and I know that at the
end of our discussions, it became a matter of pleasure for Lord Irwin
to make the concession regarding salt. And I hope that the workers
throughout the land will bring the message of free salt to the semistarved villagers and discover all the salt areas which though not good
enough for mass production are good enough for village use. It is to
these people that the charkha brings hope and happiness. Village
economics is different from industrial economics. Human economics
is not the same as that of exploitation of mere dead matter.
Young India, 11-6-1931

1
2

318

Land-holder
The extract in question is not reproduced here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

437. AGRARIAN SITUATION IN ASSAM
Assam is in the grip of dire economic distress. From everywhere, from
North Lakhimpur and Sibsagar, from Darrang and Nowgong, from Goalpara and Kamrup, come the tales of misery and woe of the ryots for this
scarcity. Hundreds of people, generally immigrants from Mymensingh,
. . . have been flocking to the towns of Goalpara and Dhubri for begging, with
nothing to cover their loins excepting half-tattered pieces. . . .
In Goalpara and Sibsagar, Nowgong and North Lakhimpur there has been
repeated failure of crops owing to the annual visitation of floods for some
years past. An earthquake also came in as another visitation in July last. . . .
Affected by this economic depression, from everywhere comes the cry
for remission of land revenue. . . .
It seems that the Government has not yet been able to shake off the
Civil Disobedience complex from their minds. . . . They have taken their
inability to pay land revenue to mean their unwillingness to do it and are
seeking to test it till the last day of kist by all sorts of indirect pressure. . . .

The foregoing report1 has been received from the Assam
Provincial Congress Committee. If the report is accurate, and there is
no reason to doubt its accuracy, it is a clear case for remission.
Young India, 11-6-1931

438. UNDER SWARAJ
A Brahmin correspondent from Madras writes2 :
During his tour Sjt. Sen Gupta said that Swaraj Government would pass
legislation to crush Brahmins and also referred to resolutions of the Karachi
Congress. On account of that the Brahmin minority has begun to be highly
restless and it has also created a sense of fear in the inds of the orthodox
Hindus. Therefore please let me know what exactly you and the Congress
mean by
1.

The words of the resolution dealing with untouchability.

2.

What exactly you and the Congress mean by saying therein that under

the Swaraj Government the Government will observe religious neutra-lity. . . .

I do not believe Sjt. Sen Gupta said that Swaraj Government
would “crush the Brahmins”. The congress resolution is clear. The
1
2

Of which only excerpts are reproduced above
Only extracts are reproduced here.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

319

correspondent is unnecessarily nervous about the future which lies as
much in his hands as in Sjt. Sen Gupta’s or mine. Let it also be
remembered that the Congress resolution is not yet a part of the
constitution. When it is, its interpretation will not rest with me or any
single individual. It will rest with the courts duly established by law.
But I gladly give my opinion as to what is likely to be the
interpretation of the Congress resolution on religious neutrality and
untouchability. It is bound to be a part of any future constitution as
there is no difference of opinion on it. Indeed, even the correspondent seems to concede as much as the Congress wants. Religious
neutrality means that the State will have no State religion nor a system
of favouritism. There will be no untouchability. The ‘untouchables’
will have the same rights as any other. But a Brahmin will not be
made to touch anybody. He will be free to make himself untouchable
and have his own well, his own temple, his own school and whatever
else he can afford, so long as he uses these things without being a
nuisance to his neighbours. But he will not be able, as some do now,
to punish untouchables for daring to walk on public streets or using
wells. There will be under swaraj no such scandal as that of the use of
public temples being denied to untouchables when it is allowed to all
other Hindus. The authority of the Vedas and the other Shastras will
not be denied but their interpretation will not rest with individuals but
will depend upon the courts of law in so far as these religious books
will be used to regulate public conduct. Conscientious scruples will be
respected, but not at the expense of public morals or the rights of
others. Those who will have extraordinary scruples will have
themselves to suffer inconvenience and pay for the luxury. The law
will not tolerate any arrogation of superiority by any person or class
whether in the name of custom or religion. But all this is my dream.
I am not the Congress. Those who would have the Congress to do
otherwise had better make haste to join it and make others of their
opinion join it. The Congress represents, or it has a constitution wide
enough to represent popular will.
Young India, 11-6-1931

320

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

439. SPEECH AT DESHA SEVIKAS’ MEETING,BOMBAY
June 11, 1931
Gandhiji, early this morning, addressed the Desh Sevikas for a few
minutes, asking them to carry on picketing peacefully. Only habitual wearers
of khaddar should have the privilege of picketing. If the audience had any
stock of foreign cloth, they must consign them to the flames. If they had millcloth, they must give them to the poor and the needy. The object of khaddar
was to help the starving peasants and workers who would obtain the full benefit of their labour if khadi was encouraged, while in the case of mill-cloth, they
would receive only anna in the rupee. To help the humanitarian cause, they must
wear khaddar.

The Hindu, 11-6-1931

440. SPEECH AT BOMBAY1
June 11, 1931
I must first apologize to you for having called you at this early
time. The Hindustani Seva Dal stands for the service of India. Till
now whenever I heard the term ‘Servant of India’ it used to rouse
great fear in my heart, because the rulers of India style themselves as
‘Servants of India’. These so-called‘Servants of India’ can never in
reality be what they call themselves.They are the servants of the British
Empire and it is an impossibility to serve the British Empire and at the
same time serve India. I can assure you, you can do no service to
India if you try to follow the workings of these so-called ‘Servants of
India’. You have to develop a desire for real service which these
people totally lack. If on acquiring power you begin to cruelly
enforce your authority on the people how is it possible to serve the
people?
It is because we lack this feeling of real service that a great deal
of rivalry and dissatisfaction has spread among ourselves. It has
pained me very much to hear that out of a desire to attain high
positions in the various Congress bodies people have been spending
money, thus creating an atmosphere of unhealthy competition. The
real worker is he who carries on the work with a steady mind in spite
of his being in the furthermost rank. The perfection of real service
does not solely depend on the magnitude of the task done but rests a
1

To the campers of the Officer’s Training Camp of the Hindustani Seva Dal
who met Gandhiji at Mani Bhavan where Gandhiji used to stay while in Bombay.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

321

great deal on the humble spirit in which it is undertaken.Those
misguided people to whom I have referred desire by force, it seems, to
serve their country. But it assuredly shows a most undesirable state of
mind. One can never prosper or be capable of doing any good to
anybody if one adopts questionable means to attain that end.
It is decidedly wrong on my part to think that I shall be able
to serve India better if I become King of India. This was exactly
the state of affairs at one time in the political life of France and
people used to employ the most cruel and drastic means to
remove their opponents from the political field. But the workers of
the Hindustani Seva Dal should work with Peace and Truth as their
foundation.
They must also cultivate to the greatest extent a sense of
humility nor must they ever relax their efforts or let the quality of the
work be in the least affected by feeling that there is not proper
appreciation. They should deal with their fellow beings in a spirit of
fair tolerance and maintain a respectful reverence for their mothers
and sisters. I know this perfect combination of humility—Truth, Love
and Peace—is very rare in this world, but you must all strive to attain
to it. Remember there will be no soldiers left to fight if everybody
becomes a commander to give orders. I sincerely hope that you will
try and live up to this ideal that I have portrayed for you at this most
precious time of the day and I can confidently say that if you
sincerely make an effort and keep the memory of this morning always
in your mind you will be doing the best service both to yourself and
to your motherland.
The Bombay Chronicle, 12-6-1931

322

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

441. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
BORSAD,

June 12, 1931
CHI. JAMNADAS,

You are a strange man. After having spent days with me here,
you go back and write from there a letter about an important matter.
It raises several questions. Should I answer them by post, or call you
back here? When I wanted to know why you thought of coming as
far as Bombay, you could give no answer and hurriedly went back,
and now you write to me a letter from there asking for Rs. 5,000.
This is now my advice to you. Write to Kakasaheb and convince him
about the propriety of your request. If you do this, my task will be
easier. Have Manu and Babi reached there?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : C.W. 9324. Courtesy : Jamnadas Gandhi

442. INTERVIEW TO EUROPEAN DEPUTATION
June 12, 1931
Gandhiji received a deputation of young Europeans, about 30 in number
including four ladies. Gandhiji, at the request of the deputation, explained the attitude
of the Congress towards Englishmen and other Europeans in India.
Gandhiji said that the Congress attitude was not one of hostility to them, but
of active friendship. He recalled to them how the Congress was started by an
Englishman, Mr. Hume, and was presided over by even members of Parliament. He
wanted them to study the object and history of the Congress, which never meant any
harm to any community or interests. If they sympathized with the Congress it was
their duty to join it. In India it was but natural that Indians should have full rights to
rule as Englishmen had in their own country. It was not reasonable for Englishmen to
ask for safeguards and trading rights of a special character on which they were
insisting. Perpetuation of these privileges, which they had carved in their 150 years
of rule in India, would amount to friendship on unequal terms. The Congress was not
merely not hostile to Englishmen, but welcome their association, assistance and cooperation and their organizing capacity. Co-operation of such a kind did not mean
co-operation on unequal terms. The deputation waited on Gandhiji for about 15
minutes.

The Hindu, 12-6-1931
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

323

443. SPEECH AT MAROLI1
June 12, 1931
Mahatma Gandhi laid the foundation of the building of a Weaving School,
started by Miss Mithubehn Petit. Addressing a big public meeting, he said that if he
had been told ten years ago that Miss Mithubehn Petit, who belonged to a celebrated
Parsi family of Bombay, would roam day and night in the villages barefooted and
dressed in coarse khaddar, regardless of the heat and cold, to work among the poor
people and teach their children spinning, weaving and other industries, he (Mr.
Gandhi) would not have believed it. Althought he had appreciated the work of Parsis,
even when the campaign of prohibition was launched, he had thought that
prohibition alone would not succeed without propagation of khaddar. The closing of
liquor shops was not the principal thing. If drunkards did not give up the habit of
drink, they would prepare illicit liquor and there would be illicit sale of liquor as at
present. Drunkards would not give up drink till they were taught some industry.
Workers working in big factories required something to be relieved of the fatigue.
The speaker, who had never tasted liquor, had affectionately given liquor to the
exhausted in South Africa. The Kolis, who were with him, demanded liquor, and the
speaker brought liquor from a canteen-keeper and gave it to them. Men who were
made to work like beasts would require liquor, but those working in a peaceful
atmosphere in their homes could easily give up drink.
If rural industries like spinning, weaving, dairying, shoe-making, etc., were
revived, rural areas would become richer. They did not want to be rich like the
millionaires of the Bombay Stock Exchange but they should get rid of their debts.
There would be a few silver coins in their cash boxes. Instead of borrowing money
from sowcars, they should deposit their savings with sowcars . They would have
then houses of their own, and the number of their cattle would increase. Such a
process was going on in the area, and it should go on in the seven lakhs of villages in
India. This was the work of swaraj. Last year, they had done the work of cleansing
the field. Now they had to do the work of sowing. That was constructive work. The
sowing work was of greater importance and had to be done for a longer time.

The Hindu, 12-6-1931

1

324

A small village about 12 miles from Surat in Gujarat
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

444. TELEGRAM TO MAHENDRA PRASAD
BORSAD,

June 13, 1931
MAHENDRA P RASAD1
C HAPRA
RAJENDRA
HE

BABU

WILL

BE

RECEIVING
TILL

HE

GOOD

AT

BEST
IS

WAS

JOINING

TIME

AND

BETTER

ME

ATTENTION.

STRONG
THIS

MUCH

IN
WILL

HAD

REST.

WHEN

I

FEW

DAYS

NOT

LEFT

LET

WEATHER

HIM.2
TIME.

HIM

MOVE

HERE

QUITE

YEAR.

GANDHI
From a photostat : S.N. 17271

445. LETTER TO DUNICHAND
June 13, 1931
DEAR LALA DUNICHAND,

Suraj Bhanji writes to say that you are not paying even the
money they have expended. I hope this is not correct. I think that
the expenses incurred should be paid. If you have suggestions for the
future please let me know.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat : G.N. 5581

1

Elder brother of Rajendra Prasad
Rajendra Prasad was ill and could not participate in the meeting of the
Working Committee held at Bombay on 9th and 10th June.
2

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

325

446. LETTER TO EMELIA MACBEAN
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 13, 1931
DEAR MADAM,

I have your letter for which I thank you. You are giving me
credit of which I am wholly undeserving. You are thinking of another
Mr. Gandhi 1 my name-sake but in no way related to me. He and I
were however friends and lived together for some time. You will be
sorry to hear that he died many years ago, leaving an only son. It was
he who visited America and made many friends. I have never had the
privilege of visiting your continent.
Yours sincerely,

Miss EMELIA MACBEAN
C/ O MRS. M ACBEAN
P RAIRIE AVENUE
C HICAGO (U.S.A.)
From a photostat : S.N. 17272

447. LETTER TO SURENDRA SINGH
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 13, 1931
DEAR SARDAR SURENDRA SINGH,

I have your letter for which I thank you. I am doing all I can
and in the manner I know to spread the gospel of love all round but it
makes very slow progress in the midst of growing hate and distrust
between Hindus and Mussalmans. As to your solution of the
communal question my observation is that the parties concerned want
a solution for all the provinces or none at all. I agree with you that it
would be a great advance if some provinces at least found out their
own solution.
Yours sincerely,

S ARDAR S URENDRA S INGH
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
P UNJAB GOVERNMENT
S IMLA EAST
From a photostat : S.N. 17273
1

326

Virchand Gandhi
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

448. LETTER TO SECRETARY, CENTRAL SIKH LEAGUE,
AMRITSAR
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 13, 1931
THE S ECRETARY
C ENTRAL S IKH LEAGUE
AMRITSAR
DEAR SIR,

I have your letter forwarded to me in my capacity as editor of
Young India. So far as the recommendations about the flag are
concerned I would advise you to send them to the Secretary of the
Flag Committee appointed by the Working Committee of the
Congress. The convener and the Secretary of the Flag Committee is
Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya, Masulipatam, S. India.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S.N. 17274

449. LETTER TO DR. M. A. ANSARI
BORSAD,

June 13, 1931
DEAR DR. ANSARI,

I forgot and I had not the time to talk to you about the local
quarrels in Delhi. A letter from Mrs. Asaf Ali reminds me that the
quarrels are not yet over and that they have extended to the ladies
also. 1 Can you not put these quarrels down?
I hope you found your brother better. I wonder what Dr.
Rehman was able to do.
DR. M. A. A NSARI
1 D ARYAGANJ, D ELHI
From a photostat : S.N. 17275

1
Mrs. Asaf Ali had written : “Members of the Delhi Mahila Seva Dal are being
vilified by Congressmen. I resign and retire as the atmosphere is too dirty for any
self-respecting woman to continue to work.”

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

327

450. LETTER TO SHAMLAL
BORSAD,

June 13, 1931
DEAR LALA SHAMLAL,

I have your letter. 1 I am glad you have written to me, and I
want you to keep me informed of the doings in Rohtak. But I shall
not be able to help you at this stage. The persecution will have to
be too glaring to enable me to bring it under the Truce terms but
where it is subtle as it appears to be in Rohtak, you must be resourceful enough to combat it. Of course you are entitled to take the
fullest advantage of ability to put up a defence in lawcourts.
Yours sincerely,

LALA S HAMLAL
ADVOCATE
9 D AYAL S INGH BUILDINGS
UPPER MALL, L AHORE
From a microfilm : S.N. 17276

451. LETTER TO DR. B. C. ROY
BORSAD,

June 13, 1931
DEAR DR. BIDHAN,

I have your letter2 for which I thank you.Your poetic description
of Shillong makes me envy you.
You must have seen from the papers what has been done about
the unfortunate quarrels in Bengal. You may depend upon my doing
everything possible to assist in ridding the Bengal atmosphere of
1
It stated : “. . . In each police station there is one Congress worker. We have
enrolled about 2,500 members and established 125 Congress Committees in the
district. This has upset the authorities and repression has been started in the district.
Our treasurer, who . . . comparatively harmless, . . . was not even imprisoned in Civil
Disobedience days, is now being prosecuted. . . . Two other workers have been
arrested. . . . Authorities want to stop the normal activities of the Congress. In the
Rohtak District the section takes special care that violent speeches are not made, but
Rohtak alone has been selected for repression because there is organized Congress
work in the district.”
2
Which endorsed Gandhiji’s proposal to refer the Bengal quarrels to
arbitration

328

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

poison.
When you see them please remember me to Basanti Devi, Mona,
Baby and Sujata. Tell them I often think of them though I never write
to them.
Yours sincerely,

DR. B IDHAN C HANDRA R OY
S HILLONG
From a microfilm : S.N. 17277

452. LETTER TO DR. B. S. MOONJE
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 13, 1931
DEAR DR. MOONJE,

I thank you for your letter of 6th June. Even if I succeed in
going to London, at present I have no intention of taking experts with
me. The scope of my work will be so limited as not to require much
expert advice.
Yours sincerely,

DR. B. S. M OONJE
F IRGROVE
S IMLA
From a photostat : S.N. 17278

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

329

453. LETTER TO BHUPENDRA NARAYAN SEN
BORSAD,

June 13, 1931
MY DEAR BHUPEN,

I have your letter. I am glad you have written to me so frankly
and freely. It is difficult for me to find the assistance that you need. I
thought you had attached yourself to the Abhoy Ashram. In any case
I would advice you to see Jamnalalji when he comes there which he
expects to do next month.
You must make up for the lost weight. 30 lb. is a big drop.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. B HUPENDRA NARAYAN S EN
P.O. BARADOUGOLE
DT. H OOGHLY (BENGAL)
From a microfilm : S.N. 17279

454. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
BORSAD,

June 13, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

You must have seen from the papers that Khan Abdul Ghaffar
Khan has been with me for some time. During the few moments that I
could spare for him from day to day, I carried on my conversations
with him and he has left on me the impression that he is a truthful and
out and out believer in non-violence. He has no connection with the
Amanullah movement. His work is solely concentrated upon the
Khudai Khidmatgar movement. This movement consists in enlisting
men for service. The following pledge is administered to them: “I
shall be truthful, I shall be chaste, I shall be non-violent and not
quarrel with my neighbours. I shall not covet my neighbours’ property. I shall be prepared to suffer even unto death for the freedom of
the country.” Those who take the pledge and enlist themselves as
Khudai Khidmatgars are expected to attend a weekly roll call in their
respective villages. He is most emphatic in his declar-ation that there
has been on the part of himself and his followers no breach of the
Settlement and he says that he has everywhere preached to the people
the necessity for carrying out its terms in so far as they are applicable
330

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to the people. But he says there are several breaches of the Settlement
on the part of the officials and he relates the following :
(a) Many civil disobedience prisoners are not yet discharged in
the Frontier Province including the Agency areas.
(b) He says that the people are being molested on the slightest
pretext. The soldiers as they pass the villagers’ houses cry “Islam
Murdabad”, “Gandhi Murdabad”, “Ghaffar Khan Murdabad”, and
he adds that he has prohibited among his followers all objectionable
cries.
Khan Saheb admits that he did not visit the Commissioner
and he says he refrained because he saw no change in the attitude
of local officials and if he went, he was afraid of his being misrepresented. He is quite prepared to see you or His Excellency the
Viceroy provided I accompany him. I do feel that you should
make his acquaintance, and if you think it worth while I shall
gladly visit Simla solely for the purpose of introducing him to
you. I think that the Settlement presumes mutual trust and it will
therefore perhaps be wise on the part of the Government to know
Khan Saheb personally and then test his assurances. Pending reply to
this letter I have detained Khan Saheb. As he has been long enough
with me and as I do not want to detain him longer than is absolutely
necessary, I would ask you please to send me a telegraphic reply. I
should add that Khan Saheb is most insistent on my visiting the
Frontier Province and seeing things for myself, making the
acquaintance of the numerous Khudai Khidmatgars and studying his
activity. I do feel that there should be no objection now to my visiting
the Frontier Province.1
Yours sincerely,

H. W. EMERSON, E SQ.
S IMLA
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931.
Library

Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and

1
Emerson replied on July 6 that such a “visit would be likely to cause
considerable excitement and to add to the difficulties of the local administration . . .”
Vide also footnote to “Letter to H. W. Emerson”, 17-6-1931.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

331

455. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
BORSAD,

June 14, 1931
DEAR AMTUL,

Your letter. You must not brood over your weakness or the fact
that you have to receive service from the Ashram. Everyone knows
that you are eager to serve. If you will have patience God will give
you the necessary strength for service. You must not worry.
Yours,

BAPU

[PS.]
Let Gangabehn treat you.
From a photostat : G.N. 241

456. LETTER TO M. I. DAVID
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 14, 1931
DEAR MR. DAVID,

I have now thought out a formula and here it is :
To provide a common platform for those Europeans and
Indians who stand for the speedy creation of a system of Government
which will enable India to take her rightful place among the free
nations of the world.
The phrase “among the free nations of the world” takes the
place of “as a fellow member of the British Commonwealth of free
nations” in the original. You will see that this formula does not
exclude British connection in the shape of equal partnership at will.
Nor does it necessarily include it. I do not say much of the other two
formulae.
Yours sincerely,

M. I. DAVID, E SQ.
4 Q UEENS R OAD
F ORT, B OMBAY
From a photostat : S.N. 17280

332

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

457. LETTER TO HAREKRUSHNA MAHTAB
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 14, 1931
MY DEAR MAHTAB BABU,

I have your letter1 for which there was no occasion for apology.
You have an ambitious programme. But with faith and application
there is no reason why you should not go through it.
I am glad that Matibas and Pur Bai are with you. It is a
good thing to start an institution with little or nothing. Faith is the
greatest asset. I need not worry about reading your budget as Jamnalalji fully represents my views and his judgment in such matters is
correct and helpful.
Yours sincerely,

S HRI HAREKRUSHNA MAHTAB
GANDHI KARMA MANDIR
BALASORE (ORISSA)
From a microfilm : S.N. 17281

458. LETTER TO P. G. MATHEW
BORSAD,

June 14, 1931
MY DEAR MATHEW,

How is it you funked it again. I had fully expected you at
Bardoli. You could have passed a clear week with me. I do not mind
your not coming if you are in love with your work. Give me an idea
of your day’s work.
S YT. M ATHEW
THE ASHRAM
S ABARMATI
From a microfilm : S.N. 17282

1

The addressee had said that the rules of the Gandhi Karma Mandir of Balasore
were rather hard, and had submitted simplified rules.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

333

459. LETTER TO M. I. DAVID
BORSAD,

June 14, 1931
DEAR MR. DAVID,

I dictated a letter last night. Mahadev had handed me another
letter from you of 11th instant in which you ask me whether I approve
of the suggestion contained in the letter in connection with the
proposed non-official conciliation committee to be formed under the
auspices of the Mayor of Bombay. I would like to make one
suggestion. It would be bet-ter not to have a rigid rule fixing a
proportion between the numbers of Indians and Europeans.1 It would
be better to adopt the natural method. It may be you will have more
earnest Europeans than Indians to work on the Committee. In that
event I should not hesitate to take more and vice versa.
Yours sincerely,

M. I. DAVID, E SQ.
4 Q UEENS R OAD
F ORT, B OMBAY
From a photostat : S.N. 17283

1

The addressee had suggested that the conciliation committee “should consist
of an equal number of Indians and Europeans”.

334

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

460. LETTER TO JOHN KYTE COLLETT
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 14, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter enclosing some Children’s League cards and
medals. I am not in touch with the Salvation Army nor do I know
anything of the Army’s work amongst children. My work lies in a
wholly different direction. You were therefore evidently misinformed
if you thought that I was working in connection with the Salvation
Army. I am therefore asking the Salvation Army people whether they
would take these medals and cards from me. If they do not, you will
please tell me what to do with the medals.
Yours sincerely,

JOHN KYTE C OLLETT, E SQ.
P RESIDENT
THE C HILDREN’S LEAGUE OF P EACE AND GOODWILL
“SUNRISE”, PENARTH
From a photostat : S.N. 17284

461. LETTER TO SALVATION ARMY, BOMBAY
BORSAD,

June 14, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have a letter from Mr. John Collett which I enclose herewith.
I send you also a copy of my letter to Mr. Collett. 1 Will you please
tell me whether you will care to receive the cards and the medals for
the use mentioned in the letter?
Yours sincerely,

Encls. 2
THE OFFICER C OMMANDING
THE BOMBAY BRANCH
S ALVATION ARMY, B OMBAY
From a photostat : S.N. 17285

1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

335

462. LETTER TO MRS. C. A. HATE
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 14, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. Some time when I am in Bombay you should
try to see me. It is difficult to advise you in the matter of food just
now. It is necessary to see you and cross-question you. Will you not
see some naturopath in Bombay? Mr. Khambhatta of Hornby Road
knows one and he has benefited by his treatment. His full address is
Bairam Khambhatta, 275 Hornby Road, Fort Bombay.
It is difficult to say how many hours’ sleep a particular
individual requires, but I can safely say for you that you should take
as much sleep as you comfortably can. And you should take daily
walks in the morning and in the evening. Once only is not enough.
If you have the strength, you should take really three or four hours’
walk. You may divide it, if you like, in two or three periods.
You ask me what should be one’s ideal in life. All the sages in
the world have said—self-realization.
The rumour about the burning of my foot was quite wrong. It
would have been more correct if the report had said I had very
narrowly1 escaped burning my foot.
Yours sincerely,

MRS. C. A. H ATE
INDU BHUVAN
343 T HAKURDWAR, B OMBAY
From a photostat : S.N. 17286

1

336

The source has “nearly”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

463. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
BORSAD,

June 14, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

Your letter enclosing an unsigned opinion of the Legislative
Department on the meaning of the word “return” in the Settlement
came upon me as a bomb shell.1 I was wholly unprepared for such an
opinion. I had flattered myself with the belief that my knowledge of
law had not become absolutely rusty. But the opinion of your legal
department shook what little confidence I had yet in my legal
knowledge. I therefore hastened to refer the matter to the best counsel
available in Bombay at the present moment. I am sending you a copy
of their opinion. 2 The first two signatories are ex-Advocates-General
of Bombay and they are both today, as is also the third, distinguished
practising lawyers. For the moment therefore my confidence is
restored, but that can be of no avail to you. I can quite understand
your not accepting the opinion of Bombay lawyers however eminent
they may be, in the teeth of opinion from your legal department
however contrary to common sense. I, therefore, suggest what I have
suggested of the Government of Bombay. As the matter involved is
one of principle for the Management of the Navajivan Press, I would
repeat the suggestion I have made to the Government of Bombay that
the Chief Justice of Bombay should be appointed sole arbitrator in the
matter. The Managing Board is naturally anxious to end this
controversy and also to avoid a continuing loss that the deprivation of
the press causes to them. I hope therefore that the matter will be
finished one way or the other without delay.
This impasse brings to me a matter of general importance.
I am having, as I imagine, more trouble than I have told you from the
Bombay Government in connection with the matters arising out of the
Settlement. And there is trouble growing in the Madras Presidency
over liquor picketing. Here is an extract from Syt. Rajagopalachari
whose instructions on this very point you had seen and which you so
admired that you asked me to congratulate him :
1

The opinion was that the phrase “will be returned” would mean “possession
will be restored” and that the Gandhi-Irwin Pact was silent on the question of the place
of delivery.
2
Vide “Opinion”, 13-6-1931
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

337

I had hitherto refrained from worrying you. The Government here are
beginning to feel that peaceful picketing is not so harmless as they had
imagined. They have discovered that it does stop drinking most effectively
and as a result the revenue is threatened. They may hold renters to their
contracts this year, but what about the next auction? They see that without
any physical obstruction or coercion of any kind, picketing does keep people
away from the shops.
The renters too espected that like last year the congress activities would
soon be interfered with by the police and so they did not themselves do
anything at first to interfere with the volunteers. But now they realize that the
Truce has put an end to the old order to things. They are consequently in a
fright. They have begun to make strong representations to Government
demanding either police interference or writing off of dues. Both Government
officials and renters are thus opening their eyes to the reality of the moral
power of picketing and the implications of the Truce. Both Government
officials and renters have, therefore, it seems, resolved on new tactics. There
is almost by concerted action a number of cases cropping up everywhere of
rowdyism to intimidate volunteers. Besides rowdyism, which might be
expected, the renters whether instigated or encouraged by officials or not, I
cannot yet say, are bringing up false charges through private complaints in
order to get fines and imprisonments imposed on the workers and
sympathizers and worry and tire out the Congress organizations. And
magistrates, too, imagine that they should support the liquor-shop men.
Further, even where they know the cases are false, they dare not expose
themselves to the suspicion that they favour the Congress and do not support
the revenue.
Local police authorities have begun to harass and interfere with the
picketing. Finding that there is no sort of coercion or disturbance of the
peace, and that they cannot legitimately object to the picketing, they are
trying other ways. They are making demonstrations of police force, pushing
the volunteers away to impossible distances from the shops and from each
other and demanding the observance of conditions that reduce picketing to an
ineffectual farce. Local police authorities are permitted to terrorize town and
village folk and proclaim that any assistance or harbouring of Congress
volunteers would amount to abetment of offenders. In fact, the 1930
atmosphere is being sought to be brought about.
I have conscientiously tried to put the best construction on all that
Government officials are doing. But I am afraid I must confess failure. If you
have time, please go through the enclosures.

338

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You might be unable to interfere with the working or not
working of the Settlement by local governments. Or your interference may not go far enough according to my view of the Settlement.
Time has therefore perhaps arrived for the appointment of a permanent Board of Arbitration to decide question of interpretation of the
Settlement and as to the full carrying out of the terms by the one
party or the other. I would therefore like you to consider this
suggestion.
Yours sincerely,

Encl. 1
H. W. EMERSON, E SQ.
S IMLA
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931.
Library

Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and

464. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
June 14, 1931
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I have your letter. I understand your difficulties. God will protect you. Don’t worry, and stay on there. You may come when you
can. I have had to come to Borsad for some days. But you should
write to me at the Bardoli address, since I shall probably have returned
there by the time I get your reply.
It is not at all certain whether I shall be going to England. Even
if it is decided that I should go, I shall not have to leave before August
15.
What is your present diet?
How is Father’s health now?
Rajendra Babu was ill for some time. He is better now. He will
be here in a few days.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3414

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

339

465. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
BORSAD,

June 14, 1931
Interviewed by a representative of the Associated Press, Mahatma Gandhi said
he aarrived at Borsad principally to console the people of Ras who were perturbed
over the continuous destruction of their hedges and stray assaults committed by
Dharalas. They suspected that Dharalas had been emboldened by the continuance as
the village headman of a Dharala who is an exconvict. Gandhiji had already asked for
the cancellation of his appointment on two grounds in terms of the Delhi Settlement :
one was that he was undesirable and the other was that his appointment was not
permanent in the terms of the Delhi Settlement. He had also asked for protection of
the non-Dharala population of Ras village. Both matters were engaging the attention
of the Collector of Kaira District. There were other matters, too, which required his
personal attention. He thought he need not go into these matters at present. Asked
how long he would stay at Borsad, Gandhiji said as soon as he had finished his work
he had instructions from Sardar Vallabhbhai to go to Bardoli which he would do.
In reply to a question whether it was true, as stated by his son Mr. Devdas at
last night’s public meeting, that he intended shortly to visit the Frontier Province,
Gandhiji said it was perfectly true that Abdul Ghaffar Khan was pressing him to visit
that province. He was equally anxious to go there and see for himself how far the
spirit of non-violence had prevailed among tribes inhabiting that province, but
whilst the Truce lasted he did not want to do anything, as far as possible, that might
embarrass Government. He was therefore in correspondence with Government on the
matter. Asked how long Abdul Ghaffar Khan would stay with him, Gandhiji said he
would stay pending the results of the correspondence between him and Government.

The Bombay Chronicle, 15-6-1931

340

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

466. CABLE TO H. S. L. POLAK
BORSAD,

June 15, 1931
KALOPH
LONDON
WILL

GLADLY

ARRIVAL

IF

SEE

I

LANCASHIRE

COME

AT

FRIENDS

ALL.

IMMEDIATELY

MALAVIYAJI

WILL

ON

COME

IF

INVITED.

GANDHI
From a photostat : S.N. 17291

467. TELEGRAM TO “THE STATESMAN”, DELHI
BORSAD,

June 15, 1931
S TATESMAN
DELHI
YOUR
JUST

WIRE.

INDIAN

AFTER

KILLED.
COL.

BEFORE
MEN.

ATTENTION
ONLY
KOP
OF

WE

GALLWEY

SEVEN

AMBULANCE

BATTLE

COLENSO
HAD

I

GENERAL

BULLER

FIRE.

LED

BY

STRE-TCHERS

FROM

GATE

MAJOR

AND

TIME

WE

THIS

AND

DISPATCH.

WERE

ZONE

MAJOR

OTHER

WORK
COL.

OF

BAPTY

SCOTT

CLEARLY

AFTER

ZONE.

I

ASSISTANCE

ZONE

WAS

THAT

OUR

REMOVED

THESE

WAS

AT

MEMORY

COULD

AT

SPION

WITHIN

ZONE

WOUNDED ON
WOOD-

OFFICERS.

VAAL
IN

SENT

PROMPT

GENERAL

OTHER

MENTIONED

GALLWEY’S

SIXTY

FROM

I

IT

REVERSE

INCLUDED

AND

AND

FOR

TOLD

AFTER

MONCRIEF

FIRE

WAS

FIRE
WE

ORDERS

SOLDIER

THANKS

CORPS

NEEDED

DANGER

WITHIN

AND
WAS

PERSONAL

THOUGH

OUT-SIDE

REACHED

CORPSE DECEASED

RECEIVED

SERVE

DUSK

WHICH LIEUTENANT ROBERTS

PITCHED TENTS I RECEIVED

REMOVE

ORDERS.

CORPS

IN

KRANTZ.

GENERAL

BETRAYS

NEXT
FOR

BULLER’S

HIM.1

GANDHI
From a photostat : S.N. 17292

1

Vide “Interview to Associated Press”, 15-6-1931. Also “Speech at Calcutta
Meeting”, 27-1-1902; and “An Autobiography”
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

341

468. LETTER TO MOHANLAL SAKSENA
BORSAD,

June 15, 1931
MY DEAR MOHANLAL,

I got your letter only today. I could not therefore discuss it with
Jawaharlal.
In spite of what the D.C. says, I hold that my message 1 to the
kisans is no breach of the Settlement.
It was never the intention that each kisan’s money should be
separately deposited. If such was the suggestion, I have forgotten all
about it. The object is that the kisans should not use up the money
that might have been saved for payment of rent.
I did receive Balkrishna’s wire. You will have noticed the
correction2 . It was a silly slip.
Just at present it is difficult for me to leave Gujarat. The things
are looking none too bright here. On your side itis all well, so long as
you hold the kisans in check. But Jawaharlal’s presence must now
ease the situation. He has no difficulty in dealing with the kisans and
restraining them.
In any event please keep me informed of the happenings there.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G ANDHI
S YT. M OHANLAL S AKSENA
34 A MINUDDAULA P ARK
LUCKNOW
From a photostat : S.N. 17289

1
2

342

Vide “To the Kisans of the U. P.”, 23-5-1931
Vide “A correction”, 11-6-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

469. LETTER TO W. E. LUCAS
BORSAD,

Via ANAND,
June 15, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I was delighted to receive your letter and would gladly meet you
all on 24th instant unless I am summoned to Simla.1 I shall bring with
me Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel and one or two other friends. As I take
no food at night I would like you to excuse me from joining you at
the dinner table but the other friends may join you if you like. I
would follow at the time to be named by you.
I appreciate your frankness. Of course I don’t expect you to
surrender your independence or coincide with my views. These
contacts are desirable and valuable for understanding one another and
removing misunderstandings.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G ANDHI
W. E. LUCAS, E SQ.
AGENT’S OFFICE, B.B. & C.I. RY. C O.
BOMBAY
From a photostat : S.N. 17290

1

For Gandhiji’s note on the meeting of the “Dinner Club”, vide “Young
Europeans”, 2-7-1931.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

343

470. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BORSAD,

Silence Day, June 15, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

I have your letter. Shankarbhai has gone to Bombay. I have
written to him and told him to bring Kamala1 to me.
If the building in which I used to occupy a room is not being
used, use it now, including Ba’s room. The number of inmates
has gone up very much, and will further increase a little. If you use
the building, it will remain in good condition. I have discussed this
with Ba. She has no objection. In fact she liked the suggestion. We
are not likely in the immediate future to come and stay there. Why,
then, should we let such a big building remain unoccupied?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./I

471. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS
BORSAD,

June 15, 1931
Interviewed by a representative of the Associated Press regarding the
controversy in respect of his services in the Boer War, Mahatma Gandhi said :

The Indian Ambulance Corps numbering over 1,100 reached
Chieveley camp near Colenso after dusk just after the battle in which
Lieutenant Roberts was killed. I received orders from Col. Gallwey
that the deceased Lieutenant’s body had to be immediately removed.
We had then hardly pitched the tents.
I sent seven men, not “coolies”, but educated men, who
returned late at night and I received special thanks from Col. Gallwey
for the prompt attention and was next day invited through Dr. Booth
to meet him in his tent.
It is quite true that on this occasion there was no question of
firing line, hostilities having been suspended for the collection of the
wounded. It is also true that despite our desire to work under fire, we
were told that we would not be allowed to do so but after the reversea
at Spion Kop, the situation became grave.
1

344

Shankarlal’s daughter
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

General Buller came to my tent and said we would enter the
firing zone in order to remove nearly 60 wounded from the foot of
Spion Kop. My companions and I were delighted to have this privilege and led by Major Bapty, we crossed the pontoon, entered firing
zone and removed the wounded including General Woodgate, Major
Scott Moncrief and other officers and carried them on stretchers 25
miles.
We were again within the firing zone at Vaal Kantz soon after
Kop. For these and general services I was mentioned in General
Buller’s dispatch and with over 20 leaders was recipient of a War
Medal.
The Bombay Chronicle, 16-6-1931

472. LETTER TO C. RAJGOPALACHARI
BORSAD,

June 16, 1931
I have your long letter. You will see the use I have made of it
from the copy herewith enclosed.1
I feel that all the questions now outstanding have got to be
referred to some board of arbitration and, if the Central Government
want to play the game, as I think they do, they would accept my
suggestion for the appointment of such a board. There may be some
modification as to the board, but the principle, I think, they will
accept. Do you suggest anything more to be done in this direction?
Till the final answer is received, you should not embark upon any
heroic measure. But I agree with you that if we do not get anything
whatsoever, we have a perfect right to take such measures as we like
including local and specific civil disobedience in so far as it may be
necessary to resist lawlessness on the part of unscrupulous officials.
I want you to study carefully the article2 I have written for the
forthcoming issue of Young India on the Working Committee
resolution. I do not like it. At the same time from its own stand-point
the Working Committee’s position could be justified. The alternativ I
had suggested was much better. Some of those who voted with the
majority, I think, even saw the point. But you will critically read the
1
2

Vide “Letter to H. W. Emerson”, 14-6-1931
Vide “substance not Shadow”, 18-6-1931.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

345

article and tell me what you think of my alternative, because that
alternative has to be enforced in the event of failure of our demand at
the Conference.
Why do you not see the Governor yourself and at any rate
discuss the liquor picketing?
S YT. C. R AJAGOPALACHARI
GANDHI ASHRAM
TIRUCHENGODU (S. INDIA)
From a photostat : S.N. 17293

473. TELEGRAM TO SITLA SAHAY
BORSAD,

June 17, 1931
1

S ITLA S AHAY
C ARE C ONGRESS
R AE BARELI
YOUR

LETTER.

WIRED

YOU

FROM

BARDOLI.2

CONSULT

JAWAHAR

GANDHI
From a microfilm : S.N. 17306

474. LETTER TO DUNI CHAND
BORSAD,

June 17, 1931
DEAR LALA DUNI CHAND,

I now have your letter about Suraj Bhan. At Simla I understood
that Lala Suraj Bhan had collected the money himself and that for
doing village work. But if he is of unsound mind, naturally you will
not give him any assistance. But I do feel that all the expenses
incurred up to now should be paid and then he should be clearly told
that he cannot get the money as this is not his property as it was
1

A khadi worker of U.P.
The wire is not traceable. But in his letter of even date to the addressee
Gandhiji’s personal secretary said it was as follows : “where cultivators accept our
conditions and are prepared to pay the rent but the zamindars are not prepared to
accept it, the amount should be received by us and deposited into the bank.” (S. N.
17307)
2

346

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

neither collected by him alone nor for the purpose he claims. The
whole of this is a sad business. Lala Suraj Bhan is your trusted man. I
therefore feel the greatest hesitation in writing to you about him.
I am glad you have sent his wife to Jullundur. I do hope she
will be happy there.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G ANDHI
LALA DUNI C HAND
ADVOCATE, A MBALA
From a photostat : G.N. 5589

475. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
BORSAD,

June 17, 1931
MY DEAR ANAND,

I hear all about you regularly through Mirabehn and
occasionally through Jairamdas. I know that you are refraining from
writing to me purely out of pity for me.
I should not consider father’s letter disappointing. I think that
he took up the correct position. But Jairamdas tells me that later he
modified his view. I think that it is a sound rule for people who are
well-to-do not to go to their friends living in public institutions except
when they are ready to make a grant to those institutions at least equal
to what their visit to such institutions might have cost them. It need
not be done offensively and can be done gracefully. If father had
simply come or sent your mother or your sister and asked them
quietly to slip into your pocket a hundred-rupee note, it would have
been still more correct.
You must not be or feel feeble either in body or in mind.
Nothing has to be done beyond your resolute to feel weak. There was
no foot-burn to the healed. The whole thing was a creation of the
reporters’ imagination.
It is good for Vidya1 to continue the diet of milk and fruit and
even fruit alone if milk disagrees, till she has a real hunger and
appetite for other food. But if she can go to Bombay for treatment
under a nature-cure expert, it would, of course, be better.
1

Addressee’s wife

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

347

You must not consider yourself ill-starred. Think of the many
millions who have not the opportunities that God has provided for
you. It is the height of ingratitude to the Maker for anyone to
consider himself ill-starred. You must shake yourself free of this
pessimism that overtakes you so often.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. A NAND T. HINGORANI
C/ O THE “HINDOO”
HYDERABAD S IND
From a photostat : S.N. 17300

476. LETTER TO A. Y. C. WULFSE
AS AT S ABARMATI,

June 17, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter.
I return the ring herewith.
I hope that you will succeed in your desire to create a work of
art that will benefit mankind.
I hope also that you have regained your health.
I got the two portraits for which too I thank you.
Yours sincerely,

A. Y. C. W ULFSE, E SQ.
AMSTERDAM, H OLLAND
From a photostat : S.N. 17301

348

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

477. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
BORSAD,

June 17, 1931
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

Sitla Sahay writes to me about impending repression in Raw
Bareli through the taluqdars.
You must have seen the enclosed notice about the flag on the
University building. I am receiving complaints from other places
also. As soon as you have the time I would like you to go into all
these things and then tell me what you think about it all. If he matters
can wait till we meet at Surat for the Working Committee we must
discuss them then or you should write to me earlier.
P ANDIT JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
ANAND BHAWAN, A LLAHABAD
From a photostat : S.N. 17303

478. LETTER TO HARDEVI SHARMA
BORSAD,

June 17, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter of the 15th instant. As to your first question I
think you are entitled to and it is your duty to help the kisans in all
legitimate ways open to men pledged to non-violence. What those
particular ways should be can only be determined from time to time
as circumstances arise. The general instructions you can glean from
the pages of Navajivan and Young India. But I would advise you to
confer with the Provincial Congress Committee members and Pandit
Jawaharlal Nehru who is now in Allahabad.
With reference to your second question if Thakur Malkhan
Singh was prosecuted he can be and should be defended.
Yours sincerely,

S YT. H ARDEVI S HARMA
HATHRAS (U.P.)
From a microfilm : S.N. 17304

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

349

479. LETTER TO K. F. NARIMAN
BORSAD,

June 17, 1931
MY DEAR NARIMAN,

I have your letters about the Pathan Abdul Ghaffar Khan and
his son. I shall begin working on them as soon as possible.
With reference to the National Flag Film I would like you to go
into the regulations governing the censorship of films and enter first
into correspondence with the Board of Censors and find their reason.
Don’t you think that this is the first step to take?
Yours sincerely,

S YT. K. F. N ARIMAN
C ONGRESS HOUSE, B OMBAY
From a photostat : S.N. 17305

480. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
BORSAD,

June 17, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

I thank you for your telegram1 about Khan Saheb Abdul
Ghaffar Khan. I have shown it to him.
I expect to hear from you in due course with reference to my
desire to visit the Frontier Province.
Yours sincerely,

H. W. EMERSON, E SQ.
S IMLA
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

1

This read : “Your letter of June thirteenth. Government of India appreciate
the value of personal contact but consider suitable course is for Abdul Ghaffar Khan to
get in touch with the Chief Commissioner of North West Frontier Province rather
than to visit Simla.”

350

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

481. SUBSTANCE NOT SHADOW
The public are entitled to know why after having made repeated
declarations to the contrary the Working Committee had passed the
resolution1 requiring me (other conditions being favourable) to attend
the Round Table Conference, if thereto required, for the presentation
of the Congress position.
Ordinarily a member of the Working Committee could not tell
the public of discussions behind its resolutions, their defeated amendments or counter resolutions. But in the present case the Working
Committee has made an exception and authorized me to take the
public into confidence in order that I might clear my position and
also explain that of the Working Committee.
It was my essentially democratic nature which, in spite of my
very strong objection, impelled me to submit to the resolution. One
may not make a principle of every objection and, if not carried, block
the way by threatening to retire from an institution or by refusing
submission to the opinion of the majority. I therefore fought the
Working Committee, reminded it of my repeated public and private
declarations and moved informally a resolution myself which I
thought was far more consistent and desirable in the national interest.
But I could not carry with me the majority who thought that not to
attend the Conference by reason of the failure of a communal
settlement would be to play into the hands of the enemy and expose
the Committee to unnecessary misrepresentation.
Though there is much to be said for the majority view,
I regard mine to be safer and more truly in consonance with
the Lahore resolution on the communal question. 2 There was, in my
opinion, sound reasoning behind my declaration that I should
not attend the Round Table Conference if there was no agreed
settlement of the communal question. Absence of it would mean
1
On June 9. It read: “The Working Committee hope that the efforts that are
now being made to secure honourable and satisfactory settlement of the communal
problem will meet with success. The Committee is of opinion that, even should these
efforts unfortunately fail, in order to avoid any possibility of the Congress attitude
being misunderstood in any shape or form, other conditions being favourable,
Mahatma Gandhi should represent the Congress at the R.T.C., if thereto required, for
the presentation of the Congress position.”
2
Vide “Speech at subjects Committee, A.I.C.C.- III”, 1-1-1930

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

351

absence of unity and absence of unity would deprive the national
demand of the strength required to secure its acceptance.
My proposition therefore before the Working Committee was
that agreed settlement failing, the Congress should give up the hope of
winning a swaraj constitution by the way of the present Round Table
Conference and should wait till all the communities were satisfied to
adopt a purely national solution. The Congress could meanwhile
further consolidate its position and work with greater concentration
for the masses including all the communities and thus make the toilers
of all the other communities regard the Congress as theirs as the
Hindus do.
This does not mean giving up the struggle for freedom.
It all depends upon what we mean by and want through purna
swaraj. If we mean an awakening among the masses, a knowledge
among them of their true interest and ability to serve that interest
against the whole world and if through purna swaraj we want
harmony, freedom from aggression from within or without and a
progressive improvement in the economic condition of the masses, we
can gain our end without political power and by directly acting upon
the powers that be. One form of direct action is adult suffrage. The
second and more potent form is satyagraha. It can easily be shown
that whatever is needful and can be gained by political power can
perhaps be more quickly and more certainly gained by satyagraha. If
such is the case and if, in spite of all, [the] attempt to secure an
honourable settlement of the communal question fails it is obvious
that we should give up the attempt to secure a swaraj constitution at
the present moment. It is better and quicker to wait till the Congress
has become equally popular with the other communities than to
attempt to force swaraj through highly artificial surroundings. If the
Congress means what it says, it cannot be long gaining the adherence
of all the other communities. Meanwhile the Congress must fulfil its
mission of representing the starving millions by fighting for their
relief, if it cannot do so by gaining power then by gaining that relief
through the government existing at the moment. Whilst discussing this
probability with English friends, I was reminded that this position was
hardly fair, not to take the power to make the reforms and to force the
hands of those who cannot carry on the administration if they grant
the reforms, in their opinion only so called. I pointed out the fallacy
underlying the rebuke. The Congress is ever ready to take the power
352

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

if it is given to it but the Congress is too weak to seize power from
unwilling hands in the artificial surroundings of the Round Table
Conference and that in the absence of real unity between the chief
actors, the communities.
The Congress wants the substance not the shadow. It can therefore wait for the shadow of power, it cannot wait for the substance of
freedom which the dumb millions so badly need and can understand.
I have placed before the public the main part of the argument I
placed before the Working Committee. It failed to convince its
majority. It may fail therefore to convince too the majority of the
public. Nevertheless my position will probably be the same as now if
and when the Conference fails to meet the Congress position.
But having accepted the resolution of the Working Com-mittee,
I shall faithfully carry it out and work at the Conference with all
possible zeal, if I am destined to attend it. I should not reject real
power if it is real. I should put my whole soul into working for it. But
I have wisdom and patience enough to wait for it if necessary and
know that such waiting may be a process of hastening.
Young India, 18-6-1931

482. NATIONAL UNIVERSITIES
The head master of Tilak Vidyalaya thus rebukes me:1
I gladly publish the letter if only to advertise the very good
work of the national school of Nagpur. As for the Tilak University, I
am not sure that I omitted to mention it on the occasion referred to.
My speech was not previously prepared. It had to be delivered
extempore. Whatever names I took were merely illustrative and not
exhaustive. I can certainly recall many national institutions which
rendered great service during the struggle. My object was to show the
very marked contrast between the Government institutions and the
national ones and to show that every anna spent in the latter was an
anna spent for swaraj. I showed too that in the nature of things it
1
The letter is not reproduced here. It complained of Gandhiji’s failure, in his
speech at Gujarat Vidyapith (vide “Speech at Convocation, gujarat Vidyapith,
Ahmedabad”, 11-4-1931), to mention the Tilak Maharashtra Vidyapith of Poona and
the Tilak Vidyalaya of Nagpur and their contribution to civil
disobedience
movement; vide also, “Letter to M. G. Datar”, 26-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

353

could not be otherwise. However badly managed the Congress may
be, it is still that and that alone which can usher in swaraj and not a
Government department. It is once more a question of swadeshi v.
videshi 1 . The English paraphrase is: ‘a good Government is no
substitute for self-Government’.
Young India, 18-6-1931

483. COLOUR BAR IN EDINBURGH
The Honorary Secretary, Edinburgh Indian Association, writes:
It will be recalled that in 1927 all the cafes, restaurants and dance halls,
imposed the colour ban, but after representations being made to various
authorities a compromise was reached and soon after the ban was raised, again
this year two cafes in Edinburgh have renewed the colour ban. These two cafes
(Strand Cafe and Cafeteria) refuse to admit coloured students as a whole without
any reasons. Edinburgh Indian Association approached the Lord Provost of
Edinburgh and the Students’ Representative Council of Edinburgh University,
but so far no action has been taken by them and the colour ban still continues.

The Hon. Secretary does not say why the two Cafes have
restored the ban or why it was originally introduced. Denial of the use
of refreshment rooms in the West is an inconvenience of which we in
India can have no adequate conception. Intense public agitation is the
only way to deal with this prejudice. The Edinburgh Indian Association will do well to supply the public with full facts.
Young India, 18-6-1931

1

354

Foreign
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

484. HINDI IN THE SOUTH
It was a good sign that at the same time as the Tamil Nadu
Conference a Hindi Prachar Conference too was held. The people of
the Southern Presidency are under promise to send for the next year
Congress delegates who would speak and understand Hindi. If we
were not living in artificial conditions, the people living in the South
will not consider the learning of Hindi as a strain on them, much less a
superfluity. It is surely more necessary for them to learn Hindi than
for the Hindi-speaking population to learn the Southern languages.
There are two speaking and understanding Hindi against one speaking
the Southern languages in all India. There must be for all India a
common language of inter-provincial contact in addition to, not in
the place of, the provincial language or languages. It can only be
Hindi-Hindustani. Some who altogether dismiss the masses from their
minds would regard English not merely as an alternative but the only
possible medium. This proposition would be unthinkable but for the
hypnotic influence of foreign domination. For the masses of the
South who must take an ever-growing part in national affairs, what can
be easier—learning Hindi which has many words in common with
their languages and which at once gives them access practically to the
whole of the North or learn English a wholly foreign tongue spoken
only by a select few? The choice really depends upon one’s conception of swaraj. If it is to be of and for only the English-knowing
Indians, English is undoubtedly the common medium. If it is to be for
and of the starving millions, of the illiterate millions, of the illiterate
women, of the suppressed untouchables, Hindi is the only possible
common language. Those who think like me will therefore welcome
the report of the great progress made by Hindi during the past twelve
years of the existence of organized propaganda. Here is the record of
work during the period:
Number of those who have taken to the study of Hindi
,,

,,

,,

4,00,000

acquired a working knowledge
of it

2,50,000

,,

,,

,,

appeared for our examinations

11,000

,,

,,

,,

passed the examinations

10,000

,,

readers published by the Sabha in its own press

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

3,00,000

355

.,

,,

sold

2,50,000

Varieties of books published

35

(All of them have gone through numerous editions, one through 12.)
Number of centres at which Hindi has been taught so far

400

,,

,,

working now (total

150

,,

,,

,,

under direct control

25

,,

,,

where examinations were held in Feb. ‘31

113

teachers trained so far

250

,,

Total funds raised and spent so far

Rs.

2,50,000

,,

,,

,,

from North India

Rs.

1,55,000

,,

,,

,,

from South India

Rs.

95,000

Let us hope that during this year of grace the progress will
be still more rapid and that the finance will be found wholly by the
South. It will be a test of the desire of the South to learn the national
language and to make India one indivisible whole.
Young India, 18-6-1931

485. NOTES
S WARAJ F OR C EYLON

A Ceylon correspondent asks the following strange questions1 :
I do not know that Ceylon is a bankrupt island or that it is
necessarily bankrupt because it does not manufacture all its own cloth
or grow all the grains it eats. But assuming that Ceylon is as the
correspondent describes, it has2 all the greater reason for being free.
Possibly Ceylon’s economic condition is bad, if it is bad, because of
its dependence. I cannot conceive of a single occasion when slavery or
dependence can be preferable to swaraj or freedom.
So far as India’s help is concerned, when India is free, whether
she will or no, her freedom will automatically spur Ceylon to
1

Not reproduced here. The first question was whether an economically dependent country should seek swaraj; and secondly, whether India would help Ceylon in
attaining freedom.
2
The source has “is”.

356

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

deliverance, if it does not actually bring it. India’s freedom must
mean more freedom to her neighbours and even other countries in the
East as her slavery or dependence means a hindrance to their growth.
Disease among neighbours can never be an advantage. And a diseased
continent like India must be a perpetual menace to her neighbours.
Dependence is perhaps the greatest disease. Mere physical illness is
any day preferable to the illness of the soul. The latter brings in its
train all kinds of physical afflictions and worse.
Young India, 18-6-1931

486. JAPANESE OR BRITISH?
That from the economic standpoint (and that is the only
standpoint important for the millions) boycott of Japanese cloth is
much the most important is clear from the following letter1 from Sjt.
H. P. Modi, President, Bombay Mill-owners’ Association.
If therefore there is any laxity on the part of boycott workers,
they will remember that emphasis on boycott of British cloth would be
of no avail whatsoever from the economic viewpoint. Incidentally one
can see how British cloth has been hit by Japanese cloth.
Young India, 18-6-1931

487. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
BORSAD,

Before Morning Prayers, June 18, 1931
CHI. KUSUM,

I had not understood your message, but I did understand your
letter and felt unhappy. The very fact that there was no letter from
you suggested that you were running away from me. Whether or not
you should do that depends on you. Be wise and wake up. You can
come here any day you wish to.
1

Not reproduced here. The correspondent had pointed out that the most serious
competitor of the Indian textile industry was Japan rather than Great Britain and that
competition from Japan was as serious a menace to the Indian industry as it was to
Lancashire trade.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

357

We shall be leaving this place on the 23rd. I shall have to go to
Bombay for two days.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1822

488. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
BORSAD,

June 18, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

I thank you for your letter of the 10th inst. enclosing copy of a
letter from Messrs Ramjilal & Bros1 . If the facts stated by them are
correct, I quite agree with you that picketing should be suspended. I
am therefore writing2 to the local Congress Committee to investigate
the matter, telling them that unless they can satisfactorily prove the
relevant allegations made in Messrs Ramjilal’s letter are incorrect,
picketing should be suspended. I enclose copy of my letter for your
information.
Yours sincerely,

Encl. I
H. W. EMERSON, E SQ.
HOME S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
S IMLA
A.I.C.C. File No. 387, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

1

Importers and dealers of foreign piece-goods, who had complained of
harassment and coercion by Congress pickets
2
Vide the following item.

358

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

489. LETTER TO SECRETARY, CONGRESS COMMITTEE,
CAWNPORE
BORSAD,

June 18, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I enclose herewith copy of a letter received by the Central
Government from Messrs Ramjilal & Bros. If the allegations about
picketing are correct, it is a clear case for immediate suspension of
picketing. Unless, therefore, you can satisfactorily disprove the
allegations made in the 2nd and subsequent paragraphs of the letter,
you will, I hope, suspend picketing at once. I would like you to wire1
to me what action you propose to take.
Yours sincerely

THE S ECRETARY
LOCAL C ONGRESS C OMMITTEE
C AWNPORE
C OPY TO MR. E MERSON.
A.I.C.C. File No. 387, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

490. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
June 18, 1931
MY DEAR RAIHANA,

I trust your truthful nature too well to be shocked by anything
you say. But your thoughts are cloudy and confused. But we cannot
discuss the thing today. There is no hurry. Perhaps the things will be
clear because of your search and because of your promise to do what
I have advised for the sake of discipline though not from conviction.
Often an honest acceptance of discipline has brought conviction. And
so may it be with you. You did well in writing to me so frankly.
Let me correct one belief of yours about me. You say, “I know
that you are too pure for sex-consciousness yourself.” I wish this was
a true certificate. I am sorry to have to disillusion you. I am trying to
lose that consciousness. But I have not lost it. Loss of that
1

Vide footnote 2, “Letter to R. M. Maxwell”, 26-4-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

359

consciousness cannot be relative; it must be absolute. I do not know
any historical instance. It is difficult, I know, for history to record
such instances.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: S.N. 9631

491. LETTER TO V. K. SADAGOPACHARIAR
BORSAD,

June 18, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I hope that you will vigorously defend the
case in the court and take all the legal steps that will be necessary in
order to vindicate your position. I am doing all I can at this end but
when the allegation is that there is a breach of the Criminal Law, I am
helpless. My function comes into operation only when a breach of
any part of the Settlement can be proved. In this case therefore, unless
picketing, admitted to be peaceful, is prohibited, the Settlement cannot
be utilized to obtain relief.1
Yours sincerely,

S YT . V. K. S ADAGOPACHARIAR
P RESIDENT , T ALUK C ONGRESS
C OMMITTEE
TIRUTTANI (CHITTOOR DT.), S. INDIA
From a microfilm: S.N. 17308

1
In a letter to C. Rajagopalachari which is not available, Gandhiji advised
him about the details of the action to be taken. The latter had placed these before the
Governor and hoped that favourable orders would be issued.

360

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

492. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
BORSAD,

June 18, 1931
CHI. JAMNALAL,

Shah Mangaldas Harilal Gandhi, Fanaswadi, 2nd Lane, Dadisheth Agiari Lane, Harilal Maneklal Gandhi’s Flats. This gentleman is
Shah Harilal Maneklal Gandhi’s son. One Surajbehn regarded Shri
Harilal as her father. He has all her money. His present condition
cannot be described as good. Surajbehn tells me that at one time it was
very good. I have written to Shri Harilal and told him that it was not at
all proper to keep a widow’s money in a private firm, and that he
should deposit it in the Bank of India and send Surajbehn a receipt in
her name. I enclose his reply. It is possible that there is no risk about
the money. But I feel worried. Request Shri Mangaldas to see you, or
you yourself should call on him, and ask him what the position is. Get
all the facts and see if you can persuade him to deposit the money in
the Bank. It is to be deposited in Surajbehn’s name. Her jewellery is
also in their custody. If possible, get that, too, in your possession, or
secure the Safe Deposit receipts for it, which are in their possession.
You will not immediately require a letter of authority from Surajbehn.
But wire to me if you require one and I will send it. In any case
arrange to see Mangaldas immediately.
I am going there on the 24th to see those English friends. 1 I
shall be accompanied by Vallabhbhai.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2889

1

Vide Vol. “Letter to W. E. Lucas”, 15-6-1931; also “Young Europeans”,
2-7-1931.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

361

493. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
June 18, 1931
CHI. JAMNADAS,

What I had in mind was that you should get the money from the
Vidyapith, but you should get your demand examined and approved
by Kakasaheb. Draw up a report and state the case as you understand
it, and send it to Kakasaheb saying that you are sending it to him for
his serutiny. Are you sure you cannot postpone the plan now that
everything is uncertain?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9325. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

494. LETTER TO PRESIDENT, CONGRESS COMMITTEE,
TIRUTTANI 1
[Before June 19, 1931] 2
Gandhiji has asked picketers not to disobey the order as that would amount to a
breach of the Truce terms on the part of Congress, but he promises to correspond with
the Home Secretary, Government of India.
Meanwhile Gandhiji has asked Tiruttani Congressmen to send him a copy of
the order and details regarding picketing movement in Tiruttani.

The Bombay Chronicle, 20-6-1931

1
In reply to his question whether the local Magistrate’s order prohibiting
picketing of liquor shops should be disobeyed
2
The report appeared under the date-line “Madras, June 19”.

362

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

495. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
BORSAD,

June 19, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

Here are copies of letters received by Syts. Morarji Desai and
Durlabhji Desai, ex-Deputy Collectors for both of whom the Central
Government had advised the Bombay Government to give pension or
gratuity in lieu of pension. You will remember that this was arranged
because you had suggested to Lord Irwin that it would be embarrassing for Provincial Governments to restore officials of high rank to
their original position. I remember your having told me during our
conversations in Simla1 that the Bombay Government had difficulty
about giving anything to the two officials concerned. But I was
unprepared for the letter according to the enclosed copy. Both these
gentlemen had applied not for grace but in terms of the Settlement.
May I therefore ask you to advise the Bombay Government to carry
out the Settlement in respect of these two officials?
Yours sincerely,
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

496. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
BORSAD,

June 19, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

I do not know whether you obtained legal opinion regarding
confiscated guns. Complaints are being received from many places
that these guns are not being restored. In most of these cases, so far as
I can see, the guns were possessed for defending owners and their property against wild beasts. I have several such cases from Karnatak.
Yours sincerely,
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

1

On May 13, 1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

363

497. LETTER TO CAPTAIN BARNES
BORSAD,

June 19, 1931
DEAR CAPTAIN BARNES1 ,

I thank you for your very full letter. I was sorry to learn that
your health had broken down, I hope however that you will be
completely restored very soon. Your letter was redirected to me from
Sabarmati and so I got it just after Khan Saheb had left me. He was
with me quite a few days and for the first time I came in intimate
contact with him. My experience of him is that he is a very sober and
truthful man believing implicitly in non-violence. Your letter however
gives a different picture of him. As he is still within reach I am
sending a friend with a copy of your letter for explanation and if
there is anything further to tell you I shall write again. Could you
please send me a copy of the drama referred to by you with
translation or without, if you cannot easily send me a translation.
Yours sincerely,

C APTAIN BARNES
HAMALA C OTTAGE
NATHIAGALI, N.W.F.P.
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-C, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

498. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
Private

A S AT

S ABARMATI ,

June 19, 1931
MY DEAR CHARLIE,

I have your two letters, both of them quite like you. Here is my
answer to the moral questions you have placed. It is perfectly true that
I would have prohibition of foreign cloth by one blow if I could
manage it and would not feel that there was the slightest trace of
violence in it. At this conclusion I arrived in 1889 and ‘90 when I was
studying in London and keenly following the controversy between
1
Sub-Divisional Officer for the Charsadda sub-division of Peshawar District in
1930; he wrote to Gandhiji on June 14, 1931 describing Abdul Ghaffar Khan’s
speeches as “inflammatory”.

364

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

total prohibitionists and temperance reformers. The former were led
by Sir Wilfred Lawson who contended that all public houses could be
closed without any compensation being paid to the keepers. The
temperance party which was really the party financed by the publichouse keepers put up a strong and successful fight for compensation
and graduation. If a man is making a living out of wrongdoing he
gains no prescriptive right and therefore is entitled to no compensation or consideration when his business is stopped whether by the
‘State or by his customers refusing to deal with him. It is irrelevant to
consider what would happen to the many labourers who might be
engaged unconsciously in helping the wrongdoer. The assumption at
the back of this argument is that wrong must be righted at any cost
and that the harm that may temporarily seem to result to the
wrongdoer and his dependents is only apparent and that in the end he
and they are all the better for it. If such was not the case, many a
reform would become impossible. Of course it is open to you to say
that you will not put foreign-cloth trade on a level with liquor or
opium trade. But this is a matter of opinion.
If I was bolstering up the Bombay mills in any shape or form it
would undoubtedly be violence. But my conscience is quite clear on
that point. I am not only not bolstering up the Indian mills but I am
fighting them in many matters. My intervention has resulted in steady
improvement of the conditions of labour. If these mills interfered with
khaddar I should desire their boycott just as strongly as that of
foreign mills.
The remedy for unemployment in England is not thoughtless
generosity of India but a complete realization by England of the
awfulness of exploitation of people, violently brought under subjection by her, and consequent radical changes in her conception of the
standard of life and a return to simplicity. Has generosity, in respect
of a man more fortunate than himself, any meaning for the man who
is living in a state of chronic starvation?
The South African analogy you have quoted is improper. What
you regard as generous action was really necessary action in terms of
non-violence. In order to show that my fight was not intended to
embarrass the Government or to seize power I was bound in
pursuance of non-violence to suspend the struggle 1 in order to show
1

In 1914, during the European railway workers’ strike; vide “Interview to
“Pretoria News” “, 9-1-1914
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

365

that I had no sympathy with the Europeans who were bent on
embarrassing the Government to the point of making it so powerless
as to enable them to seize the reins themselves. Occasions here for
what you would call generosity occurred at the time of the Delhi
Settlement 1 and are occurring whilst the Settlement is being worked
and it would delight your heart if you knew how every such occasion
has been fully availed of. And even with reference to the present
unemployment in England, many a generous gesture is possible but
none is possible if it means continuance of injury to India or fresh
injury. If England ceased to think imperially, if India came to her own
and instead of being a dependency of England became a real partner
or ally, England could get preferential treatment in hundreds of
things, which an awakened India on her road to prosperity would
require from the West. If therefore Lancashire cannot keep all its
labour going through spinning and weaving mills working for other
markets, it should find out some other use for it. Lastly, remember
that even if there was no boycott of foreign cloth and open
competition Japan would outdistance Lancashire as it is already doing.
I have your cable. Of course if I came to London my movement
will be in your hands and I would gladly go to Lancashire as early as
you would want me to.
I quite agree with you that your name should remain in the
background as much as possible.
What undignified controversy over my part in the Boer War. I
had to give the facts to Reuter & The Statesman2 .
Love.
MOHAN
From a photostat: G.N. 969

1

Gandhi-Irwin Pact; vide “Provisional Settlement”, 12-3-1931.
Vide, “Telegram to the Statesman, Delhi’: 15-6-1931 and “Interview to
Associated Press”, 15-6-1931
2

366

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

499. LETTER TO COWASJI JEHANGIR
BORSAD,

June 19, 1931
DEAR SIR COWASJI,

I thank you for your letter1 of the 18th instant.
You may publish any of my correspondence. I am glad that the
2
lady says that there is no ground now for complaint. But I cannot
help repeating in fairness to the parties complained against that they
have never admitted the charges made against them and they have
courted the fullest inquiry. My own position has always been never to
bolster up such charges because I have found by experience that large
movements like ours can only be kept pure by exposing every
weakness among workers.
Yours sincerely

S IR C OWASJI JEHANGIR
F ORT, B OMBAY
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-C, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

500. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BORSAD,

June 19, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

I don’t have time to write much today. The information about
Manjula causes me anxiety. She has got over so many illnesses before
now that she will probably get over this one, too. We should do our
best for her treatment. If Mahavir wants to join the Vidyapith, let him.
Read my letter to him. Sitla Sahay asked me to send my letter to him
through you, and I am doing so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

1
2

Regarding alleged harassment by pickets at Ghatkopar
Mrs. contractor

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

367

501. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BORSAD,

June 19, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letters. I understand what you say about Dwarkanath.
I am in correspondence with him.
We should not pay the premiums on Sorabji’s policy. I see little
possibility of our getting back the original sum. I can think of no
remedy against this.
Has Jamna completely recovered now? Was it that she took too
large a dose of the medicine through mistake, or was it the fault of the
vaid?
Panditji wanted to talk to me about the students. He believes that
the arrangement by which Premabehn teaches Gujarati is not right. It
is not sufficient either. He, therefore, requested that Shivabhai should
be employed. You acceded to the request but put him in the office.
He had also much to say against Premabehn’s temper. The
reading-room remains closed while she is in it, so much so that it is
not opened even for Maganbhai. After hearing all this, I merely said
that, if I inter-vened in the Ashram affairs just now, it would amount to
my living in it, but that, when necessary, I might give some guidance.
I, therefore, advised him to discuss the whole matter with you and
solve the problem. I think you should have a frank talk with him. He
is a straight forward man. If he has not talked to you about all this,
you should use this letter and discuss the matter with him and reassure
him. You may consult me if necessary.
Champa must have arrived there today. I have advised her to
stay in the Ashram. If she does not do that, let her stay in the red
bungalow or anywhere else. Some special arrangement will have to be
made about Shashi’s education. It would be best if you could secure
the services of a good lady teacher. Consult Kakasaheb. Savitabehn,
too, may be able to guide you. Balvant, Champa’s brother, wants to be
permitted to live in the Ashram. I have told him that he may do so if
he agrees to obey the rules. He is also eager to stay with Krishnan
Nair. I have written to him.
Blessings from

BAPU

368

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[PS.]
I will leave this place on the 23rd and spend the 24th and the
25th in Bombay. I then return to Bardoli on the 26th. This last is not
definite.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

502. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
BORSAD,

June 19, 1931
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I had your letter. Take Indu under your loving care. That boy is
pining away without his mother. The thing is that you should, like a
mother, keep a watchful eye on all boys and girls. To any woman who
wishes to serve as a mother, they are her children. Many women may
act as mothers to the same children. If, therefore, any other woman
feels such love in her heart, we should be happy about it. It is but right
that she should feel such love. At any rate you should try to awaken it
in other women.
Whenever you feel upset and worried, let me know. Never lose
heart. Try and get to know personally the men and women who have
recently joined. Remember that you are also a member of the
Managing Committee.
You have taken a rather difficult vow in regard to your food.
Since you take milk, no harm will follow. Keep me informed about
the effects on your health.
Cultivate the acquaintance of Amtulbehn. She seems to have a
very pure heart.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-6: G. S. Gangabehn, pp. 54-5; also C.W. 8777. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

369

503. LETTER TO RATANLAL MALAVIYA
BORSAD,

June 19, 1931
DEAR RATANLAL,

I have your letter. I saw the Government notice. It is no doubt
improper. If the students have courage and the spirit of sacrifice they
should not attend college till the flag goes up again.
MOHANDAS GANDHI
S HRI R ATANLAL MALAVIYA
LAW S TUDNET
NEW HOSTEL
C OLONELGANJ
ALLAHABAD-U.P.
From the Hindi original. Courtesy: Gandhi National Museum and Library

504. LETTER TO VICEROY
BORSAD,

June 20, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your kind letter of the 17th instant. So far as I
am personally concerned I am concentrating on implementing the
Settlement by the Congress, practically to the exclusion of every other
activity.
I am,
Yours sincerely

M. K. GANDHI
EXCELLENCY THE VICEROY
S IMLA
Home Department, Political File No. 33/9/1931. Courtesy: National Archives
of India

370

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

505. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
BORSAD,

June 20, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

I have your letter of 16th June enclosing extract from an
account received from the Madras Government regarding picketing. It
does make bad reading if the report is true. But what I am receiving
almost daily from Madras from workers who are thoroughly reliable
eye-witnesses makes me distrust the reports that you are receiving. But
I know that this takes us no further. So far as the Congress is
concerned I want it to implement the Settlement to the fullest extent. I
therefore make an offer. Will you advise local governments to appoint
a Board of Enquiry consisting of a nominee on their behalf and a
nominee on behalf of the Congress to conduct a summary enquiry
into the allegations on either side, and wherever it is found that the
rule of peaceful picketing has been at all violated picketing would be
entirely suspended, the Government undertaking on its part to stop
prosecutions wherever it is found that they have been undertaken in
spite of peaceful picketing. And if my suggestion does not commend
itself to you, you will perhaps suggest something better and more
acceptable. Meanwhile I am enquiring into the specific charge
mentioned in your letter.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 9369. Courtesy: India Office Library

1

For the addressee’s reply, vide “Letter from H. W. Emerson”, 4-7-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

371

506. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
BORSAD,

June 20, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

With reference to your letter enclosing extract from a report
dated 19th May from the District Magistrate, Surat, I now send you a
translation of the statement that Naran Dulabh1 , the party named in the
extract, has made.
Yours sincerely

M. K. GANDHI

Encl. 1.
Home Department, Political, File No. 33/9/1931. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

507. LETTER TO BHUJANGILAL K. CHHAYA
BORSAD,

June 20, 1931
CHI. BHUJANGILAL,

I have your letter. I know that there has been a long-standing
bond between your family and me. My letter to Jamnadas asking him
to go and see you was in answer to your previous letter. You may see
me here at Borsad on Tuesday. A bus for Borsad is always available at
the Anand railway station.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2602

1

Who had agreed to lease his land to Dhanjishaw Erachshaw, liquor seller, but,
finding that village opinion was adverse, had decided not to lease the land

372

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

508. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
BORSAD,

June 20, 1931
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I have read the resolution about Bhagat Singh which you sent.
Dev, too, had sent a copy at your suggestion. I did not like it at all.
The word “today” has affected the value of the resolution. The
addition of “today” may suggest that even today the meeting has no
faith in non-violence. Even those who do not look upon non-violence
as an unalterable article of faith need not feel it necessary to add
“today”.
I shall arrive there not on the 24th but on Thursday, the 25th. I
at any rate will travel by Gujarat Mail. If you wish, you may discuss
this matter further with me then.
Read the accompanying letter about Chaunde Maharaj and
inquire into the matter if necessary.
Rajendrababu should give up the idea of going to Bihar at present. Has Radhika come there?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N, 2890

509. LETTER TO PADMA
BORSAD,

June 20, 1931
CHI. PADMA,

I have your letter. I cannot understand why Vasumatibehn
should try to get your private notebook. Nobody is entitled to take
anything belonging to somebody else without the latter’s knowledge.
I am inquiring about the matter. Do not, however, take it very much to
heart. You should be generous. Your chief aim should be to improve
your health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6121
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

373

510. LETTER TO NANABHAI I. MASHRUWALA
BORSAD,

June 20, 1931
BHAI NANABHAI,

If people, despite gentle persuasion, persist in disregarding the
khadi rule persons like Deshpande should resign and give all their
time to the propagation of khadi. In such circumstances, one can serve
the Congress even from outside.1
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6682

511. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
BORSAD,

June 20, 1931
CHI. KANTA,

I have your letter. You must have forgotten Gujarati now. I am
writing this letter in Gujarati so that you may not forget it completely.
I have no interest in examinations at all. True examination is that to
which your teacher himself submits you. A certificate from the place
of study should be sufficient. The best certificate is one’s own. What
is the point of my having a certificate for proficiency in arithmetic if I
cannot do addition and substraction? If I do not know who Ashoka
was and what he did, what is the use of my having a similar certificate
in history? This contains the reply to your letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

1

374

Vide “Notes”, , sub-title, “Duty of Disciplinarians”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

512. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
BORSAD,

June 20, 1931
CHI. PARASRAM,

I had your letter. Why do you ask whether or no I have
confidence in you? If I had none, could I have exhorted you to make
big sacrifices? Yet, I may tell you that I cannot pronounce you free
from restlessness. Can you spin 250 yds. in an hour on the takli? The
pictures you have sent are highly objectionable.1 All of them deserve
to be burnt up.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I will look into members’ spinning.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 7489; also C.W. 4966. Courtesy:
Parasuram Mehrotra

513. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
BORSAD,

June 20, 1931
BHAI GHANSHYAMDASJI,

I have your letter and the reply to Lindsay’s letter. I shall
go through the reply and suggest if anything yet remains to be
said.
It is good that khadi is being hawked. Here is my message:
“If swaraj means food for the poor, can any aspirant for swaraj,
man or woman, use any cloth other than khadi? Khadi, though costly,
costs less because we have to make do with less of it than the quantity
of other cloth that we would otherwise consume.”
You have mentioned “hawking of khadi and propagation of
swadeshi”. What do you mean by the latter phrase?
It will be fine if the Bose and Sen Gupta affair is settled.
1

In the pictures Gandhiji had been represented as Lord Krishna and the other
leaders as five Pandavas.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

375

That the Working Committee has passed a resolution1 does not
mean that my going has been finally decided. For one thing I have
received no invitation and even if I do receive one, many obstacles lie
in the way. The Provincial Governments have grown very slack in the
implementation of the Delhi Pact. I have no enthusiasm left for going
to England. Read carefully my article in Young India 2 and also the
one to be published tomorrow in Navajivan. I have come exactly to
that view now. That way alone lies the well-being of the people, not
otherwise. I have some slight doubt regarding the last two words, but
even that is growing fainter now.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From Hindi: C.W. 7890. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

514. LETTER TO SUMANGAL PRAKASH
BORSAD,

June 20, 1931
CHI. SUMANGAL,

I have your letter. If you are on the way to recovery what need
is there to get yourself involved in any hocus-pocus? Please write to
Ramdasji that witchcraft should be shunned even if it is effective in
curing illness because it weakens one’s faith in God.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: Sumangal Prakash Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
memorial Museum and Library

1

On June 9 at Bombay; vide footnote 1, “Substance Not Shadow”, 18-6-1931
“Substance Not Shadow”, 18-6-1931, which was reproduced in Hindi
Navajivan of the same date. For the Gujarati article, vide the Addendum.
2

376

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

515. MY NOTES
NUDITY AND S OCIETY

An article on this subject has appeared in Jain Mitra. Its author,
Jain-Nyaya Tirtha Paramesthidas, has asked me to reply to the article;
I wished to express my view in this issue, but in spite of best effort I
could not find the necessary time. I hope to reply to it at the earliest
opportunity.1 As the problem is not of immediate importance, I have
had naturally to give priority to other more urgent matters.
S TUDENTS 2

A student writes:
I hear that such undertakings are demanded in other provinces
also. I will not discuss here the question whether this involves a
violation of the Settlement but this raises another question which
requires discussion. Why should parents give such an undertaking;
and if they do, what would be its value? It is likely that the authorities
will act wrongly in many things which lie outside the terms of the
Settlement. When that happens, one’s duty lies not in acquiescing in
such action or co-operating with the authorities but in not co-operating with them. No one should interpret the Agreement to mean that
the people should now give up resistance to authority and sit back
with folded hands. An agreement may clarify certain things, but may
not clarify some others. The people should certainly not sacrifice their
self-respect in matters not so clarified. Hence I would certainly advise
parents or students not to give such undertakings if they are
demanded from them and if for that reason the latter cannot attend
Government schools, they should stay away from them. All persons
thus concerned should remember that the present uncertain state will
not last long. Before the beginning of the next year at the latest, we
shall have known whether the Congress demand is going to be
accepted. There is no need to say what should be done in case it is
rejected.
3

1

Vide “Digambar Sadhus”, 5-7-1931.
Vide “Notes”, sub-title, “Self-respect above All”.
3
The letter is not translated here. It enclosed a guarantee form to be filled in
by guardians that their wards would not participate in political activities.
2

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

377

F REEDOM ABOUT S ALT
Can we carry salt from a village where it may be manufactured and sell it in
surrounding villages where it cannot be?

If the villages are so near that one can reach them on foot one
can certainly sell there the salt manufactured by oneself.
Does the Simla Notification make any difference to the law hitherto in force
that, within 10 miles of the coastline, no one could stock more than one Bengal
maund of salt?

There can be no such law though I had heard of a notification
to that effect having been issued. The latest notification issued should
be understood to cancel all previous notifications that may be
inconsistent with it. The correct position is this: According to the
Agreement one may stock the salt needed for one’s consumption or
manufactured by oneself within the limits of one’s village and
intended for sale in places which one can reach on foot.
Can one stock salt for sale? Fishermen need more salt in the month of
Bhadrapad. Can one stock enough salt for them and sell it to them at that time?

The answer to this is included in the reply above.
Can we make in Government land the pits and beds for manufacturing salt? Or
should we make them in our own?

Such pits can be made wherever salt can be manufactured. As
for private land the owner’s permission would be required, and hence
the Agreement implies that pits may be made in Government land or
one’s own.
IRRELIGION IN THE NAME OF R ELIGION

There is a village, named Raghvanaj in Matar Taluka. It is well
known that under Thakkar Bapa’s supervision, wells for Antyajas are
being dug at many places in Gujarat, and one such well is being dug
at Raghvanaj. The person supervising the work there had sent to
Thakkar Bapa a report, the following extract from which deserves to
be pondered over by all Hindus.1
This is the height of tyranny. I do not blame the Dharalas much
for the incident. The blame lies with the so-called highcaste Hindus.
The Dharalas are merely acting under the influence of the atmosphere
which the former have created. In wielding this whip of my pen, I
1

The passage is not translated here. It described how Dharala masons were
punished for working alongside Dhed volunteers.

378

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have little hope of waking up the Dharala men and women, but I do
certainly hope to be able to wake up Congress workers and the readers
of Navajivan. In such a situation, the Congress workers who come to
know of it should themselves take up the spade and start working,
explain the meaning of dharma to Dharalas and others who may be
oppressing the Antyajas and teach the latter to shed fear and to be
self-reliant. All this can be easily done as soon as we get ready to work
with our own hands. But we would do so only if we feel revolted by
such oppression.
MILLIONS S MOKED AWAY

A correspondent from Calcutta writes as follows:1
It is not very likely that my writing on the subject would end the
present waste of millions on smoking. But, apropos of this letter, I
may remark here on a phenomenon which I have been observing. We
seem to have become indifferent in keeping up the reforms which had
spontaneously spread during the satyagraha movement. The inference
to be drawn from this is alarming. If we behave well only while we are
fighting and lapse into slackness as soon as the intoxication of battle is
over, it would be difficult, if not impossible, to preserve swaraj after it
is won. In that case, would it not be desirable that the struggle be
prolonged? Perhaps such a conclusion is not altogether justified, but I
certainly fear that it may be in the interest of the country that the
struggle should continue sufficiently long so that the people may
acquire the capacity to preserve swaraj. The fight ended before we had
acquired strength enough to assimilate the reforms brought about
while it was going on. May I hope that readers who have become
indifferent in this matter will draw the appropriate lesson from this,
shake off their indifference and wake up others as well? To those who
realize that the satyagraha fight is a fight for self-purification, every
day is a day of battle or, if you like, of peace, for the effort for
self-purification should not be relaxed even for a moment.
[From Gujarati]
Javajivan, 21-6-1931

1

The letter is not translated here. It said that cigarettes, boycotted during the
struggle, were coming back into use.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

379

516. WHEAT OR CHAFF1
Everyone must have read the resolution of the Congress
Working Committee. It says in substance that if other conditions are
favourable and if I am invited, I should attend the Round Table
Conference to put before it the Congress demand even if the
communal question remains unsolved. I did not like the resolution. I
opposed it. I even placed before the Committee for discussion a draft
resolution along the lines I desired. But I was defeated and the
resolution to the above effect was passed by a majority.
Though I am often described as an autocrat, I consider myself a
man who accepts the supremacy of the people’s voice; it is in my
nature to give in to a panch. Panch means the voice of the people. I,
therefore, accepted the resolution passed by the majority. There is an
exception to this rule. We cannot give in to anyone on a question of
principle. But there are not many principles in life. one who at every
step refuses, in the name of principle, to listen to others is autocratic
and selfish. Questions of principle arise only rarely. Here there was no
such question, and so I gave in. I had often declared my determination not to attend the Round Table Conference if the Hindu-Muslim,
i.e., the communal question was not solved. But I could not convince
the Working Committee of the correctness of my position. Ordinarily
it would not be proper for me to put before the public my argument.
No member has a right to publish anything that is discussed in the
Working Committee. But in this case, the Committee has given me
permission to do so. The Committee felt that in order to enable me to
explain my position as also its own policy it was necessary to give me
such permission.
The reasoning behind my reluctance to go to the Round Table
Conference without solving the communal question was as follows:
Even if the question was solved, the acceptance of the Congress
demand in England was unlikely, but if it was not solved the sanction
behind the demands would be lost. ‘You cannot put your own house
in order and cannot unite yourselves, and still you ask for independence!’ Even if the members do not say this openly out of politeness,
they would think thus and we would read their thought in their eyes.
And they would, on the whole, be justified in taunting us thus.
1

380

Vide footnote 2, “My Notes”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

It would be better to accept our weakness rather than invite ridicule by going in such a pitiable condition. A satyagrahi never hides
his weakness. According to the law of satyagraha, from the admission
of weakness new strength is born. The first step in conquering
weakness is its admission.
No one should conclude from my argument that the Working
Committee’s resolution is an attempt to hide our weakness. It reflects
the consequence of weakness and hence amounts to unconscious
hiding of it. The logical consequence of the admission of the weakness would be not to go to the Round Table Conference. That alone
would be true admission of the weakness. One who does not have the
strength to walk and admits that in words but actually tries to walk, has
not truly admitted his weakness and by walking weakens himself all
the more. He may even faint and collapse.
Now if we admit our incapacity to solve the problem and do not
send a representative of the Congress to the Round Table Conference,
what should we do instead? That would not mean that we give up our
fight for purna swaraj. The Round Table Conference is only one
means of securing it. We may have to let go that means. Everyone will
understand this much at once. But we should even give up the desire
and the hope to secure purna swaraj through the Round Table
Conference. We have then to swallow one bitter dose, and that is that
whatever fight we start will not be for purna swaraj in name, though
the result would be the same.
If the communal question cannot be solved satisfactorily now,
then it means that the methods which we have tried so far to solve it
were wrong or inadequate. The attempts so far made aimed at bringing about understanding among the Hindu and Muslim politicians.
They were of the nature of a fight for power among them. From such
fighting no unity can come, none has come at least. If, therefore, the
Congress desires unity of the heart, it should get out of that field and
try to gain power over the hearts of Muslims and the other communities as it has gained over those of the Hindus. Such an attempt is
bound to result in a unity of hearts. There is no scope for failure in it.
The power of the Congress has its source in service of the people. If
the Congress programme is so organized that the Muslims and the
others continue to get equal benefit, then they also will come to know
the Congress.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

381

It is not that today nothing is done for their service. Nevertheless
we must acknowledge the fact that Muslims, Sikhs and others do not
respond to the Congress as much as the Hindus do. Instead of finding
fault with these communities for this state of affairs, it would be better
and more graceful for the Congress to admit its deficiency.
When the Congress will be overflowing with Indians other than
Hindus, then there will be no difference between a communal solution
and a national solution, the Muslims or other communities will not be
afraid, because they are fewer in number, of the far more numerous
Hindus, and the Hindus, physically weaker though in a majority, will
not be afraid of the physically stronger Mussalmans or Sikhs. Each
community’s strength will benefit the other communities. Unless such
conditions are created, paper swaraj will fly off with a puff like the
sheet of paper on which it is written.
What is paper swaraj, and what is the other swaraj? Let us see.
The swaraj got through the Round Table Conference means the swaraj
constitution accepted by us and passed by British Parliament into law.
This is the swaraj on the statute book, i.e., paper swaraj. Behind it,
there would not be the signatures of the millions; in fact the millions
would not be trusting one another. If Hindus and Muslims in Kanpur
and Kashi are fighting one another, then such swaraj would be no
better than chaff.
True swaraj is that which will have signatures of the millions
behind it, whose cool shelter the millions would enjoy, and in which
the incidents at Kanpur and Kashi would be past history to us and we
would laugh heartily at our past follies. Whether or not such swaraj
has become statutory, it would be true swaraj and would be like wheat,
for it would be nourishing.
I am of the view that if we cannot solve the communal question
satisfactorily and if we decide to fight for the swaraj of my conception, then our boycott of the Round Table Conference will be a sign
of our strength and will uphold our self-respect.
This is the fight of my conception. Even if the communal
question is not solved and the representative of the Congress does not
attend the Round Table Conference, something is bound to be done.
Let the communal-minded Hindus and Muslims and others share a
little power with the British under that Constitution and think that they
are participating in ruling the country. The Congress instead of asking
for power from that Government will demand the things for which
382

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

they want power and, if they are refused, it will fight through satyagraha. We do not want political power for its own sake, we want it for a
certain end. That end is service of the millions. If we cannot get today
the reins of power in our hands to improve their economic, moral and
social conditions, we need not on that account stop that work.
By giving such a turn to the fight for swaraj, we can bypass the
communal tangle and invite all the people to join the fight. Nobody
will be able to keep out of it. Those who refuse to join will lose their
face. All those who have the spirit of self-sacrifice and courage cannot
but join in the demand for what is necessary for the uplift of the
millions.
For example, a fight for revision of the land revenue laws to
make them more equitable and to reduce the burden of land revenue
would be for the benefit of all communities and in time everybody
would join it. Such a fight would result either in the desired reforms
being effected or in those holding power handing over the power to
the rebellious people. Either result would mean the same to us. As a
result of such a fight communal discords would disappear and the
people would know who their servants were and who their masters.
The people’s strength would increase day by day, they would get true
political education and know where their interests lay. This, according
to me, would be true swaraj. If we adopt such a course in time we
would find purna swaraj in our lap.
But I could not convince the Working Committee of the soundness of this scheme. The majority of the members felt that as the
Settlement had been signed, if other circumstances were favourable I
must attend the Round Table Conference despite the absence of a
solution of the communal question. I will go out of respect for the
collective decision of the Committee. And if I go, I will use all my
ability to present the Congress demand and to get it accepted. But if
the communal question is not solved, I believe it highly improbable
that our demand will be accepted, and if it is not accepted and if it is
decided to resume the fight, I would try to give the fight the turn I
have explained above.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 21-6-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

383

517. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
BORSAD,

June 21, 1931
MY DEAR KUMARAPPA,

Here is another letter from Syt. Chatur Behari Lal Andley. You
know best whether it is of any importance.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU

Encl. I
S YT . J. C. K UMARAPPA
65 E SPLANADE R OAD
BOMBAY
From a photostats G.N. 10096

518. LETTER TO NATHAM MUSLIM ASSOCIATION,
ABIRAMA
[AS AT] S ABARMATI ,

June 21, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your telegram 1 . I know that Indian life is in danger in
Burma, but what can be done from here? You have to make such
effort as you can on your side and wherever safety is threatened you
should migrate to safer places. And in order that some action can be
taken at this end, you should send full particulars of loss of life and
how the loss occurred. Are the Burmans in the villages hostile to
Indian trade and Indian residence? Are our people well-behaved
towards them? If you will give me all these particulars it might be
possible to create public opinion here.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Hindu, 2-7-1931

1
It read: “Lives, properties of innumerable innocent Indians in Burma still in
great danger. Massacre reported daily. Pray persuade authorities take immediate
necessary steps to restore peace and harmony.”

384

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

519. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
BORSAD,

June 21, 1931
BHAI KASHINATH,

I got your letter.
I certainly intend to write something about the Digambar Jain
Sadhus.1 I am thinking what I can write.
I had a talk with Haribhau, too, about your decision to leave. I
understand your reasons. You two cannot save yourselves from
falling. The fact is that you have already fallen.
He who curbs the organs of action but allows the mind to dwell
on sense-objects,—such a one, wholly deluded, is called a hypocrite.2
Here we should understand vimudhatma to mean merely that the
person lacks true knowledge and that, therefore, his outward
self-control is of no value. The man who lets his mind dwell on lustful
thoughts cannot be regarded a brahmachari simply because he
refrains from physical gratification. In other words, one must banish
from one’s mind all evil thoughts which may arise in it. Anyone who
wants to succeed in this effort would take the necessary steps, which
you never did. Now you should recognize the lack of self-control in
you both, live humbly as an ordinary married couple and practise
only such self-control outwardly as you can do mentally as well.
Think over the meaning of the bhajan: “Unless the mind is free from
desire, renunciation cannot endure.” Do not feel that I am
reproaching you. Rest assured that I have only tried to open your eyes
to the truth so that you may wake up.
I am enclosing a note 3 saying that the sums which you owe to
Navajivan and the Ashram
should be written off. You may use it. I think that this was a
1
2
3

Vide “Digambar Sadhus”, 5-7-1931.
Bhagavad Gita, III. 6
Vide the following item.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

385

mistake on your part. You should not have incurred debts in that way.
Instead of borrowing money and then seeking exemption from
repaying the loan, at the very time of drawing the money you should
have asked for so much more by way of honorarium. We ought not to
value in terms of money the work done for a public cause. I write this
for the sake of purity in our dealings. Only if we maintain the highest
standards of purity in our practical affairs can we come out of our
abject condition of mind. He who never feels inwardly poor is richer
than even the richest millionaire.
I am going to Bombay from here on Wednesday. Both of you
may come before that if you wish to. You may, however, save your
time and money, if you can be satisfied with my blessings conveyed to
you through a letter from here. We haven’t yet learnt the lesson of
simplicity. This charge applies to nearly everyone. The fault lies with
the circumstances. I have always had plenty of money at my disposal,
so that I have not succeeded in exercising strict control in its use. I
have therefore often wished how good it would be if people stopped
giving us money and we did not even know how we would get our
next meal. Read again my article1 in Navajivan on this subject.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5281

1

386

Vide “Public Expense”, 21-5-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

520. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BORSAD,

June 21, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

Write off the sums which the account books show as due from
Bhai Kashinath. He has not the means to pay them.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

521. LETTER TO LAKSHMINARAYAN GADODIA
BORSAD,

June 21, 1931
BHAI LAKSHMINARAYANJI,

I read your humorous but painful letter, containing the account
of all that happened in Kashmir in connection with the flag. The
sketch is very interesting and reveals the deplorable conditions in the
Indian States. It was your insistence on a written order that saved you.
It is evident an ordinary man, had he carried the flag, would have been
arrested. Let us see what this Round Table Conference accomplishes.
Yes, Kotak is doing good work in Kashmir.
Door to door propaganda is required for the boycott of foreign
cloth. That is more effective than picketing and the result is more or
less permanent.
Should not Dr. Ansari do something about the quarrels in
Delhi? You may suggest this to him.
Yours

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5622

522. LETTER TO PADMA
June 21, 1931
CHI. PADMA,

I am writing this reply on the blank portion of your letter, but I
will not use the whole sheet. You must take careful measures and
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

387

improve your health completely. If you wish, you may go and live
with Sarojinidevi1 , after obtaining the permission of Sitla Sahay 2 and
also of Narandas. But you must get all right before leaving the
Ashram. You are bound to get well if you take regularly the medicine
prescribed for you. Your handwriting has improved a lot. With a little
more effort, it will be still better.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6122

523. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI N. PATEL
BORSAD,

June 21, 1931
BHAI RAOJIBHAI,

I have your letter. If the superior officer does not listen to you
and redress the injustice, I would advise you to put up with it for some
time. Perhaps after a few days I may be able to advise you to take
further steps in the matter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8992

524. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BORSAD,

June 21, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

I have your letter. It was Panditji who told me about Maganbhai.
I certainly thought that there must have been some misunderstanding
on his part over other matters as there was over this. But Panditji
speaks out what he has in mind and then thinks no more about it. That
is a great virtue in him.
Mahadev told me that Manju was perfectly all right now.
The Punjabi vaid seems to charge rather high fee. If, however,
his medicines are effective, why should we not let ourselves be treated
1
2

388

Addressee’s mother
Addressee’s father
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

by him and pay him his fees? Do not allopathic doctors sometimes
charge Rs. 1,000 for a day? Some of them give free service to us. This
vaid thought that, if he could charge others, he could certainly charge
us too. If he is an honest vaid, we should not mind his fee. He does
not charge for a visit separately, but charges for visits and medicines
together. Allopathic doctors charge for them separately.
Shivabhai had a talk with me about his wife. Even if he cannot come, I
see that we have no choice but to admit his wife. If she becomes too
much of a problem, inform Shivabhai. It would be better if she stays
with Gangabehn or with some other woman of equal standing.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U.II

525. LETTER TO LALJI PARMAR
BORSAD,

June 22, 1931
CHI. LALJI,

So I have a letter from you at last. Do not be so lazy again.
Write to your father and tell him plainly that you do not wish even
your engagement to take place just now. Improve your handwriting.
Write to me regularly every week. How much do you weave daily
now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3293

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

389

526. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
BORSAD,

June 22, 1931
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I got your letter. You are doing right in giving your address in
every letter. You should not feel worried but do your duty in the
given circumstances. If you can come away early, you can stay with
me for many days. Nothing is yet certain about my going to England,
but, even if I go, I shall not be able to take you with me, however
much I may wish to do so. The work which I have to do there will not
permit me to do that. Moreover, the expense of taking you with me
will be far too much. That would not become people like us who are
trying to live simple lives. If, however, you come away from there to
stay with me, why need you return? While I am away, you will live in
the Ashram. You are bound to keep good health there. All that is
necessary is that you should come away soon.
For some time, Rajendrababu will stay hereabouts. Afterwards,
he will certainly return to Patna. But that will be after some time yet.
The Committee will meet on July 7.
I am in Borsad, but you should write to me to the Bardoli
address.
[Blessings] from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3415

390

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

527. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
BORSAD,

June 22, 1931
CHI. PREMA,

I have your letter. You have given enough details. I think it
would have been good if you had come and seen me. I could follow
Kisan’s1 letter. Write to her and tell her that I liked it.
Gangabehn’s eagerness to teach the girls all she can is quite sincere and is also admirable. I should like to give her all possible help in
strengthening it. You, too, should help her.
Panditji has much to complain against you. 2 Go to him and
listen to all that he has to say, and reply to his complaints courteously.
It will be difficult to find an inmate of the Ashram as sincere as
Panditji. Win him over. Why should he have reason to complain
against you ? You are by nature harsh, curt, reserved. This much is
true. I don’t think that these are serious defects, but they are bound to
create difficulties. You should, therefore, try to overcome them.
Straighten out matters with Panditji immediately.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Up to the 24th, letters should be directed here. On the 25th and
the 26th, I shall be in Bombay. On the 27th, most probably I shall be
in Bardoli. But it is not certain.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10257; also C.W. 6705. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

1

A friend of the addressee; she had worked hard in Bombay durlng the civil
disobedience movement.
2
The addressee in her book, Bapuna Patro, explains that her insistence on
discipline and her intolerance and discourteous behaviour towards elderly inmates of
the Ashram had caused much resentment.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

391

528. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BORSAD,

June 22, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

This letter will be brought to you by one Mahadev Mailar and
his wife, Sidhudevi. Mahadev was an inmate of the Ashram. He was
married at an early age. He observes complete brahmacharya and tells
me that his wife, too, understands the importance of the vow. Mahadev
works in an Ashram which is being run in a place called Hosari. He
and his wife will ultimately settle in that Ashram. Just now, they wish
to learn Hindi. They will learn other things, too, but they are
especially eager to master Hindi. See what arrangements you can
make for them. Personally, I think you can enlist the services of that
crazy fellow Parasram. Though crazy, he has clung to us. I don’t feel
like shifting him from Kanpur, but we may do that if necessary. It is
certainly desirable that the Ashram should have perfect arrangements
for teaching Hindi.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I have told Mahadev that, if his wife is found to be of no use to
the Ashram, she will have to leave. We shall have to bear the
expenditure on them. They, on their part, are of course willing to
work so that the Ashram is not out of pocket on their account.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

529. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[June 22, 1931] 1
CHI. NARANDAS,

There is only one point in your letter which calls for a reply. In what
context did I tell Soman that he might take his meals separately from
others? I don’t remember having told him this, but I will carry out
whatever he remembers that I told him. The general rule is what you
1

From the contents, the letter seems to have been written a day before the
letter to the addressee dated June 23, 1931; vide “Worth While Questions”, 26-4-1931

392

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

state it to be. Janakibai is a pious woman. We should keep her in the
Ashram as long as she feels happy in it. If you think it proper, show
this to Bhai Soman. What does he do these days?
Mahavir’s fever must have left him.
Mirabehn and Gaur Gopaldas intend to go to the Ashram.
Mirabehn now realizes that her place is in the Ashram or wherever
there is some work to do. She is convinced of this and wishes to live
accordingly. That is why she is going there. Assign her any work you
think proper. Make whatever arrangements you do on the
understanding that, if I have to go to England, she will accompany
me. If I have to go, it will be in the middle of August.
I am intentionally sending Gaur Gopal there. He is a youth of a
very straightforward nature. You must have come to know that he
belongs to a zamindar family. Make him as comfortable as you can
and assign to him any work you think proper. See that he acquires
proficiency in Hindi and learns to card and spin well. I should like
him to complete the whole course in weaving. Arrange his work in
such a way that he gets some time for reading.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Mirabehn will leave by the Kathiawar Mail tomorrow. It arrives
there at 7.30 or 8 a.m. She will hire a tonga from the station to take
her to the Ashram. If Ranchhodbhai or somebody else agrees to go to
the station and take her in a car to the Ashram, that will save her time.
Get Mirabehn’s room vacated for her. Balvant and Gaur Gopal will
probably be travelling with her.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-9: Shri Narandas Gandhine, Pt. I, pp. 263-4; also C.W. 8176.
Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

393

530. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
BORSAD,

June 22, 1931
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I expect much from you at this time. If you wish to cultivate
oneness with all the women and see that the girls make great progress,
you should, instead of undertaking too many tasks, be content with a
few and give more time to general supervision. If you try to do every
small thing yourself, you will not be able to exercise general supervision. You should also give up thinking about new plans of work and
the ambition to jump high. At present you have quite a large number
of grown-up women and girls under your charge. If this field of the
Ashram activities is perfectly organized, the Ashram will overflow with
women and girls. Think that your family is of unlimited size.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-6: G.S. Gangabehnne, p. 55; also C.W. 8778. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

531. ADVICE TO FARMERS, BORSAD
BORSAD,

June 22, 1931
Answering various questions put to him, Mahatma Gandhi said that everyone
who could afford should pay all dues, including past dues and taqavi. By affording, he
meant ability to pay without borrowing and without selling their belongings. He had,
from the moment he entered Borsad, made it clear to the authorities and in his
personal conversation with the Collector, that it was on that basis that he proposed
to work and offer help and it was on that basis that the lists were prepared and
payments made.
He was happy to see that all but Rs. 2,000 to Rs. 3,000 had been paid and he
had been given an assurance that this sum also would be paid up in two or three days.
There was now, therefore, no question of further calls upon them during the present
year. He had, however, written to the Collector, asking him to furnish the names of

394

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

those whom he might suspect of having withheld their correct position from him. He
would be severely disappointed if he had been misled by any of the landholders.
He warned them and told them that if there were any whom they knew, they
should bring their names to his notice and induce them to pay land revenue.
Regarding village officers who were still awaiting reinstatement, he said that he was
in correspondence with the authorities and hoped to have a satisfactory decision
about them.
Concluding, Mahatma Gandhi exhorted Patidars1 , who had taken prominent
part in the struggle, to get rid of untouchability and treat other backward communities, such as Dharalas and Barias, as themselves.
Asked what they should do regarding their confiscated lands sold to third
parties, Mahatma Gandhi said that he hoped still to secure all such lands, but if the
so-called purchasers came to take possession no opposition should be offered them.
If they were still in possession, they could till the land but they should realize that
they ran the risk of having to lose labour and seed if they were called upon to give up
possession, which they would have to do. Whilst no one should work on such land on
behalf of purchasers, no molestation should be offered against those who wished to
work.

The Bombay Chronicle, 24-6-1931

532. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
Monday [On or after June 22, 1931] 2
CHI. KUSUM,

I got your letter. Since you are so far away, I am helpless. I am
decidedly of the opinion that you should give up your intention of
joining the Congress and should cling to your work. Many others
besides you have taken up similar work at my instance. It would
surprise and pain me if you cannot observe even this measure of
self-restraint. However, follow your own inclination.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1823

1

A community in Gujarat, consisting chiefly of peasant farmers
Bapuna Patro-3: Kusum Desaine places this letter after the one dated June 18,
1931; June 22 was Monday.
2

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

395

533. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
BORSAD,

June 23, 1931
MY DEAR KUMARAPPA,

I forgot to get Sardar to wire though we talked for one minute.
You did well to send a reminder. I have now written. You may expect
a wire from Bardoli tomorrow or the day after.
BAPU
ADHYAPAK J. C. K UMARAPPA
GUJARAT VIDYAPITH
AHMEDABAD
From a photostat: G.N. 10097

534. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
June 23, 1931
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,

I got your joint letter (only three lines from Sushila).
Corruption you will find everywhere. The reformer and public worker
should do what he can to remove it, himself remain untouched by it,
and cease worrying. However, personally I do believe that persons like
you would get better support in India and so be able to do some work.
But now that you have gone back there, you should stay on for some
time and, if you wish to wind up the work, do so properly before you
come away. It would certainly be good if Indian Opinion continues.
But rather than that it should pass into the hands of persons who may
not run it well, it had better stop. Everything that exists is bound to
perish sooner or later. Let Indian Opinion, then, meet its end at your
hands. Meet Kallenbach, Omar Sheth and others, and do what you
think proper after discussing the matter with them.
You should plan to return here when the struggle is resumed. It
seems certain that it will be resumed next year, though I will make
every effort to see that it does not become necessary. Don’t decide
anything in haste or excitement.
It is a painful thing that Sorabji should refuse to pay even the
policy premiums. The Ashram cannot pay them. Do not mind if the
396

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

premiums already paid are lost. Now that Jalbhai also is there, see if
you can persuade the two brothers and make them pay the premiums.
Is any surrender value of the policy payable, or nothing at all? What is
Sorabji’s financial condition?
Nothing is yet certain about my going to England. Ramdas and
Nimu have gone to Almora to enjoy the climate for a few days.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4785

535. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
BORSAD,

June 23, 1931
CHI. RAMA,

I got your letter.
The Sisodara programme is all right. Vimu must have returned
there now. Has she grown? What did she do all these months? Ask her
and write to me what she dictates.
I am going to Bombay today for two days. I have asked
Mirabehn to go to the Ashram. She has stayed quite long with me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5331

536. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI N. PATEL
June 23, 1931
CHI. RAOJIBHAI,

If influential workers in Limbasi 1 take the lead and permit
Antyajas, opposition from the few would subside of itself. But they
must be real workers, and not merely workers in name. Why not call
the people of the village together and tell them that you would
disband the Ashram? If the people don’t let you, there is no need to
hurry; if they agree, then too there is no hurry. But it would be good
if they say yes. Our work would get publicity.
1

A village in Matar taluka, Kaira

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

397

My statement that looking for another place of work would
mean parigraha was intended to apply to all. Are not all Ashram
residents under the vow of aparigraha? I mentioned only the ideal. If
a person who is disinclined for some reason to return to the Ashram
finds himself without work at a given place, he may certainly look for
it elsewhere.
I read your letter to Mahadev about the headman. What can we
do in the case? It should be proved that he cannot pay. I cannot do
that from here and so a letter from here can have no effect. If you
write to me from there, giving evidence regarding his condition, or if I
get such a letter from somebody else, I may possibly be able to do
something in the matter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8993

537. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BORSAD,

June 23, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

I sent some letters today with Mahadev Mailar. This will be
brought by Mirabehn.
Did Kaka see Mathew? If the latter gives some time to the
Vidyapith, he will earn respect there. If, however, he does not like the
idea, it may be dropped. When I return from Bombay, I will send for
him and know from him what he wants.
Mahavir’s fever seems to have continued for quite some time. If
Mahadev’s wife can get trained, both seem ready to work. We should
have, but don’t have, a good full-time teacher of Hindi. I will try
again to make some arrangement.
Write to Ratubhai and tell him that Chhaganlal and Lilavati
cause much pain to the Doctor. If he has still any control over them,
he should try to do something in the matter. I have written a strong
letter to Chhaganlal and Lilavati. I don’t know what effect it will have.
Keep a watch over Balvant. Exact hard work from him. Make
some arrangement for his education, too. I know that it is easy to
make such suggestions, but that it is difficult to carry them out. I want
398

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you to do only as much as you can. It is not out of my mind that you
have very few workers.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I suppose I informed you that the Ashram will have to bear the
boarding expenses for Balvant. Gaur Gopaldas will arrive there
tomorrow morning. He will leave this place with me in the evening. He
will spend the night at Anand and arrive there in the morning.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

538. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
BORSAD,

June 23, 1931
CHI. JAMNADAS,

When I asked whether the construction could not be postponed,
I meant the proposed extension. I suggest that it may be postponed till
the end of this year, if possible.
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9326. Courtesy: Jamnadas Gandhi

539. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BORSAD,

June 20/[23], 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,

You must have got the message which I sent with Mahadev
concerning Narahari’s request. I have come to the conclusion that we
need not send anyone at present for picketing.
Manju seems to be safe now. Read my letter to Hariyomal. Persuade him to take milk.
Blessings from

BAPU

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

399

[PS.]
I am starting from here on the 24th and not on the 23rd. [PPS.]
Tuesday [June 23, 1931]
CHI. NARANDAS,

Why did Shankarbhai leave? With whom does Shanta live? How
is Kusum?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati M.M.U./I

540. LETTER TO CHIEF SECRETARY, CENTRAL
PROVINCES
BORSAD,

June 24, 1931
DEAR SIR,

I write this letter regarding the case of Syt. Gopal Anant Ogale1
who was sentenced on the 2nd of April 1931 to one year’s rigorous
imprisonment under Sec. 124 I.P.C. I have gone through the article
and the translation put in as Exhibit in the case and I venture
to submit that in terms of Cl. 13 Sub-section 1 of the Settlement
Syt. Ogale is entitled to discharge because in that article there is
no incitement to violence. That there may be sedition in the article, it
will be admitted, is irrelevant so far as the Settlement is concerned. For
the sake of protection I understand that the case is under appeal but I
suggest that the clause referred to of the Settlement is unequivocal. As
there is no incitement to violence and as he was arrested during the
civil disobedience movement he is entitled to discharge. 2 Indeed, it
seems to me that as soon as the Settlement was published, the
prosecution should have been withdrawn under Cl. 12 Sub-section 1
1

Then Editor of Maharashtra, Nagpur
The reply to this letter, inter alia, states: “The Governor in Council has no
doubt that the case in question is not covered by the Agreement. . . . None the less
before your letter was received the Governor in Council, as an act of grace, had
instructed the Government Advocate, . . . and Mr. Ogale was released on the 29th June
last.”
2

400

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of the Settlement. As the matter relates to a citizen’s liberty I request
prompt attention and early reply.
Yours sincerely

THE C HIEF S ECRETARY
C ENTRAL P ROVINCES GOVERNMENT
NAGPUR (C.P.)
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-C, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

541. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
BORSAD,

June 24, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

You will remember the complaint1 you sent me about Cawnpore
and about which I agreed that if the particular allegations were true, it
is a distinct breach of the Settlement. I had therefore written to the
Secretary. Here is his wire2 in reply. I shall send you his letter also
when it arrives.
Yours sincerely,

Encl. 1
A.I.C.C. File No. 387, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

542. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
BORSAD,

June 24, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

Here is a copy of a precis of an important case in Meerut. The
precis is so admirably prepared that it makes easy reading. I
do suggest that it is a terrible thing that a cultured man like Syt. Shital
Prasad Tayal3 should not be reinstated. I do hope that you will
intervene in the matter. You will observe that the incumbent alleged to
be permanent did not take up the post and the temporary man was
1

Vide “Notes”, sub-title Malaviyaji and Working Committee
It read: “Your letter eighteenth. Allegations entirely baseless. Picketing
perfectly peaceful Letter follows.”
3
A teacher in Meerut Cantonment who had been dismissed for taking part in
the Congress session at Lahore and collecting funds for khadi. The addressee in his
reply dated July 10 declined to reopen the case.
2

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

401

made permanent two months after the Settlement.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

Encl. 1
Home Department, Political, File No. 33/21/1931. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

543. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
BORSAD,

June 24, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

I thank you for your letter 1 of the 19th inst. with reference to
the question of fire-arms. I will not, for the time being, trouble you
with any further argument though I dissent from the view taken by
you. I shall watch the working of the instructions issued to the local
governments. I take it that I am free to make use of the contents of the
Memorandum in my correspondence with local governments on this
question. I shall not make use of it till I hear from you.2
Yours sincerely,
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

1

Which stated: “ . . . You refer to the modification in the original draft of
clause 16 of the Settlement of March 5th. My recollection is that, so far as arms are
concerned, the change was made not to cover the case of arms of which the licenses
had been cancelled, for these were clearly illegal possessions, but in regard to the
seizure of licensed arms taken in the course of searches and in regard to which no
offence had been committed under the Arms Act or otherwise. I am quite clear that in
this connection the present issue was not raised, since I have always realized that the
basic question was that of a re-grant of cancelled licenses. . . .”
2
The addressee wrote back on July 4, 1931: “You are certainly free to quote the
Memorandum. . . .”

402

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

544. LETTER TO H.W. EMERSON
BORSAD,

June 24, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

Your personal letter will be destroyed as soon as I have finished
this.
I believe in the English saying, “Take care of your pennies and
the pounds will take care of themselves”. If we act on the square over
the comparatively little settlement1 , the big issue in London will take
care of itself. I do therefore want (p. 69) you please to straighten out
things on your side. There is a tendency in the Provinces to crush the
Congress and the Congress spirit. It is like distrusting or belittling
one’s partner.
On my side, I do not want you to spare me. Your indictments I
shall appreciate. I do not want to hide or overlook a single breach on
our part. I want us to make (p. 70) full reparation for every wrong act
we may do. For I desire with all my heart a permanent settlement, an
honourable partnership. This is impossible if we conceal our
weaknesses or condone breaches on the part of workers. If you only
saw the letters I daily write, the discussions I daily hold on the
necessity of a faithful (p. 71) performance of what you have called
gentlemen’s agreement.
Khansaheb’s speeches have not all been correctly reported. I
wish it had been possible for you to have met him.
I shall write to you about Pandit Jawaharlal later.
You must not get ill.
The newspaper (72) cutting with your comment came as a tonic
relieving the depression of exhausting correspondence dealing with all
kinds of complaints.
Hope you are feeling better.
From a photostat: India Office Library and Records. Courtesy: The British
Library, London

1

The Provisional Settlement of March 5, 1931. For the text of the Settlement,
Vide “Provisional Settlement”, 12-3-1931
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

403

545. LETTER TO R. M. MAXWELL
BORSAD,

June 24, 1931
DEAR MR. MAXWELL,

May I remind you about several letters regarding the Settlement
to which answers are long overdue? They cover important matters and
I would be grateful if you could let me have early replies. Meanwhile
I have to draw your attention to the fact that with reference to the
restoration of forfeited watans 1 , undertakings are required before
restoration. I send you a copy in connection with one such watan.
The other parties are:
Messrs Hanamant Ramchandra Deshpande of Bilgi,
G. C. Joshi of Guledgud,
Hanumantrao Desai of Andamurnal, Taluk Bagalkot.
These undertakings in my opinion are in breach of the Settlement and
they should be waived as they were in Gujarat in connection with
Mukhis2 .
Whilst I am dictating this letter, I have a letter from Barsi town
from Mr. D. V. Sulakhe. His is a case of confiscation pure and simple.
He has sent a petition to His Excellency, but he has not been given
any reply. The petition of which I have a copy sent to me bears date
16th March.
Yours sincerely,

Encl. 1
R. M. M AXWELL, E ST.
P RIVATE S ECRETARY TO
HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR OF BOMBAY
MAHABALESHWAR
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-C, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

1
2

404

Hereditary land grants or cash allowances for performance of service
Village headmen
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

546. LETTER TO K. B. BHADRAPUR
BORSAD,

June 24, 1931
DEAR MR. BHADRAPUR,

In your letter the other day you said that the non-Dharala
population of Ras was fully entitled to protection at the hands of the
Government and that you were enquiring into the complaints made by
me to you. You will agree with me that no assurance on paper can
possibly bring relief to those who are actually being injured. The only
relief they can see and feel is when the injury ceases. Unfortunately
the same injury that I complained of seems to be continuing. This
time in order to verify so far as it was possible the complaints made by
the residents of Ras I sent Syt. Mahadev Desai to make a local
investigation. The enclosed is his report. You will see therefrom that
the hedges of the poor cultivators are still being destroyed. Valuable
babul trees are being cut down and wood taken away. I understand
from Mr. Perry that, for fear lest the Dharalas might be molested by
the Patidars, additional police still continued to be posted. I wonder if
the police is able to afford any protection to the Patidars and others.
But whether the function of this additional police is or is not to protect
the non-Dharala population of Ras, will you please let me know
whether the Government intend to protect the Patidars of Ras from
continuous molestation or whether they are to look after themselves in
the best manner they can. I shall be away from Borsad for two days,
possibly three. May I ask for immediate attention to the complaints
and may I know when I may expect reply to my letter about the
Mukhi?
Yours sincerely,

K. B. B HADRAPUR, E SQ.
C OLLECTOR OF KAIRA DT.
KAIRA
A.I.C.C. File No. 3,1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

405

547. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
AS AT S ABARMATI ,

June 24, 1931
MY DEAR CHARLIE,

I have your letter. I shall look forward to Mrs. Polak’s book 1 . I
know it will revive old and pleasant memories and it will tell me of
things I have perhaps altogether forgotten.
It is a good thing that your two books 2 are reaching the proper
people.
As is your wont you are distressed over what your eyes see and
ears hear. This time it is the terrible unemployment in Lancashire and
what you see and hear acts as an effective barrier against perceiving
the truth. I have seen from extensive experience the truth of a legal
maxim which says: “Hard cases make bad law.” Many legal maxims
are also sound moral maxims as this one is. I can say with perfect
detachment although I am immersed in the Indian turmoil that the
way you suggest is not the way to help Lancashire. If it was wrong any
time for Lancashire to impose its cloth upon India by hook or by
crook it is wrong also today and more so because India has become
conscious of the wrong. And if India now refuses to be party to the
wrong, surely she won’t be adding wrong to wrong but she would be
assisting the process of undoing the wrong done by Lancashire. That
the labourers were not conscious of the wrong that was being done is
no justification for the wrong itself being sustained by the party
wronged, that is, India or anybody else. The proper course is to show
the labourers how they have been unconsciously assisting the wrong
done by Lancashire to India and therefore how necessary it is to
retrace the step. The first thing to do therefore is, if Lancashire cloth
cannot be sold outside India, to find some other employment. What
that can be it is difficult for me to say. I do not know how England
itself is clothed. Why should not the same machinery be used for
preparing the clothing of the kind required by England or better still,
why should not the machinery be scrapped and the unemployed take
1
2

406

Mr. Gandhi: The Man (1931) with a foreword by C. F. Andrews
Mahatma Gandhi’s Ideas (1929) and Mahatma Gandhi: His Own Story (1930)
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to handicrafts? I know these are vague ideas without any basis for
them but I have given them to show which way my mind is working.
Let me help you by putting before you another fact. Foreign
cloth boycott has created a kind of atmosphere. Its effect upon
Lancashire is nothing so serious as it is made out. In the first place do
you know that before the boycott became a live thing Lancashire sent
to India only 12% of her output of piecegoods? Have you studied the
illuminating figures1 published in a recent issue of Young India
showing conclusively that Lancashire had to fear not so much Indian
boycott as the ever-growing Japanese competition? My heart goes out
to the unemployed. It goes out to you in your terrific moral struggle.
But I cannot be helpful in the way you suggest. Of that I am quite
clear. That there is a way out I have no doubt and probably if I came
to London, after a study of the situation on the spot I should be able
to suggest some practical solution. And if I came at all I would
certainly do as you want me to, first of all proceed to Lancashire and
see the unemployed face to face.
But I am not at all sure that I shall be able to go. As yet of
course there is no invitation. The Settlement is causing me much
anxiety. The local governments are not playing the game. Lathi
charges too are now and then resorted to. Jawaharlal sends me bitter
complaints from Allahabad. But I shall see what is possible when the
time for sailing comes. Jawaharlal cannot accompany me unless he
forms part of the deputation. 1 do not think it would be advisable
though of course if he was in London his presence would relieve me
of a great deal of responsibility. Malaviyaji and Ansari are a certainty.
They are most likely to be invited apart from the Working Committee
and so is Mrs. Naidu. I note you will house me with Muriel.
Love.
MOHAN
From a photostat: G.N. 970

1

Vide “Japanese or British?”,

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

407

548. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 24, 1931
CHI. MIRA,

You are on the brain. I look about me and miss you. I open the
charkha and miss you. So on and so forth. But what is the use? You
have done the right thing.1 You have left your home, your people and
all that people prize most, not to serve me personally but to serve the
cause I stand for. All the time you were squandering your love on me
personally, I felt guilty of misappropriation. And I exploded on the
slightest pretext. Now that you are not with me, my anger turns itself
upon me for having given you all those terrible scoldings. But I was
on a bed of hot ashes all the while I was accepting your service.2 You
will truly serve me by joyously serving the cause. “Cheer boys cheer,
no more of idle sorrow.”
Love.
BAPU
Bapu’s Letters to Mira, p. 156

549. LETTER TO G. FINDLAY SHIRRAS
BORSAD,

June 24, 1931
DEAR PRINCIPAL SHIRRAS,

Some students from your college have come to me for advice
regarding your refusal to admit to the college certain students who
had taken part in the civil disobedience movement. Without entering
into a discussion of the Delhi Settlement, may I suggest that at the
present moment it would be hardly proper to refuse admission to the
students who took part in the movement? Is it not a fact that the whole
of the student world was stirred to the very depths by the national
awakening, and whether they took any direct part in the movement or
not there is no doubt that they were all filled with the spirit of the
1

The addressee had gone to the Ashram.
Concerning this, Mirabehn says: “The struggle was terrible. I too was on a
bed of hot ashes because I could feel that Bapu was. This was one of the occasions
when, somehow or other, I managed to tear myself away.”
2

408

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

time. For the sake of peace therefore I would urge you to withdraw
your orders and admit all the students without imposing any conditions. I have given my opinion1 to the students which I have published
in Navajivan that any undertaking given by the students as to nonparticipation in any future struggle or regret about participa-tion in
the past would be wholly inconsistent with self-respect. I would also
go further and say, what I have not said in my opinion referred to
above, that it would also be inconsistent with the students’ inmost
belief. I hope you would not consider this letter a presumption.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
P RINCIPAL S HIRRAS
GUJARAT C OLLEGE
AHMEDABAD
From a photostat: G.N. 817

550. LETTER TO N. D. KOWALI
BORSAD,

June 24, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. 2 The persecuted men can certainly go to
court. In any case they must not submit to any tyranny and be content
to remain outside the caste. After all we want to break down false and
injurious caste barriers.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S YT . N. D. KOWALI
DADAR , B OMBAY
From a photostat: G.N. 3273

1

Vide “My Notes”, , sub-title, “Students”.
The addressee had written to Gandhiji about the excommunication of two
Kshatriya families.
2

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

409

551. LETTER TO J. J. SINGH
BORSAD,

June 24, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your lucidly written letter of June 5th. 1 I agree
in the main with all you say. The rumour about my wearing European
costume if I went to London is as ill-founded as my rumoured visit to
America. All the same I appreciate the motive lying behind your
letter.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Hindustan Times, 27-4-1969

552. LETTER TO FULCHAND K. SHAH
BORSAD,

June 24, 1931
BHAISHRI FULCHAND,

I have your letter. Your explanation does not absolve you from
blame. My point is that it is wrong to criticize one State in the territory
of another. Such criticism involves violence. You should think over all
that I have said to you from the point of view of non-violence. If you
think that the principle of non-violence itself is an error, my argument
loses all force.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 2845. Courtesy: Shardabehn Shah

1

410

Vide “A Countryman’s Advice”, 9-7-1931.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

553. SLAVE COMMUNITIES
We have the untouchables, the shame and curse of the Hindu
society. But we have also other communities whom we—the so-called
higher classes—treat almost as slaves and keep in quarters designed
for our cattle. Representatives of one such community have addressed
a letter which I condense as follows:1
We are representatives of the Rajwar community living in
the districts of Gaya, Patna, Monghyr and Palamau, in the
Province of Bihar and Orissa. . . .
On refusal to give begar2 the zamindar forthwith begins a
suit for arrears of rent, gets decree, puts the jot 3 to auction and
evicts the tenant from the land in his possession.
A Rajwar child, no sooner he reaches his 6th or 7th year,
becomes almost the property of his parents’ landlord; he is
made to tend the landlord’s cattle and do all sorts of odd jobs. .
. . In fact he leads the life of a slave, a mere chattel of the
landlord.
For working from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. Rajwars are paid at the
rate of 3 seers of unhusked rice per diem and no wages in cash
are ever paid to them. . . .
The Rajwar children are not allowed to be sent to the
primary schools and the teachers too are not allowed to teach
the boys by the landlord.
Whenever there is any theft or larceny or dacoity or any
crime whatever in the locality where this community is living,
the first suspicion and the first brunt of the police enquiry must
be borne by it, although there may not be the slightest evidence
for the same. . . .
We have already submitted these memorials to the District
Magistrates of Gaya and Patna, and to the Chief Secretary, Bihar
and Orissa Government but we have not as yet learnt what steps
the respective authorities have taken. We hope that you will do
something to ameliorate our condition.
The letter is written for the representatives and probably
1
2
3

Only extracts are reproduced here.
Forced labour
Holding

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

411

also prompted by some unknown reformer among them. It is signed
by about twenty-five representatives. What however matters is not who
wrote it but the statements made therein, if they are true.
They are highly likely to be true in the main. For such treatment
is not an isolated phenomenon of Bihar. Almost all the provinces have
these backward, suppressed, slave communities. They are no heritage
from the British. We have had them for ages and all the greater shame
on us for that.
We may plead a thousand excuses for their existence in the days
gone by. But in these days of enlightenment, awakening and insistence on swaraj, we have no excuse for tolerating the atrocity. Congress workers have to take up the cause of these communities wherever they are found. They should try to enlist the sympathy and cooperation of those who ‘own’ these men and women. Swaraj is the
sum total of all the activities that go to build up a free and vigorous
nation concious of the strength that comes from right doing. The
existence of slave communities is aterrible wrong and must therefore
be a hindrance in our march towards the goal.
Young India, 25-6-1931

554. A GENTLE REBUKE
C. Rajagopalachari’s eagle eye sees everything that appears in
print about the drink evil. He saw a report of my very innocent speech
at the village of Maroli1 where the other day I laid the foundation of a
weaving institute. I had there attempted to show the connection that
exists between factory labour and drink and said how mithubehn Petit
had, whilst doing prohibition work, discovered that if the people who
ceased to visit the liquor shops she picketed were to be permanently
weaned from drink, they should have some ambition provided in life,
some work found for them during their idle hours. I then showed how
she found such occupation in hand-spinning and weaving. I further
went on to show that if people had to do excessive labour, they would
want some stimulant and illustrated it by an experience from my own
life when during the Boer War I had to issue from the commissariat
rations of rum for those bearers who were used to drink and who
pleaded with me for rum which, they said, would enable them to bear
the fatigue and resume next day’s march. Of course, this was a
1

412

Vide, “Speech at Maroli”, 12-6-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

superstition. But superstitions die hard.
Rajagopalachari feared that the report that he had read would be
distorted to yield all kinds of meanings favourable to the opponents
of prohibition. His fear has been justified. I have received embarrassing congratulations on my conversion to sanity. They embarrass
me because I am not conscious of the conversion imputed to me. I
feel like a man who falsely reported to have died reads his obituary
notices and blushes to have the virtues he never knew he had
possessed.
Let me therefore re-declare my faith in undiluted prohibition
before I land myself in deeper water. If I was appointed dictator for
one hour for all India, the first thing I would do would be to close
without compensation all the liquor shops, destroy all the toddy palms
such as I know them in Gujarat, compel factory owners to produce
humane conditions for their workmen and open refreshment and
recreation rooms where these workmen would get innocent drinks and
equally innocent amusements. I would close down the factories if the
owners pleaded want of funds. Being a teetotaller, I would retain my
sobriety in spite of the possession of one hour’s dictatorship and
therefore arrange for the examination of my European friends and
diseased persons who may be in medical need of brandy and the like
at State expense by medical experts and where necessary they would
receive certificate which would entitle them to obtain the prescribed
quantity of the fiery waters from certified chemists. The rule will
apply mutatis mutandis to intoxicating drugs.
For the loss of revenue from drinks, I would straightway cut
down the military expenditure and expect the Commander-in-Chief to
accommodate himself to the new condition in the best way he can.
The workmen left idle by the closing of factories, I would remove to
model farms to be immediately opened as far as possible in the
neighbourhood of the factories unless I was advised during that brief
hour that the State could profitably run the factories under the
required conditions and could therefore take over from the owners.
Young India, 25-6-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

413

555. TERRIBLE IF TRUE
I take the following from a complaint about picketing:
In rural areas there is definite evidence that everything short of physical
violence has been resorted to by volunteers. Would-be customers are
obstructed, abused and generally harassed, and toddy shop renters have been
put to considerable loss and in some instances have been so discouraged that
they have ceased to get trees marked for tapping and closed their shops rather
than suffer further indignities. The Congress office in Tellichery issued
summonses to the principal renters to appear before them and few had the
courage to disobey. Those who appeared were summarily told to close their
shops, and when they asked for compensation they were told that Congress
would do nothing for them.

If these complaints are true this picketing should be suspended
immediately. Though as soon as I had this complaint I wrote
inquiring about the allegations, I thought it was better for the sake of
workers in general to publish the complaint. It may be mentioned that
somewhat similar complaints have been received regarding clothpicketing too. I can but repeat the warning 1 I have issued in these
pages that it would be better for the Congress, better for the cause of
prohibition, whether of intoxicating drinks and drugs or foreign cloth,
that we ceased picketing altogether than that there was the slightest
departure from the terms of the Delhi Settlement. If picketing cannot
remain peaceful, it should be abandoned altogether.
It is being discovered that the more effective method is to pay
house-to-house visit and meet the drunkards, opium-eaters or
foreign-cloth users in their own homes and explain to them the evil of
the use of any of the three things. There may be also addresses at
street corners and distribution of leaflets. Prabhat pheries2 too can do
this propaganda through swadeshi and anti-drink and drug songs.
Foreign-cloth boycott may also be assisted by door to door hawking
of khadi, registering orders and organizing the weaving of self-spun
yarn. Such levelling up [of] the atmosphere cannot but affect the use
of drinks and drugs and foreign cloth.
1
2

414

Vide “Notes”,, sub-title, “Picketing”, 21-5-1931
Early morning processions
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

THE OTHER S IDE

But how if these charges are in the main or wholly untrue. I
know that in Gujarat there is a tendency growing up to molest
peaceful picketers and, what is more mischievious still, there is going
on an unrestrained sale of liquor at odd hours and in odd places
under cover of the law. Sjt. C. Rajagopalachari who is the General
Secretary of the Temperance League in the place vacated by Mr.
Anderson and who is a politician only because he is a social reformer
is convinced that in the South a deliberate policy of repression of
strictly peaceful picketing has been launched in the shape of faked
prosecutions and physical interference. From Ludhiana, Ambala,
Muttra and elsewhere come authentic reports of lathi charges and the
like. I have deliberately refrained from publishing these statements of
which the various organizations have furnished me with a full record.
Besides this, there are complaints pouring in about other matters. I can
only give the assurance to the public that not one of these has escaped
my attention. But I cannot carry on a public propaganda at the same
time that I am carrying on delicate negotiations with the Central
Government from and through which I expect to gain relief in most
of, if not all of these cases.
Meanwhile I must ask all Congress workers to be patient. They
must not allow themselves to be provoked into civil disobedience. It is
never the first, it is always the last resort. We must exhaust all the
intermediate processes before we can take up that last sovereign
remedy. Whilst the Settlement lasts, we have the law-courts too, open
to us. I know that at best they bring us poor comfort. But, such as they
are, they may not be passed by, even as we may not pass by, the
respective departments of the executive Government for seeking
relief. Happily nowadays we have all over India lawyers who give their
services to the Congress organizations free of charge. Wherever
therefore these facilities exist, Congress organizations should avail
themselves of them and try to obtain such relief as is locally possible.
They must not embark on civil disobedience without first obtaining
the permission of the Working Committee. It is to meet very shortly1
and I promise to place it in full possession of all the complaints and
take directions from it. Our safety and honour today demand a
meticulous performance by us of all the conditions of the Settlement.
1

It met in Bombay from July 7 to 12.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

415

But I would appeal to the provincial governments and the
members of the Civil Service to come to the rescue. I must not conceal
from them and the public the suspicion based on the evidences before
me that they are in many cases hindering the working of the
Settlement where they are not wilfully breaking it. Let it not be proved
what is being said of them that some of them want the Settlement to
break to pieces. Let it not be said of them that they destroyed the
edifice that Lord Irwin gave anxious days and anxious nights to build
up. Let them realize that the Settlement is a solemn contract not
between two individuals but between two organizations, hitherto
fighting, now seeking to cooperate. They may not distrust the
Congress workers and treat them as if they were enemies even as the
Congressmen may not, whilst the contract persists, distrust every
official act.
Young India, 25-6-1931

556. A MARTYR
Whilst the Working Committee was deliberating in Bombay
during the early part of the month, there was a public meeting in
Dongri at which there was an uproar and at which a youth was fatally
stabbed. The news of the death was brought to the Working
Committee. It created a sensation but at the time it was thought that
some unknown unidentifiable person had died. On returning to Borsad I had a letter from Sjt. Kishorelal Mashruwala who deploring the
tragedy gave me some details about the deceased. I thereupon asked
him to procure fuller details which I now have.
Brave and good Pannalal was only 22 years old when he
received the fatal stab on that fateful night from one of the excited
Mussalman crowd. Accompanied by his father and younger brother,
Pannalal had gone to the Dongri meeting specially to hear Khan
Saheb Abdul Ghaffar Khan who was among others advertised to speak
at the meeting. After they had heard the Khan Saheb the father hailed
a victoria and they got in. Being khaddar-clad they were taken for
nationalist leaders. A howling crowd surrounded them. Stones were
rained on them. All of them were hurt. Pannalal’s left eyebrow was
bleeding. Nothing minding, in order to lighten his father’s sorrow, he
made light of his wound. Suddenly there came into his left ribs a deep
stab. Blood gushed from the wounded side. Out came the entrails.
416

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Pannalal bore it all bravely and asked to be taken to the hospital where
he said his wound would be dressed and all would be well. Alas ! all
was not well. In spite of all the attention given to him the brave young
man died the next day.
He was born of wealthy parents. His father Maganlal Zaveri is a
flourishing jeweller, much trusted and respected for his honesty. His
uncle is the Chief Judge of the Jodhpur High Court. The deceased
leaves a young widow to whom he was married only eighteen months
ago. The parents, having come under the influence of the national
movement, simplified the life of the family and sent Pannalal to the
national school. After having studied up to the sixth standard he left
studies to help his father in business. But Pannalal never left national
work. He was one of the party that raided the Wadala Salt Works and
came in for lathi blows. He always joined the dangerous processions
which were the feature of those days. Pannalal has lived by dying. My
congratulations to the parents for having had such a worthy son. Let
death and especially a death such as this leave no sting behind. The
body has been reduced to ashes but out of the ashes will rise true
unity among us. If we do not resent this death and would give many
more lives if need be, I know that true unity will not be long in
coming.
As for the widow let me hope that their love for their son will
prompt the parents to give her the education the girl widow may
desire or be fitted for and that they will give her every encouragement
to remarry when she grows to maturity. Let them, if they have drunk
in the spirit of the age, shed the superstition that a widow is the
property of the husband’s family to remain as their slave. A widow
must have the same right as a widower and must be taught to know
that she has the same free choice as men.
And of the Mussalmans who approve of such murders ? Surely,
the cause of Islam or the cause of peace which the word ‘Islam’
means, has not been advanced by the murder. It cannot be right to
take innocent life; Pannalal had given no provocation. How I wish
Pannalal’s murder would open the eyes of those whose heart approves
such murders and who make them possible. Is it not possible to
arrange a joint meeting on the very spot where the murder took place
and to declare that whether we could evolve a common formulae
regarding the political issue or not, such murders would be made
impossible. Such a meeting is not impossible as, so far as I am aware,
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

417

Pannalal’s people have forgiven the wrong and the Congress Committee purposely avoided a public funeral in order that passion might
not be in flamed. We ought to be able to hold public meetings
anywhere and fearlessly express views even though they may be
unpalatable in [a] particular neighbourhood.
Young India, 25-6-1931

557. SERIOUS ALLEGATIONS
THE EDITOR, “YOUNG INDIA ”
SIR,

In the village Pipri, Tehsil Purwa, District Unao, a raid is said to have been
made on the tenants by the zamindars of the village along with the Sub-Divisional
Magistrate, Pt. Chandra Mohan Nath and an armed guard on 30th May, 1931. . . .
It may however be said to the credit of the tenants, however illiterate they may
be, . . . they are perfectly non-violent, and not a single example can be cited in which
the tenants might have resorted to the methods of violence even for self-defence.
VISHWAMBHAR DAYAL TRIPATHI
M. A ., LL . B.

UNAO President, District Congress Committee

I publish this very serious letter 1 with only inconsequential
alterations. It is undoubtedly libellous, if the allegations are not true. I
shall gladly publish any explanations that the zamindars or the
Sub-Divisional Magistrate may wish to give. The matter demands
immediate inquiry, if the allegations are substantially correct, the
Zamindars’ Association should take up the matter and deal with the
zamindars. I may add that I wired to the writer if he could support the
allegations and he promptly wired back in the affirmative.
Young India, 25-6-1931

1

418

rom which only extracts are reproduced here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

558. NOTES
S ELF-RESPECT ABOVE ALL

I have letters1 from several provinces saying that the education
authorities are imposing conditions on the return of students who had
left their schools or colleges during the struggle. A circular of which a
copy has been sent by one of the correspondents requires parents to
give guarantees that their children will not take part in politics. These
correspondents ask me whether these conditions are consistent with
the Settlement.
Without entering into that question for the time being, I have no
hesitation in saying that neither students nor parents if they have any
self-respect left in them should accept such conditions. What will it
profit the students or the parents if they have to lose their souls to gain
the questionable advantage of a public education and a certificate?
There are the national institutions open to the students. If they do not
like these, they can study at home. It is a gross superstition to suppose
that knowledge can be obtained only by going to schools and
colleges. The world produced brilliant students before schools and
colleges came into being. There is nothing so ennobling or lasting as
self-study. Schools and colleges make most of us mere receptacles for
holding the superfluities of knowledge. Wheat is left out and mere
husk is taken in. I do not wish to decry schools and colleges as such.
They have their use. But we are making altogether too much of them.
They are but one of the many means of gaining knowledge.
OH, T HOSE ADDRESSES

Manibehn, Sardar Vallabhbhai’s daughter who does secretarial
work, wardrobe keeping and nursing for her father and therefore
always travels with him plaintively asks:
Why do the people give Father so many addresses, when he wants
money? You know better than I do that he has nowhere to lay his head on. He
has no house or chests to keep the many addresses he receives. He has no safes
in which he can keep costly caskets and gifts. For me it becomes positively a
burden to take charge of these addresses and gifts. I would like people not to
give addresses and gifts to any Congressmen. Their service must be its own
1

Vide “My Notes”, sub-title, “Students”.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

419

reward. But in any case, will you not ask them to spare Father. Let them refrain
from giving him the addresses he does not need, let them give him the money
he needs for the very work they expect him to do and so much admire.

I need add nothing to these sentiments beyond heartily
endorsing them and commending them to those who would invite the
Sardar to their places.
DUTY OF DISCIPLINARIANS

An Akola correspondent asks:1
If even elected officials in a Congress organization do not carry out the
rule of khadi laid down in the constitution, what is one to do who believes in
strict adherence to the rules?

The question is more easily asked than answered. The decision
would depend upon so many surrounding circumstances. Therefore it
is possible only to give a general guidance which it may be necessary
to depart from as new and varying circumstances arise.
Assuming that the member believing in khaddar out and out
finds that the majority do not observe the rule, that he has drawn their
attention to the breach, that he has drawn the attention of the chief
officials also and fails to find any satisfaction, he should by way of
protest retire from the elected body to which he belongs. He will
simply remain a four-anna member without exercising his right of
voting. But outside the organization he will preach discipline without
being bitter towards those who are lax in observing it. He will also do
such Congress work as commends itself to him if he can do so without
incurring the displeasure of the powers that be in the Congress organization. A vast amount of constructive work can be done without one
being a member.
WHY DON ’T THEY S PIN

A correspondent bitingly writes:
When you address meetings you ask people to spin for the sake of your
Daridranarayana 2 . If anyone asks for your autograph, Bania-like, you
impose the condition that he or she should spin! Then what prevents you from
asking Congress members on so many committees to spin? Why do they not
all spin by way of encouragement to others ? Or is spinning to be reserved for
1
2

420

Vide also “Letter to Nanabhai I. Mashruwala”, 20-6-1931
God in the form of the poor
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

non-Congressmen or at best for four-anna members but not for the chosen
ones of committees?

I apologize to the writer. Only let him remember that whereas I
cannot always give spinning demonstrations before big audiences, I
give actual demonstrations before members of committees. And is not
an ounce of practice more than tons of preaching? But the writer is
perhaps right in his sarcasm. There are hundreds of Congress
committees if not thousands. I do not speak to all of them through my
spinning. It would certainly be a good example and would add
imperceptibly but materially to the wealth of the country if the
thousands of members of these committees would spin regularly for at
least half an hour. If these figures were tabulated and published from
week to week, it will fill the atmosphere with the spirit of industry,
sacrifice and khadi, the emblem of Daridranarayana. Boycott of
foreign cloth through khadi will then be accomplished much earlier
than the most sanguine among us dare expect. But will they? “They
spin not, neither do they toil.”1
Young India, 25-6-1931

559. LETTER TO K. B. BHADRAPUR
AS AT BORSAD,

June 25, 1931
DEAR MR. BHADRAPUR,

I have your astonishing letter of 23rd inst. I had written to you
that the complainants had no evidence whereby they could fix the
blame on the Dharalas. Nor had I asked for any prosecutions. What I
had asked for was a preventive measure and if you tell me that where
complainants cannot trace the guilty parties the Government will leave
them to their fate I shall take the answer. But I was unprepared for the
gratuitous statement that it is not beyond suspicion that the damages
might have been selfinflicted to fasten the crime on the Dharalas. You
will permit me to say that sentiments like this amount to putting a
premium on crime. Does it not strike you as unthinkable that the
Patidars should engage in self-destruction for the doubtful purpose of
proving the Dharalas guilty? Nor am I able to see what earthly
purpose they can serve by cutting all their hedges in order to fasten
1

St. Matthew, VI. 28.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

421

any crime on the Dharalas. If you have at the back of your mind the
Dharala Mukhi of Ras I must tell you that it was not the Patidars who
made the suggestion that the presence of a Dharala Mukhi was
probably responsible for the cutting of these hedges. In any case the
case against the Dharala Mukhi stands on an independent footing. It is
as I hold part of the Settlement whereas it would be open to you to say
that the granting of protection to the Patidars is no part of the
Settlement and I would not be able to challenge a position of that
description.
Yours sincerely,
A.I.C.C. File No. 3, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

560. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
BOMBAY,

June 25, 1931
To a question put about his participation in the Federal Structure Committee
[Gandhiji replied:]

If I attend the Round Table Conference, I shall possibly attend
the Federal Structure Committee also.
Asked whether he had finally decided to go to the London Conference and when
he was likely to start, Gandhiji said that the Working Committee would decide all
those questions for him. His theory and views had been exploded and he would
willingly obey whatever the Committee asked him to do.
Asked whether the situation in Gujarat was satisfactory, after hesitating for a
while, Gandhiji replied that the situation was not satisfactory. But he had been
corresponding with the Government of India. Incidentally, he mentioned that he had
been receiving reports from all over India forwarded by reliable trusted workers like
Mr. C. Rajagopalachari, that a deliberate policy of repression of strictly peaceful
picketing, in the shape of faked prosecutions, physical interference and lathi charges
was hindering the working of the Settlement. None of these complaints had escaped
his attention, and he could not publish them as he was carrying on delicate
negotiations with the Central Government from and through which he expected to
gain relief. He hoped that things would not assume serious proportions as to endanger
the Truce. He had one word to say to Congressmen, that the safety and honour of the
Congress demanded meticulous performance by the Congressmen of all the
conditions of the Truce.
Gandhiji proposed to place the Working Committee in full possession of all
the complaints.

422

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Gandhiji profoundly regretted the failure of the efforts in Bhopal to effect a
settlement between the two sections of the Muslim group. It was a very unfortunate
incident. The Working Committee would discuss what next should be done in view of
the failure.
Gandhiji was confident that the Foreign-cloth Export Scheme would prove a
success and the scheme did not amount to a breach of the Truce as alleged by certain
interested parties.
Is the contention made by a new political school of thought to the effect that
the Congress, by accepting the Truce, accepted the principle of Federation as
enunciated in the last R.T.C. true? If so where does the Congress resolution of
Indepcndence passed at the Lahore Congress and reiterated at Karachi stand?
A.

This question need not be answered.
The Hindu, 25-6-1931

561. DISCUSSION ON FOREIGN-CLOTH BOYCOTT1
BOMBAY,

June 25, 1931
Mr. Gandhi said he was aware of the position, but it was an article of faith with
him that the use of any foreign manufactured articles in the composition of cloth
turned out by Indian mills was detrimental to the interests of the masses. He explained
his view at some length and regretted his inability to deflect from the course [in spite]
of any disadvantage, which might accrue to the industry, which he thought would
only be of a temporary character.
Gandhiji however realized very fully the menace of Japanese competition, and
said he would leave no stone unturned to deal with it effectively. The Congress policy
was certainly not intended to merely restrict imports from Lancashire, but all imports
of foreign cloth, and he would direct particular attention to the growing menace from
Japan. If and when a satisfactory settlement was reached, Japanese competition might
be dealt with by means of a special tariff. The whole position was one which would
have to be seriously considered in the nearest future.

The Hindu, 26-6-1931

1

With H. P. Mody, Chairman of the Mill-owners’ Association, S. D.
Saklatwala, and Lalji Naranji. The discussion turned on the increasing imports of
Japanese piece-goods, particularly artificial silk goods. It was pointed out that while
the industry was being asked to give up the use of artificial silk yarn, Japanese
imports of this class of goods were increasing at an alarming rate, disorganizing trade
not merely in artificial silk goods, but also in other varieties.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

423

562. SPEECH AT WOMEN’S MEETING, BOMBAY
June 26, 1931
Mahatma Gandhi first congratulated the women of India and particularly the
women of Bombay for the great and heroic part they had taken in the last fight. They
had shown unparalleled courage and their capacity to suffer and make supreme
sacrifices in the cause of the country was fully tested. When Gandhiji started on his
pilgrimage to Dandi 1 he had entrusted to the women of India a twofold mission.
Firstly the women of India must help the nation to exterminate all foreign cloth and
secondly they must help to enforce total prohibition. Gandhiji entrusted this task to
the women, having full faith that it would be carried out. What the women had
achieved by selfless work and during such a short time was far beyond his most
sanguine hopes.
The women of India, proceeded Gandhiji, had enhanced the prestige of the
whole nation. They were the cynosure of all eyes. The whole world looked up to them
with admiration for their patriotism. But that was not enough. The praise that was
showered on them by the world must encourage them to look forward to their future
work with greater faith and zeal.
They should with more vigour carry out the work entrusted to them during the
fight. They should persuade dealers in foreign cloth as well as consumers to shun
foreign cloth. They should beg of those who are addicted to drink to give up the vice
and they should induce the dealers in liquor to stop the evil traffic. During the last
fight men and women volunteered their services for this work but now this task had
become more onerous and difficult. There was both laxity in work and lack of
workers.
The need for a regular and disciplined army of workers was therefore all the
greater. They should not be disappointed by the results of their efforts. If they had
complete faith in their mission and believed that they were going to succeed, it would
not only be possible to exterminate foreign cloth from India but also root out the
drink evil in a short time. But this kind of work required discipline and united efforts.
He noticed among the audience a few women wearing the orange colour saris but a
majority of them did not wear this emblem. This colour was symbolic of the
dedication of their services in the cause of the country. It also indicated that they were
members of the local organization of women which carried out the mission of boycott
and prohibition.
1

424

On March 12, 1930; ads Vol. XLIII.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

My appeal to you women, therefore, is to come out and adopt
this symbol of the orange colour sari and join the band of those brave
and selfless women whose services are pledged to the country.
He then sounded a note of warning to such of the women who took to khaddar
during the last struggle but were now tempted to go in for foreign fineries. It had been
brought to his notice that a few Khoja1 women who had taken part in the movement
and had become converts to the gospel of khaddar were now showing an inclination
to buy foreign cloth. This was not the case with Khoja women alone but Hindu women
also. If they had the slightest regard and pity for the millions of their countrymen
who were facing starvation and worse they should cease patronizing foreign cloth.
They should prefer either khaddar or India-made cloth to the exclusion of all
foreign cloth. But he would point out that Indian mill-cloth was meant for those to
whom the message of the starving millions had not reached and for such persons who
were not of Congress persuasion. But every Congressman and woman and everyone
who believed in the Congress creed must adopt khaddar and khaddar alone even to the
exclusion of mill-cloth.
No doubt the use of mill-cloth would benefit a few lakhs of workers living in
industrial towns, a few thousands of shareholders and a smaller number of agents and
directors. But there were seven lakhs of villages in India and 30 crores of
poverty-stricken peasants in them. Should one place the interest of 30 crores of
peasants first or a few lakhs of industrial workers ? Their duty should be to relieve the
poverty of the 30 crores of peasants by patronizing khaddar and khaddar alone.
Mahatmaji thought that the best education for girls and women was not the
kind of university education that they were getting in schools but that they should be
taught thoroughly to master the art of spinning and carding. The message of the
charkha must be popularized throughout the length and breadth of the country and
women were best fitted for the propagation of this message. If every woman learnt to
spin and cultivated the habit of wearing only selfmade khaddar clothes they would go
a long way in winning their freedom. [Concluding, Gandhiji said:]

In khaddar alone lies your salvation and in your salvation lies
the salvation of your country.
The Bombay Chronicle, 27-6-1931

1

A Muslim community

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

425

563. SPEECH TO ‘DEPRESSED’ CLASSES DEPUTATION1
BOMBAY,

June 26, 1931
Gandhiji said in reply to the address:

Don’t call me a Mahatma, but call me a Bhangi.
He said that he appreciated the title “Pioneer of Scavengers”, once given to
him by a European friend rather than the title “Mahatma”. He promised the
deputationists that everything that he would urge at the Round Table Conference
would be in the interest of their community and the country in general. He would not
promise that the very same formula suggested by the deputation will be placed before
the Conference but if a better one suggested itself to him he would give it preference.
As regards providing educational facilities to the ‘depressed’ classes, Mahatmaji
would like to do much more than was suggested to him.
But Gandhiji was himself not sure whether the present Settlement with the
Government was a temporary settlement or permanent one. If it was a permanent one
and swaraj was achieved, then many of the problems concerning the ‘depressed’
classes could be at once tackled. Of this much he was sure, that owing to the great
awakening of the people the stigma of untouchability would soon disappear
altogether from the country.
Mahatmaji wanted to say how much the Congress had been doing for the uplift
and general advancement of the ‘depressed’ classes. After the question of
untouchability was taken up by the Congress, it had spent more than 20 lakhs of
rupees for starting ashrams and schools for ‘depressed’ classes and untouchable
classes where free education was imparted. There was a network of ashrams in Gujarat
where ‘depressed’ class boys were taught free.

The Bombay Chronicle, 27-6-1931

1

Which met Gandhiji at Mani Bhavan, Bombay. It consisted of 30 delegates
led by P. Baloo who whole-heartedly supported joint electorates with reservation of
seats, and advocated division of the community into three groups, namely, Mahars,
Chamars and thc rest of the ‘depressed’ classes.

426

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

564. TELEGRAM TO DESAI 1
[On or after June 26, 1931] 2
DESAI
C ARE C ONGRESS
BHIWANI
YOU MAY
ACCEPT UNDERTAKING
SALE
FOREIGN
CLOTH
WOULD
R.T.C. UNDER ANY CIRCUMSTANCES.

MAKING
IT
CLEAR THAT
NO
BE
ALLOWED
EVEN
AFTER

GANDHI
From a microfilm; S.N. 17323

565. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[After June 26, 1931] 3
CHI. NARANDAS,

How could I, while in Bombay, attend to your letters?
Do whatever you think proper now as regards Soman.
Try to comfort Gangabehn as much as you can.
I understand about Bhagwanji. I think in the long run he will see
his dharma.
It is stuffy everywhere.
There is no time to write more. It is 10.15 p.m.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
The other letters I hope to write tomorrow. Now it is 10.30.
[From Gujarati]
BapunaPatro-9: Shri Narandas Gandhine, Part I, p. 273; also C.W. 8188.
Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
1

Two telegrams were received from the addressee, one in Bombay and the other
at Bulsar. The telegram dated June 26, 1931 read: “Can we accept undertaking
stoppage sales foreign clothes till result Round Table Conference.”
3
In the printed source this has been placed among the letters of 1931. From
the reference to Soman, it seems this letter was written some time after the letter to
the addressee dated June 22, 1931. Gandhiji was in Bombay on June 25-26.
2
ibid
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

427

566. TELEGRAM TO DESAI1
VAPI,

June 27, 1931
YOU

CAN

AFTER

AGREE

CONFERENCE

BUT

GIVE

BOYCOTT

CLEAR
BEING

INTIMATION

NO

LIKELIHOOD

L1FTED.

GANDHI
A.I.C.C. File No. 273, 1931. Courtesy: Nehra Memorial Museum and Library

567. SPEECH AT UDVADA2
[June 27, 1931] 3
You are known all the world over for your large-hearted charity;
you are renowned for your enterprise; you have distinguished yourselves by the great patriots you have given to the country—Dadabhai
Naoroji, Pherozeshah Mehta, Dinshaw Wacha. How ugly it sounds
when one mentions in the same breath that you have distinguished
yourselves by being dealers of toddy and liquor? Don’t say the
shopkeepers would be ruined if they gave up the shops. You have
magnificent trusts and charities and the handful of Parsi liquoursellers in Gujarat can easily be turned to other occupations. But you
must take the courage in both your hands and wipe out the stain.
Young India, 2-7-1931

1

The addressee’s telegram read: “Merchants ready sealing stocks till result
Round Table Conference and abiding by Congress mandate even after that period. Can
we agree this language? If this solution accepted many unpleasant issues averted.
Reply.”
2
Holy place of the Parsis in Pardi Taluka
3
Gandhiji spent a day in Pardi Taluka while returning from Bombay to Borsad.

428

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

568. LETTER TO H. T. SORLEY
BORSAD,

June 28, 1931
DEAR SIR,

I thank you for your exhaustive letter of 23rd inst. No. 4314/30 1 . It will be impossible for me to get hold of the purchaser of the
muchwa and induce him to part with the thing he has got admittedly
so cheap. The sale of the muchwa being after the Settlement, was
clearly in breach of it and was due to the negligence of the official at
Surat. The only proper course in my opinion is to pay the owner the
market price of the muchwa, which, I understand, is Rs. 200. But I
have no evidence in support of my statement beyond the one made by
the owner. There should be no difficulty in ascertaining the market
price. I hope that the course suggested by me would be adopted
without delay. The poor owner naturally has to suffer loss whilst he
remains without a muchwa.
Yours sincerely,

H. T. S ORLEY , E SQ., M.M.I.C.S.
C OLLECTOR OF S ALT R EVENUE, B OMBAY
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-C, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

569. LETEER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
BORSAD,

June 28, 1931
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I have your letter and your postcard. I am glad the notice under
Sec. 144 in Rae Bareli has been withdrawn. It was undoubtedly due to
1

I n which the addressee had proposed that his department “will consider the
question of refunding the amount of Rs. 50 realized in the auction sale to the present
owner of the muchwa [a small boat] if the latter is willing to return the muchwa to its
original owner, and provided the Central Board of Revenue agree to this compromise
suggested by me. . . .”
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

429

your clear letter to the Chief Secretary. By the time you reach
Bombay for the Working Committee, the Committee should be ready
to give definite guidance.
I am quite convinced that in order to complete our case it is
necessary for you to ask the Governor to see you. In seeking the
interview you will tell him that you want to leave no stone unturned to
see that the clear position is placed before the highest authority in the
province. You may bring nothing from the Governor but our position
will surely be the stronger for your having made the attempt to see
him and to secure fulfilment of the Settlement. We shall lose nothing
by your offering to see him and seeing him if he accepts the offer.
You might have seen in Young India what I wrote about the
happenings in Unao District.1 I am going to write again on the
material supplied by you and others.
It was unfortunate that the Working Committee had to be
postponed. Vallabhbhai was strongly against going to Allahabad in
the present circumstances there. I think too that what with Cawnpore
and the other excitement in U.P. it was better that Allahabad was
avoided for the time being.
BAPU
P ANDIT JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
ALLAHABAD
A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 97-8

1

430

Vide “Serious Allegations”, 25-6-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

570. LETTER TO MAHAVIR GIRI
BORSAD,

June 28, 1931
CHI. MAHAVIR,

Probably the cause of your not keeping well at the Ashram lies
in yourself. I believe that we can train the body to adjust itself to any
place. The main factor is food. Through experiments one can find out
what food suits one in a particular season. There is no doubt, moreover, that much depends on one’s mind. Hence, if you are very eager
to go and live in the Vidyapith, you may go there after obtaining the
permission of Narandasbhai and Chhaganbhai. You may stay
wherever you think you will keep good health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6230

571. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
BORSAD,

June 29, 1931
CHI. VASUMATI,

This time you have written after a pretty long interval. I expected you to say in the letter what you saw at Visnagar and what inquiries you made, and give similar other information about the place.
You may still do so. How do you keep?
What is Padma’s complaint regarding her diary? She seems
to have been very much offended. Let me know what the facts are.
Ba tells me that Dahibehn has gone to Broach and from there
will go to Udvada.
I will agree with anything you decide. I only wish to see you
peaceful and steady in mind and healthy in body. You are bound to
attain that state sooner or later. I am indeed happy that you are
ceaselessly striving towards that end.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Giarati: S.N. 9325; also C.W. 572. Courtesy:
Vasumati Pandit
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

431

572. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
June 29, 1931
CHI. GANGABHEN,

I got both your letters. You seem to feel worried and upset. If
you are very much worked, come over for a day.
“Never lose heart” 1 means that, if we get unhappy experiences
in society or do not succeed immediately in our undertakings, we
should not give way to despair but should remain cheerful and go on
doing our work. This is what is meant by never losing heart.
By saying you are a member of the Managing Committee, I
tried to remind you of your responsibility and your powers You can
say in the Committee what you wish to and persuade it to accept your
proposal.
What I expect from you is this. Even if others lose heart, you
should not. Swallow all bitter draughts, go ahead and do the work
expected of you. This is what I want from you. All my expectations of
you concern strength of heart and not intellectual ability. The intellect
has less value, the heart has more. And the heart is something which
everyone has.
“Do not try to jump too high” 2 means that, instead of planning
big things, you should try to improve what we are already doing. If
you are impatient to take up new things, the task on hand will suffer.
In my thoughts, I am always there. But how can I come away? I must
finish the task that has come to me unsought.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-6: G. S. Gangabehnne, p. 56; also C.W. 8779. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

1
2

432

Vide “Letter to Gangabehn Vaidhya”, 19-6-1931
Vide “Letter to Gangabehn Vaidya”, 22-6-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

573. STATEMENT ON BAN BY SACHIN STATE1
BORSAD,

June 29, 1931
2
Let the public know that the change of venue has nothing to do
with the order. Neither Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel nor I knew anything
about it when the change of venue was decided upon. The date and
venue had to be changed for the convenience of, and at the request of
Dr. Ansari, Maulana Abul Kalam and Mr. Mohamed Alam. Nevertheless, I am sorry for the order.
Some States do not seem to realize that at present there is
agreement between the Government and the Congress. Such an order
might therefore easily embarrass the Government which to the State is
the paramount power. Indeed, Dumas was thought of merely for its
being a seaside resort. Nobody dreamt that the Working Committee
meeting in the cool air of the sea near Dumas would harm Sachin.
However, I am thankful that the accident of the change of venue has
prevented an awkward situation arising. I hope, however, that order
means no more than overzeal on the part of the District Magistrate of
Sachin.
The Bombay Chronicle, 30-6-1931

574. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
BORSAD,

June 29, 1931
CHI. MIRA,

Your letter. It is now nearing 10.30 p.m. But I must give you a
line. I am glad you are settling down. You have gone there just in
time. Do come nearer Gangabehn. She is troubled at heart. You will
be also helpful to Father Elwin.
1
Gandhiji issued this statement following an order of the District Magistrate,
Sachin State, prohibiting the meeting of the Congress Working Committee.
2
From Dumas in Sachin State to Bombay

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

433

You will be pleased to know that Surajbehn has adopted the 1/2
sari. At first I did not notice the change. Write to her a brief note.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 9666; also C.W. 5432. Courtesy: Mirabehn

575. LETTER TO P. G. MATHEWS
BORSAD,

10.30 p.m., June 29, 1931
MY DEAR MATHEW,

Do now come and pass a few days with me.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1549

576. LETTER TO GANGABEHN AND NANIBEHN JHAVERI
BORSAD,

June 29, 1931
CHI. GANGABEHN AND NANIBEHN,

As it is 10.30 p.m., I will not write much. In the circumstances
supposed in Nanibehn’s question, our duty is to be quiet. The
responsibility of what happens after we have advised others, does not
rest on us. The lesson that the Gita teaches is that we should leave the
result to God. We are only His servants carrying out His orders. Sing
the song: “Let me be your servant.”
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3116

434

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

577. LETTER TO PADMA
BORSAD,

June 30, 1931
CHI. PADMA,

I got your letter. It is 5 o’clock in the morning. My complaint
against you is that you do not take proper rest and so get fever. You
ought to take perfect rest, lying in bed all the time. lf you do so, you
will soon get well. Why don’t you listen to me and do this?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6123; also C.W. 3475. Courtesy:
Prabhudas Gandhi

578. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
BORSAD,

June 30, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

I have your lettcr of 23rd inst. setting forth objections raised
against the recent resolution of the Working Committee on boycott of
foreign cloth. I have re-read the resolution in the light of the objections raised and I have come to the conclusion that the objections are
based on an insufficient reading of the resolution and ignorance of
the previous history of the Congress policy in the matter. Long before
the civil disobedience campaign and ever since the Bengal Partition
days, boycott of foreign cloth and especially British cloth and general
British goods became the policy of the Congress. In 1920 boycott of
British goods was dropped at my instance and replaced by boycott of
foreign cloth on predominantly economic grounds and ever since it
has so remained. Whilst I was in Yeravda jail between 1922 and ‘24 a
resolution adopting boycott of British goods was passed at one of the
sessions of the Congress and since then, boycott of foreign cloth and
boycott of British goods have run on parallel lines. During the last
struggle these assumed an aggressive political character and became
practically merged. As a result of the Delhi Settlement, boycott of
British goods was discontinued and the effect of discontinuance was
so immediate that within a week of the Settlement orders for British
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

435

machinery and other goods were freely sent. Boycott of foreign cloth
however remained not as a political weapon but as an economic
necessity. Thus complete prohibition of the sale of foreign cloth as an
economic necessity has been the settled Congress policy since 1920. It
was torn from its original anti-British setting. A mere pursuit of this
policy can in no sense be interpreted to mean interference with the
liberty of action of the individual unless the policy was enforced
through violent measures. But the history of the methods adopted by
the Congress since the Settlement, I think, furnishes sufficient evidence to show that both the letter and the spirit of the Settlement have
been adhered to in the vast majority of cases by Congress organizations and prompt measures have been taken wherever any departure
from peaceful methods has been detected.
Objection has been taken to the use of the word ‘permit’ in the
resolution in question. Of course the word has reference only to those
who put themselves under Congress discipline and so long as the
Congress retains the influence it has over the people, the use of the
word ‘permit’ is not only legitimate but necessary if the Congress
resolutions are to convey the intention of the authors. So long as the
Congress policy remains what it is, it is not open to Congress organizations to permit all those under their influence importation of
foreign cloth even if individuals desired it.
As to disciplinary action the words of the resolution are surely
quite clear. Disciplinary action contemplated is “against the Committee or the individual as the case may be” and Committee or the individual means only a Congress Committee or its individual members.
That all the obligation that is imposed by the Congress is purely moral
and devoid of any violence is abundantly clear from the fact that
breaches of pledges given to the Congress continue to be reported, the
Congress remaining helpless. At the same time it is to be confessed
that in a majority of cases the moral authority of the Congress is felt
and accepted by the people.
Lastly, I entirely endorse your remark that “it is most undesirable that there should be any ground for misunderstanding as to the
attitude of the Congress in this matter.” And I assure you that members of the Working Committee are most anxious to avoid any misunderstanding, their desire being, for the good name of the Congress
436

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

if for nothing else, to be meticulous in the performance of all the
obligations undertaken on behalf of the Congress in the Delhi
Settlement.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Home Department, Political, File No. 33/6,1931. Courtesy: National
Archives of India.

579. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
BORSAD,

June 30, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

I thank you for your letter of 24th inst. intimating the withdrawal of the salt concession in two areas of the salt range, namely,
Nurpur Gorge and Kalabagh.1 I confess that I am taken aback by the
news. I think the local officials could have warned the people and
waited for the warning to take effect. The withdrawal seems to have
been so abrupt and peremptory. I am however myself making enquiries in the matter and shall let you know the result. Of course I entirely
agree with you that the use of any transport other than human is not
to be countenanced.
Yours sincerely,
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and I.ibrary

1
The addressee had stated in his letter that the people had abused the
concession granted to them and removed enormous quantities of salt on camels and
donkeys.

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

437

580. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
BORSAD,

June 30, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

In the enclosure to my letter of the 24th inst. 1 regarding the
picketing in Cawnpore the Secretary now writes correcting the date on
which the photograph was taken as 5th of May instead of middle of
March.
Yours sincerely,
A.I.C.C. File No. 387, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

581. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
BORSAD,

June 30, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,

This letter is an appeal to you as a Punjabi. There is a prisoner
who has served over 19 years’ imprisonment whose name is Pandit
Jagat Ram2 . My youngest son who was arrested in Delhi as a civil
resister and sentenced to two years’ imprisonment was in the Gujarat
jail in common with several other civil resisters. He tells me that Pandit
Jagat Ram is a most inoffensive man, has no anarchical tendencies. His
father died on the 22nd inst. His mother and brother died before his
father. There is only the widow left. Several representations, I hear,
have been made to the Punjab Government. No one knows why Pandit
Jagat Ram has not yet been discharged. This case has no connection
with the Settlement. I simply bring it to your notice so as to make an
appeal to your humanity and to ask you to use your good offices with
your friends in the Punjab Government if you think that you could,
1

Vide also letter to the addressee, “Letter to H. W. Emerson”, 18-6-1931
Chief lieutenant of Lala Hardayal in America; vide “An Old Political
Prisoner”,9-7-1931
2

438

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

without difficulty, use them. I am not worrying you with the details of
the case which are well known to the Punjab Secretariat.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 8679; also A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931. Courtesy:
Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

582. LETTER TO R. M. MAXWELL
BORSAD,

June 30, 1931
DEAR MR. MAXWELL,

Syt. S. B. Joshi of Poona sends me a copy of a petition sent by
him to His Excellency on 21st ultimo. On the 23rd April 1930 owing
to thc civil disobedience campaign he tendered his resignation as
temporary supervisor in the Rohri Canal, No. IV division. As a result,
his name was put under a general ban which it appears was declared
against all such people. I enclose herewith a copy of the ban. In my
opinion this ban should have been removed long ago in terms of the
Settlement. Will you kindly let me know the intention of the
Government in the matter?2
Yours sincerely

R. M. M AXWELL, E SQ.
P RIVATE S ECRETARY TO
H. E. THE GOVERNOR OF BOMBAY
MAHABALESHWAR
A.I.C.C. File No. 4, 1931, Part II. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

1

The addressee’s reply, inter alia, stated: “The Government of India feel that
this is not a case in which they are justified in interfering with the discretion of the
local Government, and particularly, having regard to the present state of the terrorist
movement in India.”
2
The addressee replied on July 21 that the Government were cancelling the
order which barred S. B. Joshi permanently from Government service.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

439

583. LETTER TO G. FINDLAY SHIRRAS
BORSAD,

June 30, 1931
DEAR PRINCIPAL SHIRRAS,

I thank you for your letter of 25th instant, in reply to mine. I
understand that you have admitted all students but seven. There is
therefore, I presume, no question of want of accommodation. So far
as the internal discipline is concerned I suppose that what you regard
as indiscipline was more or less common to the majority of students.
But what perhaps you have in mind is that the seven students were
ring-leaders. I suggest that, if it was right to take the other students, it
would be wrong to keep out the ring-leaders. The Delhi Settlement
makes no such distinction between the leaders and the rank and file. I
would urge you, therefore, to take the remaining students and avoid a
possible crisis.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
G. F INDLAY S HIRRAS, E SQ.
P RINCIPAL, G UJARAT C OLLEGE
AHMEDABAD
From a photostat: G.N. 819

584. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
AS AT S ABARMATI ,

June 30, 1931
MY DEAR CHARLIE,

I have your letter.
If I come there I shall tackle all the several matters which you
mention about Lancashire mills compared to Bombay mills. I may
deal with portions of your letter in Young India.
The difficulty about my going to London is still there. To get
anything done by the Government just now is like drawing a live
tooth. But bit by bit difficulties are being removed. I believe that the
Viceroy is sincerely anxious that I should go but I do not think he is
able to give much relief.
440

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Yes, the limit of five articles of food and the taking of meals
before sundown applies to India alone. In London, therefore, if the
system needs it, I shall be able to take more varied food. But so far as
milk is concerned cow’s milk and buffalo’s milk are taboo, and
naturally therefore products of these two milks.
Love.
MOHAN
C. F. A NDREWS, E SQ.
112 GOWER S TREET
LONDON W.C. 1
From a photostat: G.N. 973

585. LETTER TO S. SATYAMURTI 1
BORSAD,

June 30, 1931
MY DEAR SATYAMURTI,

Your letter on my recent article 2 on the Working Committee
resolution gave me much pleasure. I thought that it was important
enough for a public reply through the pages of Young India. You will
therefore find it in Young India.3
You have referred to a previous letter. It has not yet reached me.
It may be that owing to constant shifting it is following me from post
office to post office. If it is of any importance please send me a copy.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S YT . S. S ATYAMURTI
2/18 CAR S TREET
TRIPLICANE, M ADRAS
From a photostat: C.W. 9721. Courtesy: Governrnent of Tamilnadu

1

A photostat of the original of this letter was exhibited at the Gandhi Darshan
Exhibition held at New Delhi in 1969-70.
2
Vide “Substance Not Shadow”,18-6-1931
3
Vide “Power Not an End”, 2-7-1931
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

441

586. LETTER TO ABDUL GHAFFAR KHAN
BORSAD,

June 30, 1931
DEAR KHAN SAHEB,

I understand from the Government of India that people in
Nurpur Gorge and Kalabagh have been removing salt on a scale not
warranted by the Settlement, i.e., on camels and donkeys. No such
transport is permissible. People may carry for their own use or sale to
the poor people in the neighbourhood on their own backs and walk
the distance. No riding for sale is permissible. As a result the Government inform me that the concession has been withdrawn from these
two areas. Please enquire and let me know at once, if necessary by
wire, what has actually happened.
Yours sincerely,

KHAN ABDUL GHAFFAR KHAN S AHEB
UTMANZAI, C HARSADDA (DT. P ESHAWAR )
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

587. LETTER TO KRISHNA GOPAL
BORSAD,

June 30, 1931
DEAR LALA KRISHNA GOPAL,

I have your telegram. I have moved in the matter. 1 I do not
know what success will attend my effort. Please say nothing in public
about this. I may deal with the case2 in Young India next week unless
Pandit Jagat Ram is sooner discharged.
Yours sincerely,

LALA KRISHNA GOPAL
S IALKOT (PUNJAB)
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

1
2

442

Vide “Letter to H. W. Emerson”, 30-6-1931
Vide “An Old Political Prisoner”, 9-7-1931.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

588. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
BORSAD,

June 30, 1931
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I got your letter. You should oppose the idea of your going to
Calcutta. Tell them frankly that you improve in health when you
come to the Ashram. It shows that the only cure for your disease is
congenial atmosphere. If you can firmly explain this, all your
problems will be solved.
Vidyavati keeps ill. I do not understand the reason.
I keep good health. The diet continues to be the same. Rajendrababu
is with me. He is all right now. All of us will go to Bombay on the 7th,
and will be there for three days. The address is: Laburnum Road,
Gamdevi, Bombay.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3416

589. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS
BORSAD,

June 30, 1931
If I succeed in reaching London, and if I am invited to visit
Lancashire, I would certainly put aside all other work and visit
Lancashire and there place before the leading men the Congress
position and remove the terrible misunderstanding that has gathered
round the policy of the Congress in connection with the exclusion of
foreign cloth. Assuming that the Congress position is otherwise
accepted, I anticipate no difficulty in making porposals that would be
beneficial in their operation both to England and India.
The Hindu, 1-7-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

443

590. TELEGRAM TO M. G. DATAR1
[On or after June 30, 1931]
HEADMASTER
T. V.2 NAGPUR
DHARMADHIKARI

SHOULD

DEFEND.

SEND

FULL

PARTICULARS.

GANDHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 17329

591. TELEGRAM TO CHATURBHUJ MOTIRAM 3
[On or after June 30, 1931]
CONFLICTING
DIFFERENCES

WIRES

CONFOUND

OR APPROACH

ME.

YOU

MUST

COMPOSE

CONGRESS.

GANDHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 17330

592. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
BORSAD,

Unrevised July 1, 1931
DEAR SATISBABU,

I have your letter. Don’t expect any donation from Ahmedabad. What I would like you to do is to discuss the whole thing with
Mr. Birla. You should also find out ways and means of interesting the
middle class Bengalee and the zamindar class in the khadi work as
also in the amelioration of all the poor people. Why should there be
1
This was in reply to the addressee’s telegram of June 30, which read:
‘‘Dharmadhikari teacher our Vidyalaya and Secretary C.P. Marathi Provincial
Congress Committee arrested yesterday for sedition for speech at Kisan Conference in
C.P. Hindi. Dharmadhikari says he did not in any way break Truce terms by his
speech. Your article “Terrible if True” in Young India 25th June. Requires your
definite advice whether Dharmadhikari should defend in court. Kindly wire
immediately. . . .”
2
Tilak Vidyalaya
3
This was in reply to the addressee’s telegram of June 30 from Bhiwani,which
read: “Signed pledge according your orders. Sealed cloth. Nekiram prohibiting sales
millcloth placing four volunteers opposite each shop. Suffering losses. Breach peace
likely”

444

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

no response from the Bengalees either for khadi or for famine relief?
There is something wrong about the method of work here. You
should do this work through Rashtrabani1 . The poison that you see
about you will be neutralized only by the most correct conduct on our
part. It needs utter selfeffacement. I wanted to talk about all these
things to you when we met, but it was no good. Bombay is about the
worst place for me to hope to have any quiet chat with anybody.
There is an endless stream of visiting friends whom I must not repel.
But if you are in any way dejected or despondent you must come to
me without fixing the time-limit and hang on till we have, in leisurely
fashion, thrashed out every conceivable problem that we could think
of.
It is good that the Atma Katha2 is in demand. Do you understand Gujarati so well as to be able to translate directly from it? If
anyhody else asks for permission to translate the Atma Katha, I don’t
need to refer him to you. I will flatly refuse permission. I have a
vague recollection that Anil Babu of Shantiniketan did get from me
the permission years ago.
I am glad that your weight and strength are increasing. Remember the verse3 about fasting in the verses of the second chapter of the
Gita that we sing every evening. Fasting is good enough up to a point.
But if we are nervous about our perception of Truth and Ahimsa, the
moment we begin to satisfy real hunger, we have reached the danger
point, and our ascribing a bettcr perception of Truth and Ahimsa to
fasting or semi-fasting may be pure hallucination. Hard work must be
consistent with hard and clear thinking. Conversely, hard and clear
thinking I hold to be impossible if a person has become physically a
perfect wreck. A healthy mind in a healthy body is a correct maxim.
Love.
BAPU
S YT . S ATIS C HANDRA DAS GUPTA
15 C OLLEGE S QUARE
C ALCUTTA
From the original: C.W. 7891. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

1

Bengali weekly edited by the addressee
An Autobiography; vide “An Autobiography”
3
“When a man starves his senses, the objects of those senses disappear from
him, but not the yearning for them; the yearning too departs when he beholds the
Supreme”—II. 59.
2

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

445

593. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
BORSAD,

July 1, 1931
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I have your letter of 27th June, redirected from Bardoli.
Possibly you did not know that from Bombay I had come back to
Borsad because it has been necessary for Vallabhbhai and me to
divide our work. Danger is being averted by constant presence and
vigilance. But any day there might be a burst-up in Borsad. I have had
difficult experiences of working settlements in South Africa and even
getting the poor head broken 1 in rendering a cent per cent account
from our side, and then had to get myself arrested in making the
Government render a tolerably good account of themselves. But I
thought that I had forgotten all about working settlements. Now,
however, I am reviving old memories and many of the experiences are
being repeated. My great satisfaction however is that whether war or
settlement, the nation must go forward if we remain faithful servers.
I like all your letters to the Chief Secretary. I do hope that the
Governor will consent to see you.
Here is a complaint against you. Please keep the typewritten
sheet and return it to me if you write about it or bring it with you and
you will tell me all about it when we meet.
BAPU
A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 98-9

1

On February 10, 1908 Gandhiji was beaten up by Mir Alam and his
companions; vide “Letter to Friends”, 10-2-1908

446

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

594. A LETTER
BORSAD,

July 1, 1931
BHAI . . . 1

Narandas must have written to you about . . .’s 2 misconduct.
I know the news must have pained you. I had built castles in the air
about . . .3 but all my hopes have come to nothing. I completely failed
to understand her character. I now advise you to call her back home
immediately and marry her to whomsoever she wishes to marry. I had
three or four excellent candidates for her hand, but now we cannot
give her to any of them. The girl is so untruthful that it is impossible
to say whether she will make any man happy. Please don’t be angry
with her. Treat her with love. Ultimately, that alone will happen which
has been ordained for her and us.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3242

595. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
July 1, 1931
CHI. GANGABEHN,

You did right in writing the letter which you did. Others will also
do what . . .4 and . . . 5 did. Do not get frightened. The times are such
and our experiment is full of risks. However, no big task is ever
achieved unless one is ready to take risks. We wish neither to condemn
our experiment nor denounce Antyajas3. We should rather believe that
our tapascharya4 is insufficient and our purity imperfect. We will try
to become purer, to become worthier servants and shall go forward.
Yes, it was almost decided to give . . . in marriage to . . ., but it
1

The names have been omitted.
Ibid
3
Ibid
4
The names in this and the following paragraph are omitted in the source.
3
Literally, ‘last born’, the untouchables
4
Self-suffering as moral discipline
5
Ibid
2

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

447

was good that the evil was discovered in time. I had expressed the
opinion that both . . . and . . . should leave.
Face such situations with patience. We wish to, ought to, behave
like a vaid who, after ministering medicine to a patient, forgets both
and takes up another patient.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-6: G. 5. Gangabehnne, pp. 56-7; also C.W. 8780. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

596. LETTER TO YUDHVIR SINGH
BORSAD,

July 1, 1931
BHAI YUDHVIRJI,

I like your intention of publishing Urdu translation of Young
India and Navajivan. And I understand that no advertisements or
other articles will be accepted for your journal and only translations
of articles in the above mentioned journals will appear. This letter
must not mean that I am accepting any responsibility for your paper
or the authenticity of its translations1 .
I wish success to your enterprise.
Do forgive me for the delay in replying.
Yours,

MOHANDAS GANDHI
From Hindi: C.W. 9310. Courtesy: Dr. Yudhvir Singh

1

A block print of this appeared in the first issue of Urdu Navajivan,
25-7-1931; vide also “Urdu Navajivan”, Before 11-9-1931.

448

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I
LETTER FROM H. W. EMERSON

1

S IMLA,
April 30, 1931
MY DEAR MR. GANDHI,

You will remember that, when I last saw you in Bombay, I promised to write to
His Excellency Sir Malcolm Hailey with the object of arranging for you to have an
interview with him. I wrote to him the next day and have just received a letter from
him. He has been unable to reply before, because he has been busy in studying the
revenue and rent position. He feels that is is no use discussing the matter with you
until he is fully informed of the facts and is clear in his own mind what relief is
necessary. In other words, he wants to be quite sure that any assurance he may give
you will cover the case. At present, reports from all districts have not come in; but Sir
Malcolm Hailey hopes to be fully acquainted with the situation within a week and in a
position to discuss it. I will let you know when I hear further from him.
2.

I am sorry to see in the papers that you have not been fit, and I hope the

reports were not true, or, if they were true, that you are now alright again.
Yours sincerely,

H. W. EMERSON
M. K. GANDHI , ESQ.
AHMEDABAD
Home Department, Political, File No. 33/XI & K.Ws 1931. Courtesy :
National Archives of India

1

Vide “Letter to H. W. Emerson”, 7-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

449

APPENDIX II
NOTE BY H. W. EMERSON ON INTERVIEW BETWEEN HIMSELF AND
GANDHIJI 1
Confidential
I had prolonged discussions with Mr. Gandhi on the 13th, 14th, 15th and 16th
of May on matters arising out of the Settlement, also incidentally on general
questions.
2.
The first subject of importance discussed was the situation in Gujarat.
Particular matters raised were the followings :
(a)
Mr. Gandhi said that in the Kaira District, and particularly in the Borsad
Taluka, matters were on the whole proceeding very satisfactorily owing to the system
of co-operation between himself and Mr. Perry, the Collector. He said that the people
were paying land revenue as quickly as they could and that he was satisfying himself
by personal enquiry into cases that they were paying as much as their circumstances
would permit. He was worried about the question of unauthorized arrears. He said that
it was common ground that those who could pay the current demand and arrears should
pay; but there would be undoubtedly numerous cases in which revenue payers were
able to pay the current ones, but would not be able to pay arrears; that what he would
like was a declaration of announcement from the local Government of a general
character that in such cases the arrears would be automatically suspended. He argued
that when the arrears of those who had not joined the Civil Disobedience Movement
had been suspended and so had become authorized arrears, there was a stronger reason
for suspending the arrears of those who had suffered a great deal from the Civil
Disobedience Movement and were, therefore, prima facie in a worse position to pay.
I said that, so far as I understood the case, there had been no general suspension of
the demand in cases of those who had not joined the Civil Disobedience Movement,
but that in accordance with the ordinary system of land revenue administration certain
arrears had been suspended where there was sufficient reason. It could not be assumed
that because people had joined in the civil disobedience movement, they were,
therefore, less able to pay than people who had not joined in it. Of those who had
joined many had not suffered serious loss, a good number had suffered no loss at all,
and in any case the test was not the losses they had suffered, but their present capacity
to pay. I did not, therefore, see how a general order could be issued. He then said that
many revenue-payers were paying money representing the current demand and, in
some cases, also part of the arrears, on the understanding that this represented all that
they could pay at present, and that the balance of the arrears would be suspended, that
Government officers were taking these sums, knowing what the intentions of the
1

450

Vide “Interview to the Press”, 15-5-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

people were and that a very difficult situation would arise if later coercive processes
were issued for the balance. I said that it would clearly not be possible for
Government to accept the position that the tax-payers should determine what amount
of Government dues should be paid. He admitted this as a general proposition, but
said that where, as at present in Kaira, he himself and other Congress workers in
pursuance of the Settlement were satisfying themselves that people were paying as
much as they could pay, the position was different, and that they became more or less
involved in the transaction. I suggested to him that all Congress workers in Gujarat
were inspired by the same honesty of purpose as he himself, and that for this reason
also the Collector had to satisfy himself that there was a case for suspension, that my
information was that in some parts of Gujarat revenue payers were being encouraged
not to pay unauthorized arrears, although many of them were able to do so. I assumed
generally that neither the local Government nor the local officers desire to squeeze
money out of persons who could not pay and that it really resolved itself into a
question of good faith. If the Congress and the people genuinely played up and paid
all they could pay, then I imagined nobody would wish to resort to coercive
processes. If, on the other hand, they did not play up, I did not see how coercive
processes would be avoided. At any rate it was not necessary to take this particular
fence at the present time, and it would be sufficient to consider any difficulty, if and
when it arises.
My general impression about this part of the conversation was that Mr.
Gandhi foresees trouble in regard to the collection of unauthorized arrears, and that
while he is playing the game in Borsad, attempts are being made elsewhere to defer
the payment of unauthorized arrears on a large scale under the cover of inability to
pay. The nature of the difficulty that is likely to arise will depend on the extent to
which this movement succeeds, but if complications are to be avoided, it will
probably be necessary for the local officers not to press collection of unauthorized
arrears in cases where there will be real difficulty in paying.
(b) We had a long talk about the reinstatement of village officials. Mr.
Gandhi made the point that no new Patels had been appointed permanently in the
sense that they had been appointed for life and that the appointments were for a term
of years, e.g., 3, 5, or 10 years, and that even these were subject to further notice. He
contended that such appointments could not be treated as permanent and that they
were not, therefore, completely protected under para 19 of the Statement of the 5th of
March. I told him that I understood that this particular system of appointment was
usual and that it was not the practice in Gujarat even if normal times to appoint Patels
permanently in the sense in which he used the word. The local Government take the
view that “permanently” means substantively and that this was at least a reasonable
interpretation. Personally I did not press this, because I knew that when this clause
was under discussion in New Delhi, neither Lord Irwin nor Mr. Gandhi was aware of
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

451

the fact that the appointments made had been of this character, and the impression
was that they were either of a permanent or purely temporary character. The actual
wording of the clause did not, however, affect the broad principle which underlay this
and similar provisions. That principle was that where third party rights had been
created, the local Government were under an obligation to protect the rights and this
principle obviously applied to appointments for a term of years. It might be
contended that when the third party rights so created had been satisfied, then effect
should be given to the Settlement and return should be made to the status quo ante;
instance at the end of an appointment of three years the claims of the original holder,
if in the meantime there was no cause of disqualification against him, might be given
preferential treatment. This seemed to be a view of the case which the local
Government might be inclined to take, but I could not commit them in any way. Mr.
Gandhi was not very satisfied with this, but felt, I think, that he was not in a strong
position.
He then pursued another line, namely, that it was generally recognized that the
new men who had been put in were unable to carry on the work, that in many cases
they were criminals or of bad character, that in fact they were unable to collect the
land revenue and it was the resigned Patel who had been doing this work; that there
could be no peace in a village where a new Patel had been appointed until he was
removed from it; and that in the interest of good administration a remedy should be
found either by compensating the new Patels or by finding them jobs elsewhere. I
said that, so far as I knew, the local officers were quite prepared to enquire into
bonafide complaints against particular Patels, but they of course had to protect them
against frivolous complaints; that the third party right in such cases was the right to
a particular appointment; and that com- pensation would not be regarded by the
Patels themselves as a satisfaction of those rights. Something might perhaps be
done to ease what was admittedly a difficult problem by putting in Patels who had
resigned in vacancies elsewhere as they occur; but I did not know whether this was, in
fact, practicable. This question evidently is also causing him a good deal of concern.
(c) In regard to the repurchase of lands that had been sold, he appeared to be
fairly happy. He was very critical of the difficulties experienced in ascertaining what
lands had been sold and at what price; but he admitted that the present arrangement
under which the entries relating to all such transactions have been or will shortly be
entered up in the village registers, to which the public have access, would meet the
requirements of the case. He said that he was having more success in getting back
lands from Dharalas than he had anticipated, and in fact he was getting on better with
them than with others in regard to whom he had not expected so much difficulty. I
asked him why Garda had repudiated his transaction. He would not admit that Garda
had any reasonable cause for complaint against the Congress for any deviation from
their side of the bargain and said he was in correspondence with Sir Cowasjee

452

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Jehangir.
He said that in some cases in the Kaira District land had been forfeited for
arrears of land revenue, had then been declared to be Government property and had
been sold, that none of the sale price had been credited to the account of the defaulter,
and that, in fact, the amount in regard to which the land had been forfeited was still
being demanded. I expressed doubts about this, although I did understand that where
land had been forfeited the whole of the sale price had been credited to Government,
even although this exceeded the amount of the demand. I gathered that the Collector
of Kaira had referred this question to the local Government and they will doubtless
consider, if cases, such as stated by mr. Gandhi, have actually occurred, whether the
collection of the demand in addition to forfeiture of the land is not unduly severe.
On the whole Mr. Gandhi was more happy about Gujarat than he was when I
last saw him, and the situation there has undoubtedly improved. He himself appears to
have worked very hard to get things cleared up, but there appear to be several
troublesome matters ahead and these may create difficulties, especially where Gandhi
has not tried his hand and Vallabhbhai’s influence has been at work.
I may observe that during the course of the discussion about Gujarat and also
on one or two other occasions Mr. Gandhi dropped the claim, if he ever seriously
entertained it, that Congress should be recognized as an intermediary between
Government and the people, although he did claim, and not without reason, that
where, as in the case of Kaira, the local officers are co-operating with himself and
other workers, action should be avoided which will embarrass him and his helpers,
unless it is clear that they are not playing the game. I tackled him about the
statements attributed to him in the Press that he had advised revenue payers not to
pay land revenue if they had to borrow to do so on interest. I told him that this was a
principle that Govern- ment could not accept, that it was a well-known fact that
revenue payers had often to borrow money in order to meet their revenue demands, and
that if I had credit at the Bank, my creditors would not let me off, because I had no
ready cash. He admitted that in ordinary circumstances his advice was not justifiable,
but on the merits of this particular case he eliminated further argument by saying that
in Kaira, where the advice was given, the Collector had accepted the principle as a
working basis.
3.
We then had some discussion about salt, which was resumed later in
connection with a reference from the Central Board of Revenue. The main points,
which were raised, were the following :
(a) Mr. Gandhi is anxious that Government should issue some
communication amplifying the relevant clause of the Statement of March 5th, so that
persons entitled to the concession will know more about its character. I showed him
the lengthy and detailed circulars issued by the Central Board of Revenue for various

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

453

areas, and explained to him, what I understand to be the view of the Central Board of
Revenue, namely, that while these were necessary for departmental guidance, they
were too complicated to be of real assistance to the public, that in fact specific
difficulties were still continually cropping up, that these were being dealt with ad hoc
in a liberal and practical spirit, and that until the various points had been settled the
publication of a detailed statement would in any case be premature. Moreover,
anything in the nature of a lengthy statement would probably give rise to questions
of hypothetical character, which it was better not to raise. Mr. Gandhi accepted all
this and said that he had not intended anything in the nature of a long statement, but
that he felt it very desirable that the main principles should be published. I suggested
that he should try his hand on a draft and Government would then see whether it could
be accepted by them with such modifications as might be necessary. He promised to
let me have one.
(b) He then got on to the question of the fish-curing industry. I told him that
I understood that this matter was already under consideration by the Central Board of
Revenue, who had addressed the Madras Government. Briefly the points which he
made were the followings :—
(i)
Fishermen along the East and West Coast already enjoy the concession
of duty free salt.
(ii) On the West Coast, where fish curing is carried on by contractors in
special yards, salt has to be purchased from Government. Mr. Gandhi agreed that this
was quite right and that the salt concession should not be extended to the fish-curing
industry when the curing is done on a big scale by contractors.
(iii) He said, however, that even on the West Coast there was a certain
amount of curing done by fishermen in their own homes, that it was carried on as a
domestic and not as a big scale industry, and that it was reasonable to allow the
concession in such cases.
I declined to express any opinion in ignorance of the facts, but promised to let
the C.B.R. know the gist of the Conversation.
(c) I then mentioned to him the case reported by the Collector of Salt
Revenue, Bombay, in which it was said that Congress workers were making salt in
works situated on privately owned land at Shiroda, that there was a fairly large force
of labour employed, and that a stock of salt of 500 to 600 maunds was being
collected. We were agreed that the salt concession did not anticipate that Congress
would come in as an organization engaged in the manufacture of salt, and he admitted
that an impossible situation would arise if local Congress organizations as such took
up the manufacture of salt even for the purpose included in the Settlement. He also
admitted that if salt is being manufactured at Shiroda by paid labour, then this is not
covered by the Settlement, but he claimed that if the villagers entitled to the

454

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

concession had combined for the manufacture of salt and were making it themselves
and not through paid labour, then the case was covered by the Settlement provided the
relevant provisions of the Settlement were observed. He also claimed that the mere
manufacture of a stock of 500 or 600 maunds did not necessarily constitute a breach,
since it was natural that the people concerned should manufacture a sufficient quantity
of salt to see them over the close period. He claimed to be acquainted with the facts of
the manufacture at Shiroda, and the C.B.R. may find it necessary to collect further
information in regard to them before they can reach a decision. If it is decided that the
facts do not preclude this system of manufacture, then a practical solution may be to
limit the quantity of salt to be manufactured in accordance with an estimate of local
requirements.
(d) Mr. Gandhi agreed that the practical test of removal on foot should not
include the removal of manufactured salt by gangs of coolies.
4.
Mr. Gandhi then mentioned the matter of releases of prisoners, about
which we had a general and somewhat infructuous talk. He still seems to think that
there are cases which come within the amnesty in which releases have not been
granted, and he promised to let me have lists of these. I told him that we had sent the
previous lists to local Governments, and the replies we had so far received definitely
indicated that local Governments had very scrupulously honoured the Settlement in
this respect. I mentioned the case of the Punjab list in which, for lack of accurate
information, the local Government had been unable to identify a number of prisoners
mentioned, and of the 75 who had been identified 47 had been released before the list
was sent. This went to show that the information supplied to Mr. Gandhi was
inaccurate. I also reminded him that local Governments generally have interpreted the
Settlement very liberally in cases of technical violence and that while they have
been more strict in cases of incitement to violence, there are good reasons for this. I
took the opportunity of reminding him that within the last three weeks there have
been three incidents connected with the terrorist movement in the Punjab alone,
namely, the Shalimar affair, the Sialkot incident and the very recent bomb explosion
in the Jullundur District. He had not heard of the last and was shocked to hear that the
two persons concerned were connected with the Congress. He agreed that local
Governments were justified in taking a serious view of incitement to violence, and he
did not attempt to raise the question of cases under section 124 A., I.P.C., and section
108, Criminal Procedure Code, which at one time threatened to be a matter of
controversy. Two cases appeared to be worrying him. One was the case of an editor1
convicted in Sholapur, in regard to which he urges that there was neither violence nor
incitement to violence, and the second case was one from the Surat District, where a
youth had been convicted for arson. His crop had been attached, and he then set fire to
1

Emerson has made a note here : “He has since been released.”

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

455

it. Mr. Gandhi then attempted to argue that violence within the terms of the
Settlement had reference only to violence to person and that, therefore, this particular
incident was not violence. This of course could not be accepted. I understood that he
was in correspondence in regard to both cases with the local Government.
He wanted to know what was to happen if there were a deadlock between
Congress and the local Government in regard to particular cases. I said that the
intention was that the local Government should be the final authority, that so far no
such case has arisen, and we might wait and see. The Government of India had in the
case of several representations made to them requested local Governments to inform
them of the facts, and since neither the Government of India nor any local
Government has any desire to evade the obligations of the Settlement, there is no
reason to suppose that a solution will not be found if there is any particular case in
which there has been a genuine mistake. I informed him that local Governments had
attached very great importance to this part of the Settlement and that in some
province the Governor had himself scrutinized all doubtful cases. I imagine that Mr.
Gandhi is being given a good deal of trouble by provincial Congressmen in this
matter.
5.
We then had a humorous discussion about bicycles and a motor-car
which led up to the case of the Young India Press.
Under clause 16 of the Statement Government have agreed to return movable
property, not being an illegal possession, which was seized during the civil
disobedience movement and which at the time of the Settlement was still in the
possession of Government. A motor-car was seized in the Kaira District and was quite
properly used for official purposes. It is now, I gathered, in a somewhat dilapidated
condition and is out of action at some distance from its original home. Mr. Gandhi
claims that it should be returned at the place where it was seized. The local officers
will not admit this, and I gather that they cannot, in any case, return it there, either
by putting it into running condition or transporting it as scrap iron. This led us on to
what was the real purport of the matter, namely, the Press of Young India. This was
seized in Ahmedabad under the Press Ordinance and is of considerable value. Part of it
is still in Ahmedabad, while part of it was sent to Bombay for sale. Mr. Gandhi claims
as a right that he is entitled to its delivery at Ahmedabad, and he has recently
addressed the Bombay Government on the subject. He made it clear that he did not
want the Bombay portion of the press returned to him at Ahmedabad as a matter of
grace, if he was not entitled to this under the Settlement. I promised that we would
look into the legal aspect of the case, and if necessary, address the local
Government.1 He on his part promised that if the decision is in his favour he will not
use it for vexatious purposes, e.g., the return of a useless motor-car.
1

456

Gandhiji subsequently received a letter turning down the claim.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

6.
Under the same clause of the Settlement he raised the question of the
return of arms, the licences of which had been cancelled in connection with the Civil
Disobedience Movement. He had mentioned this before at previous talks, but I had
not appreciated the fact that the claim was under the clause, and had imagined that
what he desired was a more liberal policy within the spirit of the Settlement in regranting licences when previous ones had been cancelled. I told him that, so far as the
clause was concerned it seemed to me that as soon as an arms’ licence was cancelled,
the arm became an illegal possession and that, therefore, the case was not covered. In
any case, even if the clause did technically apply, local Governments would
obviously be unwilling to return arms where there was reason to suppose that these
arms might be used for terrorist purposes, and this applied particularly to the Punjab
and Bangal. Mr. Gandhi accepted this as reasonable and said that a way out of the
difficulty might be found by formally returning the arms, cancelling the new licences
and recovering them. I suggested that this would lead to a good deal of friction. I
promised to have the legal aspect examined.
I explained that if the matter did not come within the scope of the Settlement,
there were difficulties in addressing local Governments in regard to the re-grant of
licences, that the Arms Rules gave wide discretionary powers to District Magistrates
in regard to the grant and cancellation of licences, and that while it did not seem
improvable that they would take a reasonable view in the case of licences cancelled
during the civil disobedience movement when the licensees were responsible
persons, they would be sticky before giving licences to persons about whom they
were not satisfied.
7.
He then mentioned the case of restoration of pensions forfeited during
the Civil Disobdience Movement. I said that this had not been discussed with local
Governments; previous to the Settlement and that they and the Army Department in
the case of military pensions would certainly take strong exception to the restoration
of military and police pensions, and that, this being so, it would be difficult for
them to discriminate in favour of other civil pensions. Local Governments would,
however, doubtless consider in the ordinary course of business any applications made
to them, but I did not see how the Government of India could make any general
suggestion to them on this matter. Mr. Gandhi recognized the difficulty of restoring
military and police pensions and did not press the matter.
8.
Mr. Gandhi mentioned the case of boys and students who had been
expelled from educational institutions on account of participation in the Civil
Disobedience Movement. He said that in several provinces they were being allowed
to return only on condition that they gave a declaration that they would take no part
in politics. He seemed to think this was wrong. I explained to him that in some
Government’s institutions in the Pubjab (and probably else-where) such declarations
were taken from students on first entry—let alone from students who were allowed reVOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

457

admission after expulsion; that the latter were fortunate to be allowed to return and
knowing the importance that local Government rightly attached to discipline in
schools and colleges. I saw no point in raising this matter with them, even if the
Government of India were prepared to take a more lenient view which I did not think
they would.
9.
We next got on to the important question of the North-West Frontier
Province. I had a preliminary talk with hin on one matter, giving him the main facts
as known to us, and Mr. Howell later joined us and explained the peculiar difficulties
of the Frontier situation. The points on which I laid emphasis in the preliminary
discussion were :
(1) Abdul Ghaffar’s activities and speeches since the amnesty.
(2) His continued insistence on the Settlement being a truce and therefore a
period of preparation.
(3) The continuous recruitment of Red Shirts, their organization, drilling,
etc.
(4) Abdul Ghaffar’s attempt to spread agitation across the border.
(5) His deliberate and discourteous refusal to see the Chief Commissioner or
local officials.
(6) The encouragement he has given to the non-payment of land revenue and
the consequent effects on the land revenue administration of the Peshawar
District.
(7)

The increase in crime that has occurred there.

I suggested to Mr. Gandhi that even in other provinces where we might
tolerate and had, in fact, tolerated in the past the recruitment of Congress volunteers
up to a certain point, we could not even in those provinces tolerate either the
unlimited recruitment of volunteers or the establishment of bodies of trained
volunteers. The fact that their immediate activities were comparatively harmless was
not a decisive test. We had to look to the use to which they might be put, and if at any
time we came to the conclusion that they constituted a serious menace to future
peace, we might have to take action. At any rate, we obviously could not accept the
argument that because we do not think it necessary at present to take action against
Congress volunteers in a particular province, therefore our hands are tied either in
regard to volunteers generally or in regard to volunteers in places where they do
constitute a menace; nor, having regard to the peculiar conditions in the North-West
Frontier Province the obvious danger of the Red Shirt Movement being
misunderstood in tribal territory and its possible effects in Afghanistan, could we
regard its extension with equanimity. Mr. Gandhi appreciated these peculiar
difficulties, but was inclined to attach weight to Abdul Ghaffar’s own statement of the
case, which appeared in the Press a few days ago and in which he naturally attempted

458

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to place the odium on the local administration.
The further discussion of the matter is given in Mr. Howell’s note below :
“By arrangement with Mr. Emerson I went yesterday afternoon to interview
Mr. Gandhi. Before I arrived Mr. Emerson had already dissuaded Mr. Gandhi from his
intention of visiting the North-West Frontier Province and had secured from him a
promise to get into touch either personally or by letter with Abdul Ghaffar Khan and
induce the latter at least to examine and reconsider his methods if not to abandon, at
any rate temporarily, his campaign. There was therefore very little for me to do
except to go over the ground again, and this I did with the special idea of impressing
upon Mr. Gandhi the dangers of Abdul Ghaffar Khan’s programme in the Frontier
Province. The gist of what Mr. Emerson and I said to him in the course of the
interview was as follows :
We had no intention of questioning Abdul Ghaffar Khan’s sincerity, but we did
think the wisdom of his procedure open to question. Why for instance had he steadily
refused to have an interview with the Chief Commissioner who had shown exemplary
patience and had done his best to get into contact with him? If they were bound to fall
out at a later stage, was that any reason for not walking together so far as their ways
lay together? Again was it wise to stage an exciting drama in the presence of an
exceedingly excitable audience, such as the frontier tribes, all of them well armed, and
many of them only waiting for a favourable opportunity to go and loot the box
office? If Mr. Gandhi thought this was prudent, let him listen to what Bhai Parmanand
and other Frontier Hindus, who had reason to know what they were talking about, had
recently been saying at Lahore. The basic fact of the situation was that, as these
frontier Hindus realize, security for life and property on the Frontier, especially Hindu
life and property, and the whole stability of society depended on the maintenance of
respect for the existing Government. And if the Frontier tribes, who were never tired
of proclaiming themselves to be as good as or better than anybody else, saw Abdul
Ghaffar Khan here, or X there, or Y in another place successfully defying
Government, they too might be tempted to take a hand in the same game. Hence the
paramount importance of preventing the Red Shirts Movement from being spread
across the border. Once there it could not fail to take on a militant form and, as last
summer in Waziristan, might assume the appearance of a pro-Amanullah campaign
which would cause anxiety to King Nadir.
Throughout stress was laid not on the contention that tribal territory was
beyond the scope of the Civil Disobedience Movement, since that is dead or at any
rate dormant, or of the Irwin-Gandhi Pact, since that might give Mr. Gandhi a clue
that in the event of a further struggle he would do well to make a point of extending
activities into tribal territory, that being a weak spot on our side, but on the danger,
especially the danger to Hindu life and property, to which opposition to Government

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

459

in the Frontier region was likely to lead. He was asked whether in his opinion it was
wise for anyone conducting a difficult and an unprecedented experiment, such as is
now in progress throughout India, to begin by tampering with the breakwater which
keeps the flood waters out. Mr. Gandhi seemed to grasp the point of this question.
We also put Sir Steuart Pears’ remaining points to Mr. Gandhi, and asked him
to consider whether there really could be any use for such a body of men as 13,000,
the latest figure we had had—admittedly only an estimate— of the number of Red
Shirts. Finally the revenue situation, with special reference to Peshawar District, was
discussed at some length, and Mr. Gandhi was informed of the startling rise in the
figures of crime. He wished to know how land and water rates compared in Peshawar
with the adjoining districts in the Punjab and seemed surprised to learn that, while
agricultural conditions in the irrigated area of the Peshawar District generally
compared favourably with anything in northern India, rates of land revenue and water
rates were distinctly lower than in the adjoining districts of the Punjab. This Mr.
Gandhi’s interlocutors thought might be taken as fair evidence of the constant Pathan
tendency to have things both ways at which the Pathan is an adept and frequently
successful. Mr. Gandhi took note of this and also of the fact that liberal remissions
had been, were being and would be granted according to the necessities of the case. He
seemed disposed to agree that whatever the land revenue policy of the future
Government might be, it was perhaps bad tactics to interfere too much with revenue
collection under the existing regime. On Mr. Gandhi’s side a promise was given that
he would send for Abdul Ghaffar Khan as soon as possible, and in the meantime would
both telegraph and write to him.”
10. We had some talk about the boycott and the attitude of Lancashire. Mr.
Gandhi was more sorrowful than resentful about the latter. He claimed that the
Settlement had produced a great change in the position regarding the boycott of
foreign cloth, that there had been a very large reduction in picketing, that
discrimination against British cloth had ceased and that while there were still causes
of complaint these should be regarded in the light of the situation as a whole and not
advanced as though they represented the general position. He claimed (and I believe
rightly) that he was doing his utmost to secure the strict observance of the Settlement
and he asked that any breaches of it should be at once brought to his notice.
I admitted the truth of a great deal of what he said; but gave him a number of
illustrations of the sort of thing that was going on, and in particular, dwelt on the
prevalence of social pressure. I said that the general impression was that freedom of
action of the individual has not been secured and that it was this belief that was
responsible for reactions in Lancashire, which were of first-class political
importance in England. I emphasized the harm that was being done by every instance
of violation of the Settlement that was communicated to the British Press and I dwelt

460

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

at length on a particular case that had come to the notice of Government. This case is
briefly as follows :
“The British Goods Boycott Committee of Ahmedabad sent a letter, dated the
7th of April 1931, to the Cawnpore Chemical Works, Cawnpore, asking them various
questions, among which were the following :
(a) Do you use any British materials in the process of manufacture?
(b) Has any Englishman or foreigner any interest whatever, either direct or
indirect, in your concern? If so, what is the extent of such interest?
Mr. Gavin Jones is very closely interested in this concern and sent the letter on to us.
We had enquiries made about it and were informed that the active workers on the
Committee were members of the Congress. After the Settlement the Committee
changed its name, but apparently sent out notices on the note paper with the old
heading and also included in their questions matters which directly offended against
the Settlement.”
I told Mr. Gandhi that in this particular case the attack was on the concern of
an Englishman, who was a member of the Round Table Conference Delegation and
who had strongly supported the Indian case in London. It would hardly be a matter of
surprise if activities of this kind were to make Europpeans doubtful of their previous
attitude and that if this particular instance were communicated to the British Press or
raised in Parliament, it could not fail to have very unfortunate results. Mr. Gandhi
admitted all this and expressed regret that the matter had not been brought to his
notice even once. I said that we could not do this until we knew that Congress were
concerned in it and we had just received this information. I promised to let him have a
copy of the relevant correspondence, and he said he would have the matter put right at
once and let me know the results in a letter which Government could, if they thought
it desirable, communicate to Mr. Gavin Jones.
Mr. Gandhi is, I think, uneasy about the fulfilment of the boycott provisions of the Settlement, and while he is as keen as ever on the replacement of Indian
for foreign cloth and is convinced that the movement has come to stay, he realizes
that methods of coercion and pressure will not succeed in the long run and that any
abuse of the Settlement has adverse effects in India and in England out of proportion
to the benefit to the movement itself. He has, however, still to get his own
principles across to Congress organizations and workers as a whole and although he
has done a good deal in this direction, there is still much more to do. It will help if
local Government either directly tackle provincial Congress organizations in regard
to violation of the Settlement in this respect or communicate at once specific
instances to the Home Department to pass them on to Mr. Gandhi.
11. During the course of our talk with Mr. Gandhi a number of general
questions were incidentally discussed, and one sitting was almost entirely devoted to
big issues. An attempt is made below to summarize the points which arose.
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

461

Mr. Gandhi appears to have little hope at present of an early communal
settlement and realizes the bitterness of feeling. He expressed himself as reluctant to
go to England unless a solution is reached, for he would then feel that he could not
either with decency or consistency press for self-government when Indians themselves were at sixes and sevens. He is also sensitive as to taunts being made in this
respect. I took the following line with him :
(a) If there were no communal settlement in India, then the logical conclusion of Mr. Gandhi to this would be that unless and until there were a settlement, there
could be no further advance in the constitutional field. Even if Mr. Gandhi himself felt
this, it was not possible for Government to accept it. Government had often been
accused of Machiavellian methods, and if it adopted the line taken by Mr. Gandhi
himself, there would be an immediate outcry accompanied by political agitation on an
intense scale. This must, therefore, be ruled out, and Government must assume
constitutional advance, even if no agreed communal settlement were reached. Why
should Mr. Gandhi take in this matter a more reactionary attitude than Government
were prepared to take? Moreover, even if a settlement were not reached in India, this
did not necessarily mean that one would not be reached in England. Conditions were
in some respects more favourable there than here : representations of various
interests would be in constant touch with each other; atmosphere would be better;
British leaders were prepared to give the greatest assistance possible and in fact an
agreement had almost been reached in London on the last occasion. Moreover, Lord
Irwin would be certainly ready to help. (Here at this point Mr. Gandhi made the
suggestion that Lord Irwin might even act as an arbitrator—an admission entirely
contrary to some of his previous declarations that Indians should settle among
themselves.) A settlement in London was more likely to be secured if Congress were
represented and Mr. Gandhi himself might be expected to play a considerable part in
it. In any case, he would not help by staying in India and, so far as the communal
question was concerned, his clear duty was to go to England.
I asked him what his friends thought about this matter, and I understood that
while two or three Congressites doubted, the mjority considered that he ought to go.
Mr. Gandhi did not commit himself to any clear decision as to whether he would go or
not, but my own very definite impression is that the failure of a communal settlement
will not in itself prevent his attendance.
(b) I asked him what he was going to do about Congress representatives at
the Conference and suggested that even if he went as the sole representative it would
be convenient to have available Congress representatives who could be appointed to
Sub-Committees, since even a Mahatma could not be in three places at once. He was
very vague about this part of the business and confessed that he had been so occupied
in local affairs in Gujarat that he had not had time to give consideration to the Round

462

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Table Conference arrangements. The impression he gave was that he was very
reluctant to have anyone else as representing Congress in the picture and that he has
an idea that he can carry on alone coming in with his views at the final stage. He
obviously does not realize the amount of detailed discussion involved and the nature
and extent of the difficulties. On the other hand, he has no objection to Congressmen
being invited in their individual capacity to the Round Table Conference. I
specifically asked him this on a point raised by His Excellency when I last saw him.
In fact, he says that Lord Irwin had accepted this position and accordingly had invited
Malaviya, and he had indicated his intentions of also asking Mrs.Naidu and Dr.
Ansari. There would thus be, from Mr. Gandhi’s point of view, no objection in
inviting Congress Muslims as such, or indeed in inviting any Congress member in
any capacity other than as representative of Congress. This may assist in removing
difficulties which will almost certainly arise if Mr. Gandhi insists on being the sole
representative of the Congress.
(c)
whether—

Another constitutional matter that Congress are now taking up is as to

(a) they should serve on Sub-Committee formed previous to the Round Table
Conference, and
(b) whether they should give evidence before such Committee.
I fancy this question was brought to a head by the resignation of AhmadShah
from the North-West Frontier Provinces Subjects Committee. Mr. Gandhi knew
nothing about his appointment or his resignation, and the latter was not, I think,
given under the orders of the Congress. It was probably given under the orders of
Abdul Ghaffar, and I gathered that Mr. Gandhi thought that Ahmad Shah should have
referred both his acceptance of the appointment and his resignation to the Congress.
He agreed that the case had not been in any way prejudged and that Ahmed Shah was
wrong in making this the ground for his resignation, but he did not think that
anything could now be done to put this right, although I gave him the opportunity of
suggesting a successor. In these circumstances he agreed that the best thing was to
leave the place vacant.
On the general question the Working Committee are to hold a meeting
shortly. I very strongly urged that the decision should be in favour of co-opera- tion
both as regards accepting places and giving evidence, and I said on my own authority
that I thought there would be no difficulty, if the principle were accepted, in asking
Congress to nominate members to Committees where the principle of Congress
representation was accepted by Government. Mr. Gandhi’s doubt seemed to be as to
whether it was right to take part in Committees previous to the Round Table
Conference when he had not made up his mind about attendance at the Conference
himself. I pointed out that whatever might be his final decision in regard to London,

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

463

one important and main object of the Settlement would be defeated if Congress did
not co-operate in constitutional matters, and that, even if for any reason the Settlement broke down, their present participation would not commit them. I am rather
afraid that the Working Committee will come to a wrong decision in this matter.
(d) The question of land revenue cropped up in several connection, e.g.,
Gujarat, U.P. and North-West Frontier Province. Mr. Gandhi did not attempt to press
the idea formerly favoured by him that Congress should act generally as an
intermediary between Government and the revenue payer, but he still seems to think
that it is possible for Congress to act as the friend of the landlord or tenant and advise
him on revenue and rent matters without coming into conflict with Government or
without causing serious embarrassment. He was impressed by the attitude I took on
the matter. I told him that there was no Government in the world that would allow a
political organization to come between them and the tax-payer, when their
intervention took the form of advice to the latter as to what taxes they should pay;
that if this was tried in Afghanistan, the agitator would be quickly put against the wall
and blown from the cannon; that in the Indian States he would be deported or
imprisoned; and that in the most advanced European countries the whole resources of
the Government would be used against an organized movement of this kind carried out
by a powerful political party. In India it was particularly necessary that agitation of
this kind should be avoided and the more so in existing economic conditions and
immediately after a direct campaign against rent and revenue. I made it quite clear that
personally I regarded activities, such as those in the U.P. as a very grave breach of the
whole spirit of the Settlement. I explained that local Governments were fully alive to
the gravity of the economic situation and the necessity of being lenient in land
revenue policy. Even so they had a very difficult task in deciding what the people
could pay and could not pay, and this task could only be complicated by the
interference of Congress, one result of which was to introduce the doubt as to whether
a person was refusing to pay land revenue because he genuinely could not pay or
because Congress advice had induced him to try and get off without payment. Mr.
Gandhi was not able to accept the idea of Congress standing aside from helping
persons in distress; but he did, I think, realize some of the difficulties in the way of
intervention, and so far as he himself is concerned, he is worried less by the thought
that inaction will remove the great opportunity of getting at the rural masses than by
the failure to do something for the oppressed. We have here a definite potential
source of trouble. On the other hand, he had no hesitation in condemning pressure
being brought on landlords, direct appeals not to pay, creating false expectations on
the Congress creed of a 50 per cent reduction in revenue and generally of any refusal
to pay less than a person’s capacity to pay. The results of his forthcoming discussion
with Sir Malcolm Hailey ought to clear up the position in this respect.
(e) I attempted to give Mr. Gandhi an appreciation of the present situation

464

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in the various provinces and made special reference to the North-West Frontier
Provinces, Punjab, United Provinces, Bihar and Orissa and Bengal. I emphasized the
fact that some of the local Governments who had been satisfied with the early results
of the Settlement were getting apprehensive because of Congress activities. I pointed
out that difficulties were almost unprecedented—Constitutional, political, Communal, financial, agrarian and terrorist—that we had a good chance of surmounting them
if everyone pulled together, but that otherwise the prospects were gloomy. I said it
was the deliberate and definite policy of the Government of India to implement the
Settlement and to make every effort within reason to prevent a break-down. There
were no reactionary forces at work in this respect. At the same time, they had
necessarily to exercise constant vigilance and they could not allow a situation of
danger to develop either generally or locally, even if action meant the disappearance
of the Settlement. In this respect the outstanding danger was the mentality of the
Congress and the constant advocacy, on the contrary, of preparation for a further
struggle. This mentality was inevitably having effects elsewhere. It was partly
because of the reaction in England and unless we could check the reaction there, the
atmosphere would become entirely unfavourable. In regard to constitutional
discussion at the Conference, I suggested that his own position would be very
unpleasant if, when he was in London, a state of affairs existed in India which irritated
and even outraged public opinion in England. I gave him many instances from
different provinces of Congress subversive action. Mr. Gandhi was, I think,
generally impressed by the above factor. He had already realized the significance of
the reaction in England and he did not, as I rather expected he might do, criticize the
reactionary forces at work. Similarly he made no protest whatever against the line
taken by His Excellency the Governor of the Punjab in his recent speech, and he
seemed to accept the view I took that the speech was the natural consequence of hard
facts for which Congress were largely responsible, but his only complaint was that I
had suggested a widespread suspicion of the objects and activities of the Congress,
that these in fact were good and that they did want a peaceful solution. He admitted
that particular activities were bad and had his complete disapproval. He also
appreciated the necessity of getting the situation on to a more peaceful plane, and he
will, I hope, definitely use his influence to this end. I showed him a circular issued by
the Provincial Congress Committee of Madras, a copy of which is attached to this
note, and said that while there were one or two things in it which might be better
expressed, Government would have little cause for complaint if Congress as a whole
acted on the principles stated in it. I also told him that the line he had taken in his
own speech at Simla would definitely help, and begged him to carry on in the same
spirit and get his leaders to do likewise. I have personally no doubt that he will do his
best.
12.

I may close this note (which is already of inordinate length) with some

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

465

personal impressions.
Mr. Gandhi is, I think, more sincere than ever in his desire to see the
Settlement through, and he will do his utmost in this respect. It is probably less
likely to break down from the Congress side on a big issue than on some irritating
and comparatively unimportant matter of detail. This danger would be lessened if
Congress activities, especially in rural areas, were materially to moderate, for it
might then be possible and even desirable for local Government to stretch a point
here and there in response to Congress action. If and when this becomes feasible, the
atmosphere will improve.
Mr. Gandhi himself has definitely mellowed during the past few months. He
has been up against concrete difficulties and has had to face constructive work. This
has made him less confident in regard to preconceived ideas and more ready to see the
other side of the case, although I have always found him very fair in this respect.
Personal contact with various officers of Government has increased his desire to cooperate and while I realize only too well the difficulties and dangers in the way of
closer co-operation with Congress leaders so long as Congress are out to increase
their prestige and influence at the expense of Government and other parties, I feel
that, where it is possible to avoid these difficulties and dangers, personal contact will
definitely help to relieve the situation. This will be particularly the case if, as I hope,
Mr. Gandhi tries with success to tone down the war mentality. If there is no response
by Government, we shall get back into the same vicious circle.
Mr. Gandhi himself is at present too involved in detail to give the attention he
should be giving to big questions. He receives many complaints of failure on the part
of Government to carry out their part of the agreement, and although the great
majority of these are untrue, they doubts and suspicions. The sooner the matters
immediately arising out of the Settlement are would up the better.
Mr. Gandhi is under no illusion as to the consequences of the break-down of
the Settlement. He realizes the renewal of the Civil Disobedience Movement will
compel Government to hit hard and hit at once and I have made this perfectly clear to
him on many occasions. He accepts this as quite fair and will, if necessary, face the
consequences. But if it can be avoided, he does not want another fight and this fact
and his sense of obligation to honour promises given to Lord Irwin are factors of very
great importance in the situation.

H. W. EMERSON

The 18th May, 1931
From a photostat : India Office Records

466

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX III (A)
SIR MALCOLM HAILEY’S NOTE ON DISCUSSIONS WITH GANDHIJI11
May 20, 1931
My discussion with Mr. Gandhi today turned mainly on the agrarian situation,
but there were also some subsidiary points mentioned.
1.
As regards releases, he had little to say; he had not at all events come
prepared with a list of cases in which there were any complaints that we had not
observed the Agreement. I told him that if there were any cases which he wished to
refer to us, I should be glad if he would send them to Chief Secretary; and he agreed.
2.

He mentioned the cases of students who had been rusticated, etc., for

taking part in Civil Disobedience. I have not the full facts, but the D.P.I. has
informed me that before being re-admitted they were required to undertake that they
were to observe the disciplinary rules of the institution. This does not seem to be a
very onerous obligation, and failing any more definite complaint from Congress, I
would let the matter rest there. Mr. Gandhi did not seem to attach any great
importance to it at the time.
3.

He attached some importance to the question of arms for which licenses

had been confiscated owing to their owners taking part in Civil Disobedience. There
were I believe some such cases, though I do not now if we have anything about them
at headquarters. He told me that the Commissioner in Gujarat had recognized that this
fell within the terms of the Agreement, that Mr. Emerson had said he thought it did
so, but that he would consult legal opinion before issuing anything to local
Governments. Chief Secretary might ascertain any facts that he can on the subject,
and at the same time write demi-officially to Mr. Emerson, asking if the Government
of India think that arms licenses should be restored, where they have been confiscated
strictly on the ground that owners have taken part in Civil Disobediences.
4.

As I have said, the main point was the agrarian situation. We discussed

this at great length, and I for my part avoided any point of principle, such as whethere
the Congress was really entitled under the Agreement to be recognized as the
,representative of the people, etc., and too him at once to the facts of the situation
in the districts in which Congress had been most active. I pointed out that however
the situation had been arrived at, the danger was that tenants would now refuse to pay
rents at all and resort to acts of violence if they were pressed by l andlords. I
naturally quoted Chauri Chaura to him. He at once dis- claimed any idea of a no-

1

Vide “Speech at Nainital”, 20-5-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

467

rent campaign, and was somewhat aghast when I gave him a copy of the resolution of
the Etawah Congress Committee which he said he would look into at once. He
admitted that where compromises had been made by landlords with Congress, the
latter had not been able to persuade tenants to pay up. He said it was no part of
Congress plans to establish an organization of tahsils and thanas; they were quite
opposed to the idea of actually starting a parallel government or anything of the
kind. Having got thus far, I then again but to him the actual difficulty arising from the
situation in these districts. He said that it could only be solved by enlisting the
effective co-operation of Congress in persuading tenants to pay their rents. But he
could not promise this, nor could he engage to use his own active efforts of
persuasion direct to tenants unless Congress had something better to put forward than
the mere announcement of remissions by Government. His workers had narrowly
examined the conditions of numerous districts and were confident that tenants could
not pay even the reduced rentals in present circumstances. He indeed suggested that
the enquiry showed that rents were so high as practically to be unpayable even in
ordinary years, though he admitted that this conclusion might need some modifying
in the light of the fact that many of these rentals were old and spread over a long
series of years. He suggested the adoption of one of the three following courses :
First, (though he did not press this) he suggested that we might accept the
figures arrived at by Congress workers, which he assured me were not a mere rough
shot but the result of actual inquiries. I pointed out to him that it was quite impossible
to assume that these general figures were equally correct for all classes of tenants and
for all parts of the province.
Secondly, he suggested that our officers might hold a kind of summary inquiry
with selected Congressmen in each district or division with a view of getting better
figures.
Thirdly, if neither course was acceptable to Government, he asked that
Government itself should hold a public inquiry at which Congressmen could give
evidence as to the capacity of tenants to pay rentals. I pointed out to him that either
of the latter courses would mean delay with every prospect that no money would be
available at all for payment of rentals. If tenants get over the payment of any rental at
all this harvest, it is pretty certain that they would pay nothing for kharif. It was quite
impossible to make summary inquiries in three or four days as he thought, and a
general inquiry on the lines of that which he had in mind, namely, the Commission
on Champaran in 1916 would take many months. Anything that we did now would not
only very gravely affect the landlords, but also might have an abiding effect on our
own finances for many years to come; it was not, therefore, reasonable to ask

468

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Government to adopt a summary p rocedure which might have such far-reaching
effects. I told him that I would consider his proposals, but it seemed to me that the
result of delaying collections would be so dangerous that it would be difficult to
accept them. I pointed out that there were many districts in which our officers thought
that collections might now proceed without great difficulty, and that in my opinion
the best course was to set to work on collections wherever possible in the hope that if
these proceeded smoothly it will have its effect on the attitude of the tenants
generally. We left the matter at that, and it may be that it is not a very satisfactory
conclusion, for I did not get his definite engagement to do nothing except to
discountenance anything like a no-rent campaign or an attempt to set up Congress
tribunals. As Mr. Emerson had warned me, Mr. Gandhi feels deeply that Congress
cannot entirely retire from its position of championship of tenants and small
landowners.
5.

We discussed the question of picketing though at no great length. I

pointed out to him the danger that it was becoming communal owing to the
unwillingness of volunteers to tackle Mohammedan shopkeepers, and I also pointed
out that the snatching away of liquor or the infliction of fines is quite beyond the
spirit of the Agreement. Here is agreed and said that he would do his best to
discountenance it and had indeed already issued orders against the taking of fines.

M. H AILEY
Home Department, Political, File No. 33/XI & K.Ws., 1931. Courtesy :
National Archives of India

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

469

APPENDIX IV (B)
LETTER FROM SIR MALCOLM HAILEY TO H. W. EMERSON1
UNITED P ROVINCES ,
May 21, 1931
MY DEAR EMERSON,

Many thanks for your letter of the 16th May; I have found it very useful indeed
in my discussion with Mr. Gandhi. I send you a note as to the results which, I fear,
were not very conspicuous. But the discussion was very friendly throughout, and I was
particularly struck with the fact that he did not seem to have come prepared to open up
a battery of objections against our method of dealing with releases, ect. As you will
see, his general attitude on the object of the agrarian trouble was very much the same
as that which he took with you.
Yours sincerely,

M. H AILEY
H. W. EMERSON , ESQ.,
S ECY . TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
HOME DEPARTMENT
PS.
I have sent a copy of my note to the Viceroy.
Home Department, Political, File No. 33/XI & K.Ws., 1931. Courtesy :
National Archives of India

APPENDIX V (A)
LETTER FROM SIR MALCOLM HAILEY2
May 23, 1931
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

I have just received your letter of today, and as you ask for a very early, I have
given it urgent but very anxious consideration and write at once to give you my views
on the subject.
Thought I welcome much that is contained in your proposed manifesto, such as
the advice to tenants to begin making payments at once, your condemnation of the
use of violence by kisans, and your strongly expressed desire that they should not
injure their own cause by undersirable action, yet I much regret that I could not
associate myself in any way with the manifesto as a whole. It practically embodies a
decision that it is necessary to make for a large number of districts in the province a
rental remission for the whole year 1338 Fasli of eight annas in the rupee in the case
1
2

470

Vide“Speech at Nainital”, 20-5-1931
Vide “Letter to Malcolm Hailey”, 23-5-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of statutory and non-occupancy tenants and four annas in the case of occupancy
tenants. Though I admit that it is stated that in some cases a larger payment is
possible, yet tenants generally could not understand it as anything but a direction to
confine their payments to this level as a whole. I am myself far from convinced by
anything that I have seen or heard that a reduction on this scale is required by the
circumstances, and I am certainly clear that no one formula, whether it embraces
reductions of this amount or otherwise, could with equity be applied to the very
different conditions pevailing throughout the province.
I am advised that collections of rentals are already proceeding in many of our
districts on the basis of the reductions made by Government, and though it is not
possible at the moment to say whether these collections can everywhere be made
absolutely in full, yet to my mind the right policy is to allow collections to proceed
on this basis and to watch the results carefully. I have in conversation with you
pointed out the danger of doing anything which would encourage tenants to withhold
rentals at this stage, for if collections are not made at once, there will be little
chance of securing any payment at all at a subsequent stage. It is for this latter reason
in particular

that I have deprecated proposals for general inquiries into the present

pitch of rentals throughout the province, for no summary inquiry of this nature can do
justice to a very complicated and involved case, a decision on which will not only
affect vitally the finances of Government, but will involve far-reaching effects on the
relations of tenants and landlords.
With best wishes,
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. H AILEY
M. K. GANDHI , ESQ.
TAKULA , NAINITAL
Home Department, Political, File No. 33/XI & K. Ws., 1931. Courtesy :
National Archives of India

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

471

APPENDIX VI (B)
LETTER FROM SIR MALCOLM HAILEY TO H. W. EMERSON1
UNITED P ROVINCES ,
May 23, 1931
MY DEAR EMERSON,

I think that you ought to see at once the enclosed correspondence I have just
had with Mr. Gandhi. I had to reply at somewhat short notice, as I did not wish to do
anything that might delay him leaving us at 3 o’clock this afternoon! But it was
clearly impossible for me to agree to anything that would look like a joint manifesto
from myself and him, particularly as his draft could only have been understood by the
majority of people to embody a decision that the remissions granted by us were
altogether wrong and that something far more extensive was required. I do not know if
he will return to the charge or will want to come and see me again; but his lieutenant,
Govind Vallabh Pant, was told on the telephone that I should be unlikely to vary the
attitude I had taken up. After a good deal of consideration I think this is only one
possible for me.
Yours sincerely,

M. H AILEY
PS.
If Sir George Lambert is still in Simla would you kindly show this to him?

H. W. EMERSON , ESQ.
Home Department, Political, File No. 33/XI & K.Ws., 1931. Courtesy :
National Archives of India

APPENDIX VII
LETTER FROM R. M. MAXWELL 2
GOVERNMENT HOUSE ,
MAHABALESHWAR ,
May 13, 1931
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

At your interview with His Excellency Sir Frederick Sykes on the 17th April
His Excellency promised that certain cases which you mentiioned, pertaining to the
Home Department, would be reconsidered by the Government. I am now to inform
you of the results of that review.
1
2

472

Vide “Letter to Malcolm Hailey”, 23-5-1931
Vide “Letter to R. M. Maxwell”, 6-6-1931
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

2.
prisoners.

I am to deal firstly with your suggestions for the release of certain

(i)
You represented that the Sholapur Martial Law prisoners who had not
been released should have been released according to the Settlement, and you were
informed at the time that there were three such persons.
In the case of Mr. Rajwade you are right in your supposition, to which you
have referred in your letter of the 1st instant to Mr. Collins, that no other writing was
placed before the Court except the issue of the Karmayogi in question. Many of the
allegations in that document were either false or so grossly exaggerated (or, when he
referred to the incidents of the riots, minimized) as to be untrue to the facts. The chief
consideration, however, is that their publication at that time and in the conditions
then prevailing in Sholapur inevitably tended to inflame the population against the
authorities and thus amounted to a direct and real incitement to further violence. Their
actual effect was to make more difficult the restoration of peace, and it is impossible
to doubt that this result was foreseen by Mr. Rajwade when he published the article.
The Government, therefore, on reconsideration adhere to their view that this is not a
case which can properly claim the benefit of the amnesty.
The other two persons were convicted of tampering with justice by bribing
witnesses in the case which arose from the murder of two policemen, and on
reconsideration Government are unable to see that the Settlement can apply to a case
of this description or that the persons concerned deserve any clemency.
(ii)
The Government have reconsidered the cases of persons convicted
under Section 124-A of the I.P.C. You expressed the opinion that the writing of
articles and the making of speeches were not contemplated when i t was decided
that the Settlement should not apply to cases of violence and incitement to violence.
The Government are unable to accept this view, for it is clear that such writings and
speeches can, and often did, contain incitement to violence which is real and not
technical, and that such incitement is often more dangerous and far-reaching than
other forms of incitement to violence. The Government find that the cases of the
individuals detained in jail satisfied this test, and they are therefore in no doubt that
those persons were rightly excluded from the benefits of the amnesty. I am to add that
Government are always ready to show leniency, as in many cases in the past, to any
person convicted under Section 124-A of the I.P.C., who makes adequate apologies
and gives an undertaking not to repeat the offence but this is a point unconnected
with the Settlement, which makes no provision for conditional release.
(iii) You referred to the case of Ratanji Dayaram of Bardoli taluka, who you
said was convicted of burning his own crop and should therefore have been released.
On examining his case Government find that he was convicted of deliberately
burning his tenant’s crop in order that the revenue due to Government should not be
VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

473

paid on the land in question. He has not made any reparation to the sufferer which
might have entitled his case to consideration on grounds of clemency as distinct from
the terms of the Settlement, which, as I have pointed out, make no provision for
conditional release. Apart from this circumstance, Government consider that violent
mischief of this description does not come within the terms of the amnesty.
(iv) His Excellency understood you to say that there were certain prisoners
convicted of offences in connection with the salt campaign who had not been
released. The Home Department are however unable to trace any such cases.
(v) You stated that there were certain prosecutions which were still being
carried on for offences which took place during the civil disobedience campaign
contrary to the terms of the Settlement, and you referred in particular to a case in
Belgaum.
It was pointed out to you at the time that the particular case to which you
referred was a case of Nipani in that district. The facts of this case are that, following
the conviction of two local leaders in April 1930, a mob collected with the intention
of enforcing hartal, and after damaging public and private property and destroying the
royal portraits in the school, came into conflict with the police whom they proceeded
to stone, with the result that three policemen and some village servants were injured.
There was thus real violence and Government feel that the decision to proceed with
the case cannot be altered.
The other prosecutions which were still pending at the time of your
conversation with His Excellency were those of (a) Mahadev Kuverji and Hira Vallabh
(b) Vishnu Sali, (c) Shiva Mattur, all of S urat district, who were accused respectively
of setting fire to attached crops, severely assaulting a police constable, and setting
fire to an attached crop after beating the village servant in charge. These are clear
cases of violence which cannot be reviewed.
3.
As regards the orders of deportation passed under the Foreigners’ Act,
the Government have already, on reconsideration, withdrawn these orders in all cases,
six in number, and the persons who were in prison for failing to observe the orders
have been released. In this connection you stated that there were 30 such cases in the
Karnatak and you were informed that Government were not aware of them, on which
you agreed to furnish particulars of them to the Secretary, Home Department. As you
have not done so, His Excellency assumes that you were misinformed on the point.
4.
You stated that certain movable and immovable property forfeited had
not been returned. His Excellency finds that all the buildings seized under Ordinance
IX have been restored. The delay in some cases was due to the time which necessarily
elapsed in finding, and making the necessary arrangements with, the persons entitled
and authorized to take delivery.
As regards the return of movable property, the position has been discussed in

474

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

my separate letter of today, in reply to yours of the 7th May.
5.
As regards the Chirner case, which you represented should be withdrawn,
you were informed at the time that as the persons concerned were accused of rioting,
being armed with deadly weapons, dacoity, conspiracy to commit dacoity and causing
grievous hurt to public servants in the performance of their duty, while six of them
are directly charged with murder, the case was obviously one shich must be allowed to
take its course.
Yours sincerely,

R. M. M AXWELL
M. K. GANDHI , ESQUIRE
A.I.C.C. File No. 4/1931 Part I. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

APPENDIX VIII
OPINION1
June 13, 1931
1.
(1) The question which has arisen between the Government and the
Navajivan Press is :
“What are the obligations of the Government as regards returning the press
which was seized at Ahmedabad from the premises of the Navajivan Press?” The
question depends primarily on the language of the Instrument which says “movable
property . . . will be returned”. The meaning of the word “return” as given by Webster
is “to bring, carry, put, or send back; to restore”. According to Murray’s Oxford
Dictionary the word “return” has, among others, the following meaning :
“to bring or convey to a place or person; to send bac again; to give or render
back”. From this it is plain that where a party in possession (in this case the
Government) has agreed to return a movable property, the obligation undertaken can
only be said to have been performed when the party in possession brings or conveys
back to the place from where the thing was taken and hands it over to the person from
whom it was taken. We are, therefore, of opinion that the terms of the Agreement are
not only not silent as to the place of delivery, but are clear as to the place of delivery,
viz., the place from where it was taken or where it was seized.
2.
In an Indian Statute, the word “return” has also been used in the sense of
taking a thing back to the place from which it was brought. Section 43 of the Indian
Sale of Goods Act runs as follows :
“Unless otherwise agreed, where goods are delivered to the buyer and he refuses
1

Vide “Letter to H.W. Emerson”, 14-6-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

475

to accept them, having the right so to do, he is not to return them to the seller, but it
is sufficient if he intimates to the seller that he refuses to accept them”.
It is obvious that the word “return” must mean taking bac to the place from
which it was taken, and it is used in contradistinction to “offer to return” or “holding
it at the disposal of the party from whom it was taken”. The action of the Government
in this case merely amounts to “offer to return” or to “hold it at the disposal of the
previous owner”, but does not amount to the performance of the obligation to return.
As is pointed out above, the obligation to return requires that the thing should be
restored to the place and the person from which and from whom it was taken.
3.
We are of opinion that the section dealing with the subject of delivery of
goods as between the seller and the buyer, has got nothing to do with the present
question as no question of return arises in such a case.
4.
While clearly disagreeing with the view that the agreement in question
is silent as to the place of “return”, we are of opinion that even in that view, the place
of performance of the obligation, in an agreement like the present, is the place from
or at which the thing was taken or seized. The place in such a case has to be
determined by a reference to the object of the agreement. It is clear that in this case,
the object is to restore status quo ante.
5.
Even on the assumption, which is denied, that the agreement in this
present case is silent as to the place of “return”, by reason of the provisions of
Section 49 of the Indian Contract Act, if no place of performance was
agreed upon,
the promisee has the right to appoint the place of performance and the promisor is
bound to perform the promise (in this case, the promise to return the press) at such
place, provided it is reasonable. In this case, the promisee is entitled to name a
reasonable place for performance and the reasonable and proper place is prima facie
the place from where it was taken or where it was seized; for it is conceivable that
after the seizure, the thing may be removed, for a variety of reasons, to a distant place
and it would be clearly reasonable for the promisee to claim that it should be returned
to the place from where it was taken or where it was seized.
6.
In every view of the matter, therefore, the position taken up by the
Government in the matter of the Navajivan Press cannot be sustained. They can be
said to have fulfilled the agreement only when they have taken it to Ahmedabad (from
where it was seized) and offer to return it to the person from whom it was taken.

BHULABHAI DESAI
D. N. B AHADURJI
K. M. MUNSHI
A.I.C.C. File No., 2/1931. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

476

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX IX
LETTER FROM H. W. EMERSON1
SIMLA,

July 4, 1931
In your letter of June 14, you suggested that the time had perhaps arrived for
the appointment of a permanent Board of Arbitration to decide questions of the
interpretation of the Settlement and as to the full carrying out of the terms by the one
party or the other. Again in your letter of June 20, you made the farther suggestion
that in regard to picketing, the Government of India should advise local Governments
to appoint a Board of Inquiry, consisting of a nominee on their behalf and a nominee
on behalf of the Congress, to conduct a summary inquiry into the allegations on
either side and wherever it is found that the rule of peaceful picketing has been
violated picketing should be entirely suspended, the Government undertaking on its
part to stop prosecutions wherever it is found that they have been undertaken in spite
of peaceful picketing.
I much appreciate your object of removing the possible causes of dispute
arising out of the Settlement, but there are, I am afraid, serious difficulties in the way
of accepting either proposal. To take the lesser one first. Its scope, as I understand it,
is mainly limited to cases in which it is alleged that the methods of picketing have
contravened the ordinary law and that the police have, therefore, prosecuted or
propose to prosecute the picketer. One effect of your proposal would be that before
bringing the law into operation there should be a summary inquiry carried out by a
nominee of Government and a nominee of Congress and that further proceedings
would depend on their decision.
In other words, the duty of maintaining the law in this particular respect would
be transferred from the police, who have statutory duties, to a Board of Inquiry, the
members of which might well arrive at different conclusions.
While the police, of course, must act only in accordance with the law, it is not
practicable nor was it intended by the Settlement that their duty in this respect should
in any way be abrogated.
In cases of this kind a practical test as to whether the law has or has not been
contravened is the decision of the Court, which tries the case, and unless its decision
is reversed on appeal the finding of the Court that picketing has contravened the law
and consequently the terms of the Settlement should prima facie be followed
automatically by a suspension of picketing. The above illustrates one of the
difficulties, that would also arise in the case of Standing Boards of Arbitration.
1

Vid e “Letter to J. H. Garrett”, 20-4-1931

VOL. 52 : 28 APRIL, 1931 - 1 JULY, 1931

477

The obligations imposed on Congress by the Settlement relate largely to
matters affecting Law and Order, the freedom of action of the individual and the
carrying on of the administration, that is to say, any serious breach of it has
important reactions on one or other of these matters. So far as individual breaches
contravened the ordinary law, the position would be the same as for picketing. If
general breaches of it raised questions of policy affecting Law and Order or the
effective working of the administration, it would be clearly impossible for
Government to restrict their freedom of action by reference to a Board of Arbitration.
This was not contemplated when the Settlement was made and in particular when the
last clause of it was drafted. Nor would it be consonant with the discharge by
Government of fundamental responsibilities.
It seems to me that the working of the Settlement must depend primarily on
the good faith of the parties to it. So far as Government are concerned they desire to
adhere strictly to its terms and our information shows that the local Governments
have been scrupulous in carrying out the obligations imposed on them. Doubtful
cases are of course inevitable, but local Governments are prepared to give them most
careful examination and the Government of India will continue to bring to the notice
of local Governments any cases that are reported to them and if necessary satisfy
themselves in regard to the facts.
Young India, 20-8-1931

478

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

