1. A LETTER
DEVIPUR ,

February 17, 1947
My reply to your previous letter was still pending when I got
this second one from you. But there was nothing in your first letter
that needed immediate reply. At present there is great strain on me,
both physical and mental. My work here instead of getting easier is
becoming more difficult each day, as oppsition is increasing. All the
same, my faith and courage are steadily growing. After all, I am here
to do or die, am I not? There is no middle course here. . . . 1 It is not
certain when the third stage of my tour will begin. I have to reach
Haimchar on the 24th. . . . 2 The further programme will depend on
how exhausted I feel. I shall be satisfied if God sustains me through
the programme even up to the 24th.
[From Gujarati]
Eklo Jane Re, p. 144

2. ADVICE TO A CONGRESS WORKER3
DEVIPUR ,

February 17, 1947
Did you realize that by indulging in this vain display you would
acerbate communal passions? This display means nothing to me. . . 4
but it will leave a legacy of ill-will behind which will continue to
poison the communal relations in this village for a long time to come.
You are a Congressman. Did not it occur to you, knowing my strong
views on khadi, that ribbons and buntings made of mill cloth would
only hurt me?
I wouldn’t have felt so hurt if, instead of floral decorations, you
had presented me with garlands of yarn. They are decorative, and
1

Omissions as in the source
Ibid
3
A grand reception had been arranged for Gandhiji at Devipur. The village had
been decorated with flags, buntings, streamers and garlands of yarn. It jarred on
Gandhiji. As soon as his weekly silence was over, he sent for the principal worker.
4
Omission as in the source
2

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

1

afterwards can be used for making cloth also. So nothing is wasted. It
seems there is a lot of money in this village. Otherwise you would
never have thought of making such costly ephemeral garlands in these
hard times. You are mistaken if you have done this to express your
love for me. That does not show your love at all. It is enough if, out of
love for me, you do as I say. I just cannot imagine how after this
terrible massacre of your own people you could ever think of
spending anything over these flowers.1
The day’s experience has set me thinking furiously. Would my
colleagues, too, if they ever became Ministers, betray the same
weakness for garlands and the like? I claim no extraordinary virtue
for my workers. But this much I do expect of them that even as
Ministers they would never forget the ideals that the Congress has
professed and fought for all these years. What I have seen today,
however, makes me wonder whether I am not living in a fool’s
paradise. It seems that God has woken me up with a rude shock to
enable me to see where I stand.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book II, p. 191; and Eklo Jane Re,
p. 146

3. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING2
DEVIPUR ,

February 17, 1947
Gandhiji drew attention to two things that had been brought to his notice. The
first was that a complaint, in sending which he was unfortunately an instrument, had
been found on enquiry by the officers to be without foundation. The articles which
were reported to have been looted were mostly found in the very place from where
they were said to have been looted. This was a serious matter. It was the second case
that had come under his notice. Yesterday some Muslim friends had come to him and
admitted that the Muslims had undoubtedly gone mad in October last but though they
had not been so bad as the Hindus had been in Bihar, the Hindus were making up for it
by putting the Muslims to inconvenience by lodging false complaints against some
of them. They said that false complaints were far larger in number than true ones. That
was not the way to bring the two together. He said that all those who lodged false
complaints should be prosecuted and severely punished on conviction. If he was the
Superintendent of Police or a Minister, he would certainly institute proceedings and
1
2

2

This paragraph is translated from Eklo Jane Re.
Extracted from “Gandhiji’s Walking Tour Diary”

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

bring the perjurers to justice. As for himself, as a citizen desirous of serving his
country he would only be able to do something if the names and addresses of perjured
complainants were given to him. So far he had received no such names. The only case
that was sent to him could not be supported when the complainant was requested to
support his complaint. Generally he would say that the Hindus who lodged false
complaints injured themselves, their co-religionists and the whole country.
The other thing he wished to draw attention to was a letter he had received from
a responsible person who was doing the work of bringing about peace between the
two, that a Hindu lad was molested by some Muslims and that the latter had threatened
the Hindus that they were to expect more drastic measures than last October’s after he
had left Noakhali or, which was the same thing, after his death. He would like to think
that this statement was untrue, but he feared it was not. But he did hope that the
poison was restricted to a few illmannered persons. Whether, however, it was
restricted to a few or whether it was a widespread trait, he ventured to think it was
wholly against Islam. This he said with apologies to Fazlul Huq but no less firmly on
that account. It would be an evil day for Islam or for any religion when it was
impatient of outside criticism. He did not believe himself to be an outsider. He
respected Islam as he respected every other religion as his own and therefore he
claimed to be a sympathetic and friendly critic. It was up to every good Muslim to
take up a firm and unequivocal stand against what he believed to be vicious
propaganda.

Harijan, 16-3-1947

4. A NOTE1
ALUNIA ,

February 18, 1947
I was very much upset today. Such is my nonattachment. I felt
disgusted with myself. I even wonder whether I am really going to
pass the test of my ahimsa. It is God’s infinite kindness that He bears
with me and sustains me.
Be vigilant.
BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Eklo Jane Re, p. 148

1

Gandhiji wrote this in Manu Gandhi’s diary just after the morning prayers.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

3

5. LETTER TO M. A. ABDULLA1
NOAKHALI,

February 18, 1947
When all parties become displeased with one it is generally a
sure sign of one’s having done one’s duty. May it be so with you.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. II, p. 399

6. LETTER TO HARI SINGH GOUR
KAZIRKHIL,
R AMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,

February 18, 1947
DEAR SIR HARI SINGH GOUR,

I have yours of the 5th February delivered to me only today.
Please do not ask me to make any public statement. With the support
of so many distinguished men whom you mention you should find no
difficulty. My own way of thinking always tells me that everything
which has intrinsic merit succeeds sooner than later because it is like a
straight line which is the shortest distance between any two points. If
you have the League support your project will have plain sailing. But
I see that you had not even an acknowledgement from Quaid-e-Azam
Jinnah at the time you wrote to me. I hope you will secure his
approval.
Your sincerly,
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

The addressee, Superintendent of Police, who was transferred from Noakhali
to Murshidabad District, had, in his letter dated February 11, said: “. . . Some Calcutta
Muslims told me that the Chief Minister got annoyed with me because I did not take
action to prevent police and military zulum (oppression) upon the Muslims. . . .
Another source informs . . . that my differences . . . with some British officers were
the real cause. . . . Government . . . gave different statements to different parties . . . I
do not bother . . . as long as I am sure that my conscience is quite clear.”

4

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

7. LETTER TO RUKMINI DEVI ARUNDALE 1
KAZIRKHIL,
R AMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,

February 18, 1947
I have yours of the 6th instant delivered to me today. Much as I
should like to have you here you can have no idea of the trouble you
have to undergo in coming here unless you travel by air transport.
Even so I am in a part of the country where there are no motor-roads
worth the name. I am at a far distance from the nearest aerodrome
which is in Comilla. I am in no mood to shoulder any burden whilst I
am carrying the one in Noakhali.
I am in full agreement with you that the worthy project that Dr.
Arundale initiated has to be carried to fruition and that most of all by
you. Of course I love to see you, veena in hand, leading the people
into the way of truth and peace.
S HRIMATI R UKMINI DEVI
P RESIDENT
KALAKSHETRA
ADYAR
MADRAS
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

8. LETTER TO MANILAL B. DESAI
February 18, 1947
CHI. MANILAL,

Your letter of November 14, 1946 reached me only three or
four days ago. Such is the confusion here. You have, of course
relieved me of my worries and so I feel completely at ease.
I think almost all the questions in your letter have been
answered in my last letter to you. Jehangirji and Dr. Dinshaw must be
among the trustees, for they are completely loyal and were members
1
Eminent dancer and wife of the English Theosophist George Sydney
Arundale; founder of Kalakshetra, Madras

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

5

of the original Trust. It might be objected that they did not fully agree
with my views. But I think that cannot be helped. I am sure they will
not do or order anything there against my wishes. The other trustees
to be selected will be persons who will have to be there. I approve of
Gulbai's name. About Maganbhai also I have written to you. If you
can be sure that the well can be sunk for anything up to four or five
thousand rupees, the expense is worth incurring. But let me know first
if anybody is prepared to give such assurance.
I would approve of a partner-cultivator, but not of loaning him
money for buying bullocks and other requirements. We are not
property-owners, but trustees. A trustee can be appointed only for a
specific purpose. Our object is Nature Cure. we cannot incur such
expenditure in pursuit of that object. We may do what is possible with
our own labour. In either case, however, we will need water. If,
therefore, you can obtain an assurance that the scheme will succeed,
we will incur the expenditure. About crops, we may grow only what
we can with our own labour. We can raise the vegetables and fruits we
need. We cannot grow foodgrains. We do need milk, and therefore the
provision of cows is essential. We have got to incur the expense
necessary for that purpose. If and when a building is ready, we shall
have to spend some money for buying mattresses, etc. If Datar himself
undertakes to look after the construction of the building, I shall take it
that the problem has been solved. There has, of course, been some
misunderstanding in regard to the woman whom Appasaheb has sent,
but if she is otherwise good and ready for hard work, we have no
option but to overlook her not wearing khadi. You may gradually
persuade her to change over to khadi. If you want, I am prepared to
write to Appasaheb. But think over the matter carefully and let me
know. I will wait till I hear from you.
I understand about Paramanand.
Parasuram has left me. At present he is working for Harijan.
Sushila (Dr.) has gone to Sevagram to look into the affairs of the
hospital there. Sushila Pai, Amtussalaam, Abha, Kanu and Pyarelal
have been working in different villages and I am camping at some
distance from them. Therefore, we are unable to meet one another
often. A map of my tour has been published in the newspapers there
too. I suppose you consult it from time to time. Manu sleeps with me.
She is as a granddaughter to me, for her grandfather is the son of my
father's elder brother. She is, therefore, really a granddaughter to me.

6

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

She came to stay with me at Sevagram when she was just a little girl. I
have written about this matter to Balkoba.1 He knows her. If you have
any comments to make after reading that letter, you may write to me.
I want you to write frankly and say what you feel.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 2731. Courtesy: Manilal B. Desai

9. LETTER TO BALKRISHNA BHAVE
February 18, 1947
CHI. BALKRISHNA,

Your letter of November 14, 1946, reached me only three days
ago. Such is the confusion in the postal arrangements here. It is also
true, of course that I am, from the point of view of postal
communication, in a rather inaccessible place. Your health seems to be
sufficiently restored now. Do you experience any difficulty in
singing? If you do not, you should freely use your gift for the service
of the people. But of course not at the cost of your health.
You will see the letter I have written to Manibhai. The problems
there are quite complicated and you will be able to play an important
part in solving them.
Probably you do not know that Manubehn (Jaisukhlal's) sleeps
with me. This has pained Bhai Kishorelal, Narahari, Swami and others
and they have, therefore, stopped their connection with Harijan.
Sardar also is very angry with me. For me Manu's sleeping with me is
a matter of dharma, and I am resolved to drive home the lesson that a
person cannot give up what is a matter of dharma to him for the love
of those who are dear to him or out of fear of anybody. If in a
situation like this I give up what I believe to be my dharma through
false regard for friends or fear or love, my yajna would remain
incomplete and bear no fruit. This is my side of the case. Kishorelal's
side, as far as I can understand it, is the opposite. He thinks that I have
come to regard adharma as dharma and that, therefore, my practice
dishonours my brahmacharya and sets a bad example to people. The
thought that a man like me should set a bad example is intolerable to
1

Balkrishna Bhave; vide the following item.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

7

them, and, therefore, these friends have started non-co-operation with
me. They are free to take whatever further step they choose. I do not
know what Vinoba thinks. But the friends named above have
corresponded with him and therefore I also have written to him and
asked for his opinion. 1 Either be guided by Vinoba's reply to my
letter or think for yourself and write to me what you think. I have
discussed this matter in three of my speeches. I send copies herewith.
You need not return them. Show them to the friends there.
As regards Gokhale, I have already written to him. I had
assumed that he had not joined the Uruli experiment and, therefore,
did not mention his name. I had no intention at all of ignoring him.
But this is merely in reply to your query.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 820. Courtesy: Balkrishna Bhave

10. LETTER TO SARLA
February 18, 1947
CHI. SARLA,

I got your letter. The characters are well formed and the words
well spaced out, and the handwriting, therefore, is pleasing to the eye.
However, your composite letters are not correct. You have misspelt
'gram'.
I am glad you wish to come to me. But there are bound to be all
kinds of problems when I am daily on the move and moving from
one village to another. Touring through villages involves several
inconveniences: insufficient accommodation, very bad water, and so
on. In such circumstances I simply don't have the courage to ask you
to come. I, therefore, advise you to have some patience. God willing,
the time will come when you will be able to stay with me. I can see
from the account given by you that you are doing excellent work. Go
on with it and continue your progress. Master the art of weaving. If in
spinning also you acquire firstclass skill you can make yourself an
indispensable worker, for your services will then be in demand
everywhere. I am sure you will have improved your Marathi.
1

8

Vide “Letter to Vinoba Bhave”, 10-2-1947

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Complete your study and learn everything about nature cure. Acquire
the highest proficiency in the Urdu script and language. Learn
Sanskrit. And all this you should do as if you were merely amusing
yourself. If you do so, you will not even know how time passes. Keep
up contact with me through letters. I am not happy that Shashi's1 fever
has still not left him. If you study nature cure all over again—and it is
easy to study it—you yourself will be able to cure it. All that is
necessary is to be careful about his diet and give him hipbath and
frictionbath and treat him with mud-packs. If this is done, he will soon
get well. He should of course remain calm.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 1052. Courtesy: Champa R. Mehta

11. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING 2
ALUNIA ,

February 18, 1947
Q.

Do you support evacuation of the Hindus from the affected areas if the

League Government or the majority community agrees to give us due compensation?
A.

He had supported the proposition from the non-violent standpoint. It was

applicable to all Provinces whether the majority was Hindu or Muslim. What could
the Government do if the majority had become so hostile that they would not tolerate
the presence of the minority community? In his opinion it would be improper for
them to force the majority into submission, nor could they undertake to protect the
minority at the point of the bayonet. Suppose for instance that the majority would
not tolerate Ram

Harijan, 16-3-1947

1
2

Son of Ratilal Mehta
Extracted from "Gandhiji's Walking Tour Diary"

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

9

12. TELEGRAM TO A. FAZLUL HUQ
[On or after February 18, 1947] 1
THANKS
ANY

FOR
STAGE

WE

SHALL

AND

IF

YOUR

YOUR
OF

WIRE.
SETTLED

RENEW
YOU

DO

OVERTAKE

PROGRAMME
OUR

CONVINCE

PUBLISHED

OLD
ME

ME

AT
AND

ACQUAINTANCE
I

SHALL

DO

BIDDING.

The Hindu, 21-2-1947

13. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
ALUNIA ,

February 19, 1947
CHI. MRIDU,

I got your two telegrams, and that was yesterday. I am today
sending you a telegram in reply. You are worried but there is no cause
at all for worry. So far my life has been running its course smoothly.
More and more each day I see that it is all to the good. What I did at
Sevagram was by way of an experiment. An experiment may be
stopped any time. So for the sake of the colleagues, I had postponed
it. I did not publish the statement for your sake or Bapa’s sake. Here
the situation is totally different. Sleeping with Manu is for me
aninseparable part of the yajna. Why it is so need not be explained
here. I shall explain when you come. Since this act of mine has caused
an uproar, a great deal of my time is taken up with arguing with
colleagues and pacifying them. But inasmuch as I consider this act
part of the yajna, sparing that much time does not irk me. So you
should carry on your work without getting upset. If you want to come
only for this thing, I would urge you not to come. Kishorelalbhai by
himself should be sufficient to persuade me to desist. But you wanted
to come even otherwise, so I shall not stop you. Whatever it is, write to
me freely. Ask me anything you want.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 1260. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation
1

The addressee, in a telegram, dated February 18, had requested Gandhiji for an
interview after February 23 and added: “Go to Bihar and bring about friendly relations
between the two communities and then hurry up to Delhi to save India.”

10

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

14. TELEGRAM TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
[February 19, 1947] 1
MRIDULABEHN
C ONSTITUTION HOUSE
NEW DELHI
RECEIVED

BOTH

PUBLICATION
WRITE

FRIENDS

CAN

AND

WIRES

WHICH
DISCUSS.

SHALL

GLADLY

FEEL

UNEASY.

YESTERDAY.

WAS

BUT
IF

COME
I

RETRACE

NOTHING

INEVITABLE,
WHEN

PERCEIVE
STEP.

FELT
YOU

THAT

LOST

BY

COMPELLED
CONVENIENTLY

I

MEANWHILE

HAVE

ERRED

DO

NOT

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

15. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING2
CHARDUKHIA,
February 19, 1947
Q. What should a Hindu worker do when he is being deliberately
misrepresented by interested parties in Noakhali?
A. The answer in terms of ahimsa, generally, would be that acts should be
allowed to speak for themselves. Whilst this was good as a general proposition there
were occasions when to speak and explain was a duty and not to speak would amount
to falsehood. Therefore wisdom dictated that on occasions speech must accompany
action. Of course, one could conceive the possibility of mere thought taking the
place of speech and action. Such was the attribute of the Almighty and might be
almost possible for one in a billion, but he knew no such instance.

You have advised 3 evacuation if the majority become irrevocably hostile.
But you have also maintained that a truly nonviolent man should never give up hope
of converting his opponent by love. Under these circumstances, how can a
nonviolent man accept defeat and evacuate?
Q.

1

Vide the preceding item.
Extracted from “Gandhiji’s Walking Tour Diary”
3
Vide the preceding page.
2

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

11

A. As to this question, it was perfectly correct that a non-violent man would
not move out of his place. For such a one there would be no question of
compensation. He would simply die at his post and prove that his presence was not a
danger to the State or the community. He knew that the Hindus of Noakhali made no
such pretension. They were simple folk who loved the world and wanted to live in the
world in peace and safety. Such persons would consult their honour if the Government
honourably offered them compensation in order to see the majority living in peace. If
the mere presence of the Hindus irritated the Muslims who were in the majority, he
would consider it to be the duty of the Government to offer compensation as it would
be of the Government in a Hindu majority province to offer compensation to the
Muslims if their presence irritated the majority community.

In case of evacuation, under advice from the Government, should the
evacuees ask for compensation for (a) all their movable and immovable property, (b)
loss of business? In other words, what would you consider to be adequate
compensation?
Q.

A. Gandhiji said that the Government would be obliged to compensate for
both immovable and movable property when the latter could not be or were not
carried away with him by the evacuee. Loss of business was a ticklish question. He
could not conceive the possibility of any Government shouldering the burden of such
compensation. He would understand the proposition that asked for a reasonable sum
for enabling the person concerned to start business in a new place.

Whilst he examined and admitted the possibility of evacuation, his experience
of all India told him that the Hindus and the Muslims knew how to live at peace
among themselves. He declined to believe that people had said goodbye to their
senses so as to make it impossible to live at peace with each other as they had done
for generations. For he believed with the late poet Iqbal that the Hindus and the
Muslims who had lived together long under the shadow of the mighty Himalayas and
had drunk the waters of the Ganges and the Jamuna had a unique message for the world.

Harijan, 16-3-1947

12

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

16. EXTRACT FROM THE DIARY
February 19, 1947
On this day , and exactly at this time (7.35 p. m.) Ba quitted her
mortal frame three years ago2 .
1

Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book II, p. 195

17. A LETTER3
BIRAMPUR,
February 19, 1947
Ba passed away on this day and at this time at 7.35 p. m. The
recitation was attended by the guests who had recently arrived. I
vividly recalled this fact during the yajna today, one reason being
Manudi herself. She completed the recitation quickly, all by herself.
In the Aga Khan Palace, too, were we not alone? When, therefore, after
the Chapter VI I stretched myself and dozed off a little, I felt as if Ba
was lying with her head on my lap.
[From Gujarati]
Eklo Jane Re, p. 154

18. LETTER TO M. A. ABDULLAH
NOAKHALI,
February 20, 1947
4
According to the letter under reply there is not much to choose
between the two districts. I suppose a police officer having to deal with
crimes, will naturally spot first the weakness of the society to which he
goes. It flatters me to think that you will miss my association in
Berhampore. I am sure that would be a temporary phase only, and in
any case it can be well made up by correspondence.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. II, p. 399
1

Mahashivaratri Day, Magha Vad Chaturdashi, traditionally observed with
fast and worship of Lord Shiva. Gandhiji observed it as “a day of fasting and prayer”.
2
On February 22, 1944
3
This was addressed to one of Manu Gandhi’s sisters.
4
In his letter dated February 15, the addressee had said: “I miss here nothing
except your valuable and instructive association, which I enjoyed so long at
Noakhali.”

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

13

19. LETTER TO E. STANLEY JONES
KAZIRKHIL,
R AMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,

February 20, 1947
1

DEAR DR. STANLEY JONES ,

It almost appears as if you had never gone to America. Trains
and steamers have very effectively reduced distances. Air transport
marks a further stage in that reduction. Nevertheless, I am not satisfied
that it has increased the real happiness of mankind.
You have kindly referred to my tour in Noakhali. The result is
in God’s hands. You have mentioned Bihar in the same breath. I do
think that the Bihar crime was much greater than that of Noakhali in
magnitude. Man became brute, I hope temporarily only in both the
places. But I haven’t yet seen the light leading me to Bihar. If I can
see that, I should have no hesitation in going there. I am in constant
touch with the ministers and the people of Bihar. So far as I can see
there is real repentance. But I cannot positively swear that I am not
being misled. Immediately I feel the call I should interrupt my work
in Noakhali and hasten to Bihar. All I can say today is that I am on
the watch. One thing I would add. I have come here to put my Ahimsa
to test. I have no misgiving as to the effect of Ahimsa. But I am fully
conscious that I may not know the whole technique and may not even
be living up to what I do know. Therefore, I have submitted myself
for examination here. Hence, if that examination demands my
presence in Bihar I shall go.
I am glad you are organizing vigils of prayer. As to the letter
you have enclosed2 I do not know that I can render any service in the
shape of sending a contribution. I do not think that I can send
anything effective.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1
2

14

American missionary, author of The Christ of the Indian Road, etc.
Vide the following item.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

20. LETTER TO ROBERT A. FANGMEIER
KAZIRKHIL,
R AMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,

February 20, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter through Dr. Stanley Jones. Please do not ask
me for any article at the present moment. Whilst I am shouldering the
present burden, I have neither the time nor the inclination to go
outside the present task. Remuneration would have been no
consideration for I never write for remuneration.
Your sincerly,

R OBERT A. F ANGMEIER, E ßSQ.
1236 11 TH S TREET, N.W.
WASHINGTON 1, D.C.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

21. LETTER TO P. N. BANERJEE
AS FROM KAZIRKHIL,
R AMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,

February 20, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

Dr. Amiya Chakravarty has handed me your affectionate letter1 .
Much as I should like to give you a decisive answer I cannot do so
and, therefore, I would not trouble you to come to this part of the
country to fix up the programme and to appoint a convenient date.
My hands are tied up here and I dare not leave this place until real
peace is established which may never be during my lifetime. In that
case, as I have said repeatedly, I should finish the rest of my life in the
attempt here. But of course man can only propose. God disposes. It is
just possible that I might have to go to Bihar so as to be better able to
do the work here. But I do not think ahead of the future. In the words
1
In which the addressee had requested Gandhiji to preside over the Annual
Convocation of the University of Calcutta.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

15

of Cardinal Newman ‘one step is enough for me’. 1 Forthe rest Dr.
Chakravarty will be able to tell you all for I had a long conversation2
with him.
Your sincerly,
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

22. LETTER TO GOPINATH BARDOLOI
AS FROM KAZIRKHIL,
R AMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,

February 20, 1947
DEAR BARDOLOI 3 ,

Your letter of the 14th instant. Nirmal Babu who saw your letter
suggested that one of his pupils might be induced to do the work
mentioned by you. He will write to you as soon as he has heard from
his pupil.
I hope all your troubles will dissolve.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

23. LETTER TO CHANDRANI
February 20, 1947
CHI. CHAND,

I had a talk with Dev4 today. The subject was whether or not you
two may write to each other. He says that he would rather that I wrote
to you and gave him news of your health than that he should write to
you. Hence this letter. Otherwise I had no intention of writing to you
today.
Now please write to me what you feel about this matter. Give me
full news of your health. You should never neglect your health. How
is your work progressing?
You should know well Gujarati, Marathi and Urdu. You do
1

The verse by Newman in his hymn “Lead Kindly Light” runs thus: “One step
enough for me I do not choose to see the distant scene Lead Thou me on.”
2
Vide “Discussion with Amiya Chakravarty”, 20-2-1947
3
Prime Minister of Assam
4
Dev Prakash Nayyar

16

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

understand the reason.
Sushilabehn will give you all the news from here. Dev is doing
all the work that Pyarelal used to do for me. He shares a room with
me.
I hope your sister is steadfast in her vow.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: Chandrani Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi National
Museum and Library

24. DISCUSSION WITH AMIYA CHAKRAVARTY 1
February 20, 1947
Even if I fail, truth will not have failed. I must strive and carry
this issue towards light. I live or perish in the attempt. Noakhali and
Tipperah are not an isolated problem but it is a problem which India
must solve for herself and for humanity. Fortunately or unfortunately
I have had success in the most difficult ventures of my life. But I do
not know what will happen this time. The greatest trial is given to us
but it is never beyond our power to overcome it.
Truth is God. And He is discoverable only to non-violence and
all it means. Here will be decided the clear issue. Those who think of
separation must know where we stand. Let the facts be faced. If people
will not tolerate differences in religion, usage, food, dress or
individuality and will insist on boycott, then they cannot do so without
the help of the Government which represents the people.
If boycott is the policy of the Government, we must know about
it. A community cannot take action by itself. Bengal as well as other
provinces must understand this.
As to changeability of human nature to normality, if opportunity was given,
Mahatma Gandhi said:

If I did not believe so, I would not be here.
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 24-2-1968

1
Professor at Calcutta University; at one time served as secretary to
Rabindranath Tagore

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

17

25. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING1
C HAR LARUA,

February 20, 1947
If you think the Government may boycott, i. e., remove the minority
community after giving adequate compensation, may not people take time by the
forelock and go?
A. As to this he said that those who felt that they would take time by the
forelock and form a Hindu corporation to take the Hindus away, he had nothing in
common with them. He could not be party to any such scheme. The burden lay
entirely on the majority community and the Government. He merely meant that when
they declared bankruptcy of wisdom, the minority should go if they were adequately
compensated. The other way was the way of violence, i. e., civil war, not of nonviolence.
Q. You have said castes should go. But then will Hinduism survive? Why do
you thus mix up Hinduism with the progressive religions like Christianity or Islam?
A. He maintained that caste as it was understood must go if Hinduism was to
survive. He did not believe that Christianity and Islam were progressive and Hinduism
static, i. e., retrogressive. As a matter of fact he noticed no definite progress in any
religion. The world would not be the shambles it had become if the religions of the
world were progressive. There was room for varna, as a duty. This was true of all
religions whether the name used was other than varna. What was a Muslim Maulvi or a
Christian priest but a Brahmin if he taught his flock its true duty not for money but
because he possessed the gift of interpretation? And this was true of the other
divisions.
Q. As you are an advocate of the abolition of caste, are we to take it that you
favour intercaste marriages? Many occupations are now the monopoly of specific
castes. Should not this be abolished?
A. He was certainly in favour of intercaste marriage. The question did not
arise when all became casteless. When this happy event took place, monopoly of
occupations would go.
Q. If there is only one God, should there not be only one religion?
A. This was a strange question. Just as a tree had a million leaves similarly
though God was one, there were as many religions as there were men and women
though they were rooted in one God. They did not see this plain truth because they
were followers of different prophets and claimed as many religons as there were
prophets. As a matter of fact whilst he believed himself to be a Hindu, he knew that he
did not worship God in the same manner as one or all of them.
Q.

Harijan, 16-3-1947
1

18

Extracted from “Gandhiji’s Walking Tour Diary”

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

26. LETTER TO E. W. ARYANAYAKUM 1
February 21, 1947
You have given me a cutting from the Hindustan Standard
purporting to report the views of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad 2 on
education. Assuming the correctness of the report I say categorically
that it is inconsistent with the line followed by the Hindustani Talimi
Sangh. It is in the villages of India where India lives, not in the few
Westernized cities which are the citadels of a foreign power.
I do not believe that the State can concern itself or cope with
religious education. I believe that religious education must be the sole
concern of religious associations. Do not mix up religion and ethics. I
believe that fundamental ethics is common to all religions. Teaching
of fundamental ethics is undoubtedly a function of the State. By
religion I have not in mind fundamental ethics but what goes by the
name of denominationalism. We have suffered enough from Stateaided religion and State Church. A society or a group, which depends
partly or wholly on State aid for the existence of its religion, does not
deserve or, better still, does not have any religion worth the name. I do
not need to give any illustrations in support of this obvious truth as it
is to me.
The second point deserving attention in the report in question is
regarding the replacing of the Urdu and Nagari scripts by the Roman
script. However attractive the proposition may appear to be and
whatever is true of the Indian soldiers, in my opinion the replacing
would be a fatal blunder and we would find ourselves in the fire out of
the frying pan. In this connection, I would like you to read my
statement 4 on the subject issued to the Press on January 21 last.
The third thing that pained me was the reference to military
education. I think that we have to wait a long time before a nationwide
decision on the point is made. Otherwise, we are likely to become a
curse rather than a blessing to the world. Leaders are not made, they
1

Secretary, Hindustani Talimi Sangh. This appeared under the title “Religious
Instruction, Military Training and the Roman Script.”
2
Member, Education and Arts in the Interim Government. He was reported to
have said : “It is likely that under State supervision even denominational teaching
can be imparted in a more liberal spirit than under private control. The aim of all
religious teaching should be to make men more tolerant and broad-minded and it is my
opinion that this can be more effectively done if the State takes charge of the
question than if it is left to private initiative.”
4
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 2-2-1947

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

19

are born. Should the State be in a hurry over this matter even before
full independence is established? Therefore, I am surprised that the
Central Advisory Board should be party to such a sweeping
recommendation as they have made.1
Harijan, 23-3-1947

27. LETTER TO P. R. CHENGALVAROYA CHETTIAR
KAZIRKHIL, R AMGANJ P. S.,
NOAKHALI DISTRICT,

February 21, 1947
DEAR CHENGALVAROYAN,

Many thanks for your letter. Real forgiveness accrues to him
who is truly penitent. Harilal2 knows that when he has shed his evil
habits he will be welcome in Sevagram. All those good people who,
out of mistaken kindness, nurse [his] evil habits are his enemies.
Here is a letter3 for him.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
P. R. C HENGALVAROYA C HETTIAR
40 VENKATACHALA C HETTY S TREET
TRIPLICANE, M ADRAS
From a photostat: G. N. 102

1
The recommendations of the Central Advisory Board of Education were as
follows : “The Central Board of Education has endorsed the view of the Working
Committee of the National War Academy that residential schools, where boys may
obtain adequate facilities for developing the character and powers of leadership,
should be started by provinces and States to act as ‘feeders’ for the National War
Academy. The Board is of opinion that the new type of schools contemplated in the
scheme of National Post War Education will provide the necessary training for the
leadership, character, intelligence, courage and physical fitness required by the
military authorities for the Army, Navy and Air Force. It directs the attention of
provincial authorities to the necessity of developing their schools on these lines
which will actually serve as the kind of schools which the military authorities have in
mind....”
2
Harilal Gandhi, eldest son of Gandhiji
3
The letter is not available

20

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

28. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
February 21, 1947
CHI. MUNNALAL,

I got your long letter yesterday. Manu1 read it out to me in the
evening.
What you say about cultivation is absolutely correct. We should
grow as much grain as we can and give it to the people. We did this
once at Sabarmati. Were you there at that time? We raised a bajra crop
out of season and gave potfuls of it to the poor people. We did, of
course, charge them something. Vrajlal2 used to spend the whole day
in distributing the grain to labourers. Something like that should be
done at Sevagram too, and that on a much larger scale. Money should
be no difficulty. You may show this to anybody you like.
I was indeed very happy to learn about Kanchan3 . May her
delivery pass off without difficulty. I cannot judge whether her plan
of going to Vyara is right or not. Sushilabehn4 is going there and she
might be able to guide you better. It is very good that Kanchan’s
sister has arrived there. It is as well that you are looking after the
building work. That work also had to be done by somebody. You are
an expert at the job.
My fate lies entirely in God’s hands. If I am able to accomplish
my mission here5 and leave Bengal, I will certainly go there. But I do
not know whether I shall succeed. If I should die in my attempt here, I
would welcome such a death. Your running down here will serve no
purpose. If you have learnt anything from me, build further on it. If
you happen to come to this side and call on me incidentally, that
would be another matter. I had an excellent letter from Kanchan, but
have had no time to reply to it. Now lying in bed I dictate letters to
Manu and to others if the letters are in other languages. I am thus able
to give sufficient rest to the body and cope with the correspondence to
a certain extent. There are some newspaper correspondents with us
and they also help. Their help partly makes up for Parasram’s6
1

Daughter of Jaisukhlal Gandhi
An Ashram inmate
3
Addressee’s wife
4
Sushila Nayyar
5
Gandhiji had gone to Noakhali on November 6, 1946 and had been touring
on foot from village to village from January 2, 1947 to establish peace and
communal harmony.
6
Gandhiji’s stenographer who accompanied him during part of the Noakhali
tour. Vide “Statement to the Press”, 20-11-1946 and “Letter to Parasuram”, 2-1-1947
2

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

21

absence. I dictate Urdu letters to Dev1 and Bengali letters to Nirmal
Babu 2 . Thus my correspondence work seems to be well arranged now
and I am able to spare both my hands and eyes. That I do not write to
Kanchan should not mean that she need not write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 8628. Also C. W. 7210. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

29. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING3
KAMALAPUR,

February 21, 1947
Gandhiji congratulated the audience on having come from the surrounding
villages. He however sympathized with them for being exposed to the sun. He also
hoped that they were not afraid of the Indian sun, perhaps the greatest gift from God.
Happy was India which had clear blue sky for the larger part of the year.
He then referred to the fact that he had gone to Chandpur more than once whilst
India’s grand old son Shri Haradayal Nag4 was alive. He was then his guest. He knew,
therefore, what importance Chandpur had. He was glad that Chandpur had played its
part in looking after the refugees. But he deplored the disregard of the laws of
sanitation and cleanliness. If they rigidly carried out these rules they would not have
to live in constant dread of the plague and other diseases which were the brood of
insanitation.
He then told them that they must not harbour ill will against their Muslim
neighbours. He appealed to both the parties to live at peace with each other. But he
held that even if the Hindus alone harboured no ill will against the Muslims, or vice
versa, strife would abate. If however both harboured ill will, one against the other,
strifes were bound to be the result. There was a mantra in the Upanishads [which says]
that man became what he thought. 5 How true it was found in every walk of life! Let
them beware of harbouring an evil thought.
1

Devprakash Nayyar
Nirmal Kumar Bose, a professor of Calcutta University, was touring with
Gandhiji as his “companion and interpreter”. Vide “Silence-Day Note to N. K. Bose”,
18-11-1946 and “Statement to the Press”, 20-11-1946
3
Extracted from “Gandhiji’s Walking Tour Diary”
4
(1853-1942); participated in the non-co-operation movement and Salt
Satyagraha; devoted his life to constructive work
5
“According as one acts, according as one behaves, so does he become. The
doer of good becomes good, the doer of evil becomes evil. One becomes virtuous by
virtuous action. Others, however, say that a person consists of desires. As is his
desire, so is his will; as is his will, so is the deed he does, whatever deed he does, that
he attains.” Brihadanranyakopanishad, IV. 4.5
2

22

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

He then came to the two questions before him. The first was:
Q . You advocate inter-caste marriages. Do you also favour marriages between
Indians professing different religions? Should they declare themselves as belonging
to no denomination, or can they continue their old religious practices and yet intermarry? If so, what form should the marriage ceremony take? Is it to be a purely civil
function or a religious function? Do you consider religion to be an exclusively
personal matter?
A . Though he admitted that he had not always held the view, he had come to
the conclusion long ago, that an inter-religious marriage was a welcome event
whenever it took place. His stipulation was that such a connection was not to be a
product of lust. In his opinion [if it was a product of lust]1 it was no marriage. It was
illicit intercourse. Marriage in his estimation was a sacred institution. Hence there
must be mutual friendship, either party having equal respect for the religion of the
other. There was no question in this of conversion. Hence the marriage ceremony
would be performed by priests belonging to both faiths. This happy event could take
place when the communities shed mutual enmity and had regard for the religions of
the world.
Q . Should religious instruction form part of the school curriculum as
approved by the State? Do you favour separate schools for children belonging to
different denominations for facility of religious instruction? Or, should religious
instruction be left in the hands of private bodies? If so, do you think it is right for the
State to subsidize such bodies?
A . As to this question he said that he did not believe in State religion even
though the whole community had one religion. State interference would probably
always be unwelcome. Religion was a purely personal matter. There were in reality as
many religions as minds. Each mind had a different conception of God from the other.
He was also opposed to State aid, partly or wholly, to religious bodies. For he knew
that an institution or group, which did not manage to finance its own religious
teaching, was a stranger to true religion. This did not mean that the State schools
would not give ethical teaching. Fundamental ethics were common to all religions.

Harijan, 16-3-1947

1

From a report in Amrita Bazar Patrika

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

23

30. LETTER TO H. S. SUHRAWARDY 1
KAZIRKHIL,
R AMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,

FEBRUARY 22, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

Sardar Niranjan Singh Gill2 was with me yesterday having
returned from Bihar. He has prepared a memorandum which I have
glanced through. I suggested that he should submit it to you. As it was
he had not shown it to the Prime Minister of Bihar. I told him that the
memorandum was incomplete without its being seen by the Prime
Minister. He perceived the appositeness of my remark and said that he
was going to send a copy to the Prime Minsiter. If he feels that any of
his inferences require correction he would make the correction and
pass it on to you.
There is one thing which he has recommended, namely, that I
should go to Bihar if only for a few days. As you will see
Dr. Mahmud also, if his report is correct, thinks likewise. I am in
constant correspondence with Dr. Mahmud. I want to check up the
statement with him. I am also writing to the Prime Minister. If he also
thinks likewise I will then interrupt my work here to go to Bihar.
I have seen in the newspapers a statement attributed to you
which reads like a jibe at me 3 . I would not expect that from you.
Therefore, I give you the credit for believing that I have the “Inner
Voice” to which I listen. My belief is that all mankind has it. But the
outside din and noise have practically deadened it for the vast
majority of people. When that voice speaks I shall find myself in
Bihar without any further prompting.
While I am sending this to you I feel I ought not to omit
mention of the fact that things are not as good as they might be and
ought to be. I continue with some caution to worry the officials
immediately concerned.
BENGAL P REMIER
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1

An extract from this letter has been reproduced in “Letter to Amrit Kaur”,
22-2-1947
2
Of the Indian National Army, under whom a group of I.N.A. men were
working in Noakhali.
3
The addressee had made a frivolous reference to Gandhiji’s “inner voice”

24

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

31. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
KAZIRKHIL, R AMGANJ P. S.,
NOAKHALI DISTRICT,

February 22, 1947
CHI. AMRIT,

Just as I am dictating to friend Rangaswamy 1 I get your letter
and I have interrupted the dictation in order to see your letter. I have
now read it and hasten to dictate my answer.
I have received all the letters referred to by you and I have sent
replies also. I can’t recollect just now but I will see if I can give you
the dates. I do hope that by the time this reaches you, you will have
recovered your voice fully.
Of course there is every chance of your getting back your Hindi
and Roman-Urdu dictionary. I don’t think I carry it with me. I will
enquire and send it to you, care of Sardar2 as soon as I trace it.
There is no cold here but there is still a freshness in the air. Real
hot weather has not set in. Nights are quite cool and I use all my
blankets. But there is no need to worry about me. I am keeping good
health and have been able hitherto to go through my programme with
clockwork regularity.
The second stage of the pilgrimage ends in Haimchar on
Monday, the 24th instant.3 It is Thakkar Bapa’s 4 headquarters. I want
to watch myself for a few days in Haimchar before resuming the third
stage. It may also be that I might have to hurry to Bihar 5 . Sardar
Niranjan Singh Gill6 , who was in Bihar for three days, gave me the
impressions of his tour and had strongly recommended that I should
go to Bihar if only for a few days. I have put myself in
1

Correspondent of The Hindu
Vallabhbhai Patel, Member, Home and Information and Broadcasting in the
Interim Government
3
The first stage of Gandhiji’s walking tour had begun at Shrirampur on January
2 and the second stage commenced from Srinagar on February 5.
4
A. V. Thakkar (1869-1951); President, Gujarat Antyaja Seva Mandir;
Secretary, Harijan Sevak Sangh; General Secretary, Kasturba Gandhi National
Memorial Trust; established Bharatiya Adimjati Sevak Sangh.
5
Where communal riots had broken out on October 25, 1946, which was
celeberated as Noakhali Day
6
Of the Indian National Army, under whom a group of I. N. A. men were
working in Noakhali
2

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

25

communication with the Prime Minister of Bihar1 and await his reply.
I begin the pilgrimage every day at 7.30 or 7.35 and the stages
are so divided as not to require me to walk more than one hour and
fifteen minutes at the most. The least I have been called upon to walk
is thirty minutes. Once and only once has it been one hour and thirty
minutes.
I see that this dictionary business 2 causes a lot of worry and
takes away much of your time. Would you like to be relieved of that
work? If you would, I would then like to keep your dictionary for the
time being.
I am glad that the licensing clause in regard to khadi has been
removed. How I would love to think that you have carried conviction
to the Prime Minister3 of the Punjab about vanaspati4 ; Pyarelal is in
his village, 5 now about twenty miles from here, and doing excellent
work. Sushila has gone to Sevagram in order to put matters straight
about the maternity home and hospital. It is growing by leaps and
bounds and has become very popular. She may return to her village
work here as soon as she has finished her work in Sevagram. Renuka6
is here with me at the village. Her village is less than two miles from
here. In appearance she looks just as she was. She has had to take
great care of herself. But she is all right otherwise. Only this morning
she enquired about you. I told her that I heard from you fairly
regularly but that you were trying to save my time as much as
possible. She asked me whether you were ever coming to this part of
India. I told her not whilst I was moving from day to day but that if I
stayed for any length of time in one place and if you are well and
available from your work in the Assembly or otherwise, I would like
you to come for a few days, and she was happy. She is doing her work
steadily with her little band of workers.
Manu I have reserved to the last. Everybody here knows
everything about her. Therefore I would love to say a word or two for
1

Shrikrishna Sinha
The reference is to the English-into-Hindustani dictionary published
fortnightly in Harijan, from September 1, 1946. It was originally intended to be the
joint effort of a few co-workers but had subsequently to be taken up by the addressee
herself at Gandhiji’s instance; vide “Plucky Stand”
3
Khizar Hyat Khan Tiwana
4
Hydrogenated vegetable oil
5
The workers accompanying Gandhiji had spread themselves out in the
villages of Noakhali. Vide “Statement to the Press”, 20-11-1946
6
Renuka Ray
2

26

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

your information. But I must forbear for it is now towards one
o’clock and I must have a little bit of rest and grease on the soles of
my feet.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Keep both the shawls with you. Give them to me when we meet.
Have you given your consent to the Central Advisory Board’s
recommendation1 regarding military training?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the original: C. W. 4190. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 7826

32. LETTER TO SHRIKRISHNA SINHA
KAZIRKHIL,
R AMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,

FEBRUARY 22, 1947
SHRIKRISHNA SINHA,

I dictate this to you in English in order that it might be easier
for you to make public use of my letter which I hope will never be
necessary.
Sardar Niranjan Singh Gill saw me yesterday and gave me a
report which he has prepared with reference to his summary visit to
Bihar. I suggested that he should send you a copy so as to enable you
to correct any mis-statement into which he might have been betrayed.
I advised him too to send a copy to the Prime Minister of Bengal,
advising him at the same time that he should mark the copy as
confidential till it has been checked by you and your corrections, if
any, had been accepted by him and the Memorandum accordingly
corrected. I hope you have got the Memorandum.
There is one thing in it which refers to me. Dr. Syed Mahmud
and others would like me to visit Bihar. Sardar Niranjan Singh Gill
endorses the suggestion. Do you feel likewise? Please tell me
unhesitatingly what you feel.
Now that you have announced your Ministry’s decision to
appoint an impartial enquiry commission as soon as possible I remind
1

Vide footnote 1, “Letter to P. R. Chengalvaroya Chettiar”, 21-2-1947

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

27

you of the proverb “he gives twice who gives in time”.
BIHAR P REMIER
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

33. A LETTER
February 22, 1947
I say you cannot tread this path (the path of brahmacharya) if
you fight shy of the thorns, stones and pitfalls in the way. Maybe we
shall stumble, our feet will bleed, we may even perish. But we dare not
turn back.
*
*
*
If I am successful, the world will be enriched by my venture. If
on the other hand I am found to be a fraud or a misled fool, the world
will reject me and I shall be debunked. In either case the world will be
the gainer. This is as clear to me as two and two make four.
Mahatma Gandhi — The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, p. 223

34. LETTER TO PYARELAL
February 22, 1947
CHI. PYARELAL,

It is 6.15 now and I must stretch myself. And if I feel sleepy, I
must sleep. That is why I am dictating this letter. I read your lessons
and I like them. It would not do your spoiling your handwriting and
then asking to be forgiven. Asking forgiveness every now and again
would be like following the English practice. That would not be
proper. Your handwriting should be such that you do not have to ask
forgiveness at all. You may write less. If you resolve that whatever you
write will be in a beautiful handwriting, writing Manu’s lessons in a
beautiful handwriting will not be burdensome to you. Duty should
never be a burden. And it is one’s duty to make one’s handwriting
beautiful like beads. In spite of knowing this I myself do not follow
this. You should consider it a failing on my part, and not imitate me in
this.
I have sampled your other roti too. It was harder and there must
be something lacking in it. If you have started making roti and if you
have decided to do it, why not do it the way you formerly did? In
other words you had started mixing in it lime or tamarind juice or
tomato juice. If you do that, the roti will be lighter and easily

28

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

morespongy. In case you do not do that, I have already
suggested bhakhri. It would turn out nice if you add sufficient oil in
the dough. Do not think that you have to send it to me. You may send
it whenever it is convenient to do so.
Sushila’s letter is enclosed. I am very much impressed by it. If
she is able to act according to the wish she has expressed in it, I shall
consider it a great triumph in this yajna. You must also encourage
her. Have I not told you that you, Sushila and Manu could play the
greatest role in the success of this yajna. And even there, Manu would
be undergoing the severest test. The indications so far are good. Its
complete success would no doubt depend very largely on my own
efficiency. On the one hand is the gravest doubt on the part of
Kishorelal and others and on the other my stubbornness. My mind is
oscillating between the two. But it bends more towards action.
There is only to act, not to think about the reward.
My letter to Parasram could go only yesterday. It was merely
negligence on my part. What could I do? Once the letter goes in the
file, it is immediately forgotten. The moral of the thing is that
everything should be promptly attended to. Whatever comes later,
should also be taken up later. The diary came into my hand only
yesterday. I am sending the previous one today.
At night, February 22, 1947
I have your second letter. I have already told Dev to send the
roti tin. I do not know if it has been sent or not. And Dev is not here
at present. I shall send William’s letter. It would be a great feat on
your part if Kalu Mian recovers. It is of course good that you are
writing to him. I am writing about him to Kul Ranjan. He may be able
to suggest something. You try applying mud-pack even on the eyes. I
am doing it everyday. I am not using a piece of cloth now but
applying the earth direct. Needless to say that the eyes must be kept
closed. Jaya’s letter is enclosed.
February 23, 1947
I am in a great hurry. Hence, I am sending this without revising.
Now, send the papers about my subject.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

29

35. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING1
C HAR KRISHNAPUR,

February 22, 1947
At the outset Gandhiji said that he had received from a Muslim friend in
Baluchistan a printed sheet containing what he thought were the sayings of the
Prophet and the teachers. The whole selection was good but he was attracted by the
following from Prophet Mohamed’s sayings:
When God made the earth it shook to and fro till He put mountains on it to
keep it firm. Then the Angels asked, O God, is there anything in Thy creation
stronger than these mountains? And God replied, iron is stronger than these
mountains for it breaks them.
And is there anything in Thy creation stronger than iron?
Yes, fire is stronger than iron, for it melts it.
Is there anything stronger than fire?
Yes, water, for it quenches fire.
Is there anything stronger than water?
Yes, wind, for it puts water in motion.
O our Sustainer, is there anything stronger than wind?
Yes, a good man giving alms. If he gives it with his right hand and conceals it
from his left, he overcomes all things. Every good act is charity. Your smiling
in your brother’s face, your putting a wanderer on the right road, your giving
water to the thirsty, is charity. A man’s true wealth hereafter is the good he has
done to his fellowmen. When he dies people will ask, what property he had
left behind him? But the Angels will ask, what good deeds has he sent before
him?
Gandhiji then dealt with the following questions.
Q. Why should there be insistence on temple-entry? Of course, we understand
that in case of objection, there is scope in it for satyagraha. No- caste dinners have a
limited value; for those who join do not shed untoucha- bility in their homes or
during social ceremonies. They look upon these dinners, organized by Congressmen
or other progressives, as special occasions when caste rules are held in abeyance;
something comparable to what one does when one goes to Jagannath Puri and
partakes of cooked rice offered to Jagannath without reference to one’s caste. Antiuntouchability has not yet gone deep enough to affect the normal social life of
individuals. What can be done to break down barriers in private homes? Even with
regard to temple-entry there is one question. Do you think that priests in public
service in free India will be drafted from among competent men and women without
any reference to their former castes?
A. Gandhiji said that it was an apt question in this part of Bengal where there
1

30

Extracted from “Gandhiji’s Walking Tour Diary”

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

were the largest number of Namasudras. He welcomed the question doubly because he
had occupied the lowest rung of the Hindu ladder and because he did not believe in the
ladder of castes. He invited all to occupy that lowest rung. Then there would be no
occasions for such questions as were addressed to him. Meanwhile, he was bound to
deal with them. He entirely endorsed the proposition that untouchability would be
doomed and totally abolished when there was no prohibition applied against anyone
by reason of his caste. The only universal prohibition would be against insanitation,
degradation, etc. But he clung to the belief that temple-entry took the first place in
the programme of removal of untouchability and he made bold to say that social
public dinners would precede as they were preceding the final conquest over the demon
of untouchability. He prophesied that Hinduism would be destroyed if untouchability
was not destroyed, even as the British race would lose its name if British rule was not
destroyed in toto, as it was certainly being dissolved before their very eyes.
Q. You wrote about economic equality in 1941. Do you hold that all persons
who perform useful and necessary service in society, whether farmer or Bhangi,
engineer or accountant, doctor or teacher, have a moral right only to equal wages with
the rest? Of course, it is understood, educational or other expenses shall be a charge of
the State. Our question is, should not all persons get the same wages for their
personal needs? Do you not think that if we work for this equality, it will cut sooner
under the root of untouchability than any other process?
A. As to this Gandhiji had no doubt that if India was to live an exemplary life
of independence which would be the envy of the world, all the Bhangis, doctors,
lawyers, teachers, merchants and others would get the same wages for an honest day’s
work. Indian society may never reach the goal but it was the duty of every Indian to
set his sail towards that goal and no other if India was to be a happy land.

Harijan, 16-3-1947

36. A SILENCE-DAY NOTE
February 23, 1947
Difference between defensive and aggressive is wholly
unconvincing and meaningless. You can’t blow hot and cold. Either
have hate or love. I have already said how to deal with the want of
seeds and instruments.
M. K. G.
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

31

37. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING1
C HARSOLADI,

February 23, 1947
Q. Namasudra girls are usually married off at the age of 12 or 13; formerly the
usual age was 8 or 9. The bridegroom has to pay a dowry of Rs. 150 for the bride. The
average difference between the two is about 12 to 15 years. As a result of this the
number of widows in the Namasudra society is rather large. Among one section of the
caste widow-marriage was prevalent. But in imitation of another section which was
looked upon as superior, the former are giving up that practice. What is your advice
regarding child-marriage and widow-remarriage?
A. Dealing with the question Gandhiji said that his opinion was definite. In
the first instance there should be no possibility of child-widows. He was averse to
child-marriages. It was an evil custom which unfortunately the Namasudras had
perhaps taken from the so-called higher castes.
Gandhiji was also against the system of dowry. It was nothing but the sale of
girls. That there should be castes even amongst Namasudras was deplorable and he
would strongly advise them to abolish all caste distinctions amongst themselves.
And in this they should bear in mind the opinion the speaker had often expressed that
all caste distinctions should be abolished, and there should be only one caste,
namely, Bhangis, and all Hindus should take pride in being called Bhangis and
nothing else. This applied to the Namasudras as well.
When child-marriages were abolished, naturally there would be few, if any,
young widows. As a general rule he was for one man one wife for life, and one woman
one husband for life. Custom had familiarized women in the so-called higher castes
with enforced widowhood. Contrary was the rule with men. He called it a disgrace, but
whilst society was in that pitiable condition, he advocated widow-remarriage for all
young widows. He believed in equality of the sexes and, therefore, he could only
think of the same rights for women as men.
Q. You say that you are in favour of inter-religious marriages2 but at the same
time you say that each party should retain his or her own religion and, therefore, you
said, you tolerated even civil marriages. Are there any instances of parties belonging
to different religions keeping up their own religions to the end of their lives; and is
not the institution of civil marriage a negation of religion and does it not tend
towards laxity of religion?
1

Extracted from “Gandhiji’s Walking Tour Diary”. It being Gandhiji’s silence
day the questions and answers were read out.
2
Vide “Speech at Prayer Meeting”, 21-2-1947

32

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

A. Gandhiji said that the questions were appropriate. He had no instances in
mind where the parties had clung to their respective faiths unto death because these
friends whom he knew had not yet died. He had, however, under his observation men
and women professing different religions and each clinging to his or her own faith
without abatement. But he would go so far as to say that they need not wait for the
discovery of past instances. They should create new ones so that timid ones may shed
their timidity.
As to civil marriages he did not believe in them but he welcomed the
institution of civil marriage as a much-needed reform for the sake of reform.

Harijan, 16-3-1947

38. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
KAZIRKHIL, RAMGANJ P. S. ,
NOAKHALI DT.,
February 24, 1947
Today being silence day I am writing this. But it will be typed
for your easy reading.I have read Attlee’s speech1 . Lest I might
embarrass you by an untoward word or phrase I am not saying
anything just now.
Evidently I had anticipated practically the whole of it in my
speeches here, i. e., if I am interpreting the speech correctly. My
interpretation is this
Independence will be recognized of those parts which desired it
and will do without British protection.
The British will remain where they are wanted.
This may lead to Pakistan for those provinces or portions which
may want it. No one will be forced one way or the other. The
Congress provinces if they are wise will get what they want.
Much will depend upon what the Constituent Assembly will do
and what you as the Interim Government are able to do.2
If the British Government are and are able to remain sincere the
declaration is good. Otherwise it is dangerous.
Now about Sardar Niranjan Singh Gill. He has been to Bihar
and has produced a report which somewhat reflects upon the Sinha
1
In the House of Commons on February 20; for excerpts from it, vide
Appendix I.
2
The addressee was Vice-President, Member-in-Charge, External Affairs and
Commonwealth Relations, in the Interim Government.

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

33

Ministry.1 You should see him and his report. It has gone to
Suhrawardy and Sinha under my advice. He and Sardar Jiwan Singh
have not hit it off. The whole thing is bad. I. N. A. seems to have split
up. Probably you know all this.
In view of the above report I might have to go to Bihar. God
knows. You may show this to friends.
Hope you are well.
Blessings from
BAPU2

[PS.]
I take it that you have a cable from Durban about orders against
Drs. Dadoo and Naicker.3 I trust you have taken prompt action. I have
cabled F. M. Smuts.
BAPU
From the original:Jawaharlal Nehru Papers (M. O. Mathai). Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

39. LETTER TO J. B. KRIPALANI1
KAZIRKHIL,
R AMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,

February 24, 1947
This is a very personal letter but not private.
Manu Gandhi, my grand-daughter as we consider blood
relations, shares the bed with me, strictly as my very blood, not to give
me animal satisfaction but as part of what might be my last yajna.
This has cost me dearest associates, i.e., Vallabhbhai, Kishorelal,
probably C.R. and others. This includes Devdas. I have lost caste with
them. You as one of the dearest and earliest comrades, certainly
before Sardar and Kishorelal, should reconsider your position in the
light of what they have to say. Perhaps Sucheta will help you
somewhat. She knows something of this episode. Am I worthy of the
1

Vide “Letter to Niranjan Singh Gill”, 8-2-1947
The subscription is in Hindi.
3
It had been reported that the Government of South Africa had refused
passports to Yusuf Dadoo and G. M. Naicker and impounded their certificates of
identity.
3
(1888-1982); Principal, Gujarat Vidyapith, 1920-27; General Secretary,
Indian National Congress, 1934-45; elected its President in 1946 but resigned in
1947; Member, Constituent Assembly; resigned from Congress in 1951
2

34

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

companionship of so many old associates? I have given the deepest
thought to the matter. The whole world may foresake me but I dare
not leave what I hold is the truth for me. It may be a delusion and a
snare. If so, I must realize it myself. I have risked perdition before
now. Let this be the reality if it has to be.
I need not argue the point. I have simply conveyed the intensity
of my thought.
I suggest your discussing with Sardar and Rajaji. And then come
to the conclusion and let me know. You have to think out your
relationship not merely as a friend but as President. Of course you can
share this with Jawaharlal and Maulana. Do not consider my feelings
in the matter. I have none. All I want is to do the truth at all cost, as I
see it.
Blessings from

BAPU1
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

40. LETTER TO PYARELAL
February 24, 1947
CHI. PYARELAL,

Herewith is a copy of the letter to the Professor.2 You will learn
from it what is happening. My association with Harijan now seems to
have ended. I am not worried in the least. I am anxious about Manu’s
state of mind. All this is an ordeal for me. May truth alone triumph.
Blessings from

BAPU

[P.S.]
Send the papers about me.
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1
2

In Devanagari
Vide the peceding item

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

35

41. DISCUSSION WITH A. V. THAKKAR ,
February 24, 19471
BAPA: Why this experiment here?

GANDHIJI: You are mistaken, Bapa; it is not an experiment but an
integral part of my yajna. One may forgo an experiment, one cannot
forgo one’s duty. Now if I regard a thing as a part of my yajna — a
sacred duty — I may not give it up even if public opinion is wholly
against me. I am engaged in achieving self-purification. The five
cardinal observances are the five props of my spiritual striving.
Brahmacharya is one of them. But all the five constitute an indivisible
whole. They are inter-related and inter-dependent. If one of them is
broken, all are broken. That being so, if in practice I resile in regard
to brahmacharya to please Mrs. Grundy, I jettison not only
brahmacharya but truth, ahimsa and all the rest. I do not allow myself
any divergence between theory and practice in respect of the rest. If
then I temporize in the matter of brahmacharya, would it not blunt
the edge of my brahmacharya and vitiate my practice of truth? Ever
since my coming to Noakhali, I have been asking myself the question,
‘What is it that is choking the action of my ahimsa? Why does not the
spell work? May it not be because I have temporized in the matter of
brahmacharya?’
B. Your ahimsa has not failed. Do not miss the wood for the trees.... 2 Just

think what would have been the fate of Noakhali if you had not come. The world does
not think of brahmacharya as you do.

If I accept your contention, then it would amount to this that I
should give up what I hold to be right for me, for fear of displeasing
the world. I shudder to think where I should have been if I had
proceeded like that in my life. I should have found myself at the
bottom of the pit. You can have no idea, Bapa, but I can well picture it
to myself. I have called my present venture a yajna—a sacrifice, a
penance. It means utmost self-purification. How can there be that selfpurification when in my mind I entertain a thing which I dare not put
openly into practice? Does one need anyone’s approval or permission
to do what one holds with all one’s being to be one’s duty? Under the
circumstances, there are only two courses open to friends. Either they
should have faith in me, in the purity of my motives and my bona
G.

1

From Amrita Bazar Patrika, 27-2-1947. The source, however, has “February

2

Omission as in the source

25”.

36

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

fides, even though they are unable to follow or agree with my
reasoning, or they should part company with me. There is no middle
course. I dare not shrink from putting into action the logical
implications of my conviction when I am launched on a sacrifice
which consists of the full practice of truth. Nor must I hide or keep
my convictions to myself. That would be disloyalty to friends. Let X,
Y and Z, therefore, go the way they choose, but how can I run away
from the test? My mind is made up. On the lonely way to God on
which I have set out, I need no earthly companions. Let those who
will, therefore, denounce me, if I am the imposter they imagine me to
be, though they may not say so in so many words. It might disillusion
millions who persist in regarding me as a Mahatma. I must confess,
the prospect of being so debunked greatly pleases me. Thousands of
Hindu and Muslim women come to me. They are to me like my own
mother, sisters and daughters. But if an occasion should arise
requiring me to share the bed with any of them I must not hesitate, if I
am the brahmachari that I claim to be. If I shrink from the test, I write
myself down as a coward and a fraud.
B. What if your example is copied?

G. If there is blind imitation or unscrupulous exploitation of my
example, society will not and should not tolerate it. But if there is
sincere, bona-fide honest endeavour, society should welcome it and it
will be the better for it. As soon as my research is complete, I shall
myself proclaim the result to the whole world.
B. I for one cannot imagine anything base in you. After all, Manu is in place of
a grand-daughter to you — flesh of your flesh and bone of your bone. I confess, I had
my mental reservations in the beginning. I had come in all humility to press upon
you my doubts. I did not understand. Only after our talk today have I been able to have
a deeper understanding of the meaning of what you are trying to do.

G.

Does that make any real difference? It does not and it should
not. You seem to make a distinction between Manu and others like
her. My mind makes no such distinction. To me they are all alike—
daughters.1
Mahatma Gandhi — The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, pp. 224-6

1
According to the source the conversation had an unexpected sequel. Manu
told Gandhiji that she saw no harm in conceding to Thakkar Bapa’s request to suspend
the practice for the time being, provided Gandhiji agreed. Gandhiji readily agreed.
Vide also “Letter to Vinoba Bhave”, 10-3-1947

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

37

42. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING1
HAIMCHAR,

February 24, 1947
This being the last stage of the second part of his pilgrimage, Gandhiji
thanked God for the happy ending of the second part. He referred to the intense wish
that Bapa, whom he described as the chief priest and servant of the Harijans, had
expressed that he should include Haimchar in his programme. He referred also to the
origin of the distribution of workers in the villages that had suffered and how Bapa
had instinctively selected the Haimchar area as the field of his service.
He then referred to the communications, telegraphic and otherwise, he had
received for his opinion on Mr. Attlee’s statement3 . He said there were the Congress
and the League, not to mention other associations, which would express authoritative
opinions. He would however permit himself to say that the statement had put the
burden on the various parties of doing what they thought best. It had declared that
British rule would end before or during the month of June, 1948. It was up to the
parties to make or mar the situation. Nothing on earth could overturn their united
wish. And so far as he was concerned, he was emphatically of the opinion that if the
Hindus and Muslims closed their ranks and came together without external pressure,
they would not only better their political condition but they would affect the whole of
India and probably the world.
It was an easy descent to what was uppermost in the mind of his audience
composed mostly of Namasudras. He warned them against considering
themselves as fallen or untouchables. Those so-called higher castes were the guilty
ones; they were responsible for what they had become. If they realized the fact, they
would never make the mistake of imitating the evil customs and habits of the higher
classes.
He was sorry to hear that there were child-marriages amongst them and that
child-widows were compelled in imitation of the higher castes to abstain from
remarrying. The result, he had learned, was that diseases which resulted from
promiscuity were prevalent among them. Their betterment would not come from the
legislatures or from any other outside agency. It depended on their own efforts. they
should remember what the late Malaviyaji3 used to say, that children of God should
confine themselves to earning an honest cowrie and eat what it could procure. Then
there would be happiness for them and untouchability would be a thing of the past.
1

Extracted from “Gandhiji’s Walking Tour Diary”
Vide Appendix I.
3
Madan Mohan Malaviya (1861-1946); President, Indian National Congress,
1909 and 1918; Member, Legislative Assembly; founder of the Benares Hindu
University and its Vice-Chancellor from 1919 to 1939
2

38

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The higher castes so called would be ashamed of their sin against them.

Bapu pointed out the destruction that had been wrought. He was sorry for it but
he would not shed a tear for it nor harbour ill will against the destroyers. Let them not
bewail their lot. They were used to hard labour or should be. They might plead with
the Government to do justice and that in time. But they would not give in if that
assistance did not come. They must trust their hands and feet to set them up again in
life. God always helped those who helped themselves. Their reliance must be on the
living God and on the ever-toiling masses.

Harijan, 16-3-1947

43. FROM THE DIARY
February 24, 1947
After the morning prayer, tried to study the outline of Bengali
numeral one and to improve the outline of the second numeral. Next
struggled unsuccessfully for about ten minutes to understand the
distinction between nio and nao (future imperative and present
indicative respectively of the Bengali verb ‘take’). In the meantime
Manu brought orange juice. Put the same question to her. She too
failed to give a satisfactory explanation. That accounted for another
ten minutes. Sent for Nirmalbabu. Put the poser to him in turn. He
fared a little better but in the end he, too, gave up perplexed. In
between he handed Sardar Gill’s file. That started a conversation
about Gill. This went on till 6·35. Wrote a letter to A. Then lay down
to rest for about ten minutes; got up at 7·25, inspected the trench
latrine and set out on the day’s march.
Mahatma Gandhi—Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, pp. 200-1

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

39

44. TELEGRAM TO KEDARNATH KULKARNI
HAIMCHAR,

[On or after Feburary 24, 1947] 1
NATHJI
S HANTIKUNJ NAIGAM
C ROSS R OAD, D ADAR
BOMBAY-14
READ

YOUR

LETTER

MISSTATEMENTS.
EXIST

BETWEEN

YOU

CAN

TO

HEALTH

WITH

OBSERVE

ATTENTION.
THAT

US.

IT

NEVERTHELESS

CONVENIENTLY
OWING

CONTAINS

WIDE

AND
LONG

DIFFERENCES
COME

IF

WITHOUT
AND

INJURY
TIRESOME

JOURNEY. 2

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

45. TELEGRAM TO KISHORELAL MASHRUWALA
HAIMCHAR,

[On or after February 24, 1947] 3
YOUR

WIRE.

SENT

LONG

WIRE

NATHJI.

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Muesum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

Gandhiji was in Haimchar from February 24 to March 2, 1947.
The addressee, along with Swami Anand, came to Bihar on March 14 and held
discussion with Gandhiji on March 15 and 16; vide “Discussion with Swami Anand
and Kedar Nath”, 15/16-3-1947
3
Vide the peceding item.
2

40

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

46. NOTE TO S. HAQ1
[After February 24, 1947] 2
I have your note. I am a simple man, no reader of visions. “Fear
God and no other and love your neighbour as thyself” is my motto.2
From a photostat: C. W. 10231. Courtesy: Basant Apte. Also G. N. 11398

47. LETTER TO MAHENDRA PRATAP
KAZIRKHIL,
R AMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,

February 25, 1947
DEAR RAJA SAHEB,

I have your wire. You are probably almost right not for the
argument you have used but for deeper reasons. I have advisedly used
the adverbs ‘probably’ and ‘almost’.
Yours sincerely,

R AJA MAHENDRA P RATAP
BRINDABAN
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

48. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
February 25, 1947
DEAR DAUGHTER,

Your two letters are lying with me. Owing to heavy work I was
not able to write to you. Even this I am writing very early in the
morning.
I have read your Bengali letter. I had a talk with Satis Babu 3 .
1

The addressee in a letter in Bengali dated February 24, 1947, had written to
Gandhiji about a dream in which he had seen Gandhiji preaching Islam.
2
This is followed by the instruction “Render this into Bengali and I shall sign
it.”
3
Satis Chandra Das Gupta

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

41

You do not need money. This is not Borkamta.1 Who are the spinners?
Are they Hindus or Muslims? You have made no mistake in breaking
the fast.2 God alone knows if you have not got a new birth. If you can
come just for a day in a jeep, do come. I will explain to you what you
have to do. Satis Babu can bring you. I will be in Haimchar for six
days. Don’t be in a hurry. Come if you can stand the strain. I will
explain fully. But don’t mind if you do not like to travel by jeep. In
that case I will write and tell you what I wish to say. Jeep is also a
temptation. I do not want to lure you into it.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
The dhoti that you have sent is very good. I wore it
immediately. Today also I am wearing it. My blessings to the weavers.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 579

49. QUESTION BOX
[February 25, 1947] 3
Q. What is the difference between your non-co-operation and the nonfraternization of the Allies?

A. The answer is obvious. My non-co-operation was purely nonviolent in conception as also in effect. This does not mean that its
practice was always perfect. Theory and practice hardly ever coincide
even as Euclid’s line in practice never coincides with his theoretical
definition.
The non-fraternization policy of the Allies led to disastrous
results which he who runs may see, and the pity of it is that the disaster
is not yet completed. No one knows where it will lead to.
Harijan, 16-3-1947, and The Hindu, 27-2-1947
1

The addressee had worked in the Kasturba Seva Mandir, Borkamta from 1944
to 1946.
2
Amtussalaam who had been working in Noakhali from October 1946, had
undertaken a fast for the return of the sacrificial swords to Hindus. She broke her fast
on January 20, the twenty-fifth day of the fast, on Gandhiji’s advice. Vide “Speech at
Prayer Meeting”, 21-1-1947
3
From The Hindu

42

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

50. TALK WITH DEB NATH DAS1
February 25, 1947
Netaji will remain immortal for all time to come for his services
to India.
The Hindu, 27-2-1947
2

51. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING3
HAIMCHAR,

February 25, 1947
Unity between Hindus and Muslims is the first thing to be
achieved to facilitate the work of village reconstruction and no work
will be done without this.
Gandhiji said that instead of making schemes of great projects they should
start in a humble way the construction of good roads for peasants and destruction of
water hyacinths in tanks. Cleanliness was the one thing necessary in villages in
order to prevent diseases. If the officers engaged in village uplift task wanted to work
in co-operation with the people they must let the latter know that they were their
servants. Concluding, Gandhiji said that as he was a servant of the people he would be
glad to render all possible help in this regard.

Amrita Bazar Patrika, 28-2-1947

52. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING4
HAIMCHAR,

February 25, 1947
Gandhiji drew the attention of the audience to the meeting5 he was invited to
attend by the Relief Commissioner, Nurannabi Chowdhury. He asked them to follow
the advice he had given without waiting to know what others would do. He said that he
1
Secretary, Indian National Army Peace Committee. He met Gandhiji in the
morning and apprised him of the work done by the Peace Committee camps in
Tipperah and Noakhali.
2
Subhas Chandra Bose (1897-1945); General Secretary of Indian National
Congress, 1927, its President, 1938 and 1939; founded All-India Forward Bloc;
organized the Indian Independence League and the Indian National Army
3
Held in the afternoon on the grounds of Haimchar Bazar, the meeting was
arranged by the Rehabilitation Commissioner, Chittagong Division.
4
Extracted from “Gandhiji’s Walking Tour Diary”
5
Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

43

wanted the Kingdom of God on earth. Surely we did not want to wait for anyone else to
do so.
Then he dealt with the questions that were addressed to him.
Q. Do you not think that a strict enforcement of the purdah system would
improve the moral condition of women?

A. He was warned by some Muslim critics against speaking on the purdah. He
had therefore some hesitation in speaking about it. But he took heart when he turned
round and saw that many Hindu women observed it and that numerous Malaya Muslim
women among whom he had many friends did not observe the purdah. He also knew
many distinguished Muslim women of India who did not observe it. Lastly, the real
purdah was of the heart. A woman who peeped through the purdah and contemplated a
male on whom her gaze fell violated the spirit behind it. If a woman observed it in
spirit, she was truly carrying out what the great Prophet had said.
Q. To those who had lost all their trade your advice is that they should
voluntarily turn themselves into labourers. Who will then look after education,
commerce and the like? If you thus dissolve the division of labour, will not the cause
of civilization suffer?

A. The question betrayed ignorance of his meaning. If a man could not carry on
his original mercantile business, it was not open to him but obligatory on him to
take to physical labour, say, scavenging or breaking stones. He believed in the
division of labour or work. But he did insist on equality of wages. The lawyer, the
doctor, or the teacher was entitled to no more than the Bhangi. Then only would
division of work uplift the nation or the earth. There was no other royal road to true
civilization or happiness.
Spirit giveth life, the letter killeth. A Ganapati with an elephant’s head was a
monster but as a representation of Om1 was an uplifting symbol. Ravana with ten
heads was a fabled fool but if it meant a man who carried no head about him and was
tossed to and fro by fleeting passions, he was a many-headed demon.
Q. How can the caste Hindus look after the interests of the untouchables? How
can they realize the feelings of the classes who have suffered so long at their hands?
Is it not then better to entrust the interests of the untouchables to men of their own
caste?
A. He was of the opinion that the caste Hindus owed a sacred duty to the socalled untouchables. He must become a Bhangi in name and action. When that
happened the untouchables would rise at a bound and Hinduism would leave a rich
legacy to the world. If that happened, the system of cleaning closets would undergo a
transformation. In England the real Bhangis were famous engineers and sanitarians.
That could not happen in India so long as society was sluggish and slothful.

Harijan, 23-3-1947
1

44

The sacred syllable or Pranava

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

53. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
February [26] 1 , 1947
The last week of March next is at present for me a far cry. If
God wills He will find a way for me to attend the Conference.2
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. II, p. 89

54. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
HAIMCHAR,

February 26, 1947
Referring to the news about the Union Government’s refusal of passports and
impounding the certificates of identity for Drs. Dadoo and Naicker, Gandhiji said:

The Union Government will not be able to sustain their antiAsiatic policy by such an action.
He added that the action was wholly unwarranted and arbitrary if the facts stated
in the cablegram he had received in this connection were correct.3
Gandhiji hoped that either there were some justifying peremptory reasons for
the refusal and impounding or that second thoughts would convince the Government
that it was a hasty step and therefore it would be cancelled.

Amrita Bazar Patrika, 28-2-1947

55. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING4
HAIMCHAR,

February 26, 1947
Q. When things are all going wrong at the Centre, what can common people do
to restore unity?
A. There was a law of science which enunciated that two forces were
simultaneously at work: the centripetal and the centrifugal. He wanted to apply the
law to life also. The centre, therefore, of the Government attracted us all to it and in
good government we would respond to that centripetal force. Similar was the
centrifugal force in obedience to which we, the villagers of Haimchar, attracted the
1
The source has “6”, obviously a slip, since this letter was in reply to the
addressee’s letter dated February 24, soliciting Gandhiji’s presence at the Inter-Asian
Relations Conference which was to be held in New Delhi from March 23.
2
Gandhiji ultimately did attend the Conference on April 1 and 2.
3
Vide footnote 3, “Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru”, 24-2-1947
4
Extracted from “Gandhiji’s Walking Tour Diary”

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

45

centre. Thus, where these forces worked well there would be ordered and orderly
government at the centre and the circumference. When, however, the centre was going
wrong, it should be pointless to dominate the seven hundred thousand villages. On
the other hand, the villagers would live in perfect amity if they were wise in leaving
alone the centre to look after its so-called high politics?
Q. A man who sacrifices self-interest for the sake of his community is at least
unselfish to that extent. How can the heart of such a man be affected so that he will
sacrifice communal interests for the interest of the nation?
A. A man whose spirit of sacrifice did not go beyond his own community
became selfish himself and also made his community selfish. In his opinion the
logical conclusion of self-sacrifice was that the individual sacrificed himself for the
community, the community sacrificed itself for the district, the district for the
province, the province for the nation and the nation for the world. A drop torn from
the ocean perished without doing any good. If it remained a part of the ocean, it
shared the glory of carrying on its bosom a fleet of mighty ships.
Q. In free India whose interest shall be supreme? If a neighbouring State is in

want, what should free India do?
A. Gandhiji said that the first part of the question had been answered in the

above. A truly independent free India was bound to run to the help of its neighbours in
distress. He instanced Afghanistan, Ceylon and Burma and said that the rule also
applied to the neighbours of these three and thus, by implication, they became
India’s neighbours too. And thus, he said, if individual sacrifice was a living
sacrifice, it embraced the whole of humanity.1
Gandhiji gave to his ideal society the name Ramarajya.

Let no one commit the mistake of thinking that Ramarajya
means a rule of the Hindus. My Rama is another name for Khuda or
God. I want Khudai raj, which is the same thing as the Kingdom of
God on earth.
The rule of the first four Caliphs was somewhat comparable to
it. The establishment of such a rajya would not only mean welfare of
the whole of the Indian people but of the whole world.
Harijan, 23-3-1947, and Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, pp.
189-90

1

46

What follows is reproduced from Mahatma Gandhi — The Last Phase.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

56. TELEGRAM TO SUDHIR GHOSH
February 27, 1947
S UDHIR GHOSH
1 AURANGZEB R OAD
NEW DELHI
GOD

BE

YOU. 1

WITH

BAPU
Sudhir Ghosh Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Also
Gandhi’s Emissary, p. 200

57. TELEGRAM TO SYED MAHMUD
Express

February 27, 1947

MINISTER S YED MAHMUD
P ATNA
YOUR
WROTE

WIRE.

NECESSARY
COME
LOVE

NEWSPAPER
BABU2

SHRI

IN
EVEN

TO

STAY

IF

ANNOUNCEMENT

YOU

ALL

INTERESTS
EARLIER
WITH

CONSIDER

INJURED
THAN

YOU

UNLESS

UNAUTHORISED.
MY

PARTY
EIGHTEENTH.
YOU

PRESENCE
PREPARED

ALL

WOULD
DESIRE

OTHERWISE. 3

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1
The addressee had been appointed Public Relations Officer at the Indian High
Commission in London.
2
Vide “Letter to Secretary, Muslim League”, 28-4-1947
3
Late in February Gandhiji received a report from Dr. Syed Mahmud, Minister
for Development and Transport, Bihar saying that the situation in Bihar was indeed
serious and required his personal attention; vide also “Speech at Prayer Meeting”,
28-2-1947

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

47

58. LETTER TO LUDWIG BORSCH
KAZIRKHIL,
R AMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,
BENGAL,

February 27, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter of the 11th ultimo.1 Distance lends
enchantment to the scene. I would, therefore, warn you against visiting
India for the enrichment of your life. Life, as it is found in India, is
wholly different from the life described in the best books on ancient
wisdom in the East. I wish I could give you definite guidance on the
selection of your diet. We in India, not excluding myself, have learnt
much from English and American literature on the diet question. The
ordinary Indian diet is unbalanced and is heavily spiced. Therefore, I
would advise you to consult the many American and English textbooks written on vegetarianism and more especially on the kind
ofdiet. You will gain much more than I could give from this literature
if you used discretion.
LUDWIG BORSCH, E SQ.
66 T ENIMORE S TREET
BROOKLYN
NEW YORK
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

59. LETTER TO PYARELAL
February 27, 1947
CHI. PYARELAL,

I have your two letters. If you send me the prescription for Satis
Babu and anything else that is required, I shall do the needful. Pay the
doctors fee if it must be paid. But you must know the way I feel, the
way I acted in Bihar. Let us render such help as we can and be
content. What you are doing for Kalu Mian is an ideal thing in my
view. We should provide him personal service, give him proper diet
and be content with that. For that purpose, a doctor is not needed. I
1

In which the addressee had expressed his desire to visit India “to find and
learn about those things, which in the material-minded West one regarded with a sort
of pitying contempt” and sought Gandhiji’s advice on diet.

48

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

followed this practice in Champaran from beginning to end. The
doctors and the teachers were Ba, Durga, Manibehn Parikh, etc. It was
very impressive and very rewarding. This is just to suggest what in my
view would be the ideal thing.
I am convinced your good lies in controlling your desire to
come. A.S. and Kanu arrived yesterday. I shall send the letter you
have asked for. There is no hurry about it. Kanu and A.S. will also
read it.
What you have written about Harijan is correct. It all depends
on what Sardar finally does. It is hardly possible that he will now run
it independently. But if he does, we shall remove your name. We have
so far entirely depended on our sadhana, particularly mine. I am
without fear. I am unconcerned. But it irks me that I have not yet
cultivated non-attachment to the extent I should have. But in the end
there must be the grace of God behind human effort. Without that,
human effort is futile.
If Kalu Mian feels hot in the soles, I know the usefulness of a
mud-pack. I think it should be used.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I received another letter just while this was going. It is a
lovelyletter. I have not been able to read the account of your activities
and the lesson for Manu. I shall arrange to send the letter which you
are so eager to read. I had completely forgotten what you wrote about
Rajaji. If you write a letter about it and send it to me, I shall send it on
to him. You can write to anyone from among Rajaji, Kishorelal,
Narharibhai, Jajuji, etc. Do not worry at all about my health. Should
not a person having faith in God be free from worry?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

60. TALK WITH FAZLUL HUQ
February 27, 1947
GANDHIJI: Oh, don’t stand up. You were the Chief Minister when
I met you last !
HUQ: I shall be frank with you. It is no use saying one thing and having

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

49

something else up your sleeve.
Gandhiji nodded complete agreement.
The Maulvi Saheb began: Gandhiji had not gone to Bihar; his place was in
Bihar rather than in Noakhali; Noakhali Muslims, far from being aggressors, were the
victims of police repression. Hindu police officers were harassing innocent Muslims
and implicating them in false cases—they should be withdrawn; Muslims were not
criminals, abductors of women, etc.; Islam never taught that.
Gandhiji again agreed so far as the teachings of Islam in the abstract were
concerned.
HUQ: Very few understand Islam. They call it the religion of the sword. The

minorities in the Muslim State were the special responsibility of the majority. The
non-Muslims were zimmis. 1
The Maulvi Saheb’s last point was that far from the Hindus having cause to be
afraid of the Muslim majority in Noakhali, it was the latter, in fact, who were afraid of
Hindu domination. The Hindus should shed their fear and accept Pakistan. His
Majesty’s Government’s statement2 of 20th February, 1947, would only bring civil
war to India.
G. (In a tone of light banter): So, if I come to Barisal, there is
only the khal3 for me, is it not?
HUQ: No, no, Mahatmaji, you are always welcome. That was only a joke. I
never can let go a joke—even at the expense of my father. That is my nature !

Gandhiji said that he had always asked Jinnah to convince him of the meaning
and implications of Pakistan. His formula4 was before the Muslim League leader and
the country and so far as he was concerned the offer still stood. As regards withdrawal
of criminal cases, it rested with the Bengal Government. Regarding Bihar, he
continued:

I may shortly go there. But it will not be to oblige you.
He was awaiting Dr. Mahmud’s5 reply, he told the Maulvi Saheb, but if the
latter could assure him that the majority community in Noakhali would stand
guarantee for the safety and security of the minority community, he would feel free to
leave Bengal immediately. Could he give that assurance?
To this the Maulvi Saheb gave no straight reply. Instead, he bagan to talk
1

Who were required to pay a tax called jazia for protection by the State
Vide “Clement Attlee’s Statement”, 20-2-1947
3
A canal. Fazlul Huq was reported to have said that as a non-Muslim, Gandhiji
should not preach the teachings of Islam, for, instead of Hindu-Muslim unity, he was
creating bitterness between the two communities. Had he been to Barisal, he would
have driven him into the canal. Vide “Speech at Prayer Meeting”, 16-2-1947
4
Presumably the Rajaji Formula. Vide “C. Rajagopalachari’s Formula”
5
Syed Mahmud, Minister for Development and Transport in Bihar
2

50

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

about a coalition Government in Bengal as the only remedy for Bengal’s ills!
At this point one of Fazlul Huq’s companions broke in: “I was a worker in the
Khilafat movement1 ; you were the first leader who taught me politics.”
G. If you had taken your politics off me, you would have given a
much better account of yourself.
G. (TO HUQ): What is this quarrel between you and Suhrawardy? I
do not like it.

But the Maulvi Saheb again avoided the issue and talked instead of his
profession and his chronic trouble—lack of finance! Gandhiji thereupon twitted him
for his spendthrift nature and sent him away laughing.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, pp. 250-2

61. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING 2
HAIMCHAR,

February 27, 1947
Q. Can a man serve his immediate neighbours and yet serve the whole of

humanity? What is the true meaning of swadeshi?
A. Gandhiji said that the question had been answered by him on the previous

evening. 3 He believed implicity in the truth that a man could serve his neighbours and
humanity at the same time, the condition being that the service of the neighbours was
in no way selfish or exclusive, i.e., did not in any way involve the exploitation of
any other human being. The neighbours would then understand the spirit in which
such service was given. They would also know that they would be expected to give
their services to their neighbours. Thus considered, it would spread like the
proverbial snowball gathering strength in geometrical progression, encircling the
whole earth.
It followed that swadeshi was that spirit which dictated man to serve his nextdoor neighbour to the exclusion of any other. The condition that he had already
1

Which was launched in 1919 “against the threatened dismemberment of
Turkey and removal of the holy places of Islam from the Caliph’s control”
2
According to “Gandhiji’s Walking Tour Diary” from which this has been
extracted, Gandhiji offered prayers in a temple which was destroyed during the riots
and was rebuilt by the Government. The idol in the temple, however, eescaped
destruction because the resourceful priest had put it away in a safe place. Gandhiji
hoped that the old and rusty tins used in rebuilding the temple would be painted so as
to prevent further deterioration.
3
Vide “Speech at Prayer Meeting”, 26-2-1947

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

51

mentioned was that the neighbour thus served had in his turn to serve his own
neighbour. In this sense swadeshi was never exclusive. It recognized the scientific
limitation of human capacity for service.
Q. The Government has been introducing schemes of industrializing the

country for the maximum utilization of her raw materials, not of her abundant and
unused man-power which is left to rot in idleness. Can such schemes be considered
swadeshi?
A. Gandhiji remarked that the question had been well put. He did not exactly

know what the Government plan was. But he heartily endorsed the proposition that
any plan which exploited the raw materials of a country and neglected the potentially
more powerful man-power was lopsided and could never tend to establish human
equality.
America was the most industrialized country in the world and yet it had not
banished poverty and degradation. That was because it neglected the universal manpower and concentrated power in the hands of the few who amassed fortunes at the
expense of the many. The result was that its industrialization had become a menace to
its own poor and to the rest of the world.
If India was to escape such disaster, it had to imitate what was best in America
and the other Western countries and leave aside its attractive-looking but destructive
economic policies. Therefore, real planning consisted in the best utilization of the
whole man-power of India and the distribution of the raw products of India in her
numerous villages instead of sending them outside and rebuying finished articles at
fabulous prices.
After the questions had been answered, Gandhiji touched upon the fact that he
had a visit from some members of the Scheduled Classes. He had told them that his
mission was to teach people how to be really brave. They need not be afraid for their
lives because the so-called high-caste men had not yet returned to their places. If they
shed their fear they would have no enemies. The Muslims would be their friends when
they recognized bravery in them. Cowards were ever exposed to the enmity of all,
whether Muslims or others. The way to the attainment of that courage lay not in the
possession of the sword and the efficiency to kill one’s opponent, but in the refusal
to recognize in any other human being an enemy, along with the determination to lay
down one’s life and yet not surrender at the point of the sword.
Gandhiji then referred in detail to some of the abuses current in local society,
like child-marriage, absence of widow-remarriage, etc., which resulted in the lowering
of the moral stature of the people. If they could shed these weaknesses, they would
gain the power to die for their faith and honour.

Harijan, 23-3-1947

52

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

62. TELEGRAM TO SHRIKRISHNA SINHA
[February 28, 1947] 1
DR.

SYED

BIHAR

.

YOU

MAHMUD

.

.

.2

AND

DO

YOU

OTHERS
FEEL

WOULD

LIKEWISE?

LIKE

PLEASE

ME

TO

VISIT

TELL

ME

WHAT

FEEL.

Mahatma Gandhi — The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, p. 253

63. TELEGRAM TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
HAIMCHAR,

T IPPERA DISTT.,

February 28, 1947
MINISTER R AJAGOPALACHARI
NEW DELHI
YOUR

WIRE.

COUNTS
SHORT

NINETEEN

TWENTY

TO

HUNDRED
FORTY.

BALES

PER

PROBABLY

MONTH

GOING

REQUIRED.
BIHAR

FOR

TIME.

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

64. TELEGRAM TO SECRETARY, NATAL INDIAN
CONGRESS
February 28, 1947
S ECRETARY
NICELY
DURBAN
HAVE
VISIT.

MADE

PUBLIC

STATEMENT

SUPPORTING

STEP

ABOUT

ROYAL

3

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1

This was sent the day after Fazlul Huq’s departure, i. e., February 27. Vide
“Speech at Prayer Meeting”, 28-2-1947
2
Omission as in the source.
3
Vide Vol. LXXXII, p. 28.

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

53

65. LETTER TO RAMDASIA MAZHABI SIKH FEDERATION
KAZIRKHIL,
R AMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,

February 28, 1947
DEAR FRIENDS,

I have your letter signed by eleven members of your group. The
names are typed instead of there being original signatures. I must
confess my ignorance of the existence of this group. I do not know
what I can do to remedy the difficulty you complain of. I feel
helpless.
Yours sincerely,

THE R AMDASIA MAZHABI S IKH F EDERATION
THROUGH THE P RESIDENT
MISTRI HARNAM S INGH
P.B. SAMRALA
DISTT. L UDHIANA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

66. LETTER TO BUTT KRISTO PAUL & CO., LTD.
KAZIRKHIL,
R AMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,

February 28, 1947
GENTLEMEN,

I thank you for your prompt attention to my suggestions with
regard to the first-aid box. I have examined the contents of the few
box[es] sent by you. Whilst I was about to send you my considered
opinion Shri Satis Chandra Das Gupta was with me and so I handed
the box to him to examine it and give his expert opinion on the
contents and the make-up of the box. Naturally I cannot hurry him.
He is such a busy man. I will therefore advise you not to multiply the
new pattern and await my considered reply. I have some what I think

54

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

valuable suggestions. But having taken advantage of Satis Babu’s
presence I want to fortify myself with his expert assistance.
Yours sincerely,

BUTT KRISTO P AUL & C O., L TD.
C ALCUTTA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru uemorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

67. LETTER TO A. J. MUSTE
KAZIRKHIL,
R AMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,

February 28, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

Muriel Lester has sent me your letter of the 27th September last
which has remained on my file for some time. She has also given me a
brief description of your selfless labours. How I wish I could send you
some useful suggestions by way of help in what you very rightly term
as crisis ! The aftermath of the last war is in reality much worse than
the war itself if only because its bloodiness is so hidden from view that
man deceives himself into the belief that he is at last safer than when
the war was on.
I wish too that I could give you the assurance that India, when
she has come to her own completely, will not join the race for the
increase of armaments. I can only say that whatever I can do to
prevent any such misfortune will not be left undone.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI

A. J. MUSTE, E SQ.
From a photostat: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

55

68. LETTER TO T. HAYES
KAZIRKHIL,
R AMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,
BENGAL,

February 28, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter1 of the 16th ultimo. I do not know that I can
send you anything useful beyond saying that you should glean my
writings on fasting in the columns of Young India later transformed
into Harijan. Mr. Richard Gregg (The Putney School, Putney,
Vermont, U.S.A.) might be able to help you in getting hold of copies
of this weekly.
Yours sincerely,

ED. T. HAYES, E SQ.
7622 R OBIN R OAD
DALLAS 9, T EXAS, U.S.A.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

69. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
HAIMCHAR,

February 28, 1947
I have received a cablegram from the ex-Natal Indian Congress
which says that the Congress, the Transvaal Indian Congress, the
Coloured People’s Organization and the African National Congress
have decided on their part to refrain from taking part in or in any
manner assisting in the celebrations in honour of the Royal visit to the
Union of South Africa. They feel that in view of the disabilities
imposed upon the Asiatics and Africans and other coloured people it
would be improper on their part to share in the rejoicings of the white
people of South Africa. The cablegram asked me to endorse the
abstention which they describe by the name of “boycott”. I take this
opportunity of publicly endorsing the abstention as a natural and
dignified step by any self-respecting body of people.
The Hindu, 1-3-1947
1
In which the addressee had requested Gandhiji to send him scientific or
spiritual treatise on fasting.

56

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

70. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING 1
HAIMCHAR,

February 28, 1947
Gandhiji took up the thread of his remarks of the previous evening about the
Namasudras. He had no time to refer to the question of education. The blame for the
neglect of education among them must lie solely upon the so-called high-caste
Hindus. It was preposterous to expect that those who were deliberately suppressed by
Hindu society would themselves take to education. What he, however, deplored was
that there were men among them who taught them not to accept good things from the
so-called high-caste Hindus. He was of the opinion that it was mischievous
propaganda. Therefore, he expected the Namasudras to give definite assurance about
land [for school] and the attendance of boys and girls. In that case he had no doubt
that there were enough penitent Hindus who would gladly take up the duty of educating
these neglected children. He invited the Namasudras to send the required assurance to
Thakkar Bapa who might be trusted by them to do the rest and he hoped that there
were enough local Hindus who would offer their money and ability for the
performance of the honourable duty of educating these children.
He then referred to the prospect of his having to go to Bihar and to the
atrocities that had been committed by the Hindus of Bihar before which the
happenings in Noakhali or Tipperah paled into insignificance. He had enough
pressure put upon him by the Muslims in Bengal to go to Bihar. He had refused to
listen to the advice because he had the hope that he could work with equal effect
among the Bihar Hindus without having to go there. But he had a visit from the
secretary of Dr. Syed Mahmud. He had brought a long letter from Dr. Mahmud. They
should know that Dr. Mahmud was a valued friend of his. He was himself Development
Member of the Bihar Ministry. In answer to his question, Dr. Mahmud had written to
him asking him to visit Bihar as soon as he could. He had said that all was not as rosy
as it should be and that his presence in Bihar would ease the situation and reassure the
Muslims that he was equally concerned about the welfare of the Muslims as of the
Hindus. He could not resist Dr. Mahmud’s letter. He had, therefore, sent an urgent
wire2 to Bihar and it was highly likely that he might have to hurry to Bihar. In that
case, he would have to interrupt the tour in Noakhali and Tipperah. But the message
he would leave for the Hindus and Mussalmans here, during the short period he
expected to be absent, was that they should live with one another as brothers. This
they could only do if they shed internal weaknesses and were prepared to lay down
their lives without retaliation for the defence of what they considered sacred.3
1

Extracted from “Gandhiji’s Walking Tour Diary”
Vide”Telegram to Shrikrishna Sinha”, 28-2-1947
3
The following two paragraphs are reproduced from Amrita Bazar Patrika.
2

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

57

Gandhiji said that he was in constant communication with the authorities
concerned on the Bihar situation and had been speaking unequivocally against the
madness of Bihar Hindus. He was sure that he was there where he could serve both the
communities. He had come to Noakhali to serve both the communities and not to
create bitterness between them.
He had come here to create fearlessness among the affected people. He asked
them not to despair and told them that his associates would be working here as usual.
People here must not quarrel among themselves. They must not antagonize Muslims
but they must not also yield to threats. They should rather lay down their lives.
Gandhiji emphatically said that he had decided to go to Bihar, not for the relief of
Muslims, but to effect a change of mentality among the Hindus of Bihar. He hoped
that Hindus and Muslims would live together in amity all over India.
Gandhiji then passed on to a question which had been referred to him that
evening. It was with regard to the partition of Bengal into two pro- vinces, one
having a Hindu and the other a Muslim majority. Bengalis had once fought against
and successfully annulled the partition of their province.1 But according to some, he
proceeded, the time had now come when such a division had become desirable in the
interest of peace. Gandhiji expressed the opinion that personally he had always been
anti-partition. But it was not uncommon even for brothers to fight and separate from
one another. There were many things which India had to put up with in the past under
compulsion, but he himself was built in a totally different way.
In a similar manner, if the Hindus, who formed the majority in the whole of
India, desired to keep everyone united by means of compulsion, he would resist it in
the same manner as before. He was as much against forced partition as against forced
unity.
Gandhiji then proceeded to say that whatever might have been the history of
British rule in the past, there was no shadow of doubt that the British were going to
quit India in the near future. It was time, therefore, that the Hindus and the Muslims
should determine to live in peace and amity. The alternative was civil war which
would only serve to tear the country to pieces. One did not know what the future had in
store for them. If the people really and sincerely, and with a pure heart, wished
unitedly for a particular thing, speaking in human language, it could be said that God,
being the servant of His servants, would Himself carry out that will.
Harijan, 23-3-1947, and Amrita Bazar Patrika, 2-3-1947

1

58

The partition of Bengal in 1905 was annulled in 1911.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

71. A NOTE
February, 1947
Let Nirmal Babu examine my replies for the style as well as the
manner. Are they satisfactory?
From a facsimile: Mahatma, Vol. VII, between pp. 384 and 385

72. NOTE TO DHIRUBHAI B. DESAI 1
[February 1947] 2
Where is Madhuri3 ?
It should be done immediately.
I have never forgotten Bhulabhai’s4 ability. I know that he
entered politics at my instance. The difference which arose
between us was one of love. There are innumerable people who drink.
There are many such in the Congress, too, and I could say nothing to
them. But Bhulabhai’s addiction pained me and I told him about it.
Afterwards he even wept before me. I could not bear his being a slave
to the drink habit. And it was with him that I first discussed the matter.
Let me tell you that I had a great share in his being taken up on the
Working Committee. I had to fight for his inclusion. I was behind his
inclusion in the Constitution Committee also. Need I say more? I also
knew about the proposal to appoint you ambassador. Calm down and
acquit yourself well in your job with patience and self-control. Send
me Madhuri’s book.
[From Gujarati]
Bhulabhai Desai Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

1

Son of Bhulabhai Desai
The note is written on the reverse side of a letter dated “February 1947”.
3
Addressee’s wife
4
(1877-1946); eminent lawyer; member, Liberal Party; joined Congress in
1930; Leader of Congress Party in Central Assembly
2

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

59

73. LETTER TO H. S. SUHRAWARDY
KAZIRKHIL,
R AMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,

March 1, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

I hope you heard from the S.D.O. Chandpur, Tipperah District
that I am endeavouring to leave for Bihar tomorrow. I wish I could
say that I am trying to go because of your pressing advice to Fazlul
Haq Sahib who spoke publicly the other day and repeated the same
thing, though very courteously, on Thursday last when he was good
enough to call on me. The memorandum of Sardar Niranjan Singh
Gill about which I wrote to you on February 22, had predisposed me
towards a temporary visit to Bihar. What decided me however was a
long letter from Dr. Syed Mahmud who has sent it with his Private
Secretary. In order to come to a final decision I sent a peremptory
message yesterday through the good offices of Khan Sahib, the
S.D.O. of Chandpur, asking whether the Bihar Chief Minister had any
objection to my immediately proceeding to Patna. The reply may be
received any minute. If I go I would like you to give me hints as to
what I should see. The desire to go has arisen because suspicion has
been created in my mind that all is not well in Bihar so far as the
Hindu behaviour towards the Muslims of Bihar is concerned. The
cause in either case, in Bihar or Bengal, is identical.
There was consternation among the Hindus yesterday when I
announced my intention of immediately proceeding to Bihar. They
said they were afraid of being molested as in October. I hope that the
fear will prove groundless and that you will do all you can to allay the
fear. It is said that all aid in the shape of rations will be stopped from
the 15th instant. If this information turns out to be true there would be
widespread avoidable distress. The machinery provided for relief is
very slow.
Sufficient material for building is not there. Weavers have got
no yarn for weaving. Fishermen have got none for making nets.
Carpenters have got no tools. Agriculturists have no bullocks. There
are no seeds for sowing. Thakkar Bapa mentioned the difficuly of
merchants in Haimchar for a loan in order to enable them to start
business. He has prepared an application to be sent to you. It makes a

60

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

business like proposition. I should have thought that people who have
lost their all would be entitled to adequate grants for starting business.
On the contrary, however, he offers even interest if it is required for
the loan he proposed. I hope there will be no delay in granting the
loan. I would strongly urge that interest should not be asked in such
cases.
There is a strong belief that there is boycott by the Muslims of
Hindus so far as labour for them is concerned. Of course I have said
that no government can compel any community to labour for
another. Critics have no difficulty in agreeing to my proposition
against compulsion. They however suggest that boycott is approved,
even encouraged, by your Government. I hope that my information is
wholly wrong.
I am leaving a copy of this letter with Satis Babu of Khadi
Pratishthan who is at present stationed at Kazirkhil and who will
represent me during my absence which I hope will be only temporary
and will be attended by success. Though my absence will be
temporary, I cannot omit to mention that so far as I am personally
concerned, the whole of the official world has been courteous and
considerate to me and in this mention I include the police whom you
have put to guard my person.
H. S. S UHRAWARDY S AHIB
P RIME MINISTER
BENGAL
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

74. LETTER TO ALI HUSAIN 1
March 1, 1947
I am surprised at your asking me to condemn the Bihar Ministry
unheard. I am ashamed that at this time of day you should think of
the application of Section 93. There are many honourable ways of
exposing the corruption no matter where it exists. The application of
Section 93 is not among them.
Mahatma Gandhi — The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, pp. 248-9
1
This was in reply to the addressee’s letter dated February 18, 1947, which
read : “To save Bihar from further calamity I hope you will have the courage to declare
that the Bihar Ministry should be dismissed, Section 93 be applied, and the present
Governor may also be changed with this corrupt Ministry.”

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

61

75. INTERVIEW TO WORLD YOUTH DELEGATION 1
March 1, 1947
Gandhiji told the World Youth Delegation that youth in India was influenced
by foreign ideologies too much. They had no living contact with the real life of India.

The Hindu, 3-3-1947

76. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING2
HAIMCHAR,

March 1, 1947
Gandhiji said that he would try to cover Bajpati also on his return. 3 He could
not fix the time. He was not leaving Noakhali or Tipperah without the establishment
of heart unity. There was time for satisfying all reasonable expectations.

I hope to leave for Bihar tomorrow afternoon. I will leave
Haimchar at about three in the afternoon. I will go to Calcutta and
from there proceed to Bihar.4
He did not expect to stay there long. He would not be able to hold the prayer
meeting [tomorrow] in Haimchar but would like to have it in Chandpur.
Q. You have referred to numerous social abuses prevalent among us. They are

there; but then if the men are unwilling to effect the necessary social changes what
can we women do about it?
A. Gandhiji said that there was no occasion for women to consider themselves

subordinate or inferior to men. It was proclaimed that woman was half of man and by
parity of reasoning man was half of woman. They were not two separate entities but
halves of one. The English language went further and called woman the better half of
man. Therefore, he advised women to resort to civil rebellion against all undesirable
and unworthy restraints. All restraints to be beneficial, must be voluntary. There was
no possibility of harm resulting from civil rebellion. It presupposed purity and a
reasoned resistance.
Q. Those who have lost their dear ones, or the homes which they built up
1
The members of the delegation had asked Gandhiji the reason for differences
in the youth movement in India.
2
Extracted from “Gandhiji’s Walking Tour Diary”
3
People from Bajpati had complained that Bajpati had been dropped from
Gandhiji’s programme.
4
This paragraph is from Amrita Bazar Patrika.

62

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

through years of patient care, find it extremely difficult to forgive and forget. How
can they get over that feeling and look upon the community from which the
miscreants came with a feeling of brotherhood?
A. The speaker said the one way to forget and forgive was to contem- plate
Bihar which had done much worse than Noakhali and Tipperah. Did they want the
Muslims to take dire vengeance for the Hindu atrocities there? They could not. From
this they should learn to forget and forgive, if they did not wish to descend to the
lowest depths of barbarity. Moreover, they must not harbour an inferiority complex.
They should be brave. And forgiveness was an attribute and adornment of bravery. Let
them be truly brave. True bravery refused to strike; it would suffer all infliction with
patient cheerfulness. That would be the truest way of disarming opposition.
Q. Speaking about the proposed partition of Bengal, one of the proposals is
that there should be only two separate administrative divisions without any exchange
of populations taking place. This arrangement would keep each community in its
place in peace. What is your objection to such a proposal?
A. Gandhiji considered two administrative divisions to be as impracticable as
exchange of populations. That would result in an armed neutrality which was bound to
kill all healthy growth. The leaders of both the communities must come together as
friends and reduce their differences and suffer them. Any other way was the way of
barbarism and subordination to a third power.
Harijan, 23-3-1947, and Amrita Bazar Patrika, 4-3-1947

77. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
CHANDPUR,
March 2, 1947
1

CHI. SATIS BABU,

I had a long talk with Sardar Jiwan Singhji2 . If you think that his
men are really required for service wanted, you should discuss the
thing with him and do what you wish. If in your opinion they are not
really required, you should pay them out to date plus Rs. 30 each for
passage to their destination. Sardarji will show you the detailed
[expen]diture3 . He himself proposes to render service in every case.
His case can be considered separately on my return or even by
correspondence.
Blessings from
BAPU4
From a photostat: G. N. 8717
1
2
3
4

The superscription is in the Devanagari script.
Of the Indian National Army. Vide p. 36.
The source is damaged here.
The subscription is in Hindi.

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

63

78. NOTE TO MANU GANDHI
March 2, 1947
Bapa was pleased with you in Haimchar. He spoke to me about
it. But what pleased me particularly was that, during my week’s stay
there, I could convince1 him in regard to many things and he revised
many of his views. He is a man of great self-sacrifice and humility.
Didn’t you observe that during all these days he took some of my
time only on one day? On the other days he didn’t come at all to take
my time. Such is his consideration for others. He is a class by himself.
If he realizes that he has made a mistake, he corrects it immediately
without the slightest hesitation. I also felt happy that you could be of
some service to him. That is why I encouraged you in your attempt. I
have still to read the last two days’ entries in your diary. Leave it with
me tomorrow. I will go through it in the morning after prayer.
[From Gujarati]
Eklo Jane Re, p. 181

79. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING2
CHANDPUR,
March 2, 1947
Gandhiji explained why he had to interrupt his work in East Bengal and hurry
to Bihar. He had turned a deaf ear to pressing requests made to him by the Bengal
Premier and Mr. Fazlul Huq to go to Bihar.

Their statements could not find an echo in my heart. I had
flattered myself with the belief that I would be able to affect the Bihar
Hindus from my place in Bengal. But Dr. Syed Mahmud has sent his
secretary to me with a long letter which showed me that I should go to
Bihar for the sake of the Muslims of Bihar.3
He expected to return to his chosen scene of service — Noakhali — as soon as
1

Vide “Discussion with A. V. Thakkar”, 24-2-1947
This was Gandhiji’s last prayer meeting in East Bengal and was attended by
over 30,000 people.
3
The following paragraph is reproduced from Mahatma Gandhi — The Last
Phase.
2

64

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

possible. Dr. Mahmud’s secretary had said they would not detain him for more than a
fortnight. Meanwhile Gandhiji hoped that the Muslims would belie the fears of the
Hindu refugees that they would not be allowed to live in peace.
Gandhiji, in conclusion, appealed to Hindus and Muslims to live in peace as
brothers and friends and exhorted the officials and the police to conduct themselves in
such a way that the public would look upon them as their friends and servants who by
their selfless service and tact helped the communities to act as friends.
The Hindu, 4-3-1947, and Mahatma Gandhi — The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II,
p. 255

80. NOTE TO JIWAN SINGH1
March 2, 1947
I do not want to lose you personally.2
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, p. 255

81. A NOTE
[March 2/3, 1947] 3
You should see to it that all who are on the steamer on our
account pay the legitimate fare and expenses. Either they pay the
Government or we collect and send. It looks ugly if we all travel free.4
Show it to Nirmal Babu. Let Mridulabehn5 also see it.
From a facsimile: Mahatma, Vol. VII, between pp. 384 and 385

1
According to the source Gandhiji’s party boarded the steamer at 9.30 p. m.
Col. Jiwan Singh was the last to take leave. His contingent of the I. N. A. could not
fit into Satis Chandra Das Gupta’s scheme. As Gandhiji scribbled out his orders that
he should send away his men, Jiwan Singh felt hurt and unhappy, thinking it was a
sort of dismissal for him. He was about to bid good-bye with a heavy heart when
Gandhiji wrote this note on another slip of paper. Vide also “Letter to Satis Chandra
Das Gupta”, 2-3-1947
2
The addressee stayed on in Noakhali even after Gandhiji’s death.
3
From the reference to the steamer. Gandhiji boarded it at Chandpur on March
2 and reached Goalando the next day.
4
What follows is in Gujarati.
5
Mridula Sarabhai, daughter of Ambala Sarabhai

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

65

82. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
ON THE S TEAMER FROM C HANDPUR,

March 3, 1947
CHI. VALLABHBHAI,

I got your letter yesterday in Chandpur. I am not happy about
your ailment getting worse. It was possible to check it in the past and
it may be so still. If you do not think much of Dinshaw1 , I have other
[naturopaths] in view. But who can persuade you? You always do what
you like. Do you realize how many people are dependent on you?
I understand about Sudhir. There was a wire from him. . . .2
I may not be able to convince you about the necessity of my
work here, but I am sure it is of the utmost importance.
I leave today for Bihar. There was a letter from . . . 3 and now
there is another from Dr. Mahmud. Both are shocking and so I am
going. You are all stalwarts there and carrying on the work. In these
parts I am something of a giant among pigmies. So let me remain
here. If anything is accomplished, it will benefit the country. If
nothing can be done, nothing will be lost.
I was pained to hear about Dr. Kanuga’s illness. We should
learn to live as God ordains.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
BAPUna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 350

1
2
3

66

Dinshaw K. Mehta
Omissions as in the source

ibid

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

83. TELEGRAM TO J. B. KRIPALANI
CALCUTTA,
March 3, 1947
ACHARYA J. B. KRIPALANI
P RESIDENT, C ONGRESS
NEW DELHI
YOUR

WIRE 1 .

REGRET

INABILITY.

SEND

MESSENGER

BIHAR.

BAPU
From the original: A. I. C. C. File, 1946-48. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

84. LETTER TO PYARELAL
March 3, 1947
CHI. PYARELAL,

I have your letter. You are unnecessarily worrying yourself. One
for whom Ramanama is the unfailing cure would not beget [problems
of] blood-pressure and would not hear the drumming noise in his
ears. However, if both these do occur, he would bear them patiently
and die while doing so. I have no doubt about the truth of this point. I
do get [high] blood-pressure and get buzzing in the ears. This shows
that I should depend on Ramanama rather than take medicines,
thinking that Ramanama is not serving any purpose. It is true that this
is not easily done. In the matter of the sacred task here, we should
have recourse only to Ramanama. Even so, I did take sarpagandha
yesterday. I do have doubts about its efficacy. My duty is to die in
peace if it is necessary to die. Why should you be disturbed when I
die? You should work harder in that event. I still hope to recover only
with the help of Ramanama. But if I have ceased to be of any use, it
would be best to go.
I liked your bhakhri very much.
I have instructed Dev to send you all the papers that he can. Still
I shall look into it.
1
Which read : “We all consider your presence here next Working Committee
meeting sixth essential. Kindly postpone Bihar programme till ninth.”

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

67

I shall be leaving for Patna today. I want to stay there only for a
few days. Dev, Hunar, Manu and Nirmal Babu will accompany me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

85. INTERVIEW TO UNITED PRESS OF INDIA
[March 3, 1947] 1
To a question whether Gandhiji’s stay in Noakhali had improved the situation
there, Gandhiji said:

This question should rather be addressed to the interested parties
— people who have suffered. I worked among the people and
preached my message of love and communal amity.2 Personally I feel
the situation has improved and there is more self-confidence among
the people today, but the sufferers alone can tell you whether the
situation has really improved. It is they who matter most.
Asked about the duration of his stay in Bihar, Gandhiji said:

I cannot exactly say how long I shall be there. I am going to
Bihar after a long time. I shall be working among the Bihar sufferers
and shall discuss the problem with the local leaders. I hope it will not
be too long.
Gandhiji expressed his resolve to go back to Noakhali.

I shall continue my work there after my return.
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 5-3-1947

1
The Indian Nation, 6-3-1947, reported that the U. P. I. representative had
met Gandhiji in the “evening immediately on his arrival at Sodepur”. Gandhiji
reached Sodepur on March 3 at 9.30 p.m.
2
Gandhiji had visited 40 villages in Noakhali district and seven in Tipperah
during his walking tour, covering a distance of 11612 miles.

68

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

86. TALK WITH AMIYA CHAKRAVARTY 1
S ODEPUR ,

[March 4, 1947] 2
I am going to Bihar but my work lies unfinished in Noakhali
and Tipperah. I am going back to the Noakhali furnace and if I come
out alive I shall have something to tell Noakhali and Bihar and I can
think of nothing else. I am going to Bihar to find out what is
happening there. I shall come back as soon as I am satisfied.
The Indian Nation, 6-3-1947

87. FROM THE DIARY
S ODEPUR ,

March 4, 1947
About Manudi. . . . 3 She has still not ceased to be childish in
some ways. She must learn to behave like a mature girl. I am quite
hopeful she will do that before long. She is very simple-hearted. She
looks after me with the utmost devotion. She is wholly absorbed in
that work. But she is not careful about her food and rest, and as a
result her health suffers. I am very much pained by this. . . . 4 But
otherwise I am quite satisfied with her work.
[From Gujarati]
Eklo Jane Re, p. 185

1
Rabindranath Tagore’s secretary, who, according to the source, met Gandhiji
in the morning
2
Gandhiji had reached Sodepur at 9.30 p. m. on March 3 and left for Patna in
the evening of March 4.
3
Omissions as in the source
4
Ibid

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

69

88. LETTER TO ARUNA ASAF ALI
ON THE RAIN TO PATNA,

March 5, 1947
CHI. ARUNA

1

,

I have your letter.
I am glad. What was there to mind in your not accompanying
Asaf Ali 2 ? Go on doing what you regard as true service.
Here I am learning the lesson of absolute non-violence. I do not
know how far I shall succeed. Let us see what happens.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Brijkrishna Chandiwala Papers. Courtesy: National
Gandhi Museum and Library

89. INTERVIEW TO RAJENDRA PRASAD3
PATNA ,

March 5, 1947
Gandhiji told him that he was not yet ready with his plan. On one or two
points, however, he had come to a definite decision. He would allow Muslim
concentration under certain conditions but he would neither give arms nor Muslim
military and police. Instead, he would give them effective protection. Dr. Rajendra
Prasad agreed. . . .
Mahatma Gandhi — The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, p. 260

1

(b.1909); Member, Congress Socialist Party; President, Delhi Pradesh
Congress Committee, 1947; joined Socialist Party in 1948; elected first Mayor of
Delhi in 1958
2
Addressee’s husband, who on being appointed Ambassador to the United
States of America had left Karachi for Washington on February 8
3
(1884-1963); joined Gandhiji in 1917 during the satyagraha in Champaran;
President of Indian National Congress, 1939 and 1947; Member, Food and
Agriculture in the Interim Government; President, Constituent Assembly; Minister,
Food and Agriculture, Government of India; President of India, 1950-62

70

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

90. INTERVIEW TO C. P. N. SINHA1
March 5, 1947
SINHA: Well, now that you have come, our burden is lightened.

GANDHIJI:

I have come to lighten it. I have also wired Badshah

Khan2 to come.
s. What did Badshah Khan think of the work that is being done here?
G. He

said that the Ministry were agreeable to everything he told
them but the officers would not be able to cope with the problem.
People alone can do it. He further suggested that there should be a
committee for the purpose but it should be purely non-political. I also
feel the same way.
s. There are many Hindus who did good work during the disturbances. Where
there were such workers, very little damage was done. The Muslims still have faith in
them.
G.

All this should never have taken place.

s. People forgot themselves for a while. Where some care was taken, nothing
happened. Congress workers did not check the disturbances at all places as they ought
to have done.
G. That

is the truth. Advantage lies in admission. Then alone can
the remedy be applied.
s. At places Hindus did their best to protect the Muslims. But the problem calls
for whole-hearted active co-operation of all sections. They are ready to give it.
Mahatma Gandhi — The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, p. 257

91. DISCUSSION WITH RAJENDRA PRASAD AND BIHAR
MINISTERS
March 5, 1947
We should make a public confession of our mistake. No
commission of inquiry has been appointed to date. If we are not quick
1

Chandreshwar Prasad Narain Sinha, Vice-Chancellor of the Patna University
Abdul Ghaffar Khan (b. 1891), popularly known as “Frontier Gandhi”;
founder of the Red Shirt or Khudai khidmatgar movement; Member, Congress
Working Committees; was detained by Pakistan Government for demanding
Pakhtoonistan
2

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

71

about the matter, it will lose its effect. If we do not appoint a
commission, we shall be held to have admitted the League’s case.
The Chief Minister, Shrikrishna Sinha, expressed the fear that the League
would make political capital out of it. Gandhiji admitted that that was not
improbable. But justice never paused to consider if it would be exploited.

[ GANDHIJI:] My sixty years’ experience has taught me nothing if
not that. That is also the lesson of my three months of travail in
Noakhali. I was groping in the dark but I said just what seemed to me
to be the truth. Those who regarded me as their enemy could exploit
it. But I had faith that sooner rather than later they would see their
mistake. Be that as it may, my only strength lies in my ahimsa. The
same applies to you also. If you grasp that, you will get over your fear
and, undaunted by extraneous considerations, do justice.
Again and again Gandhiji tried to clear his old friend of unmerited suspicion.1
Dr. Mahmud’s letter which had brought him to Bihar was in reply to his (Gandhiji’s)
peremptory inquiries; the Doctor had not acted disloyally towards his colleagues. Dr.
Rajendra Prasad explained that there was really no difference. The Bihar Ministers
were never opposed to Gandhiji’s coming earlier. But they had judged that the
situation might call for the employment of drastic measures; how could they call
Gandhiji in that context? The Chief Minister put in that they had never tried to
“minimize” the atrocities.
GANDHIJI: From what I have been hearing, it seems to me that the
Bihar massacre was like the Jallianwala Bagh massacre 2 . Dr.
Mahmud’s wife today brought some Muslim women to me. I had no
reply to their tears.
Dr. Rajendra Prasad . . . repeated what he had already told Gandhiji that many
Biharis thought that they had done well.
Gandhiji replied that it was to save them from that sin that he had come. He
had told Nawab Ismail3 that he would “do or die” in Bihar.
RAJENDRA PRASAD: I have full faith we shall succeed. Give us orders.

GANDHIJI:

In Champaran nobody ordered anybody. 4 It was

1
Dr. Syed Mahmud had incurred the displeasure of his colleagues by inviting
Gandhiji to Bihar without consulting them.
2
At Amritsar on April 13, 1919
3
Muslim League Member in Bihar Assembly
4
Gandhiji had launched satyagraha in Champaran in 1917 to get the
grievances of the peasants redressed. As a consequence the Tinkathia system under
which peasants were required to grow crops on 3/20 of their holdings at the will of the
landlords was abolished.

72

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

spontaneous loyalty. You saw the miracle. If that happens here, we
shall win over even the League.
Mahatma Gandhi — The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, pp. 258-9

92. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING1
P ATNA ,

March 5, 1947
Gandhiji apologized for having come in a motor-car instead of walking to the
prayer meeting. This was, he said, a reflection on the Biharis who should know the art
of welcoming people in a quiet and dignified manner instead of the present
embarrassing manner. They should have had consideration for his old age, he said,
and spared him the shouts, however well-meant they were but which were too much for
his ears.
He complimented the vast audience on their exemplary silence, but expressing
his regret over their half-hearted participation in chanting the Ramdhun, he said:

An earnest prayer is very effective. If God is a Power, which
indeed He is, then people must pray. Devotees of every religion pray
according to their practices in their respective places of worship. It
would be more beneficial if all of them prayed together in a common
congregation.
It would be terrible if people should ‘Victory to India’ and
work for her annihilation. Such action will bring no glory to India. If
we wish victory for India, we ought to work to that end. If we merely
repeat ‘Jai Hind’ or ‘Sitaram’ without the appropriate sentiments it
would be mere parrot-like repetition. Please do not think that I do not
want victory for India. In fact I have staked everything I possess for
the sake of bringing glory to India.
I am visiting Bihar after many years. It is not as though I did not
wish to come earlier. It was Bihar that made me known to the whole of
India. No one knew me earlier. I had almost become a Negro after
staying in Africa for twenty long years. Then I came to Champaran
and the entire country woke up. Earlier I did not even know the
location of Champaran; but when I arrived here I felt as if I had
known the people of Bihar for centuries and they too seemed to know
1
At the Bankipur Maidan where over one hundred thousand people had
assembled. All the Ministers were present.
The Urdu version of the speech has been collated with the report in Harijan
published under “Gandhiji’s Bihar Tour Diary”.

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

73

me.
This Bihar of ours has today committed a heinous crime. The
atrocities perpetrated on a handful of Muslims have no parallel, so say
the Muslims, in the annuls of history. I too have read some history. I
know that the world has witnessed greater brutality by man on man.
But it is no use repeating them here. We must not compete in doing
evil and that too against whom? Those who cry for avenging Noakhali
in Bihar do not know the meaning of vengeance. Is it manliness to
return barbarism for barbarism? We ought to overcome violence by
love.
At present I have no evidence to say that Congressmen have
committed these crimes. Tomorrow I may have to admit so. I must,
however, say that Bihar has sullied the fair name of India. When I
heard in Noakhali the reports of atrocities committed in Bihar, I
decided to undertake a fast. 1 It had been reported to me that some
Congressmen had a hand in these crimes. It would be wrong even
today to say that there was not a single Congressman involved in the
mad upheaval. In India the Congress has to accept the responsibility
for the misdeeds of all communities and all individuals. I had claimed
in London 2 on your behalf that the Congress represented the whole of
India by right of service. Hence any sin committed by India comes to
the door of the Congress. You who are listening to me may not have
done any evil, yet you have to accept the responsibility. I have
become hard-hearted now. I have not come here to shed tears or to
make you cry. I would rather wish to steel your hearts. I could make
you cry if I chose. But I do not wish to do so. We should not disown
responsibility by saying that our hands are clean. India consists of
many communities. We have the tribal people among us. We are
responsible for them as well. If we disown responsibility for them, we
have no right to claim that India belongs to us.
The way to achieve independence consists in all Indians saying
with one voice that unless they gave to the whole world all that was
good in them, their survival would be meaningless. Are we going to
compete in [making] atom bombs? Are we going to match barbarism
1

In his appeal to Bihar is dated November 6, 1946 Gandhiji had expressed
his intention to go on a fast unto death unless the madness in Bihar ceased. His
appeal had an immediate effect on the situation in Bihar and the contemplated fast was
not undertaken. His partial fast, however, as a penance for the Bihar tragedy
commenced on November 6. Vide “To Bihar”, 6-11-1946
2
At the Round Table Conference in December, 1931. Vide “Speech at Plenary
Session of Round Table Conference”, 1-12-1931

74

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

with even more barbarous acts? India has placed before the world a
new weapon. I adopted the way of non-violence in 1920-21. We have
been insisting that we will attain independence through non-violence.
I do not claim that all Indians have accepted non-violence as a matter
of creed. But even when we accept anything as a matter of policy, it
becomes our duty to act upon it.
Dr. Rajendra Prasad told me today that some people believed
that the Bihar riots had arrested the crimes in Noakhali, otherwise.
Hindus everywhere would have suffered a similar fate. This is not
correct. If Hindus had to suffer similar atrocities everywhere I would
say that they were a cowardly lot. Who can frighten a person who has
shed all fear? While touring in Bengal I used to tell the people that
Hindus as well as Muslims of Noakhali had admitted that the
miscreant was a coward and the victim who feared him a greater
coward. Those who are under the illusion that Bihar has saved other
people by committing these barbarities are talking nonsense. This is
not the way to attain freedom. If Muslims believe that they would
annihilate the Hindus or if Hindus believe that they would annihilate
the Muslims, I should like to ask them what they would gain thereby?
Muslims will not serve Islam if they annihilate the Hindus; rather they
would thereby destroy Islam. And if the Hindus believe that they
would be able to annihilate Islam it means that they would be
annihilating Hindu dharma.
I consider myself a follower of Islam, Christianity,
Zoroastrianism and every other religion because I am a true Hindu.
All religions are equal and they are founded on the same faith.
Various religions are like different leaves on the same tree, with slight
differences in shades and shapes. Scriptures have said that one who
condemns other religions, condemns one’s own religion. I consider
myself a representative of all the true religions.
We should not gloat over the massacre of Muslims by Bihar
Hindus. There can be no greater shame for India. Dr. Syed Mahmud
told me that this had brought humiliation to him and to all
Congressmen. He wrote to me to come and see the madness in which
the people of Bihar, who claim to follow me, were indulging and
asked me to stop their madness. Earlier I had wondered, what I could
do by coming here but Dr. Mahmud’s letter compelled me to come
here. The Hindus of Bihar have committed a grave sin. They will raise
the head of Bihar much higher if they do honest reparations, greater

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

75

in magnitude than their crimes. There is an English saying: “The
greater the sin, the greater the saint.” I went to Noakhali with the
determination to do or die. I have come here with the same resolve. If
our thoughts are not right our actions are bound to go wrong. As
soon as there is an opportunity, we commit a crime. Why should all of
us not unite? After all we are servants of the same God, by whatever
name we may call Him. We may call him Rama or Rahim, Krishna or
Karim.
I had also been summoned to Delhi. ‘Come here’, they said,
‘what are you doing in Noakhali? We need you here’. But I did not
leave Noakhali. But when I received Dr. Mahmud’s letter regarding
Bihar, I came over here. Muslim Leaguers used to abuse me and say
‘go to Bihar’. It had no effect on me. But how could I ignore Dr.
Mahmud’s appeal? I felt that I would become worthless if I did not go
to Bihar even now. When I came and saw the conditions here I
realized that we had, indeed, committed a great sin here. It is our duty
to atone for our sin and do reparations. Those who have committed
these misdeeds have done great harm to India. Those who think that
this massacre in Bihar has saved India are really mad. This is not the
way to free India; such methods would delay the day of India’s
deliverance. May God grant us wisdom as Manubehn has just now
sung before you:
1

Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar — I, pp. 1-6, and Harijan, 23-3-1947

93. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING2
P ATNA ,

March 6,3 1947
Gandhiji began his post-prayer address by complimenting the audience as well
as Bari Saheb4 , the President of the Provincial Congress Committee and his comrades
1

Ishwar, Allah
both are your names,
Oh God, grant wisdom to us all.
2
The Urdu version has been collated with he report in Harijan published under
“Gandhiji’s Bihar Tour Diary”.
3
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar has “7”, obviously a slip, for Holi, which
Gandhiji observed “will be celebrated tomorrow”, fell on March 7.
4
Abdul Bari

76

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

for the orderliness which had been successfully maintained during the evening. 1
While the Ramdhun was being sung there were some beats out of time. His advice was
that they should practise more until both the tune and the time were in perfect unison.
A note had been handed to him reminding him that Holi was on the following
day and people would like to hear his opinion as to how it ought to be celebrated.
Gandhiji began by saying that he had no doubt in his mind that a religious ceremony
like the Holi should never be marked by wild revelry, but by a disciplined effort to put
oneself in communion with God.

Holi will be celebrated tomorrow. If we wish to celebrate it in a
religious spirit, we must meet and greet each and every Muslim in the
true spirit. With our overflowing love we should reassure the Muslims
that the Hindus are their brothers and that there can be no difference
between us.
Dr. Mahmud is a Congress Muslim; but I have been meeting
Muslims belonging to the League too. We meet one another with great
affection and talk in the most friendly manner. Houses of Muslims
have been burnt down and their fathers, brothers, sons, innocent
children, womenfolk and friends have been done to death. We should
not disclaim responsibility for these acts by saying that some other
people are responsible for them. Whoever might have actually done it,
we cannot escape the responsibility. Muslims say that they live in great
terror here. Hindus in Noakhali also used to say that they lived in
terror of the Muslims.
We should not terrorize each other. If at all, we should overawe
each other with our love and affection. Some Muslim friends say that
the Ministry here may allot some houses or lands to the Muslims
under political compulsion. But this will not do much good so long as
the Hindus and Muslims do not sincerely love or trust each other.
They say that Hindus and Muslims have been living together here for
centuries, used to refer to one another as paternal or maternal uncles
and attend wedding and funeral ceremonies. Today, however, they
have turned into sworn enemies. How could the Muslims live here if
this enmity persisted? I had to hand my head in shame when I heard
this from Muslim friends.
I have heard that Hindus here start shouting and threatening
when they see Muslims. They raise the slogans of Jai Hind Vande
Mataram. It is all very well to shout slogans; but we must make sure
1
On the previous evening, in their eagerness to go near Gandhiji and have his
darshan a large section of the assemblage had become quite unruly.

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

77

that they do not terrorize, or intimidate our upset other people. We are
guilty of a great sin. Do we intend to announce through our slogans
that we are proud of these acts? Our that we regard them as right
actions? Hindus in Noakhali were also afraid of the slogan Allah O
Akbar raised by Muslims. The slogan merely means ‘God is Great’
and no one need be afraid of this slogan. But when slogans are used
for a wrong purpose, their meanings too are misunderstood and they
become curses instead of boons.
Jai Hind does not mean victory to Hindus and defeat for
Muslims. But nowadays the Muslims take it in that light because we
have put it to wrong use and threatened them with it. When we hear
the slogans shouted by another person we think that the other fellow is
preparing for a fight, and we also start getting ready for it. If we go on
fighting like this and wreak vengeance for one place upon another,
rivers of blood will flow all over India and still the spirit of vengeance
will not subside. Hindus should behave so uffectionately that even if a
Muslim child comes into their midst, they should wash and clean him,
dress him well and shower him with such love that the child should
feel entirely at home. Only when this happens will Muslims realize
that Hindus have become their friends.
Gandhiji was firmly of the opinion that this could never be our fate if we were
determined to have it otherwise. His hope lay more in women who, he had ever
maintained, were the living embodiment of ahimsa and of self-sacrifice, without
which ahimsa could never be a reality. Gandhiji want- ed everyone to celebrate the
Holi in such a manner that every single Muslim felt that the Hindus had not only
repented what had been done to them but had also gathered love for them to an extent
which outdid their previous sentiments. If the Holi was marked by this revival of the
old friendly relations then indeed it would be a truly religious celebration.

A gentleman remarked to me that they had always regarded
Hindus as a very noble people, incapable of kidnapping anyone’s
wife or daughter, since it was immoral and barbarous to do so. But the
Hindus had stooped to such things. Many Muslim girls are missing.
That gentleman also stated that it was difficult to tell the exact number
of such girls, because whole families were missing. Muslims think that
many of their girls have been forcibly kept in Hindu houses. “If we
say this,” these friends say, “no one will pay any heed; but if you
make an earnest appeal, it may produce a serious response.”
I had made a similar appeal to Muslims in Noakhali and I repeat
it here to the Hindus. If any Muslim girl is held by any Hindu, he
should release her. If he is afraid of returning her to the court or to
the Police Station, let him take her to Dr. Mahmud or to his wife or to
me or to Dr. Rajendra Prasad. I can assure the abductors that no harm
78

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

will come to them, if they approach me. In fact, they should not be
afraid of suffering punishment for their crime. He is brave who
confesses his crime and is prepared to suffer due punishment.
Another thing which the gentleman told me was that the
Muslims were afraid that the Hindus did not want the Muslim refugees
to return to their homes. I have heard the same story in Noakhali from
Hindus and now I am hearing it from the Muslims in Bihar. Our
behaviour should be so exemplary that even if an Englishman lives
amidst us we should not let him feel that we are his enemies.
I repeat here what I said in Noakhali. As long as the Hindus and
Muslims together do not assure me that their hearts have been
cleansed and that I could leave them without any anxiety, I will not
leave this place. I shall continue to stay here as long as the Muslims do
not come to me and reassure me that the Hindus have become better
than what they were in the past. I use the word “better” on purpose.
In a way, all of us are filled with evil intentions. But every heart which
has evil traits also possesses noble impulses. And now we have to
overcome our evil traits with our nobler qualities.
You should contribute liberally to the funds raised for Mus- lim
victims. But more than giving money, you have to cleanse your hearts.
We have to win over the hearts of Muslims. We must realize that
politics leads to all sorts of things. But even Muslim Leaguers have
conceded that had Jawaharlal not arrived in Bihar1 the fate of Muslims
would have been much worse. They have undertaken to tell the whole
world that some Hindu Congressmen have at the risk of their lives
saved the Muslim Leaguers.
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—I, pp. 9-12, and Harijan, 23-3-1947

94. INTERVIEW TO NATIONALIST MUSLIMS2
March 7, 1947
Gandhiji assured them that he would not leave Bihar until he felt that cordial
relations between the two communities had been restored.

The Hindu, 9-3-1947
1

Jawaharlal Nehru and Vallabhbhai Patel accompanied by Liaquat Ali Khan and
Abdul Rab Nishtar had reached there on November 3, 1946.
2
This was reported to the United Press of India by one of the members of the
deputation which had met Gandhiji in the morning and discussed matters concerning
relief and rehabilitation work.

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

79

95. DISCUSSION WITH KHAKSARS—I
P ATNA ,

March 7, 1947
Gandhiji told them that while the Bihar Government would naturally welcome
help from any organization which was willing to work on their terms, he could not
advise them to abdicate any of their functions in favour of a private organization. 1
The Khaksar leader proceeded hyperbolically to praise their own past record of
selfless service which was without the “slightest communal bias”. Gandhiji told them
to spare themselves that trouble, for they were not meeting him for the first time; he
knew them well enough!2
Mahatma Gandhi — The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, p. 327

96. TALK WITH MANU GANDHI 3
P ATNA ,

March 7, 1947
You did notice, didn’t you, that even a beggar made a specific
donation to the Muslim relief fund instead of using it for himself. In
my eyes his four annas are more valuable than four crores of rupees.
This is true charity ! These are the people of Bihar. Today is only the
third day of my arrival here. A gesture of this kind so soon after my
arrival has deeply moved me. It is God’s grace that my voice has
reached so far. The more pure and true we grow — the more God
enables us to see these virtues reflected in others. Think deeply over
this incident.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 15-6
1

The Khaksars who had come to Bihar to render service to the riot victims
stipulated certain demands which included that (1) bona-fide refugees attested to by
them should be allowed a grant of Rs. 1,000 per man; (2) they should be empowered
to settle disputed matters with Chief Minister; (3) resettling refugees should be at
their discretion; (4) immovable properties belonging to settlers should be disposed
of at the discretion of Khaksar Relief Committee; (5) they should create an
organization of engineers and Bihar Government should pay for their services; and
(6) their proposal for levy of cess to make relief scheme effective should be
considered favourably by the Government.
2
The source here adds : “The subtle irony was lost on the sturdy soldiers. ...
Their leader jumped at the remark and said that as Gandhiji knew them, he was sure he
would stand guarantee for them and “compel” the Government to “accede” to their
demands. . . . They met him again a few days later.” Vide”Discussion with KhaksarsII”, 7-3-1947
3
A blind beggar had given four annas to Gandhiji for the Muslim relief fund.
Gandhiji, patting him on the back, had asked him to give up begging, for even a
blind person could do a lot of work — he could at least spin.

80

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

97. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING1
P ATNA ,

March 72 , 1947
Gandhiji began his address this evening by saying that just before starting for
the prayer-ground he had taken a brief rest.

Today also I was wondering all the time whether we have
realized that we had committed a great crime, a sin, and whether we
had atoned for it. All my waking hours during the day have been
spent in listening to the reports brought in by many Muslim and
Hindu friends. All of them narrated the grievous wrongs done by us.
None of them has been able to assure me that things have now settled
down to complete normalcy. While I experienced the impact of these
reports on me, I also wondered about the nature and intensity of the
impact which these crimes and atrocities must have produced on the
hearts of those who witnessed them.
The ideal of the sthitaprajna (man of steadfast wisdom) described in the second
chapter of the Gita was always before him and he was ceaseless in his efforts to reach
that ideal. Whatever others might say of him, he knew he was yet far from it. When
one really reaches such a state, his very thought becomes charged with a power which
transforms those around him. But where was that power in him now? He could only
say that he was a common mortal, made of the same clay of which others were made,
only ceaselessly striving to attain the lofty ideal which the Gita held before all
mankind.

While speaking yesterday, I had quoted an English proverb. It
means the greater the sinner, the greater the saint he becomes if he
really repents and decides to reform himself. Bihar has committed a
monstrous sin. It must now make reparations of the same magnitude
and become nobler. Bihar is a land where the verses of the Ramayana
are always on the lips of the people. I have moved widely in Bihar and
I know the people here very intimately. They live a simple life and
their voice ever rings with the music of the Ramayana. Their misdeeds
are of terrible proportions; but their capability for making reparations
is also equally great. I have been a witness to this. Then why should
1

The Urdu version has been collated with the report in Harijan published under
“Gandhiji’s Bihar Tour Diary”.
2
From Harijan and The Hindu. Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar, however, reports
it under “March 6”.

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

81

they not confess their sins and atone for them? I do not know whether
my voice does reach the people who have actually committed these
crimes. Those who are sitting here in the audience and who had no
hand in these crimes may also wonder how people could go berserk. I
don’t know whether or not I shall be able to reach those people who
had done wrong to their Muslim brethren. But I want to reach them.
They are unlettered; they do not read what appears in newspapers. I
think I must go to their homes and stay with them.
I have heard that these people shouted Mahatma Gandhiki Jai
while carrying out the massacre. I do not consider myself a Mahatma.
But I cannot understand how people who consider me a Mahatma
dragged in my name for committing such heinous crimes. I learnt of
these terrible riots in Bihar while I was trekking the villages in
Noakhali and attempting to unite the hearts of Hindus and Muslims.
Now that I have come to Bihar, I think I must visit the scenes of actual
massacre. I have not yet decided whether I should go to these places
by car or whether I should travel there as in Noakhali, on foot. In any
case, I must make myself heard by those people whom my words do
not reach and, even when they do reach, they do so in a distorted
form.
I said it yesterday and I repeat today that all those Hindus who
kidnapped Muslim women should return them. I am staying at the
house of Dr. Mahmud. It will indeed be a brave thing if the miscreants
come forward and openly confess their sins and are prepared to
undergo due punishment. But if such courage is lacking, they can at
least restore the girls to me without any fear of harm coming to them.
I shall not hand them over to the police.
There was however one thing more he would like them to do. It had been
reported that property worth about a crore of rupees had been looted or destroyed. It
did not matter what the exact figure was. For, if a man was deprived of a couple of
rupees when he had only that amount it meant that he had lost his all.

It is the duty of everyone who has looted the properties of
Muslims to return the stolen goods. Many families have been
completely wiped out. But some of their relatives may be alive. And
even if no one is left behind, the return of stolen goods will convince
the Muslims that the Hindus have undergone a change of heart and
they will begin to trust the Hindus.
I shall once again appeal to you that those of you who have

82

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

understood my message, should certainly co-operate in this noble
work and convey my message to the culprits. I can say nothing more
at present. But I have resolved to go to each and every affected village
and to strive to reach the ears of every man.
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—I, pp. 6-8, and Harijan, 23-3-1947

98. DISCUSSION WITH KHAKSARS— II
[After March 7, 1947] 1
They said they wanted freedom to work in their “own way”—the Government
should provide the finance.
Gandhiji was, however, clear that they had to work under the Government and
carry out its policy. He reminded them that the Government had to consider other
parties as well. For instance they were bound to try to secure the co-operation of the
Muslim League in the first place. If the League refused to co-operate then only could it
negotiate with other parties.
The Khaksars talked of the desirability of raising an “auxiliary force” drawn
from the refugees for affording protection to those who returned. Gandhiji was
opposed to this also. Nor was he agreeable to the proposal for forming a trust of the
properties of those who had left the province. He would instead advise the
Government to declare their terms. Such refugees as returned should have all the
protection and help which they needed, but the Government could not undertake any
responsibility in respect of those who chose to stay away. [Gandhiji said:]

If in this way only five return and they are well treated, they are
bound to draw another five after them. If the Government implements
its trust fully, I am sure, all the refugees would return.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, pp. 327-8

99. INTERVIEW TO MOHAMMAD YUNUS2
March 8, 1947
Mohammad Yunus agreed that those who had prompted or taken part in the
disturbances could be no friends of the Congress even though they might carry the
Congress label.
GANDHIJI:
1
2

Could Jinnah be left out of the picture? Was it not up

Vide footnote 4, “Interview to Nationalist Muslims”, 7-3-1947
Chief Minister of Bihar before the Congress accepted office in 1937

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

83

to those Muslims who thought that he was going the wrong way to try
to correct him?
MOHAMMAD YUNUS: Alas! That cannot be. Either you follow Jinnah or you

get out of the Muslim League.
G. Then the future is dark indeed for Islam and for India —
more for Islam than for India.
In reply to the question as to how long he expected to be in Bihar, Gandhiji
said that he had set no time limit. Islam had not yet forgotten the Karbala 1 , where
brother’s arm was raised against brother, although it had happened 1,300 years ago.
How could he forget his Karbala that was Bihar?
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, pp. 262-3

100. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING2
P ATNA ,

March 8, 1947
Gandhiji said at the prayer meeting that he hoped the audience would forgive
him for speaking always and exclusively on the them which had brought him to
Bihar. It had become his duty to listen to the tales of woe that the Muslim sufferers
unfolded before him from day to day. One of them had come to him and complained
that even so recently as two days ago, things were pilfered from the Muslim houses. If
such was the case it was most unfortunate and it betrayed a lack of the spirit of
repentance without which there was no possibility of concord between the two
communities in Bihar, indeed, in the whole of India.

Whenever any new matter comes to my knowledge in
connection with the work I have undertaken these days, I state it
frankly before the public. Yesterday I referred to one matter. Today I
heard something more about it. I shall report it to you frankly. “We
had imagined that your arrival would put a stop to all mischief,” I was
told, “but it is now four days since you came here and yet the
mischief goes on unabated.” I am witnessing here what I saw in
Noakhali. No one should say: ‘Why should we not do what they are
doing there? We are in a greater majority here.’ Even if we have been
1

A town in Iraq, which was the scene of battle between the Sunni and the Shia
Muslims in A. D. 680. As a consequence, Imam Hussain, the leader of the Shia sect,
and his followers were put to death.
2
The Urdu version has been collated with the report in Harijan published under
“Gandhiji’s Bihar Tour Diary”.

84

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

wronged, does it mean that we should try to compete with each other
in goondaism?
We behave decently not for the sake of anyone else. An English
scholar has said that one who does good deeds only performs his
duty. If we do a good deed, we do nothing extraordinary. We do only
what we ought to, and we shall be failing in our duty if we do not do
so.
We have our newspapers here. It is their duty and that of the
Chief Minister to remind the people constantly that they have committed a shameful crime, that Hindus and Muslims have to live
together and all of us are Indians. Everyone of us is equally guilty of
what anyone of us has done. We can achieve freedom only if we act in
this spirit.
Riots are raging in the Punjab.1 The administration in that
province is being run under Article 93. This is no fault of the British
that it is under the Governor’s rule. They have to run the government
as long as they are here and no one else is prepared to undertake the
responsibility. It is India’s misfortune that we cannot co-operate
amongst ourselves and act unitedly. It would be wrong for a Bihari to
excuse himself on the plea that others have perpetrated greater crimes.
Let us admit that we are the greater sinners. Only then can we hope to
reform ourselves.
Let us try to tread the straight path. I have received a telegram
from a Hindu brother. It says that I must not condemn the Hindus in
Bihar. It warns me that due to my influence over them I may mislead
them and prevent them from taking revenge. Look at the cheek of this
gentleman who is trying to teach me my duty! He calls himself a
Hindu but does not act like one. I claim to be a sanatani Hindu and
therefore represent the best things of all the religions created for the
worship of God. Every one of you, if you are honest, must feel
likewise. We have committed a dirty crime and I have come here to
cleanse the dirt and brighten the image of Hinduism. Am I going to
flinch from my duty if someone beats me up or abuses me for doing
it? It is my duty to speak out the truth and if I withhold it, I shall be
disloyal to Hindus, to Muslims and to India. I shall therefore advise
you not to listen to those who incite and misguide you.
1
Following the resignation of the Coalition Ministry, Hindus and Sikhs
staged “Anti-Pakistan” deomonstrations in Lahore on March 4 and communal riots
broke out in the province. The Governor of the Punjab promulgated Section 93 in the
province on March 5.

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

85

I wish to tell you one thing more. It is now four days that I have
been here. I have been collecting money for Harijans every day and I
have already collected a lot. But today an idea crossed my mind. The
Hindus in Bihar have committed a grave error, they have been very
unjust to Muslims. Hence they should do their duty by contributing to
a fund for the relief of Muslims by way of repentance. No one should
think that he need not lift his little finger since there is already a
Congress ministry with a Congress majority here, which will do
everything that needs to be done. The ministers have to work under
great stress in making use of public finances. You should realize that
this is your responsibility. If you donate money to me, you will be
giving it to a miser who has been on this job for the past sixty years. I
have collected lakhs of rupees; but no one can say that I
misappropriated the funds. Otherwise no one would have entrusted his
money to me. I shall therefore appeal to you to donate the money not
for my use, not for any other cause, but for the sake of the Muslim
sufferers. Give with an open heart. A wealthy landlord has promised
to give land as well as money for the Muslims. He will look after all
the Muslims who would be placed under his care. Many more people
should come forward with such offers.
I did not beg for money in Noakhali because I received
unsought about three lakh rupees. Today I thought I should hold out
the begging bowl here and awaken the conscience of the people. I
should take everyone’s help. What can I do by myself? And this is
indeed your work; I can only remind you of your duty. I cannot
perform your duty. Hence you must contribute generously to the
Bihar fund. A Muslim child must feel entirely safe in a Hindu locality
and the Muslims should be convinced of this change of heart. A
friend came to me and asserted that there was a time in Bihar when
Hindus and Muslims lived together and called each other uncles.
Today it is no longer like that. We must atone for this.
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar —I, pp. 136, and Harijan, 3031947

101. INTERVIEW TO UNITED PRESS OF INDIA
P ATNA ,

March 9, 1947
When the United Press of India’s special representative read out a message
from New Delhi regarding Mahatma’s contemplated fast, Gandhiji burst out laughing

86

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and said:

Of course, there is just a little bit of truth in it.
But he strongly disapproved of the practice of making a mountain out of a
molehill.
Gandhiji told him that there was no present intention of fasting but
circumstances might arise of which he had no present knowledge, which might
compel him to undertake a fast.

The Indian Nation, 10-3-1947

102. DISCUSSION WITH BINODANAND JHA1
March 9, 1947
Binodanand Jha protested that the Government was falsely accused of
slowness in dealing with the situation. Immediately after the riots broke out, the
Chief Minister had sent him to Gaya and then to Bhagalpur. The disturbances were the
result of a “joint conspiracy” between the political opponents of the Congress, . . .
and the British officials in the services. In proof he produced a pamphlet issued by the
Hindu Mahasabha and another by the zamindars. Still another pamphlet asked people
to organize themselves and take revenge for Bengal as the Congress seemed to be
unconcerned about the insult to Hindu women in Noakhali and Calcutta. In Bhagalpur,
the Minister complained, the disturbances were precipitated by the Muslim League’s
propaganda. It was they who after getting the Muslims to congregate in large
numbers had set the ball rolling. The Government had information that the arms they
had allowed for Muslim defence had reached the Muslim National Guards.
GANDHIJI: I

am against the giving of arms.

After the riots, the Minister continued, the League had deliberately implicated
important Hindus. The League did not want things to settle down.
G. In the same way in Noakhali the Muslims complained that the
Hindus were accusing wrong persons. I told them we should not be
afraid of false cases. But we should not hide true ones. I do not want a
single criminal to remain unpunished. The people should themselves
come forward and confess their faults.
J. It was all a reaction against the happenings in Bengal.

G.

We should not allow anything to deflect us from doing our

duty.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, pp. 2634

1

Minister, Local Self-Government and Medical in Bihar

VOL. 94 : 17, FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

87

103. DISCUSSION WITH P. C. C. MEMBERS
P ATNA,

March 9, 1947
Gandhiji told them that the more he heard of the Government spokesman’s
apologia, the more he felt the need for turning the searchlight inward. He wondered if
behind his earlier determination to stay on in Noakhali was not “sheer obstinacy” on
his part.
ONE MEMBER: Tell us how we can wash off our sin. What are your orders?

Gandhiji replied that he was ever averse to issuing orders. In Noakhali he could
not. In Bihar he could but did not want to. The very nature of the work precluded it.
What he wanted was to awaken their conscience and win their reasoned co-operation.
Since the advent of power, Congressmen had forgotten the path of duty. In a way
Muslims had come to believe Jinnah’s charge that the Congress did not belong to all,
that the Muslims that were with the Congress were there as mere puppets of the
Congress with an axe to grind to the detriment and ruin of Islam. If the Hindus were
sincere and brave, even the few Muslims that were with them could give the lie to that
calumny and enable the Muslim masses to see that they were being misled, and
perhaps save them from being so misled.
He had served Bihar before. He had now come to them on what might be his
last pilgrimage. If he died striving there, he would have done his duty. All things
hung on truth, courage and knowledge. If none of these virtues was there, the future
was dark indeed for Bihar and for India.
A Congressmen got up to say that some Congressmen had taken part in the
riot. He was interrupted by another Congressman who emphatically declared that no
Congressman had taken any part in the riot. Gandhiji felt hurt. The gentleman, he cut
in, did not seem to know what he was talking about. Even their own colleagues had
admitted that some Congressmen had taken part [in the riot]. If their confession was
half-hearted they would not gain anything by it. He had said enough. They were all
responsible people. They should search their hearts.1
The Chief Minister explained the genesis of the trouble and how his
Government had tried to do all they could before, during and after the outbreak. They
were caught unprepared. The Governor2 was absent. The Chief Secretary and the
Inspector -General of Polie, both Englishmen, had let them down. British officers
were having their revenge for 1942. He was sure, the inquiry would fully vindicate the
Bihar government. Of course, they could not act with the strength of Pandit Nehru,
who gave a thorough shaking to the officers. If it could be proved that the
Government had intentionally allowed a single Muslim to be killed, said Chief
Minister, they would have no right to remain in office.
1
2

88

After this all except the Chief Minister and a few others left.
Sir Hugh Dow

THE COLLE CTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Then, put in Gandhiji, it had to be admitted that there had been lack of
foresight. They should not bring in the Governor or the English officers. The popular
Ministers had to act as if the Governors did not exist. Granting that they (the
Ministers) had not been guilty of any wilful neglect of duty, still something was
owing for what had actually happened. That needed intelligence, courage and purity of
heart. Never had he been confronted with such a stupendous task in his life.
Everything turned on what he could do with Bihar and the Biharis. If he succeeded in
Bihar, India would be saved, the situation in the Punjab would be controlled, and the
Frontier Province, Sind and Baluchistan would come into their own.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, pp. 264-5

104. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING1
P ATNA,

March 9, 1947
It is good that I have one day of silence in the week. How
beautiful it would be if everyone could spend at least a few hours in
the day in silent introspection if it were not possible for them to spend
a whole day in complete silence. If people were accustomed to such
spiritual exercise, then their hands could never have been stained by
deeds which have actually taken place in Bihar. But this is not the
occasion for dilating upon the benefits of the practice of silence.
Today I wish to indicate in brief the duty of those who did not
personally participate in the shameful killings which took place in this
province. Their first duty is to purify their own thoughts. When
thoughts are not pure, one’s actions can never be purified. Pure action
can never come from imitation. If one tries to become good by
merely imitating the good conduct of others, such conduct never
succeeds in radiating any influence upon others; because it is after all
not the true stuff. But one whose heart has become really pure along
with his actions, can at once sense the true character of the thoughts
which influence the behaviour of his neighbours. When thoughts and
actions have both become pure there can be no repetition of the deeds
which have marred the fair face of Bihar. But the world never
progresses in a straight line. The thoughts and actions of men never
follow a parallel and uniform course. For all men these two can never
be completely purified at any single point of time.
Therefore, I would wish to indicate this evening only that ideal
1

It being Gandhiji’s silence day, his written speech was read out.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY , 1947-29, APRIL, 1947.

89

of duty, which the workers should keep before themselves. If workers
are available in sufficiently large numbers, it should be their first duty
to explain clearly to the miscreants the full consequence of their
misdeeds. It should be explained to the wrongdoers that such deeds
can never be of any good to them personally, nor can they serve the
cause of Hinduism or that of the country in general. It should be
explained to them that they have not been able to serve those whom
they intended to serve. They should also be induced to come forward
and make a clean breast of their misdeeds before the public. They
should also restore looted property and abducted women to the
proper quarters.
A change of heart can never be brought about by law. It can
only be effected through conversion of one’s thought. When that is
accomplished, there is no longer any need of compulsive laws.
I had asked you to help in the relief of Muslim brothers and
sisters who have suffered during the last riots. Yesterday you did not
come prepared for that purpose. I expect of you today to contribute
to your fullest extent in this noble cause.
The Indian Nation, 11 -3 -1947

105. FROM THE DIARY
P ATNA,

Sunday, March 9, 1947
Explained to Manudi her duty quietly. She must learn to do
everything in an orderly fashion. I would never abandon her as long
as I am alive. This is the assurance I gave her at Shrirampur. But she is
at liberty to leave me. It seems sinful to me that she should neglect her
health for the sake of my work. On who desires to follow the path of
service must first look after one’s own health. It was 1 a. m. by the
time she finished counting the fund money, and yet she did not sleep
a wink in the afternoon. This hurt me and I had to make her cry.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 24

90

THE COLLE CTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

106. A LETTER1
P ATNA,

Monday, March 10, 1947
CHI. . . .

I have just received your pathetic letter2 . Luckily today is my
silence day. Why should you cry? It is your duty to resist. Crying
should be totally forbidden. Fight as hard as . . . did. I have already
said that . . . is not putting up a tough fight and is feeling miserable.
Why this misery? Let ... abandon me if I have come to regard
adharma as dharma. If there is the slightest room for doubt, let me
have the benefit of your opinion and see what happens. I am not big,
nor are you small. We are all fellow -workers working in the same
field. . . . My ideas are becoming firmer. How can I know whether it is
[my] good sense or bad sense? In my view it is good sense. But it is
similar to “appearance of silver in the mother of pearl”3 .
To conclude, do not despair. Carry on your work without giving
any room to despair. By all means, leave me. Right now I am in the
midst of the sacred fire. I would either be burnt or saved. Though you
are far away from me, pray for me that I may have good sense. May
you all be well.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 28 -9

1

Omissions in the letter are as in the source.
Dated February 22
3
A verse by Tulsidas which means: “Appearance of silver in the mother of
pearl and that of a sheet of water in the mirage, though non-existent at all times, are
yet perceived. Such is this illusion which none can dispel.”
2

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY , 1947-29, APRIL, 1947.

91

107. LETTER TO HARSHADABEHN
P ATNA,

March 10, 1947
CHI. HARSHADABEHN,

I got the cheque for Rs. 55 sent on the occasion of
Hemendrabhai completing 55 years. My blessings to you both. The
way you celebrated Ba’s anniversary was but expected. Send the yarn,
etc., at your convenience. These days I am wandering from place to
place. With God to protect me, what more do I need?
Blessings from
BAPU

S HRI HARSHADABEHN
R ASIK VILLA
15TH R OAD
KHAR
BOMBAY
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 10431

108. LETTER TO VINOBA BHAVE
P ATNA,

March 10, 1947
CHI. VINOBA,

I have your frank letter.1 Somehow I am not convinced by your
argument. Nowadays Manu does not sleep in my bed. It is her own
wish and is due to a pathetic letter from Bapa. 2 But according to my
view it does not make any difference in the situation even if I am
practising adharma. But at the moment I am not going to take any
more of your time. In my daily prayers I earnestly pray to God to
lead me from untruth to truth. Isn’t the same idea conveyed in “Lead
kindly light” 3 ?
Carry on your Bhangi work at Surgaon.
Take care of your eyes. Let someone read out [Dr] Agrawal’s
book to you. Haven’t you heard of it?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C. W. 10546. Courtesy: Vinoba Bhave
1
2
3

92

Vide “Letter to Vinoba Bhave”, 10-2-1947
Vide also “Discussion with A. V. Thakkar”, 24-2-1947
A hymn by Cardinal Newman

THE COLLE CTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

109. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
March 10, 1947
CHI. ANAND,

I read your letter addressed to Dr. Mahmud. Don’t worry if you
have not been able to write to me.
Gangi1 will not be able to do anything here. It is enough if she
looks after you and does whatever she can from there. I think I have
already written to you.
May you both be happy.
Blessings from
BAPU

S HRI ANAND HINGORANI
7 E DMONSTONE R OAD
ALLAHABAD
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

110. LETTER TO CHANDRANI
P ATNA,

March 10, 1947
CHI. CHAND,

I got your letter only today. Dev is all right and does a lot of
work. He is not physically strong but he will become so. He is
learning quite a few new things.
Do you get any news from Amritsar? Are Father and Mother
still there?
Mehboob 2 is to be married on the 15th. He is still like a fakir.
He wanted to invite you but I told him you would not be able to come,
though he could send you an invitation if he so desired.
I am all right so to say. Touring is inescapable even here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: Chand Rani Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi National
Museum and Library
1

Addressee’s wife
Syed Mehboob, eldest son of Dr. Syed Mahmud; vide also “Blessings to Syed
Mehboob”, 14-3-1947
2

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY , 1947-29, APRIL, 1947.

93

111. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING1
P ATNA,

March 10, 1947
As the audience took some time to settle down during this evening’s prayer,
Gandhiji remarked at the beginning of his address that it would be difficult for him to
tell them all that he wanted to if they continued to behave in that manner. He expected
that they had come to the prayer-ground with an earnest desire to pray and then do the
work of God, not for mere sight-seeing.

I have been accused of utilizing the prayer meetings for the
propagation of my political ideas. My detractors will continue to
criticize me and those who have made it a habit to abuse me will
continue to indulge in their pastime. I speak of political matters in a
religious spirit. A person who leads a religious life cannot divide it in
to different compartments. As unscrupulous person who accumulates
huge wealth through fraud and deceit, and thinks that he can wash off
his sins by chanting the name of God at home, is deceiving himself.
God is not such a simpleton.
Indeed, it might even be said, continued Gandhiji that the Law which held
together the universe was indistinguishable from the Law-maker. Speaking in human
language, one might even go so far as to say that God Himself was subject to the
wheel of the Law. We were used to the saying that “the king can do no wrong”. But in
God’s universe even such a distinction was hardly permissible. One could only say
that ‘there could be no wrong in the Law, for the Law and the Law-maker were one and
the same’. There was no scope for even the least little blade of grass to be free from
the operation of God’s laws.

God is Himself the Law and the Law-giver. He does not
transgress the Law laid down by Himself nor does He allow others to
transgress it. You should understand that in our prayers we do not
merely remember him but also undertake to do His work. If you
realize this, then the meaning of my words will be easy to grasp.
A friend has written to me a frank and honest letter and that is
why I like it. He wonders why I cannot see that the quarrel between
Hindus and Muslims is not on account of religious differences but is
essentially political in origin. The Hindus want a united India. The
Muslims want Pakistan so that Muslims will rule in Pakistan and
Hindus in Hindustan. I really do not understand its implications. One
thing is very clear. Religious or political differences should not lead to
1
The Urdu version has been collated with the report in Harijan published under
“Gandhiji’s Bihar Tour Diary”.

94

THE COLLE CTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

a total war.
But what he wanted to impress upon the audience was that supposing it were
only a so -called political struggle, did it mean that all rules of decency and morals
should be thrown to the winds? When human conflicts are divorced from ethical
considerations, the road can only lead to the use of the atom bomb where every trace
of humanity is held completely in abeyance.

It is wrong to imagine that, in political warfare, one could
slaughter men, women and children, innocent and guilty alike, without
compunction. This is sheer brutality. Will forty crores of human
beings descend to the level of beasts? Will such brutality secure us
freedom? This is absolutely impossible.
We do not know what is actually happening in the Punjab. As
long as we do not get full and reliable reports, let us hope that they
have not descended to the beastly level of slaughtering innocent
women and children. But even at present we must admit that brutality
is very much in evidence in the Punjab. But to what extent, will be
known later on. Brutality can neither secure Pakistan nor preserve
India. It will destroy both Pakistan and India, leaving abject slavery
behind. I used to regard Punjabis as a brave people. I can no longer
regard them as such. Those who are burning houses, looting
properties and slaughtering the innocent, do not even know why they
are perpetrating these crimes and atrocities. In a regular war both the
sides know what they are fighting for. We are all slaves and our civil
war will harm only ourselves. We should realize the teachings of our
religions and act according to them. Our politics also should be
consistent with our religion.1
You should contribute generously for the relief of Muslims. I
shall stand up myself and collect the money. If you ask me whether
Muslims in Noakhali contributed funds for the sake of Hindus, I have
to confess that I did not get much. The reason is I am now looked
upon as an enemy by the majority of the Muslims. Even then, some
Muslims and Christians in Comilla had contributed more than Rs. 800
along with a box containing vermilion and conch -shell [bangles] for
distribution among women who had been forcibly deprived of these
auspicious symbols.
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—I, pp. 18 -20, and Harijan, 30 -3 -1947
1
At this stage the audience near the dais became rather noisy and Gandhiji had
to cut short his speech.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY , 1947-29, APRIL, 1947.

95

112. A LETTER
P ATNA,

Tuesday, March 11, 1947
I listened to your long letter to the end. I liked it, but it pained
me none the less. We must be hard and sharp with ourselves but
generous with others. Let us not take the view that all three. . . 1 of
them are at fault. No one is without fault; so who can blame whom?
Should I write to them about those faults of theirs which you have
mentioned? It is your duty to talk with these people politely. Look
within. When pride enters the mind of a sadhaka 2 , his progress is
hampered. This is what I fear from the way you have written. Go deep
into the matter and write to me. This will do for the present.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 32

113. A LETTER
P ATNA,

Tuesday, March 11, 1947
. . .3 I have your affectionate letter. I would have been happier if
I had found in it as much knowledge as affection. My relationship
with Ba was not merely physical. For me, Ba is alive even today. She is
by my side. Ba was aware of everything I did. Nobody could have
known Ba as intimately as I did. . . .
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 32

114. A LETTER
P ATNA,

Tuesday, March 11, 1947
I have your letter. Now you and Shantilal have to worry about
Panchgani. I don’t think I can leave this place in the near future. I
must do or die. God alone knows the final result. I understand about
Bhangis. As regards village industries consult Kumarappa4 .
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 33
1
2
3
4
5

96

Omission as in the source
Seeker
Omissions as in the source
Ibid
J. C. Kumarappa, Secretary, All India Village Industries Association

THE COLLE CTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

115. A LETTER1
P ATNA,

Tuesday, March 11, 1947
I have your letter. Why should I feel hurt when you have stated
facts? Write if you know something more. . . .2
[From Hindi]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 33

116. LETTER TO B. G. KHER
P ATNA,

March 11, 1947
BHAI KHER 3 ,

I don’t think I can leave this place in the near future. It is either
“do or die”.
What are you doing about Hindustani? I hope the Government
will clarify its policy regarding it. Today we are falling from our
stand. Someone ought to remain steady in the circumstances.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: B. G. Kher Papers, File No. 26. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

117. TALK WITH MUSLIM LEAGUE MEMBERS
P ATNA,

Tuesday, March 11, 1947
In your own interest please do not exaggerate. I admit that
whatever has happened here is really deplorable. But in Noakhali also
[the Hindus] are full of fear. Volunteers amongst you should go there
and convince the people that we haven’t yet attained independence
and ask them why they are fighting with each other. You should go
and declare that even a little Hindu girl or boy is just like your
1

This was addressed to a student who had complained against a girl studying in
his college who was known to Gandhiji.
2
Omission as in the source
3
(1888-1957); Chief Minister, Bombay, 1937-39 and 1946-52; member
Constituent Assembly; High Commissioner in Britain, 1952-54; Chairman, Gandhi
Smarak Nidhi, 1956-57
VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY , 1947-29, APRIL, 1947.

97

daughter or son and that they [Hindus] should not worry at all. If you
go and do this much, peace will automatically return to the Punjab
and Bihar. At the same time your name will shine forth in the world.
Everyone is liable to make mistakes; but if they are rectified in time
with a sincere heart, they will be forgotten.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 35

118. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING1
P ATNA,

March 11, 1947
Gandhiji began his address by saying that that was perhaps his last evening
prayer for the time being in the city of Patna, because his tour was going to begin on
the following day. For the next few days, he would tour with the city as the centre and
return to it every night for rest, the prayers being naturally held elsewhere. He
expected, however, that the spirit in which the previous evening’s contributions to
the fund for the Muslim sufferers had been made would continue unabated. The
collections had amounted to nearly Rs. 2,000, besides some ornaments which yet
remained to be auctioned. He was glad that women had given their ornaments, and he
reminded them in this connection that the true ornament of woman was a pure heart,
the place of which could never be taken by any physical adornment.

A friend said to me today that what the Hindus had done was no
doubt very wrong, but that they had acted under great provocation.
How could they remain peaceful after such incitement and
provocation? Well, we should not try to minimize our guilt. The above
argument would mean that if someone abuses or beats you, you will
also return the abuse and hit back. Is it good to do the very thing
which angers you? You in your turn will provoke further anger. The
world has reached the stage of atomic warfare in returning violence
for violence. Let us pray to God that He may save us from this atom
bomb mentality. I have been persuading everyone to observe silence
in reply to abuse or violence.
The whole world tries to suppress the coward. Even God does
not help the coward. He says, ‘A person who is afraid of anyone
except me, lacks faith in me.’ The brave man who has learnt the
lesson of non -violence does not return abuse for abuse, nor does he
slaughter innocent children and women under any provocation.
1
The Urdu version has been collated with the report in Harijan, published
under “Gandhiji’s Bihar Tour Diary”.

98

THE COLLE CTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

If I am starving and you feed me, the contentment in my eyes
will brighten your face too. But take another instance. Suppose I am
starving and demand food from you by abusing you. You will drive
me away, saying: ‘Go and starve yourself to death.’ My abuses will
not get me food. They will, however, make me feel that I am a brave
man. Again, if you ask your gate-keeper to beat me up for my abuses,
that will sow the seeds of hatred against you in my heart. I will say,
‘You may deny me food if I abuse you; but why did you beat me?’
The next day I shall gather a few friends and retaliate. Or, if you
manage to kill me, it will create among my relations and friends a
feeling of revenge against you. This will aggravate the quarrel. I look
upon all this as cowardice. Even if the Muslims had incited the
Hindus, they should have remained peaceful.
An evil returned by another evil only succeeded in multiplying it, instead of
reducing it. It was a universal law, he said, that violence could never be quenched by
superior violence but only by non -violence or non - violent resistance. But the true
meaning of non-violent resistance had often been misunderstood or even distorted. It
never implied that a non -violent man should bend before the violence of an
aggressor. While not returning the latter’s violence by violence, he should refuse to
submit to the latter’s illegitimate demand even to the point of death. That was the true
meaning of non-violent resistance.

I shall now discuss Pakistan. Jinnah Saheb is my friend. I have
gone to his house many a time. If Jinnah Saheb says to me: ‘Concede
Pakistan or I will kill you,’ I will reply: ‘You may kill me if you like;
but if you want Pakistan, you should first explain it to me. If you
convince me that Pakistan is a worthy ideal and Hindus are maligning
it for no reason, I shall proclaim to the Hindus from the house -tops
that you should get Pakistan.’
But if the demand was backed by force, then the only course open to the nonviolent man was to offer non -violent resistance against it as long as he was not
convinced of its justice. One was not to return violence by violence but neutralize it
by withholding one’s hand and, at the same time, refusing to submit to the demand.
This was the only civilized way of getting on in the world. Any other course could
only lead to a race for armaments interspersed by periods of peace brought about by
exhaustion, when preparations would be going on for violence of a superior order.
Peace through superior violence inevitably led to the atom bomb and all that it stood
for. It was the complete negation of non -violence and of democracy which was not
possible without the former.
The non-violent resistance described above required courage of a superior order
to that needed in violent warfare. Forgiveness was the quality of the brave, not of the
cowardly. Gandhiji here related a story from the Mahabharata: one of the Pandava
VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY , 1947-29, APRIL, 1947.

99

brothers 1 was accidentally injured while living in disguise in the home of King
Virata. The brothers not only hid what had happened, but for fear that harm might
come to the host if a drop of blood touched the ground, they prevented it from doing
so by means of a golden bowl. It was this type of forbearance and courage which
Gandhiji wished every Indian to develop, whether he was a Hindu, Mussalman,
Christian, Parsi or Sikh. That alone could rescue them from their present fallen
condition.

A friend has written to me eulogizing the sword. The Muslims
came here, says he, hurling abuses and unfurling Muslim League
flags. We tried to disuade them, continues the friend, but they did not
listen. When, however, we pulled out the swords, asserts the friend, they
came to their senses and became our friends. I tell you this was no
true bravery. The persuasion was backed by the threat of the sword.
Threats do not produce true friendship. If you were honest, you
should have told the Muslims: ‘Look here, you are only a handful
and we are in a vast majority. You are abusing us. You want to unfurl
your flag. And yet we shall not say anything to you nor return your
abuses. But we shall not allow you to unfurl the flag nor shall we
salute the Pakistani flag.’ If the Muslims had seen that, in spite of
your vast majority, you do not wish to fight them, but that on the
other hand you wish to be friendly with them, their conscience would
have awakened and they would have become your true friends. The
weapon of non-violence is mightier than the weapon of violence. The
last Great War also proves this truth.
The lesson of non -violence was present in every religion but Gandhiji
believed that perhaps it was here in India that its practice had been reduced to a
science.

Hindu religion prescribes great tapashcharya2 for the realization
of ahimsa. It is said that innumerable Hindus had shed their blood in
the cause of ahimsa until the Himalayas became purified in their
snowy whiteness by means of that sacrifice. The Hindus of today pay
only lip service to ahimsa. You must demonstrate true ahimsa in this
land of Ramachandra and King Janaka. True bravery consists in true
ahimsa. At the moment you are guilty of committing very cowardly
acts.
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar —I, pp. 20 -2, and Harijan, 30 -3 -1947

1
2

100

Yudhishthira
Penance

THE COLLE CTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

119. CABLE TO “CAVALCADE” 1
Unrevised

March 12, 1947

RECEIVED
WIRE.
REGARD
DECISION
WITHDRAWAL
BRITISH
POWER
AS
PERFECTLY
SOUND. 2
NO
ORGANIC
PEACE
POSSIBLE
WITHOUT
COMPLETE
INDEPENDENCE
INCLUDING
WITHDRAWAL
OF
BRITISH
TROOPS
AND
INFLUENCE
FROM
INDIA.
IMPOSED
PEACE
DISTURBED
HUMAN
RELATIONS.
HENCE
ESTABLISHMENT
OF
ORGANIC
PEACE
IN
INDIA
INEVITABLY
INVOLVES
SENSELESS
STRIFE
AS
IN
BENGAL,
BIHAR
AND
NOW
PUNJAB.
THIS
WILL
END
QUICKER
WHEN
NO
PARTY
IS
ABLE
TO
LOOK
TO
BRITISH
POWER
FOR
PROTECTION.
FORCED
EMASCULATION
OF
A
GREAT
NATION
WAS
BOUND
TO
HAVE
THIS
SAD
RESULT.
NO
DOUBT
MUCH
WILL
DEPEND
UPON
INDIAN
WISDOM
FOR
MINIMIZING
MISCHIEF.
WHILE CONNECTION [REMAINS] 3 HONESTY AND SAGACITY OF BRITISH
STATESMEN
AND
BRITISH
RESIDENTS
IN
INDIA
[EQUALLY]2
NECESSARY.
MUST
REGRETFULLY
SAY
THAT
DISTRUST
OF
BRITISH
STATEMENTS
AND
PROMISES
HAS
GONE
TOO
DEEP
AND
THAT
PERHAPS
LEGITIMATELY.
THEREFORE
BRITISH
DEALINGS
HAVE
TO
BE
STRICTLY
FRANK
AND
ABOVE
SUSPICION
AT
THIS
CRITICAL
MOMENT.
GIVEN
THESE
CONDITIONS
I
EXPECT
NO
DIFFICULTY
ABOUT
HEALTHY
ECONOMIC
AND
CULTURAL
RELATIONS
BETWEEN
TWO
COUNTRIES.
PLEASE
REGARD
THIS
AS
MY
INDIVIDUAL
OPINION.
ENDS.

GANDHI
From a photostat: C. W. 10560. Also a facsimile: Mahatma, Vol. VII, between
pp. 416 and 417

1

The British news magazine had sent a cable asking for Gandhiji’s message.
Here follow the words “When perfect severance British”, which appear to
have been struck off.
3
Illegible in the source
2

4

Ibid

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY , 1947-29, APRIL, 1947.

101

120. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING1
P ATNA,

March 12, 1947
Gandhiji referred, in the beginning of his address, to the decision of the
British Government to quit India. The British were a nation with a strong sense of
reality: and when they realized that it did not pay to rule, they did not hesitate to
withdraw their power over a country. This had been the course of British history in
the past. If the British were going, as they surely were, what should be the duty of
Indians at the same time, asked Gandhiji. Were we to return blow for blow among
ourselves, and thus perpetuate our slavery, only to tear up our motherland, in the end,
into bits, which went by the name of Hindustan and Pakistan, Brahministan and
Achhutistan? What greater madness could there be than what had taken place in
Bengal and Bihar, or what was taking place in the Punjab or the Frontier Province?

Today I visited a village where Hindus had caused great
damage. An old Muslim showed me his own house and those of his
relations with broken door -frames where bricks were removed from
the door -sill. I was shocked and shaken to see that the Hindus had
caused these depredations. I had wept when I saw the ruins caused by
Muslims in Noakhali. Today also I might have wept. But my tears
cannot render any succour to the sufferers. What I witnessed today
does not behove human beings. We are all responsible for this
vandalism so close to the city of Patna. Even if you did not participate
personally in the loot, you cannot escape the charge of abett-ing the
marauders. A mosque was also damaged in the village Kumarahar.
This also I consider to be a devilish deed. It is no justification to argue
that the Hindus damaged the mosque because the Muslims were
desecrating the temples. Hindus worship idols, while the Muslims do
not. But every human being does worship something or other.
God resides everywhere; not only in the Bible and the Koran, in
a mosque or a temple, but in the nose, ear, nail or even a single hair of
the body of man. I have been taught ever since my childhood that
God resides everywhere. He is subtler than the air. It is one and the
same thing whether one worships Him in a mosque, a temple or a
church. I am as much an idol-worshipper as an idolbreaker. Still when
I go to a temple, I am happy if I find it neat and clean.
Those who desecrated the mosque were not men but devils;
because mosques, temples or churches are all houses of the Lord. I
have come here today to convey to you my grief. You may perhaps
1
The Urdu version has been collated with the report in Harijan published under
“Gandhiji’s Bihar Tour Diary”.

102

THE COLLE CTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

be smiling and thinking that whatever happened was all very good.
But I assert that this is potent injustice. I am grieved when I hear that
Muslims have desecrated a temple. Should I retaliate by damaging a
mosque? How can such damage save the temple or benefit the Hindu
religion? If Muslims are about to desecrate a temple, it becomes my
duty to prevent them from their vandalism, irrespective of my not
being an idolworshipper. I should hug the idol and request them not
to demolish the temple. I should lay down my life to protect the idol
but refuse to hand it over to them. My entreaties will impress them,
they will realize that I mean no harm to them and then they will
become my friends.
Muslims are demanding Pakistan. They should therefore
explain its advantages. No one will oppose it if he sees its advantages.
But if they want to establish it forcibly, it will be a Napakistan
(impureland) instead of Pakistan (pureland).
Badshah Khan is sitting by my side. He is a fakir by nature. But
people, out of affection, call him Badshah1 because he rules the hearts
of his people through love. He comes from a tribe whose tradition is
to return a blow for a blow, and blood feuds are handed down from
sire to son. But Badshah Khan has full faith in nonviolence. I asked
him how an expert swordsman like him came to believe in
nonviolence. He said that they had come to realize nonviolence. He
said that they had come to realize non-violence as the only road to
their national freedom. If the Pathans do not give up the policy of
blow for a blow and do not adopt nonviolence, he said they would
perish in their internecine feuds.
When he took to nonviolence, he realized a kind of transformation coming
over the Pathan tribes. It did not mean that every Pathan had undergone the
transformation or that Badshah Khan had himself reached the highest goal of
nonviolence. As far as he, the speaker, knew, he (Badshah Khan) was every day
nearing the goal because he realized the truth of it. It was this type of brave
nonviolence which Gandhiji wished the audience to imitate.

If we continue to fight among ourselves, the shackles of slavery
will never be removed. The British are bound to quit this country.
They are a nation of businessmen. They calculate the profit and loss
from every transaction. They have realized that it is no longer
profitable to rule India. But what good will that freedom be to us if we
continue to fight among ourselves after the British leave?
Gandhiji continued that he had come to Bihar in order to make the people
realize the extent of the madness to which they had stooped. His object was to induce
them to repent and thus undo the wrongs which had been perpetrated.
1

Emperor

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY , 1947-29, APRIL, 1947.

103

I have been told that a storm is still raging in the hearts of the
citizens of Patna. I wish to remind you today that Bihar is the
hallowed land of Lord Buddha and King Janaka. Lord Ramachandra
had also once walked on this soil. It will be a great shame if this sacred
land continues to witness the devilish dance of violence. You can
retrieve the ancient glory of Bihar by means of nonviolence. I do not
want the bravery of swords or words. Today we need that nonviolence
which was exemplified by the people of Champaran in 1917.
Gandhiji added that, in his opinion, the departure from the straight path of
nonviolence they had made at time in 1942 was very probably responsible for the
aberration to which he had referred. He instanced also the spirit of general
lawlessness which had seized them inasmuch as they dared to travel without tickets,
pulled chains unlawfully or in senseless vindictiveness, burnt zamindari crops or
belongings. He was no lover of the Zamindari system. He had often spoken against
it; but he frankly confessed that he was not an enemy of the zamindars. He had no
enemies. The best way to bring about reform in the economic and social system,
whose evils were admittedly many, was through the royal road of selfsuffering. Any
departure from it only resulted in merely changing the form of the evil. Violence was
incapable of destroying the evil root and branch.
Lastly, Gandhiji referred to a letter he had received from the Harijans, asking
him to visit their quarters and to live with them. He would have loved to do both the
things; but he had to restrict himself to the mission that had brought him to Bihar.
But having made himself a Bhangi in thought and deed, he could never forget the
Harijans. He was sorry to say that the latter were still suffering from disabilities and
that they did not get ready redress of their grievances.
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—I, pp. 23-5, and Harijan, 30-3-1947

121. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
P ATNA,

March 13, 1947
CHI. MUNSHI 1

I got your note. I was sure that you would be able to win over
Panditji 2 . He admires hard work and intelligence. You have both in
good measure. And you have got work in which you can shine.3 May
1

(1887-1971); lawyer, educationist and man of letters; member Constituent
Assembly; Food Minister, Government of India, 1952; Governor, Uttar Pradesh,
1953-58; resigned from Congress in 1960 and joined Swatantra party; founded
Bharatiya Vidya Bhawan
2
Jawaharlal Nehru
3
The addressee was on the Experts Committee appointed by the Congress
Working Committee in July 1946, to prepare the material and draft proposals for the
Constitutent Assembly.

104

THE COLLE CTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

your heath be preserved and may you go on serving all your life.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I cannot say how long I shall have to stay here. According to
me, the Bihar and Bengal problems are really one problem. It is going
to be “do or die”. Let God’s will prevail.
Blessings to you both from

BAPU

[PPS.]
This paper is made from linseed reeds.
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 7702. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi

122. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
March 13, 1947
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

I have your long letter. It is good that you wrote in detail. What
shall I write to you? I don’t have full information of what is
happening in the Punjab. In my view what I am doing is right. I am
trying to transform both [the communities] from beasts to human
beings. It is in God’s hands to grant success. We have to do our duty.
I have no time to write more.
How is it that you have written nothing about your treatment?
I have not received your earlier letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 2505

123. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
P ATNA,

March 13, 1947
Today too I was a witness to heart-rending scenes. This seems to
be my destiny. We have indeed committed a great sin. We had lost our
sanity. Even now we are not aware of its root cause. You can ask me
whether you should not retaliate for what happened in Calcutta or
VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY , 1947-29, APRIL, 1947.

105

Noakhali. But I have told you that this is not a healthy reaction. We
should never think in terms of retaliation. If the sequence of
retaliations goes on snowballing, India will be in ruins. Why should
Muslims in Bihar be killed because some Bihari Hindus were killed in
Calcutta?
If we seek freedom, it should be for the whole of India. It is not
proper to seek separate freedom for Hindustan, Pakistan, Achhutistan
or Sikhistan. For, such a mentality may even lead a person ultimately
into demanding freedom for his own village above everything else.
This tendency is wrong. We are all Indians and an evil deed
committed anywhere in India is the concern of every Indian. I shall
stick to my pledge of “Do or Die” so long as the whole of India does
not become free.
We should not spread poison; on the other hand we should try
to prevent it from spreading. If someone commits murder, we should
be sorry because the murderer after all is our own brother. There must
be something wrong in us; that is why our brother could stoop to such
a sin. We should not become murderers to put an end to the murderer.
If our hearts are filled with ill will, we must not hide that fact. We must
openly confess it. We should think over our sins and repent for them.
Sincere penitence reduces the incidence of sin. If we do not realize
this truth, freedom of India will recede still further.
The British are leaving India; but if we continue to hate one
another even after they leave us, then that freedom will bring us no
benefit; someone else will come and snatch the freedom from us. If
we look upon everyone as our brother, then only can we reap the full
gains of freedom. Whatever is happening in the Punjab or the Frontier
today is a matter of grave concern and regret. But we should not try to
imitate the gangsterism of the Punjab. People say that Bihar has made
enough amends for its sins and the Government here is also very alert
and that I should now go to the Punjab. But what shall I do? I can go
to the Punjab only when the Hindus and Muslims of Bihar tell me with
one voice that they need me no more and that I may safely go to the
Punjab. That will also give me strength enough to tackle the Punjab. It
lies with you to strengthen my hands. If you do not give me strength,
how can I go? You will yourself accuse me of running away from my
pledge of “Do or Die”. God is the source of all strength. If He
commands me, I shall go to the Punjab. I am only an humble
instrument in His hands. If my voice can reach the Hindus, Muslims

106

THE COLLE CTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and Sikhs of the Punjab, I would tell them that the happenings in their
province are doing good to no one. If the wild fire that is raging in
the Punjab is not controlled, it will vitiate the climate in the whole of
India.
Today I visited the ruined and deserted villages in the
neighbourhood. I hung down my head in shame. The people who
perpetrated these crimes should also feel ashamed. Those who have
looted Muslim properties should return them. If they dare not
surrender to any authority, let them come to me or to Dr. Mahmud.
They should not apprehend punishment. We will not tell the police.
But one should not be afraid of undergoing punishment for one’s sin.
It would be praiseworthy indeed if you confessed your guilt even
when there is fear of punishment. Those who have caused damage to
others should pay compensation for the same.
While I was returning from my tour today, the villagers of
Siparah stopped my car and presented me with a purse. The purse also
contained a letter which stated that the villagers were sorry for what
they had done. They assured me that they would try to resettle their
Muslim brothers in the village. I appeal to all of you to atone for your
sins as honestly as the brothers at Siparah. The amount which that
small village has contributed and the manner in which they have
expressed their sentiments deserve praise. It will be yet more
commendable if they come forward to return the looted property.
I shall report to you something which I saw in a village today.
One of your Ministers, Anugraha Babu 1 , is sitting here. I wish to
report to him also and to ask him why there is so much delay in
atoning for that sin. Why are these villages still wearing a forlorn
look? You will say this is a job which the Government ought to do. I
am asking you, why should the Government do this job? Did you seek
Government’s permission while ruining the villages? It is your
responsibility to rebuild the villages. You must remove the debris and
clean the villages. The Government will be thankful to you and will
send you experts who can guide the work of sanitation. This is a job
wherein even women and children can participate. You should help
the Government and the Government will help you.
The village I visited today was more unclean than the one I
visited yesterday. Rains will make it even worse. Someone has
1

Anugraha Narayan Sinha, Minister, Finance, Labour, Supply and Price-

Control
VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY , 1947-29, APRIL, 1947.

107

recorded that India is strewn with excrement. One cannot contradict
him if one visits the villages. Every corner in the village we visited was
dirty. The lanes were very filthy and the roads were in a shabby state.
I would call upon you to clean up these villages so that they reflect the
cleanliness of your hearts. Besides contributing money you should be
prepared for the work of sanitation. If you do not clean up the
villages, how can I ask the Muslims to return to their homes? It is your
duty to start the cleanliness drive from today. If your hearts are clean,
the Muslims will surely return. I myself wish to undertake sanita tion
work. I have done this work in my time; but now I do not have the
physical strength to do it. You must make your villages clean and
beautiful. You should grow flowers and main tain a garden where
women and children can walk about. The lanes should be spotlessly
clean. The roads even if they are narrow, should be so well-maintained
that even a blind man should be able to walk on them. This alone can
turn the villages of India into heaven on earth.
[From Urdu]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—I, pp. 27-9

124. LETTER TO PRESIDENT, SAIVA PARIPALAN SANGAM
P ATNA,

March 14, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

The draft you have sent will be used as suggested by you.
Though I am in Bihar at present, the headquarters for Noakhali
continue to be Kazirkhil, Noakhali.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
P RESIDENT
S AIVA P ARIPALAN S ANGAM
BADULLA, C EYLON
From a photostat: G. N. 779

108

THE COLLE CTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

125. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
P ATNA,

March 14, 1947
CHI. SATIS BABU,

There has been no letter from you and none from Pyarelal or
others. What is the reason? How is everything going on there?
I gather from Rajagopalachari’s letter1 that we will not be able to
get yarn from that source. How are you managing at present? What
will you do about obtaining yarn?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 8963

126. LETTER TO GANGI A. HINGORANI
P ATNA ,

March 14, 1947
CHI. GANGI,

I have your letter and also Anand’s telegram. You and Anand
can come over just to see me but you will not be able to go with me
wherever I go. In this tour the fewer the people the better it is. So my
advice to you is not to come. I shall not be in P ATNA after Monday.
What is the use of just meeting me?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi : Courtesy : National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

1

C. Rajagopalachari, who was member Industries and Supply, in the Interim
Government, in his letter dated March 5, 1947, had written: “Your telegram about
1,900 bales per month came as a surprise. It is unlikely that we shall be able to secure
more than about 100 to 200 bales of yarn for this purpose. It would be possible for
the Government of India to arrange for a regular monthly quota of yarn to Noakhali.”
VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY , 1947-29, APRIL, 1947.

109

127. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
P ATNA ,

March 14, 1947
DEAR DAUGHTER,

I am unable to forget the last day of our meeting1 . I do not find
any mistake in my observation. If there is, tell me.
There is no letter from you. How is the work going on? How is
your health ?
I am well. The task is a difficult one.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G. N. 580

128. BLESSINGS TO SYED MEHBOOB2
March 14, 1947
I would give you anything you like just for the asking.
The Hindu, 16-3-1947

129. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING3
KHUSROPUR ,

Mach 14, 1947
I wish that whatever I tell you now should touch your hearts.
The scene I witnessed today after my tour of two days was very
painful. I do not suggest that my visits to villages earlier were not
painful. Large houses of Muslims have been razed to the ground.
Women and children had been slaughtered. I just cannot describe it in
detail. Although I have hardened my heart, I am incapable of
describing all the details even if I wish to do so. Muslims were your
brothers and they are so even now. I have been hearing that Muslims
in Bihar were particularly gentle. There used to be occasional disputes
1

The addressee, at Gandhiji’s instance, had come to see him at Haimchar on
February 26. Vide “Letter to Amtussalaam”, 25-2-1947
2
On the eve of the addressee’s marriage Gandhiji presented him with two yarn
garlands, one for him and the other for his bride.
3
The Urdu version has been collated with the report in Harijan published under
“Gandhiji’s Bihar Tour Diary”.

110

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

between Hindus and Muslims. But such disputes are bound to occur as
long as the world lasts. But they should not tear heart from heart.
Unfortunately this has happened now. I am fated to witness worse
scenes than what I have seen during the last three days. What is
happening in the Punjab is heartrending. God alone knows how long
such riots will continue. The people who are fighting in the Punjab do
not even know what are the likely consequences of their action. If we
go on fighting among ourselves in this manner, a third party may
impose itself on us as an arbiter, and all sorts of witnesses, honest or
dishonest, may come forward. It is better to have an arbitrator from
among ourselves rather than allow an outsider. But the best thing is
that the need for arbitration should not arise at all. I wish that Hindus
and Muslims should cleanse their hearts and live like brothers.
Those who have committed crimes should come forward and
confess their guilt with God as witness. No one should do so in a spirit
of bravado. If someone has misbehaved in imitation of others, he too
should own his mistake. I want a genuine feeling of repentance and an
honest atonement for the atrocities committed by thousands of Hindus
on a handful of Muslims.
Referring to the method of violence, Gandhiji said that some sort of
peace might perhaps be established in the province by means of force. He
would hope, but it could never be said with confidence, that the evil would not
spread throughout India, as it happened in the case of 1857. Similar things, as we
know, had happened during the Sepoy War when it was quelled by means of superior
arms. Outwardly, things quieted down but the hatred against an imposed rule went deep
underground with the result that we were even today reaping the harvest of what was
then sown. The British Government took the place of the East India Company. They
established schools and law courts and Indians took to these with enthusiasm; they
even co-operated in the diffusion of Western culture; but, in spite of all this, they
could never bear the insult or the degradation involved in political subjugation.
Similarly, but in a worse manner, if the Punjab quietened down by reason of superior
force used against the people of the Punjab, the seed of further conflict and bitterness
between brothers that the Hindus and the Muslims were, would go still deeper.
Violence, continued Gandhiji, thus could never be ended by counter-violence. The
only effective answer to it was the way of non-violence.

People had adopted ahimsa in Champaran at my instance. I now
feel that it was the ahimsa of the weak. The British, who were our
adversaries, were a mighty power. That is why we seem to have

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

111

adopted non-violence in facing them; but we could nor remain nonviolent in our dealings with one another. We should feel sorry
that we resorted to violence in dealing with our brothers. The
mothers and sisters of Muslims are like our own mothers and sisters.
If we have behaved with them like devils, it is our duty to atone for
that sin.
Hindus and Muslims in Bihar should come closer than ever
before. The followers of the two religions should never be afraid of
one another. We should be afraid only of being overpowered by one
another’s love and affection. It is for you to consider whether you
prefer to live in amity or wish to convert the whole of India into a
boiling cauldron like Bihar or the Punjab.
Women have had a great hand in the growth of ahimsa. They
can, if they choose, play a big role in Bihar. The events in Noakhali,
Bihar and the Punjab are most unfortunate. If you have made up your
mind to torture Gandhi, I cannot complain. In spite of my services to
the country and to you, you have every right to say that Gandhi has
cheated you and, but for him, you would have slaughtered all the
Muslims — although you could not have done so. I would plead with
you to pay attention to what I have to say. I do not wish anyone to be
swayed by my personal influence; I want you to think calmly and act
on my advice only if it appeals to your head and heart.
The Secretary of the Provincial Muslim League who had been good enough to
come to him had complained that although the Government had made arrangements
for repatriation, the mental attitude of the Hindus was not sufficiently reassuring.
Gandhiji firmly said that the reality had to be faced and a determined effort made by
every one of them to root out the least trace of the feeling of hostility and make it
possible for their Muslim neighbours to live in brotherly love once more.

Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs are all engaged in a bitter feud in
the Punjab. Sikhs have always claimed that one Sikh is equal in fight
to a lakh and quarter of men. They arm even their children with
kirpans. Many people are embracing Sikhism, lured by the kirpan. If
you sincerely think that the way of the Punjab is the proper answer to
the challenge of the times, you are free to follow it. I plead with you
in all earnestness to tell me frankly that you do not approve of my
way. I will not be hurt by your honesty.
Gandhiji would rather not live than see the day when the weapon of
nonviolence was given up. It did not matter where he laid down his life for achieving
his cherished aim; anywhere in India would still be India for him. But he still hugged

112

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the hope that nonviolence would surely be crowned with victory in the end; for in the
example which Bihar might set in this line today lay the hope of peace and progress
for our unhappy land.

I shall not say that Bihar has ignored my past services. I do not
want you to do anything for my sake. I want you to work in the name
of God, our Father. Confess your sins and atone for them with God
alone as witness.
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar — I, pp. 31-4, and Harijan, 30-3-1947

130. LETTER TO DR. B. S. MOONJE
P ATNA ,

March 15, 1947
DEAR DR. MOONJE,

I got only today your letter of the 17th ultimo. You will
appreciate my difficulty when I tell you that at present I have no time
to read anything outside the scope of my present activity. But I have
no hesitation whatsoever in saying that if we succeed in driving [out]
the twin demons of untouchability and the socalled caste, we shall
have gone a long way towards removing the third demon, i.e.,
communalism.
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

131. DISCUSSION WITH RELIEF COMMITTEE MEMBERS1
March 15, 1947
QUESTION: Will you advise Muslims to return to their villages in the

prevailing disturbed conditions ?

: If you have the courage and if you have the
requisite faith in God, I shall advise you to return to your
villages. I do realize that it is a difficult task. If I had under
gone such harrowing experience, perhaps I myself would not have
been able to go back; it would have made me a raving lunatic. The
memory of murdered men and women would have haunted me.
But I aspire to reach a stage when I shall have such abiding faith in
ANSWER

1

Some members of the Muslim League Relief Committee had met
Gandhiji and asked him several questions on behalf of the Muslim refugees of
Phulwari Sharif.

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

113

God that I would go and stay in the midst of people who had become
my enemies.
Q. If there is no change of heart in the majority community, what should the

suffering minority do ? Should they live in small pockets or leave the province for
ever ?
A.

If you do not return and since it was the fault of the Hindus,
the Government is bound to compensate you for the loss of your
property. But I do not understand your demand that the Government
should allot land somewhere else. Well, if you can arrange mutual
exchanges, no one can prevent you. But if the Government arranges
this, it will not lead to a purification of hearts. Many people are
talking of pockets. I simply do not understand this. If those villages
where the Muslims are in majority welcome you, who can prevent you
from going there? Similarly, no one can prevent you from leaving
the province if you decide to go in spite of my promises of affection.
There is a law in the U.S.A. that anyone wanting to migrate from that
country has to obtain Government’s permission. I do not approve of
such a law.
Q. Should or should not those who have committed murder, rape, arson and

other heinous crimes receive appropriate punishment? If you think they should, how
will you advise the Government of Bihar?
A. Of course, those responsible for devilish deeds must be

punished. The Government of Bihar has not abjured the principle of
punishment. There is no such government anywhere in the world
today. When such a government comes into being, I shall listen to
their argument. But a government which believes in the theory of
crime and punishment but does not punish the criminal has no right
to call itself a government.
Q. Should the Government of Bihar make adequate Provision for the relief of

orphans and widows who have no one to support them? If some organization has
undertaken such work, what will you advise the Bihar Government on this?
A.
They are the responsibility of the State. If some

organization wants to render relief in its own manner, it will not be
justified in expecting assistance from the Government. This work has
to be done either by the Government itself or in a manner approved
by the Government.
Q. How will it be possible to make good the historical, cultural, social and
religious damage done by the madness of the majority?

A.

114

This has been a cruel and terrible tragedy. Such holocausts

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have shaken the world earlier and will do so even in the future. Only
when we are reformed and tolerant enough to realize that all religious
lead to the same God called by various people by various names, will
the world change for the better. Till then the earth not be a habitable
place. Till that change comes about, it is impossible to prevent such
barbarity and the irreparable losses resultant from it.
Q. What should be done with those officers who openly helped the rioters and

deliberately helped one side against the other?
A. Those officers against whom such charges can be proved can
have no place in the government.
Q. What do you propose to do to prevent the repetition of riots at place where

the Muslims have suffered? Even now the houses and properties of Muslims are being
damaged.

I am doing my best to prevent a repetition. I shall continue to
stay here till I succeed in my effort. I have already declared that I
shall do or die. God will either grant me success or put an end to my
life. I believe that a change of heart is essential if I am to succeed. As I
have been telling the Hindus in Noakhali, this is not a work where the
army or police can be of much help. You must gather courage and
fear on one except God. I shall advice the Ministers to frame a law
making Hindus responsible for the safety of the Muslim minority.
Such laws will not in fact be needed where hearts have been purified.
A.

Q. Can the cruelties and injustices meted out to us detain you for long in

Bihar? Your prolonged presence is needed for the help of the refugees.
A. You need not worry on that account. I shall not leave Bihar
so long as Hindus and Muslims do not jointly allow me to do so on
the basis of their brotherly feelings.
Q. Will you call them Congressmen who organized and led the recent riots? If
not, what action will be taken against them to preserve the prestige of the Congress?

How can those who participated in riots be called
Congressmen? Before condemning them, I must listen to their
versions of the story. I am a devotee of truth and shall lay down my
life in serving truth.
[From Urdu]
A.

Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar— I, pp. 35-8

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

115

132. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING1
P ATNA ,

March 15, 1947
I have been absent from here for the last three days. During
these three days I visited a few villages. The villagers there have
contributed their mite for the relief of Muslims. They gave more
small coins than notes. Rich and wealthy people live here. You
donated one thousand rupees on the first day and two thousand on the
next day. When the gathering is large, it becomes very difficult to
collect the donations.
When Gandhiji began his address he first referred to his visit2 and said that
people might naturally be interested to learn why be had gone there. For him it was a
courtesy call because he could not go expecting any favours or services from the
Governor as of yore. Under a responsible government, which theirs was, services
and favours he could expect only from the Ministers who were the representatives of
the people. The Governor had undoubtedly powers with reference to the minorities
but these too he could exercise only with great restraint. What they discussed it was
for the Governor to communicate to his Ministers. One thing, however, the speaker
was free to tell them. To his agreeable surprise, the Governor had said that those who
were responsible to the people had to begin with themselves. If they did not begin
with their individual lives and show relative perfection, they could not be real
reformers or servants of the people.
Gandhiji wanted the people also to disabuse themselves of any thought that
they had usurped any power from the British. Nonviolent noncooperation did not
admit of any such assumption. What they performed was a simple duty. The result
undoubtedly was that the British naturally and voluntarily divested themselves of
much authority and power and it was up to the people to do their duty along the lines
of non-violence, if they were to have complete power as and for the people.

We have only partly recovered what we had lost through our
folly. There is on doubt that we shall regain the power in full measure.
I have already explained to you the way to complete freedom.
The recent events in Bihar were a departure from that right conduct and, if the
1

The Urdu version has been collated with the report in Harijan published under
“Gandhiji’s Bihar Tour Diary”.
2
Gandhiji had gone to meet the Governor about an hour before prayer time and
had returned five minutes late for the prayer.

116

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

truth was not recognized and if the infection of the Punjab spread, he had not a shadow
of doubt that they would lose what was within their grasp. He, therefore, expected
Bihar to recognize the fact and do its duty honourably and well.

You must not fight among yourselves and should not kill
women, children and old men. You must put a complete stop to these
internal feuds. If you think that these feuds will bring freedom, you
are sadly mistaken. The belief that through internal fight we will attain
freedom is like expecting a barren woman to give birth to a child.
During the last three days I saw that houses had been razed to
the ground, roofs pulled down and a lot of destruction had been
caused. I hear that old men, children and women had been
slaughtered. Our first duty therefore is to repent for our misdeeds. We
should resolve not to commit these horrors again and to prevent
others from doing so. The same thing applies here also. We must first
reform ourselves and then try to reform others.
It was painful for him to find the houses in the same condition in which the
rioters had left them. If they wanted their Muslim neighbours to come back, it was
necessary that proper conditions should be restored and the debris completely cleared.
Every individual who felt it was his duty to make the return of the refugees smooth,
could at once lend a hand in rendering the broken homes habitable once more.

Some poor Muslims had also come to see me today. I advised
them to return to their homes. I assured them that the Ministers were
looking after their interests. I have given them an assurance on your
behalf and asked them to return to their homes. The Muslims can be
safe amidst you, if it is your wish. You should now start living together
as before and always remember that I gave the assurance to the
Muslims in your name and on your behalf. I have assured a
flourishing Muslim merchant that he should not be afraid of restarting
his business in full confidence, for I am sure that the Bihari Hindu
would honour that pledge.
I am confident that the recent tragedy will never be repeated. I
shall appeal to the Ministers to keep the interests of Muslims at heart. I
cannot order them. I have never ordered anyone in my life. I only
wish to appeal to everyone.
When nonviolence finds expression through a person, it
influences other people too. I am not a great man. I am just the same
today as I was when I came to Bihar for the first time. Of course there
has been one change. My heart has been steeled now. I have assured
the Muslims on your behalf that no Hindu will abuse them or hurt

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

117

them or think of doing any such thing. Bihar should set an example
of ahimsa which could be followed by other provinces. Rather than
imitating Bengal or the Punjab, you should build a Bihar which
Bengal and the Punjab would like to emulate. I have come to Bihar
from Noakhali, but my heart is still in Noakhali. I used to say there
that I was working for Bihar in Noakhali. Similarly, I have not lost
sight of the work in Noakhali while I am in Bihar.
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—I, pp. 39-41, and Harijan, 30-3-1947

133. FROM THE DIARY1
March 15, 1947
Talked with . . . for an hour. Received . . . ’s letter. Since I took
time to explain why I was not moved by . . . ’s letter though it was
very loving, I could go to bed only at 11 o’clock. Got up at 2.30 to
visit the toilet. The rest of my time was spent in deciding how I could
convince him about my point. Still, I do not feel exhausted.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 53

1

118

Omissions in the item are as in the source.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

134. DISCUSSION WITH SWAMI ANAND AND
KEDAR NATH
[March 15/16, 1947] 1
QUESTION : Why did you not, according to your wont, take your co-workers
into confidence and carry them with you before embarking on this novel practice2 ?
Why this secrecy ?

GANDHIJI : No secrecy was intended. Everything was fortuitous.
Previous consultation with friends was ruled out by the very nature of
the thing. Besides, I hold that previous consent was unnecessary. At
the same time I should have insisted on ventilating the matter
thoroughly at the very start. If I had only done that, much of the
present trouble and commotion would have been avoided. The
omission was a serious flaw. I was asking myself as to what would be
an appropriate penance for it when Thakkar Bapa came 3 . You know
the rest of the story.
Q. The irreparable harm, if you weaken the foundation of the moral order on
which society rests and which has been built up by long and painful discipline, is
obvious. But no corresponding gain is apparent to us to justify a break with
established tradition. What is your defence ? We are not out to humiliate you or to
score a victory over you. We only wish to understand.

G. No moral progress or reform is possible if one is not
prepared to get out of the rut of orthodox tradition. By allowing
ourselves to be cribbed by castiron social conventions, we have lost.
The orthodox conception of the ninefold wall of protection in regard
to brahmacharya is in my opinion inadequate and defective. I have
never accepted it for myself. In my opinion even striving after the true
brahmacharya is not possible by keeping behind it. For 20 years I
was in closest touch with the West in South Africa. I have known the
writings on sex by eminent writers like Havelock Ellis and Bertrand
Russell and their theories. They are all thinkers of eminence, integrity
1
According to My Days with Gandhi, Swami Anand and Kedar Nath came to
Bihar on March 14, 1947. Their discussion was entirely private and continued the
next two days. Vide also footnote 1, “Letter to Nirmal Kumar Bose”, 17-3-1947
2
Gandhiji’s experiment in brahmacharya, involving Manu Gandhi. Vide
“Letter to Nirmal Kumar Bose”, 17-3-1947 also “Letter to Vallabhbhai Patel”,
1/2-2-1947
3
On February 24, 1947; vide “Discussion with A. V. Thakkar”, 24-2-1947

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

119

and experience. They have suffered for their convictions and for
giving expression to the same. While totally repudiating institutions
like marriage, etc., and the current code of morals—and there I
disagree with them—they are firm believers in the possibility and
desirability of purity in life independently of those institutions and
usages. I have come across men and women in the West who lead pure
lives although they do not accept or observe the current usages and
social conventions. My research runs somewhat in that direction. If
you admit the necessity and desirability of reform, of discarding the
old, wherever necessary, and building a new system of ethics and
morals suited to the present age, then the question of seeking the
permission of others or convincing them does not arise. A reformer
cannot afford to wait till others are converted; he must take the lead
and venture forth alone even in the teeth of universal opposition. I
want to test, enlarge and revise the current definition of
brahmacharya, by which you swear, in the light of my observation,
study and experience. Therefore, whenever an opportunity presents
itself I do not evade it or run away from it. On the contrary, I deem it
my duty—dharma—to meet it squarely in the face and find out where
it leads to and where I stand. To avoid the contact of a woman or to
run away from it out of fear, I regard as unbecoming of an aspirant
after true brahmacharya. I have never tried to cultivate or seek sex
contact for carnal satisfaction. I do not claim to have completely
eradicated the sex feeling in me. But it is my claim that I can keep it
under control.
Q. We are not aware of your ever having put before the people at large these
ideas of yours. On the contrary we have all along known you to have put before the
public ideas with which we are familiar, and which we have associated with your
striving. What is the explanation ?
G. Even today, so far as the people in general are concerned, I
am putting before them for practice what you call my old ideas. At
the same time, for myself, as I have said, I have been deeply
influenced by modern thought. Even amongst us there is the Tantra
school which has influenced Western savants like Justice Sir John
Woodroffe. I read his works in Yeravada prison. You have all been
brought up in the orthodox tradition. According to my definition,
you cannot be regarded as true brahmacharis. You are off and on

120

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

falling ill; you suffer from all sorts of bodily ailments. I claim that I
represent true brahmacharya better than any of you. You do not seem
to regard a lapse in respect of truth, nonviolence, nonstealing, etc., to
be so serious a matter. But a fancied breach in respect of
brahmacharya, i.e., relation between man and woman, upsets you
completely. I regard this conception of brahmacharya as narrow,
hidebound and retrograde. To me truth, ahimsa and brahmacharya
are all ideals of equal importance. They all call for an equal measure
of striving on our part, and lapse in respect of any of them is to me a
matter of equal concern. I maintain that my conduct in no way
constitutes a departure from the true ideal of brahmacharya. As
against it, brahmacharya which reduces itself to a system of
prescriptive do’s and don’ts and which is in vogue amongst us today
has a baneful effect upon society; it has lowered the ideal and robbed
it of its true content. I deem it my highest duty to put these
prescriptive conventions and taboos in their proper place and to
release the ideal from the fetters that have been put upon it.
Q. One last question. If your attitude and practice constitutes such an advance
in the cultivation of true selfrestraint, why does not its beneficial effect show in your
surroundings ? Why do we find so much disquiet and unhappiness around you ? Why
are your companions emotionally unhinged ?

I know well the shortcomings as well as virtues of my
companions. You do not know their other side. You jump to hasty
conclusions from superficial observation, which is unbecoming in a
striver after truth.
I am not so lost as you seem to think. I can only ask you to have
faith in me. I cannot give up at your bidding what to me is a matter of
deep conviction. I am sorry, I am helpless.
G.

Q. We cannot say we have been convinced. We feel unhappy. We cannot leave

the matter here. We shall continue to strive with you. Should you again feel prompted
to go against the established rules, just think of your sorrowing friends.

I know. But what can I do when I feel impelled by duty ? I
can imagine circumstances when I may feel it my clear duty to go
against the established rules. In such circumstances I cannot allow
myself to be bound down by any commitment whatsoever.
G.

Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, pp. 226-9

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

121

135. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
P ATNA ,

March 16, 1947
MY DEAR KU.,

I have your letter 1 . I have seen the power of attorney which I
enclose herewith. I suppose you know that it displaces your Chairman
and other members of the Board2 and enables you to play ducks and
drakes with the assets of the Board. So long as you know and realize
the immensity of the power you are taking, I feel quite safe.
I see from the papers that you have become a member of the
Congress Working Committee. There is much to be cleaned
in those stables. I have no doubt that you will count no cost too dear
to perform the cleansing operation. I shall watch your career with
considerable interest.
Send my love to Bharatan 3 wherever he is. Do you ever hear
from Sita4 ? Or, has she entirely disappeared from the village life such
as it was?
You will pass on to me all the titbits that you may consider I
should be aware of.
It is just discovered that you do not need my signature at all. I
had thought that I was the President of the Association. But if I am
not, I am glad of it because so much burden is off my shoulders.5
Love.
BAPU
S HRI J. C. K UMARAPPA
MAGANWADI
WARDHA
From a photostat : G. N. 10188

1

Dated February 1, 1947
Of Management of the All-India Village Industries Association
3
Addressee’s brother
4
Bharatan Kumarappa’s wife
5
On March 26, the addressee replied :“Thanks for the power of attorney which
reached me at Madras. You are still our President but not a Trustee. Only the Trustees
have to sign it. We shall not leave you off so easily from the Association. . . .”
2

122

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

136. LETTER TO SOLOMON ALEXANDER
P ATNA ,

March 16, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

Of course I knew your brother very well indeed. But I plead
with you to spare me at the present moment. I must not divide my
attention for things great or small. It will be time for me to consider
others if I come out safe from the fire which I am trying to quench.
The odds are so great that the fire may quench me, instead of my
quenching it.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S OLOMON ALEXANDER, E SQ.
BARRISTER-AT-LAW
25 R UE TALAAT HARB
ALEXANDRIA
(EGYPT)
From a photostat : G. N. 8037

137. LETTER TO T. R. VENKATARAMA SASTRI
P ATNA ,

March 16, 1947
DEAR VENKATARAMA SASTRI,

I have your precious letter about the proposed Sastriar
Memorial1 .
Let me tell you that I have not identified myself with the
Malaviyaji Memorial although I am deeply interested in the doings of
the Kashi Vishwavidyalaya.
As for the proposal, whilst I am deeply concerned with
everything about Sastriar I wonder if it is necessary to have an
institution in memory of the deceased for political education. Isn’t
that function performed by the Servants of India Society for which he
gave his life ? Political education is today being given by so many
1

In memory of V. S. Srinivasa Sastri who had died on April 17, 1946

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

123

parties in which I may mention the Socialist Party and the Communist
Party. However much one may differ from their way of thinking, it is
not possible to withhold admiration from them for drawing to their
fold people of learning, industry and self-sacrifice. I intensely dislike
destructive criticism unless it is accompanied at the same time with
constructive suggestions. I claim no exemption for my criticism.
Strictly speaking mine is no criticism. I have simply thrown out a
thought for your consideration. As at present equipped I would say
that it might be a good thing to make an appeal for sustaining and
expanding Sastriar’s last and best beloved institution. That it needs
expansion I have no doubt. I haven’t thought out how. I will add
however that the donors should earmark their donations for the object
to be particularized in the general appeal. At this juncture when
everything is in the meltingpot and institutions are undergoing rapid
transformation it may be necessary to take the precaution. If you
think that my suggestion is worthy of consideration you will have to
consult the present President1 of the Society.
The fact that I have taken deep interest in your project should
not be taken to mean that I shall identify myself with that or any other
project. My views about memorials have undergone change for some
years and experience is daily strengthening them. But this is not for
engaging you in considering them.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI T. R. VENKATARAMA S ASTRI
“KAUSTUBHA”
EDWARD ELLIOTS R OAD
MYLAPORE
MADRAS
From the original : T. R. Venkatarama Sastri Papers. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

1

124

Hriday Nath Kunzru

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

138. LETTER TO GEORGE WINTHROPLE
P ATNA ,

March 16, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. Of course I am interested in everything about
Thoreau and Emerson. My knowledge of Thoreau is confined to
Walden and Civil Disobedience and some stray writings of his. Civil
Disobedience was the work that gripped me. But I do not consider
myself worthy enough for the purpose of identifying myself with any
Thoreau Society.
GEORGE WINTHROPLE, E SQ.
C ONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy
: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

139. LETTER TO TARABEHN JASANI
P ATNA ,

March 16, 1947
CHI. TARA,

It is a great calamity for Manu, you and other members of the
family. I learnt about it only from Satish’s wire. I never expected such
an end to Mohanlal. But do we not see every day that the most
unexpected things happen ? He who is born must die. Knowing this,
we should learn to remain calm.
What more need I write. Write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 8788

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

125

140. ADVICE TO MUSLIM REFUGEES1
P ATNA ,

Sunday, March 16, 1947
You have my sympathy in your misery. What has happened
should never have happened. But I believe that everything is futile
unless there is a change of heart. I would suggest that you should go
to Noakhali. Go there and find out for yourself if the Hindus have not
been oppressed. If you are convinced about it, engage yourselves in
relief work and service in that place. Impress upon the minority that
they are your brethren, that they cannot leave the country, and that
they may do so only over your dead bodies. Tell even the oppressors
— let me say they are the members of the [Muslim] League — that
such tyranny would neither bring any benefit to their party nor would
it protect it in any way. And if the tyrants still continue to oppress,
you must lay down your lives to protect your brethren. You must
courageously tell them that they should first strike you before striking
the innocent. Even if there is one such person among you, your fame
would be matchless in all the world and God would shower flowers
over you, and that fragrance would spread in the entire country. I am
merely showing you your duty, since you have come to seek my
advice. I would be the happiest man to see you rising high and to see
Pakistan becoming really pak 2 . And, if you do this people would
come to you to learn the lessons of nonviolence and love.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 63

1
The refugees, accompanied by S. N. Maulvi, Dr. Azad Hussain and Hakim
Tasadduq Hussain, called on Gandhiji at 2.15 p. m.
2
Pure

126

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

141. ADVICE TO MUSLIM WOMEN1
P ATNA ,

Sunday, March 16, 1947
You should have faith in God. He is the one who looks after
everyone. I am only striving [to do my duty]. You mix with the Hindu
women. Tell the children in your families things which promote love
[among the two communities]. What you can do, men can never do.
Tell your husband, son or father, or whoever is there, that he should
rush to the rescue of the Hindus if they are terrorized by the Muslims
anywhere in the country. Protect the Hindu women and inspire
confidence in them that they are your own sisters. I have described
women as the very embodiment of nonviolence. God has given to
woman a loving heart which man does not possess. You should put it
to good use. It is as clear to me as daylight that as long as women do
not acquire qualities of refinement and do not realize their duty, the
country can make no progress. Women from numerous such Muslim
families have come to me. So many of them are just like daughters to
me. One of them is right in Noakhali. Amtussalaam is just skin and
bones, but she is putting up a brave fight. She undertook a number of
fasts. Raihana who comes from the family of Abbas Tyabji is just as
brave. She is a devotee of Krishna. She reads the Gita and the Koran
together. She understands the meaning of the Gita as much as she
understands the meaning of the Koran. I believe that she has more
Hindus than Muslims among her friends. There are many girls who
have given up distinctions of caste and creed. My advice to you is that
you should forget distinctions of caste and community if you want to
be happy. It is one God who has endowed us with human life. We are
all human beings, all men and women belonging to the same country.
Let us justify our religion as human beings.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 64

1
The Muslim women came clad in burqas. Gandhiji asked : “Why do you
observe purdah from me ? Women do not observe it with me. The real purdah should
be of the heart.” The women then removed their burqas.

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

127

142. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
P ATNA ,

March 16, 1947
I did not find time to write my speech for this silence day. I had
told you yesterday itself that Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan would speak
to you today. He will therefore address you today instead of me.
[From Urdu]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—I, p. 42

143. FROM THE DIARY1
P ATNA ,

Sunday, March 16, 1947
Today I was wide awake as it struck two. I did not seem to get
sleep. Then all at once I heard Manudi reciting the shlokas of the
morning prayer. I was startled. I called her a couple of times. Then
she was quiet. She did not say anything, but she was frightened. She
lifted my mosquitocurtain and held my hand. I stroked her for a few
minutes and asked her to be calm. Now she became conscious and
withdrew her hand. I asked her to go to sleep without worrying. I told
her not to worry about the prayers and assured her that I would wake
her up [in time]. That girl is worrying so much about me! She is just
like an innocent child. It is only because of that quality in her that she
has remained with me in such a trying yajna. I started thinking about
it. I am not happy about the bleeding from her nose. I have asked her
to keep a mud-pack on the back of her neck. I started thinking about
. . . I did not like the manner of . . .’s questions and the grin on his
face. I started thinking about my dharma and it was already 3.30 a.m.
I started cleaning my teeth and then woke up Manudi . . . Got the
prayers started at 3.55 a.m.
Held talks between 7.30 and 9.30 a.m. I explained to them my
point of view. In the light of my present views about brahmacharya I
felt that their ideas about brahmacharya were faulty and imperfect. It
is very necessary for them to improve those ideas along my line. I
have never sought the company of a woman with a view to satisfying
my passions. Of course I mentioned one exception. I have made
1

128

Omissions in the item are as in the source.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

progress by my actions and expect to advance further. I am not in any
way bound to. . . They may continue to write letters. I shall try to
reply. It would be better if only one of them wrote.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 60-1

144. LETTER TO SIR HUGH DOW
P ATNA ,

March 17, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

I was so struck by your reference (strange for a bureaucrat) to
individual conduct that I referred to it on Saturday at my after prayer
speech.1
Yesterday evening I met your Ministers and gave them the
purport of our talk of last Saturday. I told them that
1. you considered them to be dilatory about placating the
Muslims who were so much the injured party;
2. permanent officials interpreted this to mean that the Ministers
did not want them to be prompt in taking energetic action to restore
confidence among the Muslims;
3. the guilty ones were not properly dealt with;
4. the League demands were turned down not on merits but
because they were League demands.
The Ministers present totally refuted all these imputations and
the Chief Minister expressed considerable surprise. The Chief Minister
said that he and his colleagues had often differed from you on several
questions including the minorities. He added, however, that on behalf
of himself and his colleagues he had given you the assurance that in
their handling of the minority question they would readily accept
your advice even though there were differences between you and
them.
I am showing this to the Chief Minister to check up my version
of what the Ministers had said.
My only reason for writing this is not to advertise differences
between you and your Ministers but to remove misunderstandings and
to assist, wherever I can, in promoting goodwill between the retiring
British official world and the Indian politicians who are, and are
1

Vide “Speech at Prayer Meeting”, 15-3-1947

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

129

becoming growingly, responsible for the well being of the people
whom they guide and serve.
I casually referred to the condition of the working men in the
mica industry. But I shall await your promised note before I can
pursue it fully.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
H. E., THE GOVERNOR OF BIHAR
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 228-9

145. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
P ATNA ,

March 17, 1947
CHI. VALLABHBHAI,

Please read the enclosed papers about Paul and do what is
necessary. I am sorry to have to put you to all this trouble but I
cannot help it. However, if you can find no time at all to read them,
forget about the matter and return the papers. If you do anything
about it, you need not send them back.
Nathji and Swami had been here. We talked at great length.2
They themselves will write to you.
Sushila writes that you are not keeping good health; please be
careful.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2 : Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 351

1
2

130

For the addressee’s reply, vide ”Letter from Sir Hugh Dow”, 17-3-1947
Vide”Discussion with Swami Anand and Kedar Nath”

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

146. A LETTER1
P ATNA ,

Monday, March 17, 1947
You seem to believe that after thousands of years I am the one
born (as an incarnation of God). But I don’t think so. I claim that all
those who work with the same earnestness as I do can certainly do
what I have been able to. It should be possible for everyone to be
always vigilant and go on trying ceaselessly. But if what you believe is
true, should I not be able to realize even the physical impurities in me
?
Our definition of brahmacharya is imperfect. I am trying to
make it perfect. Even the sharp intelligence of . . . is incapable of
[understanding] brahmacharya. It was clear from the conversation
between us that . . . also does not know the meaning of
brahmacharya. I cannot express the pain I feel as I write these words.
I am steeling my heart to write this. . . . I claim that except on one
occasion I have not been a victim of passions and that is why I write
the harsh words above.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 67-8

147. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
ON THE TRAIN

March 17, 1947
CHI. SATIS BABU,

I have your letter. Write and tell me how the whole work is
going on. I understand about Sardar Jiwan Singh. I had written that
the accounts should be checked first. 2 But it does not matter if the
money has already been given. Now the balance should tally. Sardar
Jiwan Singh must be staying with you. If he needs special diet, arrange
for it. He requires meat and fish. Let him have these. Everything will
be set right with love.
1
2

Omissions in the letter are as in the source.
Vide “Letter to Stis Chandra Das Gupta”, 2-3-1947

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

131

Now how do you manage for the cloth? Could you get
handspun yarn? Do the weavers weave it? They are our true support.
Where is Hemprabhadevi1 ? How is she? She should not worry.
Nathji and Swami had come. They discussed Manu with me at
length.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G. N. 8964

148. NOTE TO NIRMAL KUMAR BOSE2
March 17, 1947
You may post it if you wish. There are errors of facts in the
letter. There are other defects to which I would draw your attention. I
would therefore advise you to wait till you have seen my opinion. But
do just as you please.3
My Days with Gandhi, p. 175

149. LETTER TO NIRMAL KUMAR BOSE4
March 17, 1947
CHI. NIRMAL BABU,

Your letter is full of inaccuracies and unwarranted assumptions.
I had asked you to discuss the thing with me. You could not do it. The
result is bad. I do not mind what opinion you hold, only it must be
well fortified
You should have ascertained my views from me before
accepting second-hand evidence however honest it might be.
I go beyond the orthodox view as we know it. My definition
does not admit of laxity. I do not call that brahmacharya that means
1

Addressee’s wife
According to the source, after their discussion with Gandhiji, Kedar Nath and
Swami Anand asked the addressee his views since Gandhiji had mentioned that “his
immediate personal associates did not see anything wrong in his acts”. The addressee
stated his views in a letter and gave it to them for communication to other friends.
Afterwards he placed before Gandhiji a copy of the letter along with the post-script.
As Gandhiji was observing silence, he wrote this note in reply. For extracts from the
addressee’s letter, vide “N. K. Bose Letter to Kedar Nath and Others”, 16-3-1947
3
Vide also the following two items.
4
This was written on the train to Masaurhi and handed over to the addressee
who was accompanying Gandhiji.
2

132

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

not to touch a woman. What I do today is nothing new for me. So far
as I known myself, I hold today the same view I held when about 45
years ago I took the vow. Without the vow in England as a student, I
freely mixed with women and yet I called myself a brahmachari for
the period of my residence there. For me, brahmacharya is that
thought and practice which puts you in touch with the Infinite and
takes you to His presence.1 In that sense Dayanand Saraswati2 was not.
Most certainly I am not. But I am trying to reach that state and, in
accordance with my belief, I have made substantial progress in that
direction.
I have not become modern at all in the same sense you seem to
mean. I am as ancient as can be imagined and hope to remain so to
the end of my life. If this displeases you, I cannot help it. Let me
appear to you and others as naked as I can.
You have not done justice to A, B or C. You do not know them
fully. Have you any right to judge them before you have taken the
trouble of knowing them as fully as possible? That you may not want
to or that you have no time, I would appreciate. But that very fact
should prevent you from passing judgement on them.
I am amazed at your assumption that my experiment im- plied
any assumption of woman’s inferiority. She would be, if I looked
upon her with lust with or without her consent. I have believed in
woman’s perfect equality with man. My wife was ‘inferior’ when she
was the instrument of my lust. She ceased to be that when she lay with
me naked as my sister. If she and I were not lustfully agitated in our
minds and bodies, the contact raised both of us.
Should there be difference if it is not my wife, as she once was,
but some other sister ? I do hope you will acquit me of having any
lustful designs upon women or girls who have been naked with me. A
or B’s hysteria had nothing to do with my experiment, I hope. They
were before the experiment what they are today, if they have not less
of it.
The distinction between Manu and others is meaningless for our
discussion. That she is my grand-daughter may exempt me from
criticism. But I do not want that advantage.
“Experiment” or prayog is an ill-chosen word. I have used it. It
differs from the present in the sense that the one could be stopped by
1
2

Vide also “Letter to Amrit Kaur”, 18-3-1947
Founder of Arya Samaj

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

133

me, the other being dharma could not be. Now comes the stop.
That I should take the public in my confidence before I do
anything new is [not] novel to me. In the present case there is nothing
new.
BAPU
My Days with Gandhi, pp. 176-8

150. NOTE TO NIRMAL KUMAR BOSE1
March 17, 1947
When must you go? There is no immediate hurry, is there? Let
us wait till the three days’ tour is over.
My Days with Gandhi, p. 178

151. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING 2
MASAURHI,

March 17, 1947
It is not necessary, perhaps, to tell you that I have undertaken
this tour not for pleasure but out of sorrow. I visit only those places
where Muslims have suffered in some way or the other at the hands of
Hindus. Everywhere I appeal to Hindus to atone for their sins.
A large number of Hindus attacked a handful of Muslims and
killed women and children. This is not bravery but cowardice. It is
cowardly to kill a person even under an apprehension that he is likely
to kill us. We have to show true repentance for whatever has
happened. If a brother of ours commits a crime, we cannot escape the
responsibility. I include myself when I say “we”. No one should
think that he has committed no crime and this old man is
unnecessarily implicating him. When one man commits a crime, all
mankind becomes responsible for it. Hence even if a single Hindu has
misbehaved here, all the Hindus will be put in the dock.
What the Muslims have done in Noakhali or what the Hindus
1

After receiving the letter dated March 17, vide the preceding item, the
addressee told Gandhiji that he “might have to 0leave him earlier than by the end of
the month”. Vide also “Letter to Nirmal Kumar Bose”, 18-3-1947
2
The meeting was attended by more than thirty thousand people. A very
large number of people participated in the Ramdhun for which Gandhiji congratulated
them.

134

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have done in Bihar brings no benefit to India; on the contrary it is an
obstacle to India’s independence. I have been told that people
shouted Mahavirjiki jai and Gandhijiki jai while committing these
heinous crimes. Such people have not understood me. I am appealing
to Hindus here that whoever has committed a crime should confess it.
Those who have committed robbery, arson or murder should come to
me and make a confession. I am no police officer; nor have I come
here to prosecute you. You should not hesitate to make a confession
before me at any rate. I shall not report the names of the criminals to
the Ministers here, even though they are my friends. You should
display your courage by confessing your guilt and ennoble your soul
by atoning for it.
Hindus have written to me that they have indeed committed the
crimes; but they plead that they have had enough provocation.
According to them, the Muslims took the offensive and the Hindus
retaliated in selfdefence. Now, I pose this question before you.
Suppose a man speaks ill of me or abuses me, should I retaliate by
abusing him and soil my own tongue? If a man turns into a devil,
should I confront him by becoming a devil myself? One who attacks
another person is a coward, but it would be an act of bravery to refuse
to be provoked even in the face of an attack. One should realize that if
the aggressor commits a shameful act one should not oneself commit
a similar act.
I know the people of Bihar very well and I have visited this
province very often. I had built great hopes on Bihar but this time the
people here have dashed them to the ground. The only thing left to us
now is to confess honestly that we are guilty of a serious crime. We
should atone for the crime and declare that it would never be
repeated. A Hindu friend has said, “I agree that you should have
fought with those Muslims who had provoked you; but what is the
justification for thousands of Hindus killing innocent women and
children? Even if you had resorted to violence, you should have done
it in a brave manner.”
Muslims complain that the Provincial Government’s hands are
also not clean and the Ministers participated in the atrocities
committed on the Muslims. It is difficult for me to believe this; I
cannot also believe that the Chief Minister had a hand in this. Hindus

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

135

152. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
P ATNA,

March 18, 1947
CHI. AMRIT,

I had your letter. I wanted to write to you at once but never got
the chance. It is a very strenuous time I am having here. But do not
worry.
You remember those two notebooks containing rich treasures
from the Bible and other Christian literature. If they have not taught
you and me to be anxious for nothing and nobody, they have taught
nothing worth learning, for our faith in the living God is to be
measured by the extent of freedom from anxiety of any kind
whatsoever and full faith in God requires an accurate knowledge of
His laws and corresponding obedience thereto. This is the sum total of
nature cure. The supreme law, making others superfluous, is heartassimilation of Ramanama in every fibre of our being. The truth of
this is verified in everyday experience.
I note what you say about your suffering and about Dr. Jacob’s
treatment. I hope to be able to learn some day that you have shed all
your illnesses.
Tell Shummy 1 that he belies the teaching of the Bible which
among our company he seems to know best.
Sardar2 must not have any swelling whatsoever. But his
obstinacy is very great.
I have asked you to pay me a brief visit. You might be of some
use in the work that is being done here. That means your sparing a
fortnight at the most. But I do not want you to neglect the duty you
have undertaken, of course with my full consent.
Who told you that I had consented to take some rest? That rest
must certainly come some day. Meantime I am learning day by day,
though little by little, that all work, without any the slightest trace of
anxiety, is true and living rest.
Jajuji3 has sent me a copy of your letter about the Secretaryship.
I want you to give me a full and accurate account of the big
tragedy that is going on in the Punjab.
Surely you cannot be called “Her Highness” as Catlin calls
1

Shumshere Singh, addressee’s brother
Vallabhbhai Patel
3
Shrikrishnadas Jaju, Secretary, A. I. S. A.
2

136

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you.
Lastly about myself. I had an affectionate but mournful visit
from Nathji and Swami Anand. I gave them as much time as I was
capable of giving. Our discussions were full, frank and cordial. You
will have no difficulty in accepting at its face value my statement that
not one of our company knows the full value and implications of
brahmacharya, and that among these ignoramuses I am the least
ignorant and the most experienced. With one solitary exception I have
never looked upon a woman with a lustful eye. I have touched
perhaps thousands upon thousands. But my touch has never carried
the meaning of lustfulness. I have lain with some naked, never with the
intention of having any lustful satisfaction. My touch has been for our
mutual uplift. I would like those who have felt otherwise, if there are
any, truly to testify against me. Even the one solitary instance referred
to by me was never with the intention of despoiling her. Nevertheless
my confession stands that in that case my touch had lustfulness about
it. I was carried away in spite of myself and but for God’s intervention
I might have become a wreck.
My meaning of brahmacharya is this:
One who never has any lustful intention, who by constant
attendance upon God has become proof against conscious or
unconscious emissions, who is capable of lying naked with naked
women, however beautiful they may be, without being in any manner
whatsoever sexually excited. Such a person should be incapable of
lying, incapable of intending or doing harm to a single man or
woman in the whole world, is free from anger and malice and
detached in the sense of the Bhagavadgita. Such a person is a full
brahmachari. Brahmachari literally means a person who is making
daily and steady progress towards God and whose every act is done in
pursuance of that end and no other.
You say K.1 and N.2 had agreed to withdraw their boycott. From
the letters I have, such is not my impression. Nor did I gather that
impression from N[athji] and S[wami].
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 3702. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6511

1
Kishorelal Mashruwala and Narahari Parikh; vide “Telegram to Kishorelal G.
Mashruwala”, 9-2-1947
2
Ibid

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

137

153. LETTER TO NIRMAL KUMAR BOSE1
March 18, 1947
CHI. NIRMAL BABU,

If you must leave today I must not stand between you and your
duty as you conceive it. You made me so used to you that I shall miss
you. Pyarelal I cannot have just now. He must be in his place. If you
leave today, I suppose you have arranged to hand over all papers in
perfect order. The only one who can take charge is Dev.
Your explanation does not give me satisfaction. But I must not
argue. If you want me to do so, I could do it through correspondence
which perhaps better suits your nature. Of course you are at liberty to
discuss the whole of me and my writings with anybody you like. This
applies equally to the three letters2 . I simply drew your attention to
what appeared to be a hasty decision and that too in order to see as
much perfection in you as possible.
“Haste is waste”.3
BAPU’S
blessings
My Days with Gandhi, p. 181

154 LETTER TO JAG PARVESH CHANDAR
P ATNA,

March 18, 1947
DEAR JAG PARVESH CHANDAR,

I have tried desperately to overtake your letter received on the
26th ultimo. It is remarkable that you have not dated your letter.4
I did get your book Is Grouping of Provinces Compulsory? and
1

This was in reply to the addressee’s letter written after a long discussion with
Gandhiji. For extracts from the letter, vide Appendix V.
2
Vide “Letter to Nirmal Kumar Bose”, 17-3-1947; also “Letter to N. K. Bose”,
7-2-1947
3
The addressee explains: “At a quarter to three in the afternoon I bade goodbye to Bapu. . . . He blessed me and said, “You have taken your decision in haste.”
4
This was in reply to the addressee’s undated letter which read: “Ever since
December 22, 1946 I am confined to bed due to nervous breakdown. All my limbs are
tied with the strings of fear. I am under the treatment of expert doctors but a few words
of advice from you will carry more weight than anything else. Once the late Shri
Mahadev Desai suffered from nervous breakdown and he was under your care. Please do
spare a few minutes and let me know the treatment that Shri Desai underwent.”

138

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I noticed that you have answered the question in the negative. A
trained lawyer in Nagpur has done likewise.
Mahadev I suppose did not have the same malady that you seem
to have. In any case unless I know more fully I can’t guide you.
Moreover, Mahadev had put himself under an Ayurvedic physician at
that time, staying in bed. Of course he did so with my consent.
Therefore you will see that I cannot appropriate full credit for such
recovery as Mahadev had.
You will see that I am just now in Bihar for the same cause
which took me to Noakhali which means that I have to attend to two. I
would like you to tell me all about the tragedy that is still going on in
the Punjab. Has your portion of Lahore also been affected?
S HRI JAG P ARVESH C HANDAR
8 J B LOCK
MODEL TOWN
LAHORE
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

155. LETTER TO VINODINI
P ATNA,

March 18, 1947
CHI. VINODINI1 ,

How is it that you have still not sent to Chi. Jaisukhlal the letters
regarding Pyarelal? He is perturbed and is drawing unfavourable
conclusions against you both and Pyarelal. Pyare- lal of course has
written to say that all the letters should be sent. What objection can
you have, then? And that, too, when you have to show the letters to
your own father? I would advise you to send the letters immediately to
Jaisukhlal and apologize to him for the delay.
I trust both of you are well.
Blessings from
BAPU

[PS.]
For the present I shall have to stay on in Bihar. I shall be touring
the different parts, but the headquarters will be at Patna. Manu is well.
She also is angry with you, but will of course calm down.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIV
1

Daughter of Jaisukhlal Gandhi

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

139

156. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL GANDHI
P ATNA,

March 18, 1947
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,

I got your letter. I have written to Vinodini again. 1 There must
be some misunderstanding. That she would deliberately withhold the
letters is not the impression I have of her. However, I have written
quite strongly to her.
Manu is getting on quite well. She wins everybody’s heart by
her spirit of service. I am quite hopeful that her health will become
perfectly normal. She is being treated with my remedies only—earth,
water, ether, fire and air. If Ramanama sinks deep into her heart, it will
be easy enough for her to benefit from these five elements. She is
quite regular, of course, in her lessons.
You need not worry at all regarding Pyarelal. I do not see the
slightest need for Manu to give up her lessons, etc., owing to this.
Manu’s good will be Pyarelal’s good. Manu is firm in this matter.
There will be reason for fear only if I am proved mistaken.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIV

157. DISCUSSION WITH MUSLIM REFUGEES
MASAURHI,

March 18, 1947
REFUGEES: Please give us an assurance that our lives, property and honour

will be protected.2
GANDHIJI:

Efforts are being made in this direction. I shall advise
the Government to hold all the Hindus in a village responsible for any
harm to its Muslim minority and to punish them strictly according to
law.
R. Securities should be taken from gangsters and influential people in the

locality so that they may not foment riots again.
1

Vide the preceding item.
Most of the houses in Masaurhi were razed to the ground during the riots and
all but 25 out of a population of 1,000 had fled from the village.
2

140

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Those persons who had led the riots should be held
responsible for law and order in the locality to prevent recurrence of
riots. As it is not right to hold everyone responsible for the riots, it
would not be right to punish everyone for the riots; nor would it be
easy to do so. But if you can recognize and prove anyone’s
participation in the riots, the law will certainly punish him.
G.

R. We should be issued licenses to possess arms for self-protection.

G. It is strange that I am hearing the same arguments here which
I used to hear in Noakhali. I shall certainly oppose this. I can never
understand why some or all of you should be given arms. This is not
the way of creating an atmosphere of friendship. I had told the
Hindus in Noakhali that they could not live there nor could the local
Government protect them if the entire Muslim population was hostile
to them. Should the Government kill 80 per cent of the population to
protect them? No government can do this today. I would like to tell
you that my ways are different. I believe that a man should become
brave but bravery consists not in killing but in getting killed and that
too without hatred for the killer. Muslims were no cowards, but they
are terrified today and that too on account of us—this makes me hang
my head in shame. If my staying here has any meaning, you should
shed your anxiety. I shall not go away till you yourself ask me to go,
and assure me that Hindus and Muslims are living like brothers again.
R. There should be some arrangement so that all Muslims can live together.

This talk of ‘pockets’ is not new to me. As soon as I arrived
in Bihar, I went to see the leader of the Muslim League, Barrister
Abdul Aziz of Patna. He explained to me everything. Earlier I used to
oppose the idea of ‘pockets’; but now I understand the logic behind
the demand. I can very well understand that one just cannot stay at a
place where one’s relations and friends have been massacred. Hence if
people want to shift to villages where there is a large number of
Muslims, they can migrate there with mutual consent.
I have advised the Government to build houses for displaced
persons or give them funds for the purpose if they so choose. If you
demand, however, that the Government should provide you
everything, it may not be in a position to do so because it would mean
acquisition of some people’s lands. And this would lead to all sorts of
complications. If there is any vacant piece of land and you can settle
G.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

141

there, you may certainly do so. A big landlord from North Bihar was
ready to take as many Muslims as would like to stay on his lands. If
you agree I shall write to him.
R. We should receive compensation for whatever we have lost.

G. Even the Government would go bankrupt if it agreed to this.
Some people claim they have lost lakhs, some others claim they have
lost crores. How can we evaluate the actual loss? I think the
Government would not be in a position to pay even onefourth of the
claims. It can only provide shelter or give money to enable people to
stand on their own feet. In Noakhali, many weavers and fishermen had
practically nothing to support themselves. There I had suggested that
the local Government should advance them loans which could be
repaid in easy instalments. Money alone has no value. You are all
farmers, a hard working lot. If you take courage in both hands, you
will forget in no time what you have undergone. Moreover a
commission is being set up. Its object is not only to record whatever
has happened, but also to examine the steps that are being taken and
to recommend measures for the future.
R. 50 per cent of us should be taken in the police force.

G. I am totally opposed to such demands. I told Hindus in
Noakhali: “I will not put in a word for a Hindu police officer. Does it
make any sense that an officer is removed just because he is a
Muslim? Of course, he should certainly be removed if he is
inefficient. And after all, the officers are going to carry out only what
the Chief Minister of Bengal, Shaheed Suhrawardy Saheb, wants them
to do. If Shaheed Saheb is good, the officers will be good; but if he
himself is bad, how can they remain good?”
R. The Government or the Congress should pay us compensation or loans in

proportion to the size of our business.
G. The Government should only advance loans and not pay
compensation.
R. Stolen goods are being recovered. This work should be done swiftly and

firmly. Aid should be given to those who want to buy looms and yarn. They should be
given free rations as long as they do not earn enough for their sustenance.
G. All efforts must certainly be made to recover looted property.
To those whose tools and properties have been totally destroyed
Government must provide shelter and foot till they can stand on their

142

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

own feet. But if someone argues that the Government should go on
providing everything free, then that will not be feasible. It will mean
the Government should provide everything free to an exmillionaire
until he starts earning his millions. This is a ridiculous proposition.
R. Adequate arrangements should be made for recovering abducted girls.

G. Certainly.

Please give the names and addresses of such girls to
me. I shall immediately try to trace them. Hindus have been writing to
me to let them know even if there is one such girl; and they will move
heaven and earth to recover her.
R. We should have complete freedom to practise our religious rites, as we used

to enjoy before the riots.
G. Certainly,

it should be so.

R. The Government should make early and adequate arrangements to repair or

rebuild before the rainy season such houses as were damaged during the riots.
G. Certainly,

this work should be finished early.

The following decisions taken at the meeting of the refugees were placed
before Gandhiji for his comments:
1. The relief camps should be situated near police stations instead of inside the
towns. Gandhiji should be requested to depute two special workers for each camp.
G. I

agree.

2. We shall, besides Government help, raise volunteers with the cooperation
of Hindus for our protection, clearing of our houses and so on.
G. Right.
3. Panchayats will be formed which will perform such functions as scotching
false rumours, settling internal disputes, returning mortgages and striving to recover
stolen goods and so on.
G. Formation of panchayats is welcome. If people cooperate
among themselves, I shall help them in every possible way.
4. The loans for relief should be advanced in a spirit of mutual help.
G. Right.
5. Women volunteers should also be recruited from among the Muslims as well
as Hindus and they should, in addition to other work, strive to recover abducted
women.
G. Right.
6. After constructing the houses, essential things like utensils, cots, small

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

143

tables, etc., should also be provided.
G. Right.
7. Licences for arms should be issued on the recommendations of the
panchayat. They should not be issued to persons who do not need them or who want
them for sport.
G. That’s

right.

[From Urdu]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar— II, pp. 4-9

158. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
BIR,

March 18, 1947
I saw today the wreckage caused by us at Masaurhi. I had read
in newspapers the Muslims League version of the happenings at
Masaurhi, and I confess that I thought the version was grossly
exaggerated. I did not believe that man could be so depraved or that
Biharis could stoop so low. But today I witnessed it with my own eyes.
When Muslims fled you either looted their property or destroyed it.
They had not harmed you in any way. I have come here with the
resolve or serving the Muslims. I am a servant of God and therefore
consider it my duty to serve all human beings.
It is very unfortunate that our hearts have not yet been cleansed.
I concede that the Muslims behaved very viciously in Calcutta and
Noakhali. But how can that be avenged in Bihar? It was a very wrong
decision to observe a Noakhali Day here. 1 Had I known it, I would
never have allowed such an observance in Bihar. I am very sorry that
my name was falsely dragged into this affair and I was maligned.
My statements were presented to the public in a twisted and
distorted form. When Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru constituted the
Provisional Government at Delhi,2 people wished to celebrate the
occasion like Diwali. When I heard this, I said we should do no such
thing because Jawaharlal and his colleagues had put on a crown of
thorns.3 The Muslim League had not joined the Government and it
was a pity that riots had broken out in Noakhali. But my statement was
1

On October 25, 1946
On September 2, 1946
3
Vide “Speech at Prayer Meeting”, 2-9-1946
2

144

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

distorted and people were told that Gandhi wanted them to observe a
Noakhali Day. I had never even dreamt of this. And when the
Noakhali Day was observed, people were so much excited that they
thought they were expected to settle the Noakhali scores with the
Muslims.
Hindus and Muslims used to live here as good neighbours. They
had mutual love and affection. They might have quarrelled
occasionally, but that did not affect their relations. They used to
become friends again soon. It is an altogether different story now.
Today celebration of any Day leads to fratricide. I have said that this
must not happen while I am alive. I can never be a witness to
fratricide. If this thing is repeated in Bihar I shall perish in that
conflagration. I have heard that the Muslims here are panicstricken
over the Punjab Day to be observed on the 23rd. I hope this is a false
alarm. I assert that we must not observe a Punjab Day. If we do this, it
will lead to dreadful consequences. The freedom of our country will
become a distant dream. I pray to God that He must never let me live
to witness that day. I am awakening the whole of Bihar through these
words addressed to you.
While I was coming to the village of Bir, the residents of two
villages stopped me on the way and handed over to me two letters.
The first letter was addressed jointly by the Hindus and Muslims of
Sain. They also contributed Rs. 55 for the relief of distressed Muslims
in Bihar. I wish to read out to you their letter. They write:
We the residents of Sain are pained to see you in anguish which has
been caused by our foolishness. We are extremely sorry for what has
happened. Here, however, we Hindus and Muslims lived like brothers despite
the prevailing lawlessness and we are happy and proud to tell you that we are
living as brothers even today. We seek your blessings that we may continue to
live in love and affection.

The other letter was given to me by the residents of Barni. They
write:
When the riots were going on all around we formed a peace committee.
No one was harmed here and no disturbance was caused in our area. There is
absolutely no difference between Hindus and Muslims. We are working on the
same lines even today, and we assure you that we will always continue to live
like brothers.

The residents of this village also were not involved in any riot;
and yet they are feeling sorry. This has made me very happy.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

145

Some of our Muslim brothers have said that they are afraid of
returning to their homes. Thieves and dacoits have carried away their
goods. According to me, even the thieves and dacoits are our brothers.
It would be ideal if they gave up their profession. But if that is not
possible, they should at any rate not rob the innocent people whom we
have beaten away from their homes.
Now you should contribute as much as you can for the relief of
the Muslims in distress. I cannot collect the donations myself, because
that exhausts me, besides I shall have to work during the night also.
Volunteers are going round for collection. Please donate the
maximum amount you can and thereby earn the merit for it and at the
same time atone for your sins.
[From Urdu]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—II, pp. 10-2

159. TELEGRAM TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
P ATNA,

[March 19, 1947] 1
S ATISCHANDRA DASGUPTA
KAZIRKHIL
R AMGANJ
IF

YOU

JOIN

CAN
ME

SPARE
PATNA

BISEN2

AND

IF

HE

WISHES

HE

CAN

IMMEDIATELY.

GANDHI
From a photostat: G. N. 7713

160. LETTER TO NIRMAL KUMAR BOSE
BIR,

March 19, 1947
CHI. NIRMAL BABU,

Now that you are gone, I must say I did not like your abrupt
departure. Manu was disturbed and Y asked if she had been the cause
of your sudden departure. I told her I did not think so; but there was
an uncertain ring about my ‘no’. If you went without any other cause
1
2

146

From the reference to the telegram in the letter to the addressee; vide p. 128.
Shiv Balak Bisen

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

than the call from the University,1 I have nothing to say.
What is Freudian philosophy? I have not read any writing of his.
One friend, himself a professor and follower of Freud, discussed his
writings for a brief moment. You are the second.
I do not want to emphasize my impression 2 that you jump to
hasty conclusions. You ought to know the three more fully. You are
not just to them.
Have you in the light of my letter3 and discussion accepted my
position that I am not guilty of modernity? If you hold on to the view
you have expressed in your letter 4 to K. you owe it to me to explain
your standpoint and enable me to understand myself more fully than
I do.
Blessings from

BAPU
My Days with Gandhi, p. 183

161. DISCUSSION WITH CONGRESS WORKERS5
BIR,

March 19, 1947
Shah Uzair Munimi, President of the District Congress Committee, described
the devastation in Patna district. According to him the district of Patna was the worsthit in Bihar. After listening to his report, Gandhiji said:

What should we do now? Have you thought of something?
Shah Saheb replied that if they could get even a few honest men, things could
be set right. Thereupon Gandhiji asked:

Is it or isn’t it a fact that quite a large number of Congressmen
took part in the disturbances? I ask this question because people are
making this allegation. But the Congressmen assembled here can
themselves tell the truth. How many of the 132 members of your
Committee were involved? It would be a very great thing if all of you
assert that none of you was involved. But this assertion cannot be
made. These 132 are supposed to be the elected representatives of the
people. But I learn there is a lot of fraud involved in this. There are
many in the Congress who register bogus members by paying four
1

As stated by the addressee in his letter dated March 18; vide Appendix V.
Vide “Letter to Nirmal Kumar Bose”, 18-3-1947
3
Vide”Letter to Nirmal Kumar Bose”, 17-3-1947
4
Vide “N. K. Bose’s Letter to Kedar Nath and Others”, 16-3-1947
5
This was held in the morning.
2

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

147

annas from their own pockets and thus become elected
representatives. I have also worked in the Congress. Today I am not
even a fouranna member. But there was a time when I was a member
of the Working Committee and I was virtually all in all. Hence I know
the Congress inside out. This Police Station has jurisdiction over 300
villages which have elected 132 representatives. They can do
substantial work if they so choose.
I wish to ask you, how could you live to see an old woman of
110 years being butchered before your eyes? How could you tolerate
it? I do not wish to talk about anything else. I have vowed to do or
die. I will not rest nor let others rest. I would wander all over on foot
and ask the skeletons lying about how all that had happened. There is
such a fire raging in me that I would know no peace till I have found
a solution for all this. You know what happened when I reached
Sodepur 1 . I had not gone there for rest. Hence I left for Kazirkhil and
Chaumuhani. Chaumuhani is a big Station. What was the use of
waiting there? Kazirkhil had been devastated. But the station-master
there had transformed it into some sort of an ashram. So I requested
him to take me to some place where there were no amenities. Hence I
proceeded to Srirampur 2 . It was a predominantly Muslim area with
only a sprinkling of Hindu houses which had been burnt down. The
Muslims welcomed me. Even then I hurried from there and wandered
from village to village. I am afraid I will have to go through the same
ordeal in Bihar. If I find that my comrades are deceiving me, I will be
furious and I shall walk barefoot on and on through hail or storm. I
would throw away the soft seat and other amenities which you have
offered me. After all, it was in Bihar that I had renounced similar
comforts earlier. When I came to Champaran in 1917, though
Rajendra Babu and other leaders were my friends, they used to have
their meals in separate kitchens. I asked them why we should eat
separately when we were all engaged in rendering service. Then I set
up a common kitchen. My wife Kasturba, Mahadev Desai’s wife
Durgabehn, and Narahari Bhai’s3 Manibehn all of them together used
to cook and all of us had our meals together. I would never get more
loyal and hearty co-operation in the whole world than what I got from
Rajendra Babu, Brijkishore Babu, Janak Babu, Dharani Babu and
Gorakh Babu. As a result of this there was a transformation in
Champaran. The British indigo planters lost their hold. But I am told
the Indian planters today have become even more powerful. The
lesson we learnt in Champaran was the result of the hardships
1
2
3

148

On October 29, 1946
On November 20, 1946
Narahari Parikh

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

undergone by the people of Bihar. Without them I could not be what I
am nor could my achievements be worth much. I am a bird of
passage. God has not allowed me to stay at one place. We have to
work in the same spirit today with which Brijkishore Babu had
worked. Today I do not find that honesty or loyalty. I once again
appeal to you to work only if you can do so truthfully. My words
may sound harsh, but you must realize that even if you forsake me, I
shall not leave Bihar. It is difficult to force me out of Bihar. During
the Champaran satyagraha, the Commissioner of Tirhut notified me
that I, being an outsider, should leave the area. 1 I told Brijkishore
Babu and Rajendra Babu that I wished to challenge the Government
and that they would have to give up their legal profession and become
my clerks or interpreters if they decided to back me up. I gave them a
night’s time to think it over. Rajendra Babu had been offered a
judicial post. But the next morning itself he and Brijkishore Babu
announced that they had decided to give up their legal practice and to
become my clerks and interpreters. The Bihar of today is the result of
the transformation of their hearts. It is now for you to decide whether
I should go in the car or travel on foot. Of course I prefer walking.
When Muslims in Noakhali taunted me to go to Bihar, I used to feel
hurt. Some Muslims look upon me as an enemy of Islam. Some
people expressed doubts whether I could achieve what I wanted to in
Noakhali. But I had no doubts. Even today I believe that I can work
for Noakhali and the whole of India from Bihar. The non-violent
fight which I had launched against injustice and oppression in
Champaran had sent new life pulsating throughout India. The work in
Bihar this time is far more difficult and significant. This time it seems
I will have to strive to the utmost to prove that Hinduism and Islam
can exist side by side. This is being put to test today. Many people
believe that they cannot and one will have to remain subordinate to
the other. I do not think so. If the Hindu Mahasabha insists that
Muslims should remain subordinate to Hindus or if the Muslim
League insists that Hindus should subordinate themselves to Muslims,
this will not do. No one need live as subordinate to another. All have
to live together as equals. Even Jinnah Saheb has now declared that
the minorities will be shown greater consideration in regions where
Muslims constitute the majority.
Q. All people lived like brothers in Bihar before the trouble started in Bengal.
Later on Noakhali turned everyone’s head. The events in the Punjab are also casting
their shadows. It is necessary that we go and live among the people to prevent the
outside evil influence from spreading and to maintain cordial relations. But today
1

Vide “Letter to District Magistrate, Champaran”, 16-4-1917 and Appendix
“N. K. Bose’s Letter to Kedar Nath and Others”, 16-3-1947

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

149

many Congressmen do not wish to serve the people; they want power for themselves.
They join the Congress for their own selfish ends and indulge in intrigue and
groupism. How shall we get out of this mire? If we strengthen the Congress in Bihar
we can check the evil. The people of Bihar have behaved badly, we have become
vicious, the whole atmosphere has been vitiated. In this atmosphere, many
Congressmen kept quiet and could not stem the tide, and some of them were carried
away by it.
A. It was easy to wrest power from British hands but it is very

difficult to overcome our own weakness and to set up an efficient
administration. You should tell me whether you can cooperate with
me in this work or not. If you cannot, I request you to leave me.
There are people today who declare that I am out of date and that I
should give up all politics. I do not agree with this. This region is
teeming with Hindus. We will not rely upon the police for our work
although they are our police. We must do this work ourselves.
Suhrawardy Saheb had developed the police in Noakhali to protect
me from Muslim fanatics; but I made friends with Muslims there. The
Government here have also deployed the police. I ask them, what is
the police for? Muslims are not going to kill me here; the Hindus may
probably think of doing so. That is why I wish that the task of
establishing peace should be undertaken by you all and not only by
the Government although it is our Government. You should either
achieve success in your mission or die in the attempt.1
[From Urdu]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar — II, pp. 13-6

162. TALK WITH VILLAGE REPRESENTATIVES2
BIR,

March 19, 1947
Great care should be taken while constituting the panchayats,
otherwise gangsters may get into them. The British Government by
appointing revenue and police functionaries for every village has
1

According to Mahatma Gandhi — The Last Phase, Gandhiji was visibly
agitated. In a low, impassioned voice he shared his anguish with Badshah Khan, who
sat listening with a grave face. Soon Badshah Khan also left and only one of
Gandhiji’s secretaries remained in the room. Sadly Gandhiji turned to him and
remarked: “You see where I stand !”
2
Shah Uzair Munimi had reported that, from among the representatives, an
eleven-member committee had been formed and it had agreed to ameliorate the
conditions in the six affected circles as also to form volunteer corps and panchayats.

150

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

strengthened the hands of the goondas. This has undermined the
authority of the village panchayats. While exercising centralized
power over the country, the British Government has polluted the
atmosphere in the villages. The petty village officials have become
masters instead of being servants. So great care has to be taken to
ensure that these gangster elements do not get into the panchayats. It
will be a good procedure to elect the panchayat by ballot. Let
everyone secretly write on blank pieces of paper five names of
persons whom he or she may like to form the panchayat. The first five
persons who get the maximum votes should be elected to the
panchayat.
Those who have committed murders and taken part in riots, or
those who are suspected of such acts, should be debarred from
membership of the panchayats. They should themselves keep out of
these bodies. If we are not able to cultivate this spirit we shall not be
able to do anything well. Even a government cannot function unless
the people are organized. The committee that has been formed will
wield real power and do some useful work if it works honestly.
At this stage, Gandhiji was asked: “Can those Congressmen who have
allegations against them remain office bearers in the Congress?”

Suppose I am innocent but the Muslims suspect my bona fides
and want me to stay out of it, I shall stay out but still I will continue to
serve them. I shall advise even leaders like Jagat Babu and Murli Babu
to keep out if they have been so accused. This is the convention in
Britain too. If there is a false accusation against you even when you
are absolutely innocent, you should keep out of any committee and
continue to serve the Muslims. If you work in good faith, believe me,
the Muslims who are suspicious today will give up their suspicion and
cooperate with you.
There are many thugs in the Congress. Thugs are in the
ascendance everywhere today. Those Congressmen who are suspect
should leave the Congress and serve the Muslims if they so choose.
But one should never carry a dagger in one’s sleeve while pretending
to chant the name of Rama. Some people ask how any work can be
done where there are a number of gangsters. The volunteers can tell
the gangsters that they are not afraid of them and continue to work. If
they say this and courageously go ahead with their work, no one dare
displease them. We have to be brave and honest. Wherever there are
goondas there are good people as well and they should tell the

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

151

goondas that they would rather die than run away in the face of an
attack. Today there are more goondas than honest people in a village.
The problem is how to remedy the situation.
[From Urdu]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—II, pp. 17-8

163. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
GORIAKHARHI,

March 19, 1947
I shall say after the prayers the few things that I wish to tell you.
Since there is some time yet for the prayers to commence, I wish it to
be utilized for collecting money for the relief of afflicted Muslims.
We have committed a great sin by killing and robbing innocent
Muslims. We can do some atonement through such donations. Hence
I appeal to you to contribute your maximum.
After the prayers Gandhiji continued:

I have seen signboards put up at the prayer ground to indicate
separate enclosuers. Some of them are in English and some in Hindi. I
was amazed to see the English boards. For whom are they written?
The newspaper correspondents are all Indians and they can read
Hindi. Are the English signboards then intended for Badshah Khan?
Or did you think that I had stayed away from India for many years
and had therefore been denationalized?
This is very objectionable. I am not an enemy of the English
language or script. But I believe that a thing in the wrong place is
ugly. I can be honoured only by being kept in my proper place.
Similar is the case with the English language and script. They are not
appropriate for the Indian people. I have said it time and again, and I
repeat it, that Hindustani alone can become the common language of
all Indians. Neither Hindi nor Urdu can take that place. I do not claim
to be proficient in Hindi; but I do understand Hindi well and to some
extent Urdu also. I used to attempt conversation in Urdu with my
friend Maulana Abdul Bari of Firangi Mahal, Lucknow and other
friends; and even now I try to speak chaste and correct Urdu with
Muslim friends.
Till all the Hindus and Muslims in our country willingly accept

152

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

one language and one script, it is essential that we learn both Hindi
and Urdu. Whether or not the Muslims learn Hindi and Devanagari,
we must learn the Urdu language and script. At the moment we have
also to atone for our crimes against the Muslims. Hence it is all the
more necessary that we demonstrate our affection and sympathy for
them by learning their language and script. From tomorrow onwards I
wish to see signboards in Hindi and Urdu wherever I go. Brijkishore
Babu and Rajendra Babu who accompanied me during those early
days in Champaran normally used to write in Urdu only.
We should try our utmost to rehabilitate the Muslims who used
to live in our neighbourhood. We should appeal to them to forget the
past. We should bring them back to their homes. We should tell them
that they can kill us if they want to, but must come back to their
homes. The volunteers should become Khudai Khidmatgars1 . They
should respectfully appeal to the people to follow the dictates of their
religion which taught them that their outward behaviour should be in
keeping with their conscience and that they should tread the path of
truth. Those who have committed crimes should honestly confess
them and atone for them. All those who have taken part in the riots
are sinners and they should atone for their sins.
[Form Urdu]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—II, pp. 19-20

164. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU2
March 20, 1947
I would like you. . . to tell me what you can about the Punjab
tragedy. I know nothing about it save what is allowed to appear in the
Press which I thoroughly distrust. Nor am I in sympathy with what
may be termed by the old expression of “hush hush policy”. It is
amazing how the country is adopting almost the every measures which
it criticized during the British administration. Of course, I know the
reason behind it. It makes no appeal to me.
* * *
1
2

Literally, servants of God
Omissions in the letter are as in the source.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

153

I have long intended to write to you asking you about the
Working Committee resolution1 on the possible partition of the
Punjab. I would like to know the reason behind it. I have to speak
about it. I have done so in the absence of full facts with the greatest
caution. Kripalani said in answer to a question in Madras that it was
possible that the principle might be applied to Bengal also. I was
asked by a Muslim Leaguer of note. . . if it was applicable to the
Muslim-majority provinces, why it should not be so to a Congressmajority province like Bihar. I think I did not know the reason behind
the Working Committee’s resolution, nor had I the opportunity. I
could only give my own view which was against any partition based
on communal grounds and the two-nation theory. Anything was
possible by compulsion. But willing consent required an appeal to
reason and heart. Compulsion or show of it had no place in
voluntariness.2
Mahatma Gandhi — The Last Phase, Vol. II, pp. 34-5

165. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
MASAURHI,

March 20, 1947
You know I have returned after a two days’ stay at Bir. I could
see within these two days the damage wrought by us. 3 Today also I
saw a village4 which had been deserted, and where a large number of
women and children had been killed. I cannot narrate the whole story,
1
Passed at its meeting held in New Delhi on March 6, 7 and 8. For the text of
the resolution, vide “Congress Working Committee’s Resolution on the Punjab”
2
The addressee on March 25, replied, “About our proposal to divide the
Punjab, this flows naturally from our previous decisions. These were negative
previously, but now a time for decision has come and mere passing of resolutions
giving expression to our views meant little. I feel convinced and so did most of the
members of the Working Committee that we must press for this immediate division
so that reality might be brought into the picture. Indeed this is the only answer to
partition as demanded by Jinnah. I found people in the Punjab agreeable to this
proposal except Muslims as a rule. For the present it means an administrative
decision without any change in law.”
3
Gandhiji had visited Andari and Garriakhari the previous day. Out of 168
there was not a single Muslim in Andari. At Garriahkhari out of 400 Muslims 119
were killed, 11 injured and 12 were missing. The houses were all in ruins.
4
Harla

154

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

because my heart is so full that I might burst into tears if I tried to tell
it. One who wants to see things for himself can still go there. We have
not been able to do anything by way of reparations during all these
months. The devastated villages continue to wear a deserted look.
Even now thieves and dacoits haunt the place and carry away goods
since no Muslim stays there. And how can the Muslims stay at a place
where their brothers and sisters, parents and children have been
slaughtered? The mere memory of the massacre will stun them. I
myself, perhaps, could not have stayed there. You might argue that the
Government should rebuild or repair the damaged houses. But I ask
you, ‘Did you seek permission from the Government, when you
resorted to murder, loot and arson?’ You have to atone for the sins,
not the Government, because, after all, the Government is your own
and not imported from England.
If you rebuild Muslim houses and clean up their villages, they
may think of returning to their homes in the confidence that Hindus
had become their brothers, forgetting and forgiving the death of their
relatives, who, after all, had to die one day or other. But this can
happen only if you rebuild their houses with your own hands, clean
their wells, sink new wells to replace the old ones filled with corpses of
massacred Muslims. Muslims will trust you only when you do all this;
and then they will return to their villages on their own. I appeal to
every Hindu brother and sister to participate personally in undoing
the damage. Those who are convinced that this is their duty should
enter their names in the list with me or with Mridulabehn. Those who
cannot come to me here or at Patna, should send their names by post.
Much work remains to be done at Masaurhi too. You should render
service wherever necessary, preferably in your own neighbourhood.
There is no need for outsiders to come over to Masaurhi for the work
of resettlement. Put up beautiful houses in place of the debris so that
one who looks at them will hardly believe what ruins were there. When
you do this it is bound to influence the other provinces too and its
fragrance will spread all over India.
I would request you not to think of celebrating a Punjab Day.
Never make the mistake of avenging the Punjab in Bihar. Just as the
Muslims here are in panic, so are the Hindus trembling in fear in
Noakhali at the talk of a Pakistan Day. I wish to reach the ears of
Janab Suhrawardy Saheb, the Chief Minister of Bengal. I wish to
remind him that he had called upon me, as a Hindu, to go to Bihar

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

155

where Hindus had perpetrated many atrocities, and that I came to
Bihar at his bidding. The Hindus here have indeed committed many
sins which need to be atoned for. I am myself undergoing penance.
That is why I am here in Bihar although I have many tasks awaiting
me at Sevagram, and in Delhi. If Suhrawardy Saheb wishes that I
should remain in Bihar, he should prevent the observance of a
Pakistan Day in Bengal. I do not want to prevent the Muslims from
demanding Pakistan; but they should do so by explaining the
advantages of Pakistan. Even if they want to observe a Pakistan Day,
they should do so by convincing the Hindus so that they don’t get
nervous.
Hindus have been writing to me and confessing their guilt. I am
also receiving letters written by Hindus and Muslims that because of
the fraternal feeling there had been perfect peace in their villages and
that they will never turn into each other’s enemies. Such sentiments
make me happy. I am also happy that people are contributing
generously for the relief of afflicted Muslims. But now I would appeal
to you to donate not merely money but also your own hard labour ;
take up the trowel and get down to reconstructing the homes of
Muslims which you have destroyed.
[ From Urdu]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—II, pp. 19-20

156

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

166. TELEGRAM TO H. S. SUHRAWARDY
Confidential
CHIEF MINISTER,
KHADI

ETCETERA
RUMOURED

OBSERVED
CREATED

AS

HAVE

PERSONAL
THE

PAKISTAN

MADE

WORK

AND

CORRECTLY.

AND

DAS

HERE,

CASES

APPEAL

ARSON

COMING

EXPECT

I
DO
YOU

THAT
BE

THIS

RUMOUR
ALSO

I

GUPTA.

THEREFORE

AND

EXPECT

MEETING.

ATTENTION
CHANDRA

THAT

DAY
I

PUBLIC

PRAYER

NOAKHALI
AND

REPORTS

INCREASING,
FURTHER
STATES
THAT
22 ND
INSTANT
TO

CONSTERNATION.

EVENING’S
SATIS

BENGAL

PRATISTHAN

LOOT
IT
IS

I

March 20, 1947

HAS
BASELESS.

AT

THIS

SUGGEST
IN
AM
NOT
TO

YOUR

TOUCH

WITH

PLUNGED

INTO

WANT

RUSH

ACT

NOBLY

1

GANDHI
From a Photostat: G. N. 8967

167. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
P ATNA,

March 19/ [20] , 1947
1

CHI. SATIS BABU,

I must dictate this to save time. The dictation can only be in
English because Rangaswamy is not an efficient Hindustani writer.
The first thing is to give you the sad news that Nirmal Babu
abruptly left yesterday. He had prepared me for the news two days
ago. He was wanted by his University. He had some private work too.
And so he was to leave. But he suddenly took it into his head to leave
yesterday. I had not the heart to detain him against his will and to
come between him and what he thought was his dharma at the time.
1
“The addressee in response to this “issued orders prohibiting the holding of
‘open air meetings, demonstrations and processions’ in areas in which prohibitory
orders were already in force and sent one of his colleagues to Noakhali to restore
confidence.”
2
From the reference to the telegram to Suhrawardy in the post-script it appears
the letter was completed and despatched on March 20 ; vide the preceding item.

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947-29, APRIL 1947.

157

Kakasaheb1 wrote to me three days ago that he would like me to
have Bisen by my side. I was thinking what to do and though I know
that he could not in any way be a substitute for Nirmal Babu the
latter’s absence has made me come to a hurried decision that if Bisen
is not wanted by you he should join me. He is a handy man who
knows Gujarati as well as his mother tongue. He is a willing worker.
So if you can spare him and he wants to come you can send him. Let
him go to Patna and report himself at Dr. Mahmud’s place. I sent you
a telegram today about sending Bisen here.2
I am here touring in Patna district and looking at the awful
scenes of destruction wrought by human beings gone mad. I had
hoped that I would be able at the outside, in a fortnight, to go back to
Noakhali and its velvety earth and soft grass. I very much fear that I
must now do Noakhali work from here as I had flattered myself while
in Noakhali that I was also doing Bihar work. Having come here I see
how vitally necessary it was for me to come. I do not know that I
won’t have to undertake a pilgrimage on foot here also. Probably I
shall not be able to do so on foot. But everything is in the lap of God.
It is quite clear to me that whatever be my fate you should all,
including the Sevagram party, stick to your posts.
How is Sardar Jivan Singhji shaping himself?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I had your wire. I have sent a wire to Suhrawardy.3 Sent . . .4 also
a wire.
S HREE S ATIS C HANDRA DAS GUPTA
KAZIRKHIL
R AMGANJ P. S.
NOAKHALI
From a photostat: G. N. 8966
1
D. B. Kalelkar (1885-1981) ; Educationist, litterateur and a close associate of
Gandhiji ; Vice-Chancellor of Gujarat Vidyapith, 1928-36; Principal, Gujarat
National College ; President, Hindustani Prachar Sabha.
2
Vide “Telegram to Satis chandra Das Gupta”, 19-3-1947
3
Vide the preceding item.
4
Illegible in the source

158

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

168. FROM THE DIARY
MASAURHI,
March 20, 1947
It was 1 a.m. when Manudi completed counting the money. She
should have gone to bed soon after the collection. She could have
written the shlokas some other time. Or, I should relieve her of some
of my work. It distresses me very much that she is not getting enough
sleep. I wonder what I should do about it. Let her tell me if she can
think of something. She can help me a lot in this matter if she wishes
to. But she is unwilling to free herself from any work whatever. The
collection was a thousand.
[ From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 80

169. LETTER TO SIR HUGH DOW
P ATNA,

March 21, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your three letters for all of which I thank you. As you
know at present I am touring in the affected parts of Bihar. But I shall
bear in mind your kind offer about making use of your beautiful
garden to rest a little from the din and noise that surround me.
The word “bureaucrat” was used 1 by me in its original sense.
You do not represent autocracy. Certainly not democracy. But, as I
hold, you essentially represent bureaucracy. Several English friends,
some holding as high a place as you do, told me frankly that,
representing as they did a big corporation of bureaucrats, they were
unable to give effect to the full man in them. With this thought at the
back of my mind I could not help admiring your remark that
experience had taught you that after all the true reformer must begin
with himself.
1

Vide “Letter to Sir Hugh Dow”, 17-3-1947
In his reply dated March 22, the addressee about this said : “I suppose, I am a
bureaucrat in the sense used by you : it is not a term that I resent. The complexity of
modern life ties most rulers to their desks more than they like, and this must be true
even of yourself. But I look forward to the early day when neither half of this word
will have much application to me.”

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947-29, APRIL 1947.

159

As to the rest of your letter of March 17 which you were kind
enough to send so promptly, I gladly accept your correction and the
presentation of your position.1 I am hoping that something will come
out of this frank interchange of views.
I got your letter of the 18th instant only this morning. It was
delivered some time yesterday. But it came into my hands only today.
The note2 referred to in your letter to the Prime Minister of Bihar has
not yet come into my hands. I suppose it will be received by me
tomorrow when I hope to reach Patna if I do not receive it earlier.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
H. E. S IR HUGH DOW
GOVERNOR OF BIHAR
P ATNA
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 233-4.

170. LETTER TO H. S. SUHRAWARDY
March 21, 1947
DEAR SUHRAWARDY,

Pardon the somewhat familiar style. I hope you got my wire 3
[of] yesterday and that there was no justification for the fears
expressed to me. I have a right to expect you to act on the square. The
heart is too full to enable me to say more.
I am just now in a little village in the devastated area.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G. N. 8968

1

Vide “Letter from Sir Hugh Dow”, 17-3-1947
The addressee had prepared a note on the plight of child labour in mica
factories, a topic which had cropped up during his talk with Gandhiji. The note said
that the Bihar Government had recommended strict enforcement of the Employment
of children (Ammendment) Act of 1939, and that “in no circumstances should children
below the age of twelve be employed in mica factories.”
3
Vide “Telegram to H. S. Suhrawardy”, 20-3-1947
2

160

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

171. TALK WITH MUSLIM REFUGEES1
HANSDIH,
March 21, 1947
I have been constantly trying to make everyone understand that
they should give up fear. There is no fear in my heart and I advise
you to fear no one but God. But how can people go and stay in
houses which have been burnt or destroyed? I shall be glad if the
Government builds houses for them or advances money for the
purpose. When a man turns into a devil, he is neither a Hindu nor a
Muslim.
I do not know what arrangement has been made regarding
rations. I believe it should not cause anyone any inconve- nience.
People should remove every trace of fear from their hearts. Who can
protect man better than God? We should have full faith in Him and
muster up courage. He is not brave who perpetrates atrocities. That
man is brave who boldly faces any calamity. I wish to reassure you. I
have been unequivocally saying that any Hindu who harms or as
much as touches a Muslim, would be causing my death. I am going
everywhere. Patna district has been the worst-affected. Hence it may
take a little more time. Subsequently I shall tour other districts ; but I
shall not go out of Bihar. Badshah Khan had planned to go to the
Frontier, but he has postponed his departure and will remain here for
some time. He believes that the climate all over India will improve if
Bihar improves its ways. Shah Nawaz Saheb2 has also arrived. His
presence will be a great help. Mridulabehn has been accompanying
me. She may go to Delhi for a couple of days, but will return
immediately. She is working very hard, and she does not discriminate
between a Hindu and a Muslim.
I have thrown in my lot with you here. I do not get time even to
read the newspapers. Friends read out some news to me. I have written
to Pandit Nehru and sought information about the general
conditions.3 From what we hear, neither the Punjab nor Noakhali is yet
entirely peaceful. But I shall stay on in Bihar till you are satisfied and
until Hindus and Muslims on their own reassure me and tell me that I
can leave without any anxiety.
1

Who had come to meet Gandhiji from the neighbouring villages.
Shah Nawaz Khan of the Indian National Army
3
Vide “Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru”, 20-3-1947
2

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947-29, APRIL 1947.

161

Only tents have been erected at Masaurhi ; the camp will start
functioning soon. But it would be better if you built your own houses,
because the whole atmosphere is reeking with corruption and blackmarketing and the contractors are after unlawful gains. You should
therefore try to build your own houses. I have been calling upon
Hindus to help Muslims in every possible way, by cleaning their
houses, streets, and removing the debris. I am going to make the same
appeal to Hindu Congressmen and representatives of villages today.
[ From Urdu ]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—II, pp. 24-5

172. TALK WITH VILLAGE REPRESENTATIVES1
HANSDIH,
March 21, 1947
Q. Is it [not] difficult to stop riots so long as the system of zamindari

continues? The landlords are the persons who incite riots and will continue to do so.
A. I think it is foolish to connect riots with zamindari. The
problem of zamindari is very old. How is it rational to kill Muslims to
solve that problem? And many of the zamindars are themselves
Hindus. The Maharaja of Darbhanga is a very big zamindar. Should
he and his wife be killed? I am very friendly with him. He respects me
like a father because his late father was a good friend of mine. A
Hindu zamindar from North Bihar has promised to provide land to
the Muslims. It is not proper to link the problem of Hindu-Muslim
riots with the zamindari system. The latter is an altogether different
problem and we have to consider ways and means of abolishing the
system.
Then Gandhiji was informed of the talk that the property lost by the Muslims
here would be restored to them only when what was lost by the Hindus in Noakhali
and the Punjab was restored to them. There would be friendship only when cases in
Bihar as well as in Bengal were withdrawn simultaneously.

Has the time arrived when the Muslims in Bihar must obey the
dictates of Hindus? Must they stop going into mosques or reciting the
Koran if Hindus prohibit it? No one has yet shown the courage to say
this. But the demand that Muslims should live at the mercy of Hindus
1

162

The meeting was held at 2.30 p.m.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

boils down to this. Those who are demanding Pakistan also seem to
think on these lines. I ask those who see no harm in imitating the
Punjab and Bengal whether Hindus should also turn ruffians if
Muslims choose to do so. After all, how should a Hindu devoted to
ahimsa or brahmacharya carry himself? I do not intend to suggest that
nothing untoward happened in Noakhali. But there women, children
and old persons were not murdered the way it happened here, nor was
it on such a large scale. As it is Satis Babu has again invited me to
Noakhali. But I think if I have to die in the attempt to restore
communal harmony, it is better to die here than in Noakhali.
Nor is it right to demand withdrawal of prosecutions. Our nonviolent methods are altogether different, but the Governments
functioning today are based on the theory of punishment. Why then
should they not arrest and punish the culprits? If the culprits in
Noakhali are not being arrested, it is the fault of the Government
there, which is not following the tenets of Islam. If the present trends
continue there, Bengal will not become free, nor will Muslims there be
free. Your proportion in the population is much greater here. In
Bengal, the proportion of Muslims to Hindus is 51 to 49. Here, only
12 persons in 100 are Muslims. What sort of bravery is it to kill the
12? The Ramayana says that even a dog should be given a hearing.
Rama abandoned Sita in response to the argument of a washerwoman. Devotees of the Ramayana ought to fall at the feet of every
guilty person and appeal to him to come forward and confess his
crime. When he pleads guilty and repents or atones for it or begs to be
given due punishment for his crime, we may then let him go with a
mild chastisement in view of his honest penitence.
I wish to give vent to the fire that is raging within me in the
course of my answers to your questions. Why should we behave in this
manner? Neither you nor I have a correct picture of what is
happening in the Punjab. Anyway, whatever it may be, it is indeed
deplorable. But we have to keep our houses clean. We need not make
our houses filthy because another person fills his house with filth. If
you [do not] act according [to my advice], remember you will be
sorry for it. You will regret that you did not listen to this old man’s
advice. There are people, I know, who say that Muslims are like
serpents and that just as we would kill a snake we should also kill
Muslim women and children along with their menfolk. I tell you such

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947-29, APRIL 1947.

163

people are mad. They are not Hindus ; they do not know what is
Hinduism. There are similar fanatics among Muslims too; but they are
not true Muslims. In the beginning the protagonists of Pakistan used
to insist that Hindus in their region would have to live like Muslims.
But now they concede that minorities will have to be protected. I
remind you again that those who hurt Muslims will be hurting me. I
am camping here simply to put an end to this fratricide or die in the
effort.
Q. What should we do if Muslims do not trust us even when we reassure them?

A. If you speak to them earnestly and reassure them, they will
certainly come, because no one likes to leave his home on his own.
Give us the names of the villages whose Muslim residents are not
ready to return to their homes in spite of assurances from the Hindus
so that we may trace those people and persuade them to return to their
villages.
[ From Urdu ]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—II, pp. 26-8

173. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
C HORHUAN,

March 21, 1947
I wish that those who have assembled here would think of the
damage done and the number of men, women and children brutally
done to death in this village, and sit in mournful silence in memory of
the deceased. This will do you good. You will consider for yourselves
why those who committed these crimes did so. Was it to save their
religion? I would rather say that they did not thereby save any
religion but harmed it. No religion teaches anyone to kill his
neighbours. Righteous wars do take place, but I do not approve of
them either. In the Bhagavadgita, too, oppressors and tyrants were
resisted in a righteous war. It is the work of ruffians to kill innocent
children and blameless men and women. A marauder wreaks
destruction on others out of selfishness or ignorance. Whatever has
happened here is, in my opinion, the work of oppressors and
barbarians. Many houses have been burnt down and many others have
been reduced to debris. The houses which a few months ago were full
of life, are now desolate.

164

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Why we turned into such barbarians will be revealed only in
future. But the immediate problem is what you should do next. It is
the duty of all men and women, I think, to clean the ruined houses
and make them neat and habitable. We can always render some
service, however poor we may be. Mere bathing in the Ganga does not
wash away our sins. We should undertake honest cleansing. We can
keep our bodies clean by bathing in clean water. But all men and
women should cleanse themselves in every other way also. They
should render all service honorarily and in a spirit of expiation. Did
those who committed arson do it for any payment? We must wipe out
the stains of their demoniac deeds with the water of human kindness.
You should go to the Muslim brethren and tell them to forget the past,
that it will never be repeated and persuade them to return and live
peacefully as before. Tell them that their misery is your misery, that
you are their brothers, that both Hindus and Muslims are sons of the
same soil, both eat and drink from the same source and breathe the
same air, hence there should be no ill will between them. Tell them
that you will not get any peace of mind until they return to their
homes. It is possible that the Muslims may turn round and ask how
they can go back and live in the houses where their kith and kin have
been done to death. They will be justified in saying so. But if the
guilty persons go to the Muslims with truly penitent hearts, I am sure,
they will be persuaded. Human hearts melt before love. When the
murderers themselves go to them in sackcloth and ashes and promise
them never to repeat such deeds, even a stony heart will melt.
You should not depend on the Government to do this work. The
Government will of course lend a hand. But it is mainly your task.
The Government can give you tools and materials ; but the cleaning
has to be done by you.
Amidst this mad upheaval there were some Hindus, like oases in
a desert, who risked the wrath of the violent mobs and saved the lives
of many Muslims and gave them shelter. They deserve
congratulations though they do not need any. They have done their
duty and acquired punya1 . Punya contains all congratulations. Since
we have become strangers to human sentiments these days, we are
impelled to congratulate any evidence of human love. Those who
gave shelter to Muslims did not do so from any selfish motives. If I
have not gone to meet them, let them not think that I have no regard
or respect for them. I would love to meet them and know how they
1

Merit acquired from good acts.

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947-29, APRIL 1947.

165

saved the lives of Muslims. I have been unable to go to them in spite
of my admiration because I have come here like a physician who goes
only to those who are suffering. I have come to lighten the sufferings
of Muslims in Bihar.
I have been told that the Hindus have also suffered in the riots at
some places. If there are any such Hindus, they too will be given
relief. But I pay more attention to Muslims because there are quite a
few of them here who are willing to help the Hindus.
I have been told that about fifty persons, who were wanted in
connection with riot cases, surrendered themselves the day after my
arrival at Masaurhi. I welcome this and hope that others who had
taken part in the riots will also surrender to the appropriate authorities,
making a clean breast of the crimes they had committed and taking
whatever punishment might be given to them. If they do not have the
courage to surrender to the authorities, let them come to me or to
Badshah Khan or to Major-General Shah Nawaz with their
confessions.
A friend from Bengal 1 had recently come to me and told me
that the Hindus in Noakhali are apprehensive about the preparations
being made by the Muslims to observe the Pakistan Day and wish that
I should return to Noakhali. I have asked the friend to return to
Bengal without insisting on my going there. I am doing the same
work here that I was doing in Bengal. If the Hindus in Bihar become
honest and convince the Muslims that no harm will be done to them
and if Muslims too do not want to take revenge in view of the Hindus’
promise to look after them well, it will have its effect on the whole of
India. As a result of this Muslims in Noakhali may also assure Hindus
of their safety. There is no question of abandoning my post of duty
till the Hindus and Muslims from both these regions assure me that
they do not need my services. The Muslims of Bihar and the Hindus
of Bengal should accept me as security for the safety of their lives and
property. I shall suffer if they are made to suffer in any way.
I have repeatedly said that I have come here to do or die. If
communal peace is not established, I shall pray to God to hasten my
end, because, in that event, I shall not be in a position to serve anyone.
[ From Urdu}
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—II, pp. 29-32
1

166

According to Harijan, from Khadi Pratishthan

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

174. LETTER TO H. S. SUHRAWARDY
P ATNA,

March 22, 1947
I have seen your press note and I am glad that you had
anticipated my request to you. I must confess that it does not give me
much satisfaction. May we hold Pakistan Day celebration meetings in
parts of Bengal where Section 144, Criminal Procedure Code is not in
action or where there is no other prohibitory order? And if meetings
can be held indoors, are they not likely to be far more dangerous than
public meetings?
I hope you got my note 2 sent you through Arunanshu Babu last
night.
1

H. S. S UHRAWARDY S AHIB
P RIME MINISTER
BENGAL
C ALCUTTA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

175. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
P ATNA,

March 22, 1947
CHI. AMRIT,

This is a mere love letter. Mridula asked me if I did not want to
write to you and I at once said of course, I do. Hence this note.
How are you now? Tell me all you can about the Punjab.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 4191. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 7827

1

For the press note, vide footnote on “Telegram to H. S. Suhrwardy”, 20-3-

2

Vide “Letter to H. S. Suhrawardy”, 21-3-1947

1947

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947-29, APRIL 1947.

167

176. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
P ATNA,

March 22, 1947
CHI. VALLABHBHAI,

If you can, please explain your resolution 1 about the Punjab. I
cannot form any judgement.
I trust you are well.2
Blessings from

BAPU

[ From Gujarati ]
Bapuna Patro— 2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 351.

177. TALK WITH WOMEN REFUGEES3
P IPALWAN,

March 22, 1947
I am sad as well as glad to meet you all. There are many sisters
here whose husbands, sons and relations have been killed. Their tragic
tales make me sad. I was very glad to hear that the S. D. O. acted very
promptly and prudently to prevent riots here, and that refugees from
other places were given shelter here. Hindus from this place have
written to me saying that they did not participate at all in the riots.
I have seen with my own eyes how much people have suffered
because of the riots. I have seen houses which were burnt or looted,
and I was told that the residents had been killed. The aggrieved
people, the people whose houses have been destroyed, wish to resettle
1

Vide “Congress Working Committee’s Resolution on the Punjab”
On March 24, the addressee replied : It is difficult to explain to you the
resolution about the Punjab. If was adopted after the deepest deliberation. Nothing
has been done in a hurry or without full thought. That you had expressed your views
against it, we learnt only from the papers. But you are, of course, entitled to say what
you feel right. The situation in the Punjab is far worse than in Bihar . . . . The
military has taken over control. As a result, on the surface things seem to have
quietened down somewhat. But no one can say when there may be a flare-up again. If
that happens, I am afraid, even Delhi will not remain unaffected. But here of course
we shall be able to deal with it.
3
While returning to Patna Gandhiji met some Muslim women refugees at
Pipalwan in the morning.
2

168

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

at some other place. Personally, I do not approve of this. Why should
we lose heart? We should keep up courage. The Hindus have
committed a sin. What have they gained thereby? You do not trust
them. But if their hearts are cleansed, if they clean your houses, if they
build new houses for you and if they sincerely atone for their sins,
why should you then not return to your homes? True bravery on the
part of Hindus consists in confessing their guilt and changing their
hearts. I shall be only too glad if they do this.
People should return to the houses where there had been no
killing. If the residents don’t feel like going to murder-haunted
houses they may shift to another place. It would be good if lands can
be exchanged by mutual consent. It may not be possible for the
Government to arrange such transfers. In any case whether they return
to their own villages or shift to some other place, Muslim brothers and
sisters should eschew all anger and bear no ill will towards Hindus.
You should not think of taking revenge against those who have
oppressed you. That is true bravery.
How transitory is this life? Everyone has to die one day. It is
difficult to comprehend the ways of God. Is there any place where He
is not present? Some people hold God responsible for whatever has
happened. Who can understand His ways? God cannot be talked about
disparagingly. Why should we, then, blame Him for these happenings?
I do not wish to hear such talk from the lips of those who recite the
kalma. In fact, no one should even speak in this vein.
I wish to reassure all of you that I am wandering from place to
place to prevent a repetition of what has happened so that Hindus and
Muslims may live like brothers. I shall stay and strive here as long as
hearts are not cleansed and fraternal feelings are not revived. I shall
do or die; I shall either succeed in my mission or perish in the effort.
[ From Urdu ]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—II, pp. 33-4

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947-29, APRIL 1947.

169

178. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING1
P ATNA,

March 22, 1947
I have returned to Patna today after a five-day tour. You would
have learnt from newspapers where I went and what I said. I liked the
attitude of the villagers. They are genuinely penitent. Liberal
contributions are being made by them for the relief of their Muslim
brethren. I was very happy to see this. Many persons have also written
to me that they will not misbehave again.
In a number of places, Gandhiji said, due to the bravery of the local Hindus, no
incidents had occurred. He was told by the Muslims themselves that in Dinapore Subdivision no trouble occurred though the Muslims were greatly nervous.
Gandhiji said that he had addressed the Muslim women refugees in the morning
at Pipalwan.2 He did not wish at present to enter into a description of the feelings of
these women and their present condition. His heart was too heavy and he did not wish
to shed tears. He only wanted to tell them how to repent. He tried as best as he could
to console them and persuade them to pick up courage and return to their villages,
placing reliance on God. At this meeting he was told that Muslim women and men
dreaded the approach of March 22, as it had been reported that Punjab Day would be
observed in Bihar on that date. He had told them that the Bihar Government had
banned the observance of any kind of day, be it Pakistan Day or Punjab Day. The
Minister who was present also gave the assurance that no celebration of any kind
would be permitted and that the ban would be strictly enforced throughout the
province. The Bihar Government, Gandhiji said, had banned the kisan rally also.

It is a different thing that the rally should not have been tarred
with the same brush. But the situation is very delicate today. Our
people’s hearts are not clean. Hence even a kisan rally should be
abandoned. I shall appeal to the people concerned not to celebrate
either a Punjab Day or a Pakistan Day. The Ministers have issued the
order after much deliberation; hence the order must be obeyed. If one
wishes to disobey a law as a satyagrahi, one can do so. When we have
the voting right we can remove the Ministers if we do not approve of
their policies. But so long as they are in authority, we must carry out
1
The Urdu version has been collated with the report in Harijan published under
“Gandhiji’s Bihar Tour Diary”.
2
Vide the preceding item.

170

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

their orders.
A true satyagrahi should implicitly obey the directions of those he had himself
put in power. What Gandhiji said did not refer only to March 22. It applied to the
future also and at no time should these celebrations be indulged in, so long as the
atmosphere remained as it was that day.

There is a conflagration in every quarter today. A kisan rally is
not advisable in these circumstances. You can write to the Government
about the difficulties you are facing. You can agitate through
newspapers. Rallies are intended to awaken the kisans and to organize
the people. I have been leading such activities for the past sixty years
and am quite an expert in these matters. Conditions today are not
conducive for such activities. The Gita speaks of action in inaction and
inaction in action.1 If I apply this to the present-day context, it means
we can do a lot of good by keeping quiet. We should discriminate
between dharma and adharma. There are occasions when keeping
away from adharma becomes the dharma. It is no doubt our duty to
awaken the kisans . But this is not the time for it. It is the duty of every
Hindu to follow the teachings of the Gita , although anyone in the
world can derive benefit from the Gita . No one can say that we
should repeat the same action in season and out of season. We are
subserving our waking hours even when we sleep; but if we go on
sleeping all the time we will be as good as dead. This only means that
every action has its appropriate time. Desisting from an inopportune
action is as good as timely action.
The 22nd March has passed off peacefully. It is a good thing.
We should now forget all about it. We don’t have to celebrate a
Punjab Day or a Pakistan Day. These days are intended only to make
us fight. But our Muslim brothers here do not wish to fight. Why
should we then celebrate a Punjab Day?
I concede that a kisan rally stands on a different footing. But the
times are not propitious even for a kisan rally. Every action should be
undertaken at an appropriate time. This is an occasion for penitence.
We should first atone for our sins. It is part of the atonement to realize
that the atrocities committed on Muslim brothers and sisters constitute
grave sins. If we are convinced that the Hindu heart has been cleansed
through such atonement, then we can organize a kisan rally.
1

IV. 18

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947-29, APRIL 1947.

171

Major-General Shah Nawaz Khan has arrived here. Badshah
Khan who intended to leave, has postponed his departure. A scheme is
being prepared to rehabilitate the Muslims who have suffered at our
hands. Every Hindu brother and sister should go to villages and put in
hard labour, not for the sake of wages but in a spirit of service. We
should clean up Muslim villages and rebuild their houses to convince
them that once again we have become their brothers although for a
time we had gone berserk.
Some officials have informed me that about fifty persons have
confessed their crimes. They have admitted that they are guilty. They
are prepared to undergo any punishment meted out to them. This is a
welcome development. But thousands have committed such crimes.
All these thousands should confess their crimes. Then the Muslims
will not be in a position to say that the criminals have not been
arrested. Whoever has committed a crime should frankly say that
earlier he was afraid of prosecution, but having made a confession he
is now prepared to undergo any punishment. This would not only
enhance their own prestige but also that of Bihar as a whole.
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—II, pp. 35-7, and Harijan, 6-4-1947

179. LETTER TO SHIV BALAK BISEN
March 23, 1947
CHI. BISEN,

Your letter was frank. That your views about the Ashram
inmates are not correct does not matter. As for your desire to stay with
me, we shall think about it when I return there. I cannot decide just
now. Normally I would have welcomed your services, but at present I
have to consider what [my] dharma is. We are going to meet before
long, aren’t we?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 7726

172

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

180. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL GANDHI
March 23, 1947
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,

The reply you gave to Narandas is perfectly correct. I have
written to him, too.
You need not worry about Manu at all. She is still forgetful, of
course, and indifferent about herself. I have explained to her that
those who are free from all impure feelings or desires are indifferent
about nothing, nor do they forget things. She understands this, but is
unable to act upon it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M. M. U/III

181. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
P ATNA,

March 23, 1947
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

I read both your letters and gave them to Khan Saheb for
reading. He says he is watchful and will go when it is necessary. If I
ask him to go he is ready to leave today. But I do not feel the need for
it. Your anxiety is meaningless. You must have received my previous
letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 2504

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947-29, APRIL 1947.

173

182. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
P ATNA,

March 23, 1947
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

After sending a letter1 today I received your letter of the 20th
and also the paper cuttings.
If you have stopped Dubeji’s treatment, my advice is that you
should go to the Nature Cure clinic in Calcutta. You can come over
here to see me. You can come wherever I am or come after my third
tour.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 2503

183. DISCUSSION WITH WOMEN WORKERS 2
P ATNA,

March 23, 1947
QUESTION: Can women take part in politics while they are working in the

Kasturba Memorial Fund?
GANDHIJI: This question can be answered in two ways: they can
and cannot take part in politics. If they want to serve, they should not
take part in politics. There is Congress rule in the country at present
(it may be socialism or communism in future). Now, supposing it is
necessary to sell spinning-wheels or khadi for the sake of propaganda
in the villages, women can take part in such activities. But supposing
the intentions of the Congress go wrong and instead of khadi it wants
to sell liquor in the villages, the sevikas3 would certainly not take part
in such an activity. Rather, they would start a satyagraha campaign
against it if it became necessary. Women can take part in any activity
which is in the interest of the country irrespective of the ‘ism’ of the
ruling party.
1

Vide the preceding item.
Of the Kasturba Gandhi National Memorial Fund who met Gandhiji at 4 p.m.
3
Women workers
2

174

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Q. When we raise slogans in the villages the Muslims do not join us. What

should be done about it?
G. You must keep quiet and try to persuade them. If they still do
not come forward, you must give up raising slogans. As for me, I do
not give importance to slogans any more. People have been stabbed
while cries of Bharatmataki jai and Gandhijiki jai were being raised. That
is why slogans have become so repugnant. It is easy to understand
such feelings.
Q. Women do not still seem to give up untouchability and purdah. What should

we do?
G. If they do not give them up they must be persuaded to do so.
You must carry on your work. You should not worry about the
results. Those who want to serve should continue to work more and
ever more, and firmly hold on the truth.
A. HARIJAN WOMAN: Nobody is willing to sit by my side. What should I do?

G. (Smiling): There are so many women sitting around you. You
must forget that you are a Harijan. Things would automatically
smoothen out if you do that.

[ From Gujarati ]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 89-90

184. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING1
P ATNA,

March 23, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

I request you and those others whom my voice could reach to
understand the aim of life. The sole purpose of life is that we should
serve the creation of the Power which has created us and on whose
mercy or, say, kindness, depends out very breath. Let us not destroy
this creation. But today, in our arrogance we have either lost sight of
this cause or we tend to forget it and are either fighting each other or
preparing to do so. If we cannot avoid this calamity, you may be sure
that India’s independence is an impossibility. If you think you can
1
As Gandhiji was observing silence his written speech was read out at the
meeting held at the Bankipur Maidan.

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947-29, APRIL 1947.

175

achieve independence by the simple fact of the British quitting the
land, you are sadly mistaken. If we continue to fight amongst
ourselves even after their departure some other power would step in.
To think that we can fight the world with its own weapons is like
expecting a barren woman to give birth to a child.
A friend has written that a semblance of peace appears to have
been established in the Punjab. But this peace and tranquillity has
come through military occupation. Everyone is preparing openly for
a fight and is busy collecting arms. If these preparations continue the
peace established through the army or the police will ultimately turn
out to be the peace of the grave. Real peace will come about only
when one party at least silently adopts the course of true bravery.
Bihar has realized through its own experience that there can be no
bravery in killing women and children, or old and innocent people,
that it is sheer cowardice. What a grand thing it would be if Bihar
could show the real power of non-violent bravery and thus guide
India and the whole world on the path of true life.1
[ From Urdu ]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—II, pp. 38-9

185. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
P ATNA,

March 23, 1947
CHI. AMRIT,

I sent a love note2 yesterday thro[ugh] Mridula. I have yours of
21st.
When I get the time to write, your letters are not before me.
Hence the omissions.
Tell me whether you have the dictionaries3 you wanted.
I fancy that I wrote 4 to you twice about paying me a brief visit
but never at the sacrifice of your duty undertaken there. Mine may be
regarded as a selfish wish. We shall exchange thoughts about it when
the 4th April is on us.
I was satisfied with your answer about Aryanayakum.
1

According to Harijan, at the end Gandhiji informed the audience that the
prayer meeting on Monday would be held near Poonpoon.
2
Vide “Letter to Amrit Kaur”, 22-3-1947
3
Vide “Letter to Amrit Kaur”, 22-2-1947
4
Vide “Letter to Amrit Kaur”, 18-3-1947

176

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I think now I have answered all your questions, your letter was
in front of me.
I have taken the Monday silence. It is now 6.10 [p.m.] when I
finish this.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 4192. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 7828

186. LETTER TO JAIKRISHNA BHANSALI
March 23, 1947
CHI. BHANSALI,

I do not like the change in your diet. Even a person of selfcontrol may not disregard nature’s laws. You cannot eat kodra1 ,
banti2 , etc. uncooked. You may, if you wish, make your food
moderate or even abstemious. I should advise you to eat cooked kodra,
take a moderate quantity of milk and fruit and eat such green
vegetables as can be eaten raw.
I think you should now stop going out. People are exploiting
you.
According to me, your work is to keep a watch over the Ashram
in a spirit of non-attachment. In any case it will do no good to take
Pushpa out. 3 She is still immature. She ought not to give up khadi
work. Her knowledge is very imperfect. Explain all this to her. She
must not visit Raju.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 10441. Courtesy: Munnalal G. Shah

187. LETTER TO PUSHPA K. DESAI
P ATNA,

March 24, 1947
CHI. PUSHPA,

You feel tempted to go out with Bhansalibhai, but that is not
proper. Your dharma lies in completing the khadi work and learning
1

Cereals

2

Ibid

3

Vide also the following item.

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947-29, APRIL 1947.

177

to see God in that work alone. You have a long way to go yet. You
must learn to be steady in your mind. Do not think of going out
anywhere.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9278

188. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
March 24, 1947
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

You are writing to Dev, but he cannot read Hindi with ease.
Ultimately I have to strain myself. It would be better if you write in
Gujarati. He finds it difficult to decipher your Nagari characters.
Bhansali may go [out], but Pushpa ought not to. Read what I
have written to them.1
I am surprised about Gomati.2
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10658

189. A LETTER3
P ATNA,

March 24, 1947
I have not read your letter to . . . but I have read the reply. The
reply seems correct to me. And so long as he has faith in me what else
could he write? Moreover, there is no question of practising it just
now. But where there is no pretence, is it not thought itself that matters
most? And therefore what all of you have to consider is whether it is
proper to remain with me if my thoughts are unconsciously impure. If
they are so, all of you who have firmly stood by me should withdraw
your co-operation. As far as I can see . . . agrees on this point. At least
I hope so. Copies of the letters written to . . . must have been sent to
1

Vide The preceding two items.
Wife of Kishorelal G. Mashruwala
3
Omissions in the letter are as in the source.
2

178

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

all of you. Ask for the copies if you have not received them. Do not
hesitate to write to me anything you may wish to write . . . is in a great
dilemma. I have written him a letter and passed it on to . . . for posting
. . . is very much perturbed. You had better meet and talk with him.
The situation is such that no one can remain neutral. There can hardly
be any scope for compromise when it is a matter of determining what
is dharma and what is adharma.
[ For Gujarati ]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 91-2

190. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
P ATNA,

March 24, 1947
CHI. SATIS BABU,

I find that it is difficult to leave Bihar. The work here seems to
be easier than it was there. But it is difficult all the same. This much is
clear that if I am able to do something here, it will have its impact
everywhere. Think over it and send me your opinion.
Never give up the work in Noakhali even if you have to die.
Tell Sucheta1 and Annada 2 if they have done anything against
[your wishes]. I have received Dinlipi 3 .
Cholera must have completely subsided by now.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 8969

1
(1908-1975) ; wife of J. B. Kripalani ; Secretary, Kasturba Gandhi
National Memorial Trust; Member Constituent Assembly; Chief Minister of
U. P. in 1963
2
Annada Choudhary
3
A cyclostyled daily bulletin, issued by the Gandhi Camp in Noakhali for
circulation among workers and friends

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947-29, APRIL 1947.

179

191. NOTE TO GLADYS OWEN1
March 24, 1947
1. Dr. Gopichand is Gopichand Bhargava . Initials I do not know. I
shall give you a letter. He is well known to everyone of note.
2. Answered above.
3. No reply necessary. You will feel your way when you reach
there. Of course You should go quickly.
4. My confidence is a little shaken because I have begun to fear
that I might not quickly reach the requisite state of detachment
described in the Gita. Read if you care the last 18 verses of Chapter II
of the Gita in Edwin Arnold’s translation 3 . I become impatient and
irritated. It is not conducive to a life of utter consecration without
which a long life of 125 years is neither possible nor desirable.
5. I am not particular about your seeing anything here. You
may go to Ramzanpur now. But I would like you to return to take my
letter to Dr. G. and see what I write to Horace 4 . This I may not do
now. I must go to the massage table. But you should please yourself.
6. I shall write to Catlin and give him a date.
Note: Give me a copy of answer 4. If you go away now you
may send a copy at leisure.
2

From a photostat: G.N. 6201

192. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
R AJGHAT,

March 24, 1947
It is well nigh impossible for me to say anything amid such
noise. I can say something only when you are quiet. In the first place,
I wish to address a few words to the men and women volunteers. I
1
The addressee, a Quaker educationist and teacher, explains : “On March 23,
1947, I went to Patna to see if there was anything Bapu wanted me to do and this is
part of Bapu’s conversation with me on his silence day, March 24, 1947, when he
asked me to go to . . . ”
2
(1889-1966) ; Chairman of Punjab Branch of Harijan Sevak Sangh; Chief
Minister of Punjab, 1947-51
3
The Song Celestial
4
Vide “Letter to Horace Alexander”, 25-3-1947

180

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have told them before also what they should do during the tours. It is
the duty of women volunteers to guide women as to how they should
sit and conduct themselves at public meetings. For this they should
distribute leaflets beforehand and should read them out for their
benefit. The men who are either standing or sitting are keeping quiet,
but because the women are not quiet, they cannot also hear anything.
In fact, it is not women alone who are to be blamed for this. They are
over-worked, poor and illiterate. They behave as they are told by their
menfolk. If we have to take work from them, we should make them
understand things and educate them. It is the duty of the women
volunteers first of all to tell women the rules to be observed at public
meetings.
Today I saw a village1 where Hindus too have suffered losses. I
had been asked earlier to visit that village. I realize the Hindus have
suffered but that in no way mitigates their guilt. I did not visit the
place with the thought of the Hindus who have suffered there. But that
does not mean that I am hurt only at the loss of Muslims and that
Hindus’ sufferings do not move me. I am equally pained at the
sufferings of all persons. In the words of Sir Syed Ahmed Khan,
founder of the Aligarh University, I would say that the Hindus and the
Muslims are like the two eyes of Mother India. Just as the trouble in
one eye afflicts the other too, similarly the whole of India suffers
when either Hindus or Muslims suffer. If you realize this, I would
think my purpose has been fulfilled.
[ From Urdu ]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—II, p. 40

193. LETTER TO HORACE ALEXANDER
P ATNA,

March 25, 1947
MY DEAR HORACE,

Gladys has given me your letter and I had a fairly long
discussion2 with her as a result of which she has written to you a letter
which I enclose herewith. She has gone to see the Friends’ Unit3 and
she is expected to return tonight. I think her presentation of my
1

Behrawan
Vide “Note to Gladys Owen”, 24-3-1947
3
Friends’ Service Unit
2

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947-29, APRIL 1947.

181

position is fairly correct. But let me put it in my own language.
What I feel is that however much detached we may want to be
from our surroundings and the unseen atmosphere about us, we
cannot but be affected by it. Hence I am not sure whether, whilst the
British military forces are in India, we can possibly be in real Indian
atmosphere of peace and tranquillity, if these are ever to be her lot
during our generation. The present distemper may continue beyond
January next and if it does not I am afraid it won’t be because of
sanity regained by the communities but because of the fear of the
military. What is the use of our meeting under the protection of the
bayonet, whether it is British or Indian? May it not be wise therefore
for sincere peace-lovers to pray in their own homes, every day if you
like, even for five minutes at the same time throughout the world? It
will be easy enough for everyone to find out the hour which should
correspond with the time, say, in Calcutta or any place in India. We
can even make the calculations and publish the different times for the
different centres. The value would lie in finding the exact time. If you
still think that a meeting should take place here, I suggest
postponement till after the withdrawal of British arms.
These are my random thoughts, not for you to act upon unless
they fully appeal to you, because in this matter I have yielded to your
judgment. If you propose to go on with your idea and want to have
the meeting at the time you have conceived, send me the thirty names
and I shall send you my suggestions as to whether I want to add to the
list.
With reference to milk distribution in Madras you have another
Ministry there now.1 I wonder if it will make any difference. I hold on
to my suggestion.
About my own private affair I have done and am doing all I
can. I suppose you already know that Manu no longer sleeps in the
same bed with me. This departure was made by her with my full
approval in order to please Bapa who, though he saw absolutely
nothing wrong, would appeal to her not to continue [it] whilst I was in
Bihar and whilst I was engaged in this important work. I do not agree
with the conclusion. But I did not wish to argue and therefore I
promptly agreed.
Whilst I am dictating this letter I see that you could not know
1

The Ministry headed by T. Prakasam had resigned on March 14 and the new
Ministry assumed office on March 23, under the leadership of O. P. Ramaswami
Reddiar.

182

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

this because the decision was made on the last day of my stay in
Haimchar. What, however, is the subject of examination is my mental
attitude, whether it is correct or whether, as Kishorelal and some other
Indian friends consider, it is a remnant of my sexuality however
unconscious it might be. My whole mental outlook will be changed
immediately I saw this defect in me. Only then, the weakness was
coeval with the time when I took the vow of brahmacharya which was
probably in 1902 1 .It may be that their definition of brahmacharya is
different from mine.
I return the draft with very slight corrections if it is to go at all.
Love.
Yours,
BAPU

HORACE ALEXANDER, E SQ.
1 UPPER WOOD S TREET
C ALCUTTA
From a photostat: G. N. 1443

194. LETTER TO SIR HUGH DOW
P ATNA,

March 25, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

Many thanks for your letter2 of the 22nd instant. I have to deny
myself the pleasure of writing in my own hand for the sake of sparing
you the infliction of bad handwriting, of which I am really ashamed.
Whenever you feel that you want to discuss anything with me please
do not hesitate to tell me so and I shall be at your disposal.
I am going on my third tour tomorrow morning. I return on the
28th instant.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
H. E. S IR HUGH DOW
GOVERNMENT HOUSE
P ATNA
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 234-5
1
Gandhiji took the vow some time in August-September, 1906 after his return
from ambulance service during the Zulu revolt in Natal; vide “An Autobiography”
2
Vide footnote 1, “Letter to sir Hugh Dow”, 21-3-1947

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947-29, APRIL 1947.

183

195. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
P ATNA,

March 25, 1947
CHI. AMRITLAL,

I got your letter. Enclosed is a letter for Dhiren 1 . Read it and
then pass it on to him. I have merely given in it my opinion, but I
think it will be enough for you. All the same, if you on your own wish
to keep him, you may do so. I could not train him, nor could Satis
Babu. This would be a charitable view. If we take an uncharitable view,
we might say that both Satis Babu and I kept him with us for his own
good, but he could not stay with either. However, sooner or later he is
bound to stay somewhere. He does have a certain kind of ability, and
will be able to earn enough for a living. Those who wish to get
married can certainly do so. Dhiren, therefore, will miss nothing. I
now look upon him as completely free.
You may now do what you think fit. Kakasaheb will of course
see this. Give the accompanying letters to the two brothers.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10813

196. LETTER TO TARABEHN JASANI
P ATNA,

March 25, 1947
CHI. TARA,

As soon as Satish2 told me about Mohanlal, I wrote 2 to you at
Wankaner. Now Bal3 writes and tells me that you are there and feel
very much depressed. Why are you so weak? Have you ever known
anybody’s dear one to have lived for ever? The way Mohanlal has
gone, you, I and all others have to go. Why, then, rejoice or grieve
over things? Is it not our selfishness that we do so? You have to shed
lustre on Mohanlal’s name, and you have the ability to do that. If you
1

Dhirendra, son of Amrita Lal Chatterjee. The letter is not available.
Sons of D. B. Kalelkar
2
Vide “Letter to Trarbehn Jasani”, 16-3-1947
3
Sons of D. B. Kalelakr
2

184

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

do not have it, cultivate it. Arise, awake, open your eyes and see. Do
your duty.
Blessings to you both from

BAPU
C HI. T ARABEHN
C/O S HRI G. J ASANI'
36 DOCTOR R AJENDRA R OAD
BHAWANIPUR, C ALCUTTA
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 8789

197. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
P ATNA,

March 25, 1947
CHI. SATIS BABU,

I have your three letters. It can be said that the danger about
which you have written in two of them does not exist now. But no one
can say what will happen in the end.
I think it is better to store paddy after obtaining a permit.
I am enclosing herewith the two cheques, one for Rs. 400 and
the other for Rs. 182 with the letters received along with them.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 8970

198. LETTER TO NAGEN BABU
P ATNA,

March 25, 1947
BHAI NAGEN BABU,

I got your letter. Bhai Kalipada will give you all the news. I can
only say that my heart is in Noakhali, and whatever I do here is bound
to have some effect there. No one need by scared and no one should
be a coward. What God wills will be done.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL. 94 : 17 FEBRUARY, 1947-29, APRIL 1947.

185

199. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
P ATNA,

March 25, 1947
My third tour will commence tomorrow. I shall go to Jahanabad
and return on March 28. The prayer meeting will again be held here
on the 29th.
I saw the destruction in the village which I visited and met the
Hindus and the Muslims there. Today also I have been meeting
people throughout the day. One Muslim friend said that it was very
good indeed that I visited them. Now they were convinced that
nothing of this sort would recur. But I was pained by what another
Muslim friend told me. He said that the Hindus were now boycotting
the Muslims. Sometimes boycott could be a welcome thing but it is
bad if it is directed against one’s own brother. Suppose we have been
under the treatment of a Muslim doctor till today, as for instance I
used to be treated by Dr. Ansari, 1 Hakim Ajmal Khan 2 or Dr. Abdul
Rehman. Should we stop being treated by him as soon as a HinduMuslim riot breaks out? Boycott had an important place in our
struggle against the British. But if it is adopted amongst ourselves it
will amount to violence. The Hindus have committed a sin in Bihar
and today they are the guilty ones ; do they now want to persist in
doing wrong? The case of the doctor was cited only as an example.
The gentleman mentioned by me is a businessman and landlord. Both
Hindus and Muslims had their shops on his land and did business
there. It was a source of income for him. But now the Hindus have
stopped going there; this is a pernicious boycott. It so happens
sometimes that one who is engaged as a tailor does not like anyone
else to take up that profession. There was a time when a tailor’s son
took to tailoring only. But now a tailor’s son can also become a head
clerk. Such ill will and feeling of animosity should be given up.
1

M. A. Ansari (1880-1936) ; physician and surgeon ; Member, Congress
Working Committee; President, Indian National Congress, 1927 ; Chancellor, Jamia
Millia Islamia, 1928-36
2
(1863-1927) ; Chief Physician to the Nawab of Rampur, 1892-1902;
President, Indian National Congress, 1921 ; first Chancellor of Jamia Millia Islamia,
1920-27

186

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Let me give you some good news too. Today some League
friends met me and expressed their wish to live with the Hindus
amicably and wanted the Government to listen to them. I said to them
that though the League represented a large number of Muslims I did
not agree that those who were outside the League were not Muslims or
that the League was the sole representative of the Muslims. The
boycott of the League would not do. I even asked the Noakhali
Muslims to obey the orders of the League. So long as they were in the
League, it was their duty to carry out its orders. But if the League
misguided them and asked them to slit the throats of the Hindus, they
should refuse to obey it and quit the League.
The League friends also said: “Though we belong to the
League still we are friends of the Hindus. If the Government does not
take us into confidence, how can the Muslims trust it? It we plead with
the Muslims who had run away, they will come back. But if we do not
co-operate how many Muslims can you bring back? Maybe a few of
them would return. But all of them will not . The Government should
consult us.” I told them it was a good and straightforward suggestion.
Each should co-operate with the other and do his duty. When we work
unitedly it will have its impact on India as well as on the world. It will
purify our hearts. We should act only with a pure heart. What is the
use of our being together without unity of hearts?
I also heard some Muslims say that there were ten crore Muslims
and even if one crore perished the remaining nine crores would fight
for founding a nation of their own. I told them that if they had such
notions they would not serve Islam in any way. On the contrary they
would destroy it. I had told the Hindus also in Noakhali that they
should get rid of all fear. We should fear God alone. It is cowardice to
agree to something or to bow our heads before others out of fear.
The friend from Noakhali has informed me that after my return
from Noakhali the situation there has deteriorated again. I told him
that if the Hindus in Bihar co-operated with me, I could work for
Noakhali while I was still here. I would appeal to the Muslims of
Noakhali, if my voice could reach them, to live in unity with Hindus,
wherever they may be. Hindus should do likewise. I do not know what
will happen in Noakhali in future—whether the surviving Hindus will
be killed, their houses looted or burnt. But if this happens, the
Muslims will dig their own graves. Even here I hear voices are being
raised that scores will be settled once Gandhi goes away. This is a bad
omen. I beseech you not to become cowards, but to be truthful and

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

187

have faith in God. It is folly to agree to anything out of fear. Today
some Domes came to see me. They told me that it was not only caste
Hindus who boycotted them but even the Bhangis among Harijans
boycotted them. They said that the Domes were normally engaged in
bamboo work, only the poor ones did scavenging. They are not even
aware of the exact strength of their community. Only one boy from
the community goes to college. The Domes invited me to stay with
them. I told them that, though I would like it, I was at the moment
engaged in other very important work. I was grieved to know that the
Bhangis did not allow them to draw water from their wells. Bhangis
and other Harijan friends should not discriminate amongst themselves.
I fail to understand why others regard Harijans as inferior. I have
myself become a Bhangi. If I swept your lanes and cleaned your
latrines, and you hurled abuses at me and I tolerated them, how would
I then become low? Those who are engaged in scavenging are not
inferior but it is those who abuse others that are low. Those who do
the cleaning for us and serve us should be treated with love by all of
us.
[From Urdu]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—II, pp. 41-4

200. LETTER TO LORD MOUNTBATTEN1
P ATNA,

March 26, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter of the 22nd instant received by me
yesterday.
You have rightly gauged my difficulty about moving out of
Bihar at the present moment. But I dare not resist your kind call. I am
just now leaving for one of the disturbed areas of Bihar. Will you
therefore forgive me if I do not send you the exact date of my
departure for Delhi? I return from this third Bihar tour on the 28th
instant. My departure will therefore be as quickly as I can arrange it
after the 28th.
In order that this may be in your hands as early as possible I
1

The addressee had taken over as Viceroy and Governor-General of India on
March 24, 1947.

188

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

send this through His Excellency the Governor of Bihar.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
H. E. LORD LOUIS MOUNTBATTEN OF BURMA
NEW DELHI
[PS.]

I expect to leave for New Delhi on the 30th instant.
M. K. G.
From a photostat: G. N. 10832

201. LETTER TO SYED ZAFAR IMAM
P ATNA,

March 26, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter of the 25th instant. It will be a matter
of pleasure to me if someone on behalf of the League accompanies
me during the tour 1 . I think Mridulabehn has already told the local
League in the same strain. You will certainly be informed when the
date for the visit to Tilhara is fixed.
In the second paragraph you refer to my ‘inner voice’. Is this a
gibe, a compliment or an unthought remark? I ask this question
purposely because I want all the help that the local League can render
sincerely in the difficult task in front of me.
S. Z AFAR IMAM S AHIB
P ATNA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

202. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
P ATNA,

March 26, 1947
Gandhiji’s attention being drawn by the A. P. I. to a report in a section of the
Press ( not The Indian Nation) about a letter said to have been received by him from
the new Viceroy and his alleged reply thereto, he said that it was packed with half1

To Tilhara, to ascertain the true extent of damages caused to the Muslim
lives, properties and holy places of worship during commual riots in Bihar.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

189

truths which he always held as more dangerous than full untruths and therefore,
characterized half-truths as “a lie and a half”.
Pressed for clarification Gandhiji said that he had no desire to run into the trap,
however unconscious it might be. He added that whoever had concocted the message
had done no service to the cause of Indian independence or to honest journalism. He
would like Indian journalists not to copy the worst features of journalism of the West
with which unfortunately it was reeking. But if there was to be imitation it should be
of the best in Western journalism of which he was happy to be able to testify.
Gandhiji said:

There are several brilliant examples in journalism and as a
journalist of long standing, though an amateur, I must conclude by
the warning that journalism which is rightly called the Fourth Estate
should never degrade itself by becoming a means of making money.
This caution is doubly necessary at the present critical time in the
history of the country.
The Indian Nation, 27-3-1947

203. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING1
JEHANABAD,

March 26, 1947
Gandhiji began his post-prayer speech by referring to the common weakness
of misunderstanding opponents, attributing to them motives which could not be
proved. Such behaviour often led to untoward results which prudent people would
avoid. Such misunderstanding was responsible for differences between the Congress
and the League.2 Both the organizations had a large following. The responsibility
resting on them was all the greater for their popularity. Their conduct towards each
other had to be above suspicion.
Gandhiji next referred to his visit to Kako Relief Camp 3 and the village of
Saistabad. Men and women burst into tears when they saw him. He told them that to
break under one’s sorrow did not become brave people. All religions taught that
sorrow should be bravely borne.
As he watched crowds of sturdy men pursuing him, mobbing his car and
1

Extracted from “Gandhiji’s Bihar Tour Diary”
Gandhiji had offered to stay in Jehanabad with some members of the Muslim
League who had called on him at Patna. Not knowing this, one of his secretaries
arranged for his stay with the authorities. When Gandhiji came to know of it, he tried
to contact the members of the Muslim League but could not. The latter, however,
accused him of breach of promise.
3
Where 500 refugees had taken shelter
2

190

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

shouting vociferously Mahatma Gandhiki jai, etc., he could well imagine the havoc
they must have wrought when they attacked a handful of Mussalmans. The Hindus
should be ashamed of the act. They should take a vow never to succumb to the
madness again. Nor should they think of taking revenge for the incidents of the
Punjab or the like. Would they themselves become beasts simply because others
happened to sink to that level? If ever they became mad again, they should destroy
him first. His prayer in that case would be that God may give him the strength to pray
to Him to forgive his murderers, that is, to purify their hearts. He prayed that God may
enable him to show by example what true bravery was. No one could mistake arson
and murder of innocent women and children as a brave act. It was cowardice of the
meanest type.
Gandhiji next referred to a complaint that he had received from the Hindus of
Kako enumerating their sufferings at the hands of Muslim zamindars. He interpreted it
as intended to minimize their own offence against the Mussalmans. It was not
manliness to attempt to do so.
Again Gandhiji referred to a report that he had heard of the Hindus threatening
the Mussalmans that they would wreak vengeance on them when he (Gandhiji) was
gone. It ill became the votaries of the Ramayana to try to suppress the fourteen or
fifteen per cent of the Muslims in their midst. Men aspiring to be free could hardly
think of enslaving others. If they tried to do so, they would only be binding their
own chains of slavery tighter. It became their duty to go and beg forgiveness of the
Mussalmans, and by their true repentance they should try to persuade them to go back
to their homes. They should rebuild their houses. They should make their sorrow their
own.

Harijan, 13-4-1947

204. TELEGRAM TO CHOATHMAL
C HOATHMAL
S ECY. P ROVINCIAL S WEEPERS’ F EDERATION

[On or after March 26, 1947] 1
YOUR
WIRE 2 .
DIFFICULT
VALUNJKAR.
ACT
AS

ADVISE
THEY

FROM HERE.
ADVISE.

SEE

VINOBAJI,

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1

From the postmark
The addressee had requested Gandhiji’s intervention in the ill-treatment of
leaders of sweepers in jail.
2

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

191

205. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
GHOSI, J EHANABAD,

March 27, 1947
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

You may make whatever arrangement seems best to all of you
regarding Kanchan. It is essential that her delivery pass off without
any difficulty.
Kanchan’s own desire in this matter should get the first priority.
If she wants to have the delivery at her mother’s, please arrange it that
way.
It is for you all to decide whether you can arrange for the
delivery in the old hospital building. I will raise no objection if you
decide that. I cannot say more than this from here.
I understand about Hoshiaribehn1 .
I trust Mohan2 and Anasuya3 are doing well. How long will they
stay there?
Tell Bhansalibhai that he should stop eating cereals and pulses
until the fever disappears completely. He should till then live on milk,
butter-milk and fruit. If he does that, the body will recover its normal
health quickly. Raw kodra is taboo. We are not strong enough to digest
it.3
Tell Prabhakar that he must get rid of his weakness.
If Shashi 4 takes friction-bath regularly and observes the
necessary restrictions on diet, I am sure his fever will disappear. It will
of course be good if he goes to Panchgani.
I understand about Kausambi’s5 illness.
Why does Nayakumji get severe attacks of cold so often? Tell
him that he must get rid of the disease once for all with the help of
rural remedies, that is, by nature-cure methods. This is also part of
basic education.
If Sharda 6 can do without Shakaribehn 7 , I think it would be
1

Niece of Balvantsinha
Son and daughter-in-law of Narahari Parikh
3
Vide also “Letter to Pushpa K. Desai”, 24-3-1947
4
Son of Ratilal Mehta
5
Dharmanand Kausambi, who had been Professor of Buddhist Literature at the
Gujarat Vidyapith, was suffering from a severe skin ailment.
6
Addressee’s daughter, married to Gordhandas Chokhawala
7
Addressee’s wife
2

192

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

good for her to return to the Ashram. Let her do what keeps her
happy and contented.
Parnerkar’s1 leg must have got all right now. Manohar also, I
hope, is all right. This is my third tour. I am in a village today. I have
to leave for Delhi on the 30th to meet the Viceroy there. I shall be
staying there for two or three days.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10659

206. TALK WITH MUSLIMS 2
AMTHUA,

March 27, 1947
Gandhiji said that the style in which the memorandum had been written, it
could not represent the views of the people who surrounded him there because when he
himself understood so little of it he was sure the illiterate friends around him could not
understand what it conveyed. He asked how could the reader of the memorandum claim
to represent the views of those for whom he spoke.
Referring to the complaints against the Hindus, Gandhiji said it was his
mission to make people brave whether they were Hindus or Muslims and he asked the
people who had submitted the memorandum not to preach cowardice among the
Muslims. He gave the example of South Africa where he led the Indians, a bare handful
of 13,000 in the entire sub-continent, against great odds and those Indians were
courageous enough today to fight their oppressors. In Bihar the Muslims were in a
much greater majority than the Indians in South Africa and therefore they should be
brave.
Gandhiji reaffirmed that he was not disloyal or unfaithful to the Muslims and
that his one aim in life was to help the Muslims as long as he was alive and he would
try to help them even by dying.
Before he left he invited the Muslims to come and see him and place fore him
all the difficulties in their way.

The Indian Nation, 29-3-1947

1

Y. M. Parnerkar, a dairy expert
Gandhiji visited Amthua at 8 a.m. where Muslims presented to him a
memorandum written in highly Persianized Urdu. It stated among other things that
Gandhiji’s visit was likely to do more harm than good and that the Government had
helped rioters and Congressmen who were in league with them.
2

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

193

207. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING 1
OKRI,

March 27, 1947
Gandhiji uttered the warning that Indians might lose the golden apple of
independence which was almost within their grasp, out of insanity, which had caused
scenes of desolation and destruction, and stated that the peace that reigned in the land
was only on the surface. He said this while referring to his visit during the morning
and afternoon to some riotaffected villages.
Gandhiji added that they knew the very first pronouncement that the Viceroy
had made when he assumed office stated that he was sent as the last Viceroy to wind up
the British rule in India. They must have noticed that the pronouncement was
deliberate, unconditional and unequivocal. He said that we must trust British promises
for it would be cowardice to say that all Britons were dishonest. That, he explained,
would mean that we were ourselves dishonest. Gandhiji added that the jar of British
sins was full and they must go but it was not right to abuse them while they were
departing. He knew that it had become a fashion, though not without cause, to distrust
every British declaration. He for one would advise the acceptance of every declaration
at its face value without qualifying it in the light of past experience to the contrary.
His experience was that it was the deceiver who always lost and never the dupe if he
was honest and brave. But he very much feared on account of what had happened in the
country that by their folly or, what was worse than that, insanity, they might let slip
out of their hands their hard-won prize before it was strongly locked in their
unbreakable fist.
Gandhiji referred to Bihar and the Punjab and said that he had wisdom enough
to see that they themselves might tempt the Viceroy to eat his own words, uttered
solemnly on a solemn occasion. Heaven forbid that such an occasion should arise,
but, if it did, even though his might be a voice in the wilderness, he would declare that
the Viceroy should firmly and truly carry out his declaration and complete the British
withdrawal.
Gandhiji then referred to his tour today in villages Amthua, Belai and Ghosi,
this morning and Abdal Chak, Zulfipur and Abdalpur2 . He said that the same stories of
atrocities were repeated the whole day. He advised the Congressmen who had
approached him and said that innocent men were in jail as a result of communal cases,
that they should produce those who were guilty and if they failed they should cease to
be Congressmen. Gandhiji also advised the guilty to confess to him, for he would not
give them away to Government but then they thought to atone for their sins. Gandhiji
also requested Hindus to return all abducted women and girls, if any in their
possession, at once.

1
2

194

The reports in Harijan and The Indian Nation have been collated.
In the afternoon

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Gandhiji referred to the police strike 1 , and said that the police, like the
scavengers, should never go on strike. Theirs was an essential service and they
should render that service irrespective of pay.
There were many other effective and honourable means of getting grievances
redressed. If he were a Cabinet Minister, he would offer the strikers nothing whatever
under the threat of a strike, which implied force. He would give them the choice of an
impartial arbitration, without any condition. He said:

It will be a bad day for India if the military, including the police,
rule India.
He hoped the police would call off their strike unconditionally and request the
Ministry to appoint an impartial arbitrator to investigate their case.
Gandhiji also appealed to the policemen not to behave in the manner in which
they were behaving then. Every policeman, he said, was a servant of the people and
his duty was to behave like the Khudai Khidmatgars. Policemen were the custodians of
law.
Continuing, Gandhiji said that if every man, woman and child tried to
understand his or her duty and if there was no theft or dacoity, there would be no need
for policemen. Everyone could then become a policeman and help each other.
Gandhiji expressed regret that the Bihar Government had employed British
soldiers to deal with the strikers. No matter what the cause was, and wherever it was,
the Indian Governments must never requisition the services of British soldiers to deal
with civil disturbances. Otherwise it would mean that the Indian Governments were
helpless without British arms.
Harijan, 13-4-1947, and The Indian Nation, 29-3-1947

1

On March 20, 1947, a police havildar was convicted of contempt of court by
the Sub-divisional Officer, Gaya. The Gaya police then gave notice of strike unless
redress was given to the havildar and the Sub-Divisional Officer punished. An
immediate inquiry was ordered by the District Magistrate. The strike commenced on
March 24 and the strikers refused to return to duty in spite of the inquiry which began
the same day. From Gaya the strike spread to Patna and Monghyr.
VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

195

208. TELEGRAM TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
J EHANABAD,

March 28, 1947
ANAND HINGORANI
7 E DMONSTONE R OAD
ALLAHABAD
LEAVING

THIRTIETH

MORNING.

GANDHI
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

209. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
JEHANABAD,

March 28, 1947
CHI. MANILAL,

I got your long letter of March 7. You have given sufficient
details. You need not hesitate to write to me out of compassion for me
because of the pressure of work on me. I have not known a father who
would not welcome a letter from his son or daughter. On the contrary,
every father looks forward to such letters. It is true, of course, that if
my sons were to write silly and sentimental letters, I would be pained
to read them. But I have never taught any of you to be sentimental or
to write such letters, nor is it in the nature of any of you to be or act
so. I, therefore, have no fear on that score.
I understand what you say regarding me. It is enough for me
that you do not worry about me but leave me in God’s hands. It is
also true that, if what I am doing is wrong, I alone will have to suffer
the consequences. If it is good, its benefit will be shared by millions.
If refusal to extend a welcome to the Prince 1 is likely to do us
any harm, we should endure it. When we accorded a welcome in our
time the circumstances were different, and moreover we extended the

1

196

Vide “Statement to the Press”, p. 28.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

welcome jointly with other people.1 Keep on sending me newspaper
cuttings which you think I should read. I rarely read your journal 2 .
And moreover in the midst of all this touring, how can I even get it?
Dadoo and Naicker called on me3 as soon as they arrived. I was
in Patna then. I had only a brief talk with them. They said they would
come back and call on me again. They didn’t say a word regarding
you. Nor did I ask them. I didn’t think it advisable to do so. And,
moreover, your letter gives me all the information, and so really
speaking I had nothing to inquire about.
One thing seems certain, namely, that now the struggle will be
carried on through selfless and elected representatives. I cannot say
how long I shall be detained in Bihar and Noakhali.
I have to leave for Delhi the day after tomorrow to meet the new
Viceroy. I think I will have to stay there for two or three days and
then return here.
Don’t worry at all about Sita4 . I do whatever is necessary.
Blessings from
BAPU
CHI. SUSHILA,

Despatch this letter to Manilal. You may add whatever you wish
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 4997

210. TALK WITH MUSLIM REFUGEES5
JEHANABAD,

March 28 6 , 1947
One memorandum suggested that Gandhiji’s reference to the Noakhali
incidents in his speeches instead of suppressing the feeling of Hindus here would
aggravate them.
1

The reference appears to be to the visit of Duke of Cornwall and York to
South Africa; vide
2
Indian Opinion
3
On March 20
4
Addressee’s daughter
5
The report in Harijan, reproduced from The Searchlight, 30-3-1947, has
been collated with the version in Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase. Gandhiji was
replying to a written memorandum submitted by the Muslim refugees.
6
Biharni Komi Agman however gives this talk under March 26.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

197

Gandhiji answered that the inference was not correct for he had not spared the
Hindus. In fact there was a time when he used to be equally plainspoken with the
Muslims, too. He had even fasted for twenty-one days for what they had done in
1924. 1 The Muslims did not then regard him as their enemy.
Gandhiji said that as the Muslims today generally considered him as their
enemy, he was sometimes obliged to speak with restraint. In the Punjab worse things
were happening and at first he did not believe the newspaper stories but his
subsequent enquiries made him believe that far more excesses than the newspapers
reported were being committed in the Punjab. Because it was the doing of a particular
community, should he not speak about it? His mission could not be successful by
such suppression, he said.

As far as possible I have refrained from discussing the affairs in
Noakhali in my speeches. But whenever I have had occasion to speak
about Noakhali, I claim that I have spoken with great restraint. Do the
Muslims want that I should not speak about the sins committed by
them in Noakhali and that I should only speak about the sins of the
Hindus in Bihar? If I do that, I will be a coward. To me the sins of the
Noakhali Muslims and the Bihar Hindus are of the same magnitude
and equally condemnable.
Gandhiji thereafter replying to another memorandum, which stated that the
signatories had no confidence in the present Ministry, said:

I told the Hindus of Noakhali, who also expressed lack of
confidence in Mr. Shaheed Suhrawardy, that they could not remove
Shaheed Saheb from the Ministry as he was returned by the separate
electorate system. So long as Shaheed Saheb enjoys the confidence of
the community he represents, no one can remove him. Similarly, how
can you remove the Ministers when they have been returned by the
Hindu electorate? This unfortunate situation has been created by the
communal electorate system which, you know, I have always
condemned. Dr. Khan Saheb 2 also said the same thing the other day
that so long as he enjoyed the confidence of the Pathans there was no
question of his resignation. Moreover, what will happen if the Ministry
goes out? There will again be the rule of the bureaucratic
Government. That apart, I can take good work from these Ministers as
my relationship with them is most friendly.
The Bihar Ministers have told me that if I asked them to resign,
they would do so. But it would be wrong on my part to ask them to
1
2

198

Vide “Statement Announcing 21-Day Fast”, 18-9-1924
Premier of the North-West Frontier Province

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

resign. I can ask them to do only what is reasonable.
Referring to the demand that fifty per cent of the officers and constables put in
charge of new thanas 1 should be Muslims, Gandhiji replied:

I disapproved of the very same demand of the Noakhali Hindus.
This demand cuts across my peace mission. If conceded, this will
mean so many small Pakistans and a division of Bihar. After all,
wherever you live, you have to live by creating mutual goodwill and
friendly relations with your neighbours. Even the Quaid-e-Azam once
said that in the Pakistan areas the majority must so behave as to win
the confidence of the minority. In the same manner, I am urging
upon the Hindus here to win your confidence. Either Pakistan or
Hindustan, whichever is established, it must be based on justice and
fair play.
Referring to another demand that the Muslims may be allowed to resettle in
certain exclusive areas, Gandhiji said:

You cannot force the Government to keep you in certain
exclusive areas. Could I tell that to Shaheed Saheb for the Noakhali
Hindus? I never gave any encouragement to the Noakhali Hindus for
such a move. I told the Hindus of Noakhali that if they were afraid,
they could go anywhere if they got compensation. And why should
the Government not pay compensation when they got the properties?
Similarly, I will tell you to go anywhere provided you get adequate
compensation. But I must tell you that it is not my heart’s desire.
Leaving your homestead in such a manner is nothing but cowardice.
If the Government is not prepared to pay compensation, I should say
it is unworthy of them and the Government cannot refuse it.
Moreover, if the Ministers who have been returned by the Hindu votes
say that the Hindus here have gone beyond control, it is better for
them to consume themselves in the flames of the Hindu rage than to
continue in office. The Government has to do justice and cannot
afford injustice in any manner.
Referring thereafter to the Muslim grievances regarding the reported
appointment of Mr. Justice Reuben to conduct the Bihar Riots Enquiry, Gandhiji said,
the memorandum suggested that the Muslims had no faith in Mr. Reuben. But they
never suggested whom they wanted. To hold anyone as a suspect simply because he
was a non-Muslim was not right. Personally he would have liked the Judge to be a
Muslim provided he was acceptable to all. Unfortunately in the vitiated atmosphere of
1

New police stations that were being set up to create confidence among the
refugees.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

199

the times, Hindus did not trust the Muslims and the Muslims the Hindus.

We must have faith in some non-Muslim such as Mr. Justice
Reuben. There is no harm in the one-man Commission. If the
Muslims want, they can submit a panel of names from amongst which
the commission should be appointed. Then I can inform the
authorities. I am not one of those who would refuse to do anything
simply because the League wants it. Truth alone should be our
criterion, no matter who utters it.
With regard to the demand of restoration and finding out of abducted women,
Gandhiji said:

Since my arrival in Bihar I have been telling all those Muslims
who told me about the abducted girls to give me the names and the
family connections of such girls in order to help find out if they were
still alive. But till now not one name has been submitted to me. I again
ask you to submit the names of the unfortunate girls.
In the meeting . . . was also present Mahant Bhagwat Das, M.L.A, against
whom Muslims brought forward charges that he infuriated the Hindu mob during the
riots. Bhagwat Das then stood up and told Gandhiji that he was innocent and asked the
Muslims to bring forward specific instances to prove the charges.
It was further alleged that he was related to a notorious dacoit. The member of
the Assembly denied that he was related to the dacoit in question. As for the
allegations against him, he was prepared to face an inquiry by a body of Muslim
Leaguers themselves. If they found him guilty, he would submit to any punishment.
Even otherwise, he would carry out Gandhiji’s orders.
Gandhiji remarked that if the dacoit referred to was still at large, every effort
should be made to arrest him and all should co-operate with the Government to that
end. Gandhiji said:

It is a challenge to the Government. If the Government fails to
arrest the culprits it will stand discredited.
Turning to the member of the Assembly in question, he told him that a special
responsibility rested upon him, he being a member from the locality. If the Muslims
suspected him of complicity in the riots, he should resign his seat even though the
suspicion against him was unfounded. To the Muslims Gandhiji said that they should
seek God’s truth only, prove their charges and if they could not be proved,
unreservedly withdraw them.
Harijan, 13-4-1947, and Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, pp.
309-11

200

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

211. TALK WITH MUSLIM REFUGEES AND VILLAGE
REPRESENTATIVES1
March 28, 1947
Gandhiji agreed with them that where the Muslims had in panic sold their
property at ridiculously cheap prices they should be able to get the same back at those
very rates. Police outposts should be opened at places where looting and destruction
of property was still going on. An inquiry should be held into the conduct of the
officers who were guilty of gross neglect of their duty during the disturbances, and
those against whom the charges were established should be dismissed. It was further
suggested to Gandhiji that attention should be paid to the irresponsible and
communal-minded section of the Congress. Gandhiji replied that unlike the Muslim
League and the Hindu Mahasabha the Congress was meant to serve all. If it belied its
nationalist character, it would destroy itself.
QUESTION: Does the experience that you have had and the atmosphere that you

find around you lend you any hope of success in your mission of re-establishing lost
confidence between the Hindus and Muslims?
GANDHIJI:

Man can only try. The result is in the hands of God.

Addressing the village representatives, Gandhiji exhorted them to cleanse
their hearts. If they told him they were innocent, he would not believe them. If a
single Hindu had committed the crime, they were all responsible for it. Could he
reassure the Muslims on their behalf, he asked, that the realization of their sin had
been brought home to them and their hearts had been thoroughly cleansed by genuine
repentance? If, on the other hand, they felt that in butchering the Muslims they had
done the right thing, they should say so plainly, so that he might know exactly
where he stood and decide his future course of action accordingly. For, he had sworn to
“do or die” in Bihar.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, p. 311

1

In the afternoon Gandhiji met representatives from the surrounding villages
and Muslim refugees. Gandhiji’s answers to questions that had been asked at the
meeting of the Muslim Refugees in the Morning were read out to them. They then
proceeded to ask further questions. Vide also the preceding item.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

201

212. TALK WITH CONGRESS WORKERS 1
March 28, 1947
QUESTION: It is being said that Congressmen have taken quite an active part in
the riots and there is an increasing tendency among the workers to take bribes.

I do not know whom I shall hold responsible for this.
My faith in God, however, is not a whit shaken by it, rather it is
strengthened. These incidents have shown me the persons I trust in
their true colours. I will not be losing anything if they prove to be
false, because they will be shunned wherever they go. I am not
anyone’s master, I am only an humble servant. When the dawn of
independence is on the horizon, our people are indulging in such
madness.
GANDHIJI:

Q. The Muslims who fled their homes are trying to sell their properties at
cheap rates and the Hindus naturally want to buy them. Should they do so?

G. Honesty demands that the deal should be fair. The Hindus
should pay the Muslims a fair price for their properties. As a matter of
fact, instead of buying, they should hold them in trust.
Q. Should we ask the Hindus not to buy their properties?

G. Yes. But it should not develop into a boycott as in Noakhali.
We should not take advantage of the Muslims’ distress.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol, I, Bk. II, pp. 311-2, and Biharni
Komi Agman, p. 94.

213. TALK WITH POLICEMEN2
JEHANABAD,

March 28, 1947
Gandhiji told them that their strike was ill-advised and there was no
convincing argument in favour of continuing it. They were not mere wage-earners.
They were members of an essential service. Limbs of the law were expected to put duty
before self-interest. If they continued their strike until their demand was conceded, it
would jeopardize their case. They should, therefore, immediately and unconditionally
call off the strike. The Government of the day was their own and there was no loss of
dignity in surrendering to it. But they should follow his advice only if their leaders
1

The account in Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase has been collated with the
Gujarati version in Biharni Komi Agman.
2
The policemen who were on strike came to see Gandhiji at 1.15 p.m.

202

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

accepted it. While they belonged to their organization, loyalty demanded that they
should consult their leaders before they acted upon his advice.
Gandhiji deprecated the growing rift between the Hindu and the Muslim
policemen and told them that Hindu policemen should treat their Muslim colleagues
as their brothers. Their conduct should be such that both Hindus and Muslims should
have equal faith in them and the Muslims should not feel that for their protection they
needed Muslim policemen and vice versa.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, p. 313

214. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING1
ALLAHGANJ,

March 28, 1947
Gandhiji began by saying that he had passed a very full and heavy day. The day
was begun with a long meeting2 with the members of the local Muslim League at the
bungalow of Mr. Azharul Haq, local League leader. He was with them for over an hour
and had a hearty chat with them answering all kinds of questions. Then he had a
meeting 3 at his residential quarters with Hindus and Muslims belonging to
JEHANABAD and the surrounding villages. He had then a meeting4 with the
Congressmen which included members of the various Congress Committees. Later he
met the members of the local Hindu Mahasabha. Finally he had a heart-to-heart talk5
with over 25 members of the police force on strike. Then at half past three again he
visited the villages of Malathi, Gangasagar, Bola and Allahganj, in which Muslims
had suffered badly.
Referring to his visit to the villages, Gandhiji said that naturally he was full of
topics on which he wanted to speak and bespeak their attention. He was sorry to say
that Hindu repentance was not open and sincere enough to inspire confidence among
the Muslims. He had told the afternoon meeting that it was open to the representative
Hindus who were present at the meeting to disabuse the Muslims of their suspicion.
He was sorry to say that not one Hindu got up to give the needed assurance. He had not
the heart, therefore, to ask his Muslim hearers whether they (the Hindus) had cleansed
their hearts. Muslims were the injured party in Bihar and it was not open to anyone to
expect a satisfactory answer from them unless the guilty Hindu party had led the way
1

The reports from Harijan, The Indian Nation and The Hindu have been
collated.
2
Vide “Talk with Muslim Refugees”, 28-3-1947
3
Vide “Talk with Muslim Refugees and Village Representative”, 28-3-1947
4
Vide “Talk with Congress Workers”, 28-3-1947
5
Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

203

by repentance. There were, yet, ring-leaders like Mathura Singh at large and
successfully evading arrest. There was, therefore, little cause for wonder if the
Muslims were afraid to return to their respective villages. Gandhiji said that he could
not help feeling that the culprit could not long remain at large if the Hindu population
did not give him shelter. He asked Mathura Singh’s friends and sympathizers to
advise him to discover himself and face the consequences of his action. He would also
like to tell him that it was no act of bravery for him to evade arrest. He was thus
rendering a disservice to himself, his religion and his country. He suggested to the
Congressmen, in whose midst the inhumanities were enacted, that they could not
absolve themselves from the guilt, unless they made every effort to induce all the
culprits to come out into the open and to wash their guilt as publicly as they had
committed the crimes.
Continuing, Gandhiji said that he had visited a mosque in the village Bola
which was damaged during the disturbances. He was told that on the day of Holi the
mosque was again desecrated by some villagers who played Holi inside the mosque
premises. If it was true, Gandhiji said, it was undoubtedly a notice given by them to
the Muslims not to enter their homes even when they were rebuilt, not dare to visit
the mosque. If this reported desecration on Holi day was a fact, it was a bad omen for
the Hindus, for Bihar and for the whole country. He regretted the reported action of the
local Hindus and warned them to respect all places of worship alike. He called upon
the culprits to confess. But, Gandhiji regretted, new parties and new leaders had risen
who believed in all sorts of crimes and perhaps nobody was prepared to listen to him.
He recalled the theme of today’s bhajan and prayed to God for help and hoped Bihar
would come out of the difficulty now facing the province.
Gandhiji went on to say that he had heard at the Muslim League meeting in the
morning and at the meeting of the Hindus and the Muslims in the afternoon that
Mahant Bhagwat Das who was a member of the Bihar Legislative Assembly was
himself a participator in the crime and was himself present at both the meetings. The
speaker advised him whilst he was under suspicion to give up his membership. He was
glad to say that Mahant Bhagwat Das, without a moment’s hesitation, welcomed the
advice and promised at once to act up to it. He also added that Bhagwat Das was in no
way a participator directly or indirectly in the crime and that he was quite ready to face
an open, impartial enquiry to be made by the Muslim League itself. If it was a sincere
declaration, Gandhiji said, it was certainly a refreshing thing at a time when there was
no real sign of sincere sorrow and repentance on the part of the Hindus in the affected
areas. This he was obliged to say in spite of welcome letters of repentance to which
he had made reference at the previous evening’s meeting.
His attention has been drawn, Gandhiji said, to the fact that the Government
lorry which had accompanied him in his tour was forcibly boarded by passers-by as if
they had a right to travel in it even as the authorized occupants. He was sorry at the
unmanly exhibition of authority and lawlessness. Such licence could not be tolerated
even in the freest country in the world. Those who defied the law were digging the

204

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

grave of Indian independence before it was in their hands.
Gandhiji fervently appealed to all Bihar and through Bihar to the Indian
people not to plunge the country into a turmoil in the prelude to the dawn of freedom
over this land which he called the arunodaya of the new age. Gandhiji warned the
nation to awaken before the day of freedom dawned, just as all good men were up from
slumber and prayed before sunrise.
Gandhiji set at rest all speculation about his visit to Delhi in response to Lord
Mountbatten’s invitation by announcing that he was leaving Bihar for three or four
days. Gandhiji said he was determined to stay in Bihar and see the work he had taken
up through and no man could prevent him from doing it. God alone could keep him
away if He so desired. 1
Harijan, 13-4-1947, The Indian Nation, 30-3-1947, and The Hindu, 31-3-1947

215. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
P ATNA,

March 29, 1947
MY DEAR KU.,

I wrote to you thoughtlessly a few days ago. 2 But having now
got your letter of the 22nd instant 3 I feel that the healthy rule which
prevents the members of constructive organizations from becoming
members of the Working Committee should not be tampered with
however tempting a particular offer may be. What the President can
do however is to invite you and such other members when expert
advice is wanted on village matters. If you were a fullfledged member
you would be obliged to give your thought to many other matters
which did not fall within your jurisdiction as a village scavenger.
Hence my opinion is that we must resist this temptation. However, I
am likely to see the President during the next few days. I shall discuss
the matter with him and if there is anything to change my view I shall
write again.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU

S HRI J. C. K UMARAPPA
WARDHA
From a photostat: G. N. 10192
1

With this Gandhiji concluded the third part of his tour in Bihar.
Vide “Letter to J. C. Kumarappa”, 16-3-1947
3
In which the addressee had sought Gandhiji’s advice regarding the Congress
President’s request to him “to serve on the Working Committee in the place of
Jayaprakash Narayan”
2

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

205

216. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING1
P ATNA,

March 29, 1947
At the outset Gandhiji told the audience that he would be leaving for Delhi the
next day and hoped to return in about four or five days.
Gandhiji then feelingly referred to the death on the previous evening of Prof.
Abdul Bari, President of the Bihar Provincial Congress Committee, under tragic
circumstances. Prof. Bari was a disciple and co-worker of Dr. Rajendra Prasad. Dr.
Rajendra Prasad has built for himself a unique and undisputed position and influence in
the province by his service and sacrifice. Prof. Bari had also by his service in the
cause of the workers in Jamshedpur and other places endeared himself to the people
and risen to occupy the position of the President of the Provincial Congress
Committee. A fearless fighter, Prof. Bari was with the Congress during the different
phases of its struggle for freedom.
Gandhiji referred to his visit earlier in the day to Prof. Bari’s house to console
the members of the bereaved family and ask them not to grieve and to hearten them
for the work that had specially descended upon the weak shoulders of his children.
Gandhiji said that as he entered the house he was struck with its simplicity and the
simple life Prof. Bari had led. The house was located in an ordinary narrow lane and
what he saw inside the house fully bore out what everyone had said about Prof. Bari,
that he was a poor man and that though he had opportunities he scrupulously
maintained his integrity as far as public finances were concerned. At a time when the
administration of the country was in the Congress hands and crores of rupees had to
be administered, men of Prof. Bari’s honesty would have been of invaluable help. He
had hoped on his return from the third tour just finished, to be more closely associated
with him and to make an effective appeal to him to modify, if not altogether get rid
of, his short temper which went ill with the very high office, in fact the highest in
the province of Bihar, especially when there was a nationalist ministry at the head of
affairs which naturally had to be influenced by the premier provincial Congress
organization. Gandhiji said that he had had full faith in Prof. Bari and had known that
his word carried great weight with him. But God had willed otherwise and He had
deprived Bihar of the great service of a very brave man with the heart of a fakir. But
men like Bari never died, and it was for those who remained to carry on the noble
work he had left behind.
Gandhiji then referred to the circumstances of Prof. Bari’s death and said that
1

206

Extracted from “Gandhiji’s Bihar Tour Diary”

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in an unfortunate altercation that had ensued between him and one Gurkha member of
the anti-smuggling force and a former member of the Indian National Army, the latter
shot him. He warned the audience that there was no politics of any kind in the death
and that it would be wrong and unjustified to associate the whole I. N. A. organization
with the death of Prof. Bari because of what one single individual did.

Harijan, 13-4-1947

217. LETTER TO SYED ZAFAR IMAM
P ATNA,

March 30, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

I see upto the time of writing you have not acknowledged my
letter of 26th instant.1 As unfortunately I have to go to Delhi, I hope
only for a few days, I must refer to the first paragraph of your letter
of 25th instant. I wish you would disabuse your mind of the
impression that anything hangs on my actually witnessing all the
damage done during the wretched carnage. I have, therefore, advised
the ministers to be as speedy as possible in clearing all debris and
rebuilding all damaged property. This essential work ought not to
stop for a single day especially because of the impending rains. If
there is anything, [any] particular damage which you would like me to
see I would suggest your taking Shrimati Mridulabehn Sarabhai with
you to see it. It would be as good as my seeing it.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

Vide “Letter to Syed Jafar Imam”, 29-4-1947

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

207

218. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
ON TRAIN,

March 30, 1947
1
What do you two want to do in Delhi? I shall have little time to
talk. I have become perfectly useless for such things now. If success
attends my effort in Bihar and Noakhali I shall live.
Where would you want to stay˙˙˙ in Delhi? Who are they? What
is he doing? I do not know what is going to happen in Delhi. I have
only two with me this time. Let us see.
Supposing that your hearing is restored, why not the million
deaf people also should have the restoration?2 And how would it
benefit humanity? Do you know that Beethoven the great musician
was deaf? You are worrying about nothing. But that is my view. You
must do what you think is best for you.
In your place I should welcome this deafness. You are spared
much useless hearing. There is no harm in friends writing what they
wish to tell you .
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

219. A NOTE3
ON THE TRAIN,

March 30, 1947
Meet the prisoners if they4 permit you to do so. But offer them
only as much as Jayaprakash suggests. I do not want that he and I
should differ on this issue. The real work is to be done by him. I have
no doubt at all that my policy is absolutely correct. The Chief
Minister should grant you permission to meet them. He should not
even think that you will help any party of Socialists. If any political
gain is made out of it, it would be a poisonous legacy of the British
rulers. A volunteer cannot be in a party. As far as possible the police
1

The addressee and his wife Gangi Hingorani
The addressee had sought Gandhiji’s approval to proceed to the United States
for treatment of his deafness.
3
According to the G. N. register this was addressed to Dr. Syed Mahmud. But
from the form of address it appears to have been written to a lady. The note carries the
remark 4: “Regarding the Police”.
The Government
2

208

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

prisoners should be released. The cases of those charged with murder
will have to be considered separately. The duty of the police is to
remain faithful to the government of the time. Today’s Government is
counted as the people’s Government. Here the question of capitalist
and labour does not arise. A solution can be found to the problems.
The police should keep aloof from them.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: G. N. 5099

220. INTERVIEW WITH LORD MOUNTBATTEN1
April 1, 1947
Gandhiji asked the Viceroy if Manu2 could in the meantime roam about the
garden so that they could proceed with their talk uninterrupted.
“Certainly”, replied the Viceroy. Then addressing Manu he added: “All this is
yours; we are only trustees. We have come to make it over to you.” Gandhiji put in
laughing:

You can search her person for any hidden arms.
“I am perfectly satisfied there can be no need for that in a disciple of yours,”
replied the Viceroy with a smile.
The Viceroy told Gandhiji that it had always been the British policy not to
yield anything to force, but the Mahatma’s non-violence had won. They had decided
to quit as a result of India’s non-violent struggle. Towards the close, on being invited
to do so, Gandhiji placed before the astonished Viceroy his solution to the Indian
deadlock.3
He reiterated what he had said often before, that he did not mind Jinnah or the
Muslim League turning the whole of India into Pakistan, provided it was done by
appeal to reason and not under threat of violence. But while he had previously held
that this could be properly done only after the British had quitted, and while in
principle he still adhered to that view, the crux of his present proposal was that he
was now prepared under Mountbatten’s umpireship—not as Viceroy but as man—to
invite Jinnah to form a government of his choice at the centre and to present his
Pakistan plan for acceptance even before the transfer of power. The Congress could
1

Gandhiji called on the Viceroy at 9 a.m. At their meeting the previous day,
the talk had mostly centred round Gandhiji’s early life, his sojourn in England and
subsequent
struggles in South Africa and India.
2
Who along with Brijkrishna Chandiwala had brought in Gandhiji’s lunch
3
For the outline of Gandhiji’s plan, vide “Outline of Draft Agreement”, 4-41947

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

209

give its whole-hearted support to the Jinnah Government. At the same time since the
Muslim League would now be the Government, it would have no further excuse for
continuing the movements of organized lawlessness, which it had launched in some
of the provinces. These must be called off. Further, since the Viceroy had declared that
he was out to do justice only and nothing would be yielded to force, if the League did
not accept the offer, the same offer mutatis mutandis should be made to the Congress.
The old policy of trying to please both the parties must be given up.
Gandhiji told the Viceroy that the system of British policy of “divide and rule”
had brought about a situation in which the only alternative to a continuation of the
British rule, which they had found was no longer feasible, was to accept the logic of
the “Quit India” demand and retire unconditionally, leaving India to her fate. The role
of peace–maker in the “communal triangle” which they had themselves helped to
create was not for them.1
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. II, pp. 77-9

221. DISCUSSION AT INTER-ASIAN RELATIONS
CONFERENCE 2
April 1, 1947
The Azerbaijan delegate, Mr. Yousotoff, who was presiding at the Plenary
Session, requested Gandhiji to say a few words.
Gandhiji replied that he would be attending the closing session of the
Conference on April 2 and would speak then. For the present, he would answer any
questions that the members might like to put to him.
In answer to a question whether he believed in the theory of one world and
whether it would succeed under the present conditions, Gandhiji declared:

I would not like to live in this world if it is not to be one world.
Certainly I should like to see this dream realized in my lifetime.
I hope that all the representatives who have come here from the
different Asian countries will strive their level best to have only one
world. They will have to think out ways and means for achieving this
goal.
If you work with fixed determination, there is no doubt that in
1

For an account of the interview as recorded by the Viceroy, vide “Interview
with Lord Mountbatten”, 1-4-1947
2
The Conference, attended by 250 delegates representing 22 Asian countries
and 10,000 visitors, had been inaugurated on March 23, 1947, at the Red Fort by
Jawaharlal Nehru.
The report in Harijan under the title “Strive for One World”, has been collated
with the version in The Hindu.

210

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

our own generation we will certainly realize this dream.
Dr. Han Liwu from China asked him his views on the proposal to set up an
Asian institute. Gandhiji replying said:

The question is certainly very nice. Let me confess my
ignorance. I have really to apologize to you. Pandit Nehru had asked
me long before this Conference was scheduled to take place whether it
would at all be possible for me to attend it. It has proved to be a much
more important conference than it was expected to be. I was obliged
to say at that time that I was very sorry and would not be able to
come.1 When Lord Mountbatten, the new Viceroy, invited me to meet
him, however, I could not say ‘No’. It would have been foreign to my
nature to do so. The Viceroy had already told me that the credit for
bringing me to Delhi during the Asian Conference was really his. And
I told the Viceroy: “I am your prisoner. But I am also Pandit Nehru’s
prisoner, for, after all, he is your Vice-President !”
Through correspondence I know almost all parts of the world
and naturally, therefore, of Asia, though I know very few of you
personally—perhaps none of you. I am doubtful whether I can say
anything useful but the question is one after my heart. Some portions
of the question put to me now were discussed by Pandit Nehru
yesterday. It is a great event that for the first time in our history such a
conference takes place on the Indian soil. I am sorry that I have to
refer to the conditions that we see today. We do not know how to keep
peace between ourselves. We have so many differences which we
cannot settle between ourselves in a humane and friendly manner. We
think we must resort to the law of the jungle. It is an experience which
I would not like you to carry to your respective countries. I would
instead like you to bury it here.
India is now on the threshold of complete independence. India
wants to be independent of everybody who wants to own this country.
We do not want a change of masters. We want to be masters on our
own soil, though I am not quite sure how it will come about. All that
we know is that we should do our duty and leave the results in the
hands of God and not in the hands of man. Man is supposed to be the
maker of his destiny. It is only partly true. He can make his destiny,
only in so far as he is allowed by the Great Power which overrides all
out intentions, all our plans and carries out His own plans.
I call that Great Power not by the name of Allah, not by the
1

Vide “Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru”, 26-2-1947

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

211

name of Khuda or God but by the name of Truth. For me, Truth is
God and Truth overrides all our plans. The whole truth is only
embodied within the heart of that Great Power—Truth. I was taught
from my early days to regard Truth as unapproachable—something
that you cannot reach. A great Englishman taught me to believe that
God is unknowable. He is knowable but knowable only to the extent
that our limited intellect allows.
You, gentlemen, have come here from different parts of Asia,
and having come with eagerness and zest you should all have yearly
meetings or two-yearly or three-yearly conferences. You should carry
away sweet memories of the meetings and make every effort to build
the great edifice of Truth.
All the Asian representatives have come together. Is it in order
to wage a war against Europe, against America or against nonAsiatics? I say most emphatically ‘No’. This is not India’s mission. I
am free to confess that I will feel extremely sorry if India, having won
independence through essentially and predominantly non-violent
means, was going to use that independence for the suppression of the
other parts of the world. Europeans have hitherto exploited different
races inhabiting this vast continent called Asia. It will be a sorry thing
if we go away from this Conference without a fixed determination that
Asia shall live and live as free as any Western nation. I just wanted to
say that conferences like the present one should meet regularly, and if
you ask me where, India is the place. You will forgive me for this
partiality for India.
Harijan, 20-4-1947, and The Hindu, 2-4-1947

222. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
NEW DELHI,

April 1, 1947
Today as soon as Manu Gandhi uttered the first word of the Kalma from the
Koran a young man stood up, marched right up to the stage where Gandhiji sat and
said, “You go away from here. This is a Hindu temple where we will not allow a
Muslim prayer. You have been repeatedly telling this thing to us but our mothers and
sisters continue to be slaughtered. We cannot tolerate it any longer.” Gandhiji told
him:

You are free to go. If you do not want to pray let the others do

212

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

it. This place does not belong to you. This is not the right way.1
You did not do the right thing. You forcibly removed the young
man from the meeting. You should not have done such a thing. It
would give him a sense of triumph. He was very excited. He did not
wish to listen to the prayer. But I know that you all wish to listen to it.
I do not wish to hold the prayer in spite of protests. Now I intend to
give up the rest of the prayer. You are all familiar with the prayer I
offer. You have heard it even before I went to Noakhali. In my
sequence of prayers, the Muslim prayer is followed by the Parsi
prayer. After that this girl would have sung to you a bhajan in her
melodious voice and then there would have been Ramdhun. But now I
am leaving out the Parsi prayer and also the Ramdhun. Auz-o-Billahi
is the beginning of one of the verses of the Koran. You think that
uttering this expression is an insult to Hinduism. But I am a true
sanatani Hindu. My Hinduism tells me that along with the Hindu
prayer I should also offer the Muslim prayer and the Parsi and
Christian prayers. True Hinduism lies in offering prayers of all
religions because only he is a good Hindu who is also a good Muslim
and a good Parsi. The young man said that this was a Hindu temple
and such prayers could not be held here. But that is wild talk. This
temple belongs to the Bhangis. Even a single Bhangi can throw me
out of this place if he so desires. But these people love me. They know
that I am a Hindu. Jugal Kishore Birla, on the other hand, is my
brother. He is a big man in terms of money but he regards me an
elder. He has put me up here because he considers me a pious HIndu.
He also takes me to the big temple built by him. If in spite of all this
the young man insists that I should go away and I cannot pray here, it
is merely his arrogance. But you should have won him over with love.
You threw him out by force. What is the point in offering prayers by
resorting to force? The young man was in a rage and in his anger was
talking wild things. It was out of such talk that all those things
happened in the Punjab. This rage is what starts all the fanaticism.
The shlokas just recited by this girl say that when a man broods
on objects of the senses—that is, all the five senses—he is caught up in
craving. Then he is possessed by wrath which leads to stupefaction,
1

But the young man could not be silenced. He came close to Gandhiji. People
tried to pull him back but he stood firm and persisted in arguing. A lady put herself
between Gandhiji and the young man. Gandhiji asked her to keep away, saying, “Let
no one stand between me and him.” But the people removed the young man from the
meeting.
VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

213

i.e., insanity.1
Driven by such frenzy the simple folk of Bihar have indulged in
such acts as make me hang my head down in shame. In the same mad
fury the people of Noakhali indulged in excesses. But the law of the
jungle was more in evidence in Bihar than in Noakhali and it was even
more so in the Punjab.
If you are true Hindus, you should not act in such a manner. If
in a meeting something is being said which we do not like to hear we
must get up and leave the meeting. There is no need to shout and
make a row. Moreover, this is a matter of religion. Leave alone
religious discussion this man would not even allow people to pray.
Prayers should not be disturbed as was done by this young man. Such
acts help no one.
None of those who have died in the Punjab will ever come back.
Ultimately all of us have to go the same way. If is true that these
people met their death by being slaughtered whereas others die of
cholera or in some other way. He who is born is destined to die. In
being born there is, to an extent, some human responsibility, but in the
matter of dying, none but God has any hand. Death cannot be
avoided on any account. Death is our companion, our friend. If
people have died with courage, they have lost nothing. Rather, they
have gained something. But the great problem is how to deal with
those who committed these murders. True, to err is human. After all
man is but a bundle of errors. But we ought to rectify the errors. God
will not overlook our acts. When we go to Him He will look into our
hearts. He knows our hearts. If there is a change of heart in us, he will
pardon all our lapses.
I have many friends in the Punjab who call themselves my
devoted followers. But who am I that they should describe themselves
as such? All these friends insist that since I have already come as far as
Delhi I should go over to the Punjab at least for one night, so as to
comfort the people there. It would take only a few hours if I fly. But
how can I go at somebody’s bidding? I shall go there only at God’s
bidding or at the bidding of my own heart. I did not go to Noakhali at
someone else’s call. Before leaving this place I had said that I was
going there because my heart urged me to do so. People had been for
long asking me to go to Bihar but I had not gone there at anyone’s
call. I went when Dr. Mahmud Saheb wrote to me that my going there
would alone clear the minds of the Biharis.
1

214

Bhagavadgita, II. 62 and 63

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Bihar is a province where Hindus and Muslims can live together
[in peace]. But there too women and children have been subjected to
outrages no less violent. Blind with fury, people killed innocent
children; they slaughtered the womenfolk and threw the bodies into
the wells. I am not talking in the air. All these are facts that can be
proved by evidence. After that the Muslims are bound to say that they
would not live there. But once they are assured that they would not be
treated like that again, they would come back. The Bihari Muslims
had nearly come to appreciate this ; so much so that if we could have
reassured them, I was confident that the Muslims who had fled to
Asansol and Sind would have come back. They were on the point of
returning. But now, should the atrocities in the Punjab be avenged in
Bihar? Then, will it be repeated in Madras? And where will this end?
Will all of us become barbarous in this way? The Congress fought a
non-violent battle against the British. Should we now start killing our
own brethren? True, Muslims are perpetrating atrocities, but should we
also do the same? Was there an act of atrocity that the British did not
commit?
But now the British are going. The Viceroy told me that they
had never retreated, but they were leaving India, as a result of her nonviolent struggle. You might say that they are doing it for show,
because in any case they had got to go. But, if anyone comes to us
with honest intentions, why should we interpret his honesty as
wickedness? I have learnt to accept honesty on the face of it till I have
experience to the contrary. Just at the moment of the departure of the
British should we present the spectacle of pleading for the retention of
their army although they are leaving? In the Punjab today we are
protected solely by them. But can we call it protection? I wish we
could protect ourselves even if only a handful of us survived. Let us
not be afraid of dying. If we are to be killed, would we not rather be
killed by our Muslim brothers? Would a brother cease to be a brother
because he has changed his religion? Moreover, do we not indulge in
the same acts as they do? What have we not done to the women in
Bihar? The Hindus have done it, which means I have done it. It is a
matter of shame. Do you think I should hurl two abuses in return for
one? But that is exactly what both the Hindus and the Muslims are
secretly doing and they are possessed by a mad frenzy.
Here is Badshah Khan sitting right beside me. Who can remove
him from here? How much prayer did I leave unfinished because of

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

215

that young man? I did so because I wanted to demonstrate, I wanted to
proclaim to one and all that I would be a good Hindu only if I am a
good Parsi, a good Muslim. Would it be religious to abuse other
religions? For me, there is nothing like different religions.
All these people who have come from all over Asia 1 talk very
lovingly to Jawaharlal. They are all very pleased with him. By the
grace of God, we have a gem of a man in our midst who wants to
embrace the whole world. Should we not maintain peace if only to
honour him?
Now let me say a few things about the Viceroy. I was with him
yesterday for more than two hours, and therefore could not come for
the prayers. Fortunately the girl started the prayers as I had instructed
her. Today also I talked with the Viceroy for two hours.2 He said that
he was making an honest effort. He assured me that he was the last
Viceroy. He said he never wanted to come to India. He wanted to be
on the seas but he came here because he was prevailed upon.
He was sent here when the Labour Government of Great Britain
decided to quit India, since he belongs to the royal family. The British
want to depart from India with grace. He said he was eager to hand
over this country even to a single Parsi if he came forward to take it,
not to mention a Hindu or a Muslim. Why should I not listen to one
who comes to me with such honest intentions? The British have done
us enough harm in the past. But Lord Mountbatten has done us no
harm. He says that he would like to be a servant right from today if it
were possible. But it is not proper that he should run away while we
are fighting with each other. He, after all, belongs to a brave race. Why
should he run away? He is thinking of the manner in which he should
leave the country. He is making good efforts. He is proceeding
honourably. If we too proceed accordingly, what has never before
happened will happen now. If anyone wants to accommodate a fellow
who would not conduct himself honourably but would act
barbarously, let him learn from me how to do it. I am a prisoner of
the Viceroy till Friday. Jawahar also wants to detain me here. After
three days I shall tell you everything. I do not want to hide anything.
But what can possibly happen? Whatever the Congress decides will be
done; nothing will be according to what I say. Mr writ runs no more.
If it did the tragedies in the Punjab, Bihar and Noakhali would not
1

For the Inter-Asian Relations Conference
Vide “Interview with Lord Mountbatten”, 1-4-1947, and “Interview With
Lord Mountbatten”, 1-4-1947
2

216

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have happened. No one listens to me any more. I am a small man.
True, there was a time when mine was a big voice. Then everyone
obeyed what I said; now neither the Congress nor the Hindus nor the
Muslims listen to me. Where is the Congress today? It is
disintegrating. I am crying in the wilderness. Today everyone can
forsake me but God will not. He has His devotee tested. An English
poem 1 describes God as the “Hound of Heaven”. He is the retriever
of dharma, i.e., He seeks out dharma. It would be enough if He hears
me. When God rules your hearts you will do only as He bids. We
should therefore behave like rational creatures. We ought not to let
loose our tongues at the slightest provocation.
[From Hindi]
Prarthana-Pravachan—Part I, pp. 5-11

223. TALK WITH MANU GANDHI
April 1, 1947
It is here that my non-violence will undergo its true test. But you
are in charge of conducting the prayer. The purity and sincerity with
which you conduct the prayer is sure to have its impact on the general
public. The people will learn a new lesson through it. Your
responsibility in this regard is indeed great. And if the recitation of
Ramanama is from the heart Rama will himself inspire rightmindedness in all. I have no doubt about it.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 118

1

By Francis Thompson (1859-1907)

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

217

224. A LETTER
April 2, 1947
I have come here but I could see the Sardar only for a few
minutes. His field of work has grown so vast that I do not like to
engage him in talks. I would rather not encroach upon his time even
to know his views about me and about Harijan. When I look at the
work-schedule of the Cabinet I feel as if I had more time than they. It
looks surprising, yet it is true.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 120

225. ADVICE TO MAHARAJA OF KAPURTHALA1
April 2, 1947
All you can expect to hear from me is that you should cease to
be a ruler and become a servant of the people. I can say no more.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 121

226. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
DELHI,

April 2, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

If there is anybody who intends today to object to the prayers,
as was done yesterday, I should like to be informed so that I may not
begin the prayers at all. I do not wish to hold the prayers in the face
of opposition by anyone.
Two persons stood up and said, “If you wish to have your prayers you should
hold them in the grounds outside this Hindu temple.”

This temple belongs to Bhangis. I too am a Bhangi. It
would be a different matter if the Trustees object. I shall hold the
prayers in this very place if you would let me do so.
GANDHIJI:

A YOUNG MAN : This temple belongs to the public. We have seen what has
1
This was given to Sir Jagatjit Singh Bahadur, who met Gandhiji and sought
his advice.

218

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

happened in the Punjab. We shall certainly not allow you to hold the prayers.
GANDHIJI: I do not wish to enter into an argument. Let me tell
you with due respect that you can’t represent the Bhangis. I am a
Bhangi by choice. I have removed night-soil. If I ask you, you will
not be able to do so. Even so if you object I shall not hold the
prayers.

“We wish to hear the prayers. We want to have the prayers”, people shouted.
GANDHIJI: Among these thousands of people you are the only
two persons who are putting an obstruction. If does not behove you. I
know you are full of anger. I shall have the prayers, but not unless
you calm yourselves and try to understand.

The young man shouted: “If you want to recite the verses of the Gita in a
mosque, will the Muslims allow you to do so? We have witnessed so much in the
Punjab.”

It is not necessary to shout. You are not protecting
Hindu dharma by doing so, in fact you are murdering it. I am not
postponing the prayer out of fear. If anybody wants to stop me once I
have started the prayers I shall not stop even if I am killed. And you
will see I shall be reciting Rama Rahim and Krishna Karim1 when I
breathe my last. I have told you that I am a Bhangi, a Christian, a
Muslim, besides of course being a Hindu. How can you stop me when
Badshah Khan is here with me? But you may stop me, even a child
can do so.
GANDHIJI:

YOUNG MAN: Go to the Punjab.

GANDHIJI: What shall I do by going there? I am straining every
nerve to do what service I can for the Punjab, Bihar and Noakhali even
while remaining here.
Some persons tried to remove the young man.
GANDHIJI: Please

do not push him. Be patient.

YOUNG MAN: Give us four minutes, we would like to talk to you.

GANDHIJI I

don’t have the time and I don’t want to enter into an
argument. I would only urge upon you respectfully to tell me in the
affirmative or negative [whether I should hold the prayer or not].
YOUNG MAN: We shall not allow you to hold the prayers.
1

According to the source after his return from Noakhali, Gandhiji replaced the
refrain Bhaj man pyare Sitaram by Bhaj man pyare Rama Rahim, bhaj man pyare
Krishna Karim.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

219

GANDHIJI: Everyone should remain seated peacefully. I am
going. No one should molest these persons. You may consider this to
be your triumph but is it so? Is it bravery to stab anybody in the
back? I must say that by doing so you are murdering Hinduism. You
must try to think and understand. I will put the same question to you
tomorrow and if you object to the prayers I shall go away.

[From Hindi]
Prarthana-Pravachan—Part I, pp. 11-3

227. SPEECH AT INTER-ASIAN RELATIONS CONFERENCE 1
April 2, 1947
I do not think that I should apologize to you for having to
speak in a foreign tongue. I wonder if this loud speaker carries my
voice to the farthest end of this vast audience. If some of those who
are far away are unable to hear what I may say, it will be the fault of
the loud speaker.
I was going to tell you that I do not wish to apologize. I dare
not. You cannot understand the provincial language which is my
mother ton-gue. I do not want to insult you by speaking in my own
language (Guja-rati). Our national speech in Hindustani. I know that it
will be a long time before it can be made into an international speech.
For international commerce, undoubtedly, English occupies the first
place. I used to hear that French was the language of diplomacy. I was
told when I was young that if I wanted to go from one end of Europe
to the other, I must try to pick up French. I tried to learn French in
order that I may be able to make myself understood. There is a rivalry
between French and English. Having been taught English I have
naturally to resort to that language.
I was wondering as to what I was to say to you. I wanted to
collect my thoughts but, let me confess to you, I had no time. Yet I
had promised yesterday that I would try to say a few words. While I
was coming with Badshah Khan I asked for a little piece of paper and
pencil. I got a pen instead of a pencil. I tried to scribble a few words.
You will be sorry to hear from me that that piece of paper is not by
my side though I remember what I wanted to say.
1

The version in Harijan entitled “The Message of Asia”, has been collated
with The Hindu report. More than 25,000 persons attended the concluding session
presided over by Sarojini Naidu. Gandhiji spoke in Hindi.

220

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You, friends, have not seen the real India and you are not
meeting in conference in the midst of real India. Delhi, Bombay,
Madras, Calcutta, Lahore—all these are big cities and are, therefore,
influenced by the West.
I then thought of a story. It was in French and was translated for
me by an Anglo-French philosopher. He was an unselfish man. He
befriended me without having known me because he always sided with
the minorities. I was not then in my own country. I was not only in a
hopeless minority but in a despised minority, if the Europeans in
South Africa will forgive me for saying so. I was a coolie lawyer. At
that time we had no coolie doctors, not coolie lawyers. I was the first
in the field. You know perhaps what is meant by the word coolie.
This friend—his mother was a French woman and his father an
Englishman—said: “I want to translate for you a French story. There
were three scientists who went out from France in search of truth.
They went to different parts of Asia. One of them found his way to
India. He began to search. He went to the socalled cities of those
times—naturally this was before British occupation, before even the
Moghul period. He saw the socalled high-caste people, men and
women, and he felt at a loss. Finally, he went to a humble cottage in a
humble village. That was the cottage of a Bhangi and there he found
the truth that he was in search of.”
If you realy want to see India at its best [sic], you have to find it
in the humble Bhangi homes of such villages. There are 7,00,000 of
such villages and 38 crores of people inhabit them.
If some of you see the villages, you will not be fascinated by the
sight. You will have to scratch below the dung heap. I do not say that
they ever were heavenly places. Today they are really dung-heaps.
They were not like that before. What I say is not from history but
from what I have seen myself I have travelled from one end of India
to the other and have seen the miserable specimen of humanity with
lustreless eyes. They are India. In these humble cottages, in the midst
of these dung-heaps, are to be found the humble Bhangis in whom
you find the concentrated essence of wisdom.
Again, I have learnt from books—books written by English
historians. We read books written in English by English historians but
we do not write in our own mother tongue or in the national
language—Hindustani. We study our history through English books
rather than through the originals. That is the cultural conquest which

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

221

India has undergone.
Stating that wisdom had come to the West from the East, Gandhiji said:

The first of these wise men was Zoroaster. He belonged to the
East. He was followed by the Buddha who belonged to the East—
India. Who followed the Buddha? Jesus, who came from the East.
Before Jesus was Moses who belonged to Palestine though he was
born in Egypt. After Jesus came Mohammed. I omit any reference to
Krishna and Rama and other lights. I do not call them lesser lights but
they are less known to the literary world. All the same I do not know
of a single person in the world to match these men of Asia. And then
what happened? Christianity became disfigured when it went to the
West. I am sorry to have to say that. I would not talk any furher.
I have told you the story in order to make you understand that
what you see in the big cities is not the real India. Certainly, the
carnage that is going on before our very eyes is a shameful thing. As I
said yesterday, do not carry the memory of that carnage beyond the
confines of India.
What I want you to understand is the message of Asia. It is not
to be learnt through the Western spectacles or by
imitating the atom bomb. If you want to give a message to the West, it
must be the message of love and the message of truth. I want you to
go away with the thought that Asia has to conquer the West through
love the truth. I do not want merely to appeal to your heads. I want to
capture your hearts.
Of course, I believe in “one world”. How can I possibly do
otherwise, when I became an inheritor of the message of love that
these great unconquerable teachers left for us? In this age of
democracy, in this age of awakening of the poorest of the poor, you
can redeliver this message with the greatest emphasis. You will
complete the conquest of the West not through vengeance because
you have been exploited, but with real understanding. I am confident
that if all of you put your hearts together—not merely heads—to
understand the secret of the message these wise men of the East have
left to us, and if we really become worthy of that great message, the
conquest of the West will be complete. This conquest will be loved by
the West itself.
The West is today pining for wisdom. It is despairing of the
multiplication of the atom bomb, because atom bombs mean utter
222

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

destruction not merely of the West but of the whole world, as if the
prophesy of the Bible was going to be fulfilled and there was to be a
perfect deluge. It is up to you to tell world of its wickedness and sin—
that is the teaching your teachers and my teachers have taught Asia.
Harijan, 20-4-1947, and The Hindu, 3-4-1947

228. TELEGRAM TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
P ATNA,

April 3, 1947
S ATISH BABU
KAZIRKHIL
C AMP NOAKHALI
SEND

BULLETIN

IN

ENGLISH.

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

229. A TALK

1

April 3, 1947
We must project ourselves in a better light in foreign countries.
Foreigners observe us with a view to learning something from us. But
we, in our turn, come under their spell. As a matter of fact we should
try to impress them with what is our own. For instance, while there we
should insist on wearing khadi, should ply the charkha regularly,
abstain from smoking, drinking and taking tea and should have
vegetarian food if possible. We must live as simply as possible,
conforming to our way of life. If we do this, we shall be able to
impress the people there and enhance our country’s glory. We should
demonstrate to them the advantages of our way of life. What is the
true meaning of appointing our ambassadors in those countries or
their ambassadors in our country? It means that these ambassadors,
through their conduct and manner of dressing and their food habits,
should reveal their own cultural heritage to the other country so that it
can benefit from it. Such mutually advantageous exchanges would
spread friendliness which in turn would promote world peace, and this
1

On the conduct of Indian ambassadors abroad

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

223

would enable people to live in harmony and peace and make
progress. In my opinion this is the basic purpose of appointing
ambassadors in every country. No doubt there are distinct
international advantages accruing from this in the commercial and
economic spheres, but the most signifi- cant is the former advantage.
Hence we must take great care to see that our representatives exhibit
no undesirable trait. Then alone would we shine forth and rise from
our present backward state. There is a saying in English that if wealth
is lost nothing is lost, if health is lost much is lost but if honour is lost
everything is lost.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 130-1

230. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
NEW DELHI,

April 3, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

Yesterday there were only two or three persons who wanted to
stop the prayers, but today the matter has gone further. I have
received a letter written by the president of some scavengers’ union. It
says that I must not stay here. Just look at the ordeal an old man like
me has to go through. But the president of the scavengers’ union here
is another person. After all I am a scavenger myself and all my
scavenger friends here listen to me. I have been staying here after
consulting them and will continue to stay. Moreover, Jugal Kishore
Birla is the boss here. He has put me up here. When the person who
has accommodated me does not ask me to leave, why should I go?
Again today I shall ask you whether I should hold the prayer or
not. But before that I would like to ask if you have
understood what I said to you yesterday. If you have, you would have
realized why I stopped the prayer yesterday. If somebody tells me not
to hold the prayer or that, if I did, I may not include the recitation
from the Koran, should I accept defeat and continue the prayer? I am
not going to give up the prayer even if I have to lose my life. Those
who stop the prayer in this manner do not advance Hinduism but
harm it. Yesterday there were only two or three such persons ; today
there are many.
I am disturbed by what I heard today. I hope it is not true—
224

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

namely, that the persons obstructing prayers belong to a big
organization1 .
But those who do physical exercises and drill here every
morning and are members of that organization love me. If they do
not want me to stay here there is no point in my staying on. I must not
remain here. But I had a talk with their leader. He said that it was not
their intention to harm anyone. The Sangh was not formed to oppose
anyone. True, they had not accepted my method of non-violence; but
they were willing to confine themselves within the Congress discipline.
So long as the Congress rules non-violently they would remain
peaceful. He thus talked with me very cordially.
If you still want to stop me, then kindly do not come here from
tomorrow. I do not wish to hold prayers in this manner. I am made of
different stuff. If I am a Hindu, I am also a Muslim. And the Sikhs are
almost Hindus. I have seen the Granth Sahib. In many parts it is
Hinduism to the letter—the religion I follow. Hence, with great
humility I request you to remain peaceful because I would stop the
prayer even at a child’s wish. If you want to recite God’s name by
creating a row you would be acting like a devil although you may be
uttering the name of God. And I can never do the work of the devil. I
am a devotee of God alone.
Please do not take it as cowardice on my part. Had you been in
large numbers and had all of you insisted that I should not hold the
prayer, I would certainly have carried on. I would have asked you to
cut my throat and continued the prayer. But here in the presence of so
many of you, a handful of persons want to stop me. If you suppress
them and insist on my continuing the prayer it would be the act of a
devil and I cannot follow the devil. He who is God’s enemy is the
devil. I cannot co-operate with the devil. My method of resisting is
like Rama’s. During the battle between Rama and Ravana Vibhishana
asked Rama how he would fight against Ravana without a chariot.
Rama then pointed out how one could fight a war with the help of
qualities like truthfulness, valour and so on. Rama was a devotee of
God and talked like one. I have regarded Rama not as God but as a
devotee. Later on from a devotee he came to be regarded as God.
Tulsidas too has described Rama as without a body. This One without
form pervades all forms. Him we worship. I am a worshipper of this
Rama. How can I ever worship Ravana? You may kill me, spit in my
1

The Rashtriya wayamsevak Sangh

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

225

face but I shall go on repeating Rama Rahim and Krishna Karim till
my last breath. And even at the moment you shower blows on me I
shall not blame you. Nor shall I complain to God whatever may be
done to me. I am His devotee. I shall accept His wish.
But today, even if a child wants me to stop, I shall stop the
prayer. I shall leave the place. Please remain seated in silence and do
not indulge in arguments. Silence is also a form of prayer, and my
prayer is not meant for the world to see. It is for peace of mind, for
cleansing the heart. In the present circumstances we cannot cleanse
our hearts by praying while they are full of anger. Hence, let us
consider silence itself as prayer.
If people forced me down from all sides, stopped me from
praying and under pain of bodily injury I discontinued the prayer it
would be irreligion, not religion. It would not cleanse our hearts. What
face would I have to go and tell the Hindus of Noakhali not to be
afraid and to go on repeating Ramanama? That is why I ask you to
understand this peaceful method of mine. How can I carry on the
prayer if all of you want to stop me? But I would continue the
Ramdhun and Rama Rahim Krishna Karim, and so on and leave the
place if a child wants me to do so.
Now I ask you to reply ‘yes’ or ‘no’. Do not argue. Shall I
conduct the prayer?
Some thirty persons stood up and said: “Do not hold the prayer, we do not
want your prayers.”
GANDHIJI:

Well, so, all of you are against it?

Two to three hundred persons cried out: “No, all of us are not against it. Do
hold the prayer.”
G. No, there are too many people against it. I am defeated, you
have won. Tomorrow more people can raise their hands. Even now
your number is considerable. I can hold the prayer, but I have no
desire to be killed at your hands. I want to live and work.
PEOPLE: Not all, only a few are not in favour.

G. That’s all right, there need not be more ! Even these few can
kill me if they want.
This was followed by shouting from both the sides and there was a great deal of
noise. Gandhiji stood at the edge of the dais and said:

Please listen. Do not get so excited. You are all Hindus. A Hindu
226

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

ought to think calmly and speak after great thought and
consideration. Please go home and think how the wound of the
Punjab can be healed. I am also thinking about it as best as I can. But
the wound is not going to be healed by getting angry.
With this Gandhiji finished his speech. But a voice came from the crowd:
“Please answer one question before leaving. Why did you stop Ramdhun at Noakhali?1
Stop it here too and hold your prayers in your room.”
G. I do not wish to give any answer here. Please leave this place
and do not quarrel even after you have left.
Gandhiji then started to leave. In the meantime the police tried to restore
order. This created confusion in the meeting. Then Gandhiji returned to the dais.
People asked him to start the prayer. They offered to pacify those who were
protesting. They said they would all sit down, and that they were all ready to lay down
their lives for him, but he should not abandon the prayer.

If you are going to die let it be on my condition. Allmy life I
have been teaching the art of laying down life and learning it myself.
If you want to lay down your lives, you should not do it boiling with
rage. You should meet death with the strength of coolness. Right now
these people are confused. They think that it is only Gandhi who is
going about doing all the harm. So, for the present, consider only my
silence as my prayer. I know at present everyone’s blood is boiling
because of the events in the Punjab. Isn’t my own blood boiling?
There is a fire raging even in my heart. I understand the problem of
the Punjab fully well. The Punjabis are all my brothers. Right now
they are all enraged. They must calm down. The people of Bihar were
also angry. I have contained their anger. In the present situation we
can make any headway only by containing our anger.
The police have taken away those few persons. How can I hold
the prayer when they have been removed? Let them return to this
place and sit here in silence and then we shall all pray together.
Just now, I am using my energy in thinking how to prevent what
is going on. What else? Do you think I visit the Viceroy for dinner
parties? 2 We are both putting our heads together and trying to find out
G.

1

According to the source Ramdhun was never stopped during prayers at
Noakhali. A few Muslims did leave the prayer meeting when the Ramdhun started,
but the prayer did not stop.
2
For reports of the interviews with the Viceroy on April 2 and 3, vide
“Interview With Lord Mountbatten” and “Interview With Lord Mountbatten”,
3-4-1947

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

227

a way. He is more eager to put an end to all this chaos than I am. It is
just as well that he should. I request you again to remain quiet. Silence
by itself is prayer. I do not like those who protest being stopped by
force.
When Gandhiji turned to go, people stopped him for the third time and said:
“Why do you listen to those few persons who are causing obstruction? Actually, they
have suffered nothing. It is we who have suffered in the Punjab—who have been
wronged. But we are not preventing you. We request you to hold the prayer, if only for
some time.”

You are right. But you must give them a chance to
understand.
G.

Some people said: “Will you answer our question?”
G. You just think. I am an old man. Can I keep standing and
talk? I tell even the Viceroy that he should not expect me to talk
standing. Do I have all that energy? But God makes me talk. He gives
me strength. I am having [high] blood-pressure these days. Still He is
pulling me along. Tomorrow I shall talk more provided there is no
opposition.
Let those who are at the root of this opposition at least come to
me and talk. If all they want is that I should not stay here I shall go
away. There are many people who would have me stay with them. But
I am a Bhangi, and am content to put up in the Bhangi Colony. I
could even have all this accommodation here. They have only small
holes to live in. I cannot stand it. I insist on cleanliness. If God grants
me the strength, I shall start living in one of them.
May God be kind to all and grant independence to India.
[From Hindi]
Prarthana-Pravachan—Part I, pp. 14-9

231. OUTLINE OF DRAFT AGREEMENT1
April 4, 19472
1. Mr. Jinnah to be given the option of forming a Cabinet.
2. The selection of the Cabinet is left entirely to Mr. Jinnah. The
members may be all Muslims, or all non-Muslims, or they may be
1

At the end of his interview with the Viceroy on April 4, Gandhiji dictated
this to Lord Ismay, Chief of Staff. Vide “Letter to Lord Ismay”, 5-4-1947 and
“Interview with Lord Mountbatten”, 4-4-1947
2 ibid

228

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

representatives of all classes and creeds of the Indian people.
3. If Mr. Jinnah accepted this offer, the Congress would
guarantee to co-operate freely and sincerely, so long as all the
measures that Mr. Jinnah’s Cabinet bring forward are in the interests
of the Indian people as a whole.
4. The sole referee of what is or is not in the interests of India as
a whole will be Lord Mountbatten, in his personal capacity.
5. Mr. Jinnah must stipulate, on behalf of the League or of any
other parties represented in the Cabinet formed by him that, so far as
he or they are concerned, they will do their utmost to preserve peace
throughout India.
6. There shall be no National Guards 1 or any other form of
private army.
7. Within the framework hereof Mr. Jinnah will be perfectly free
to present for acceptance a scheme of Pakistan even before the
transfer of power, provided however, that he is successful in his appeal
to reason and not to the force of arms which he abjures for all time
for this purpose. Thus, there will be no compulsion in this matter over
a province or a part thereof.
8. In the Assembly the Congress has a decisive majority. But the
Congress shall never use that majority against the League policy
simply because of its identification with the League but will give its
hearty support to every measure brought forward by the League
Government, provided that it is in the interest of the whole of India.
Whether it is in such interest or not shall be decided by Lord
Mountbatten as man and not in his representative capacity.
9. If Mr. Jinnah rejects this offer, the same offer to be made
mutatis mutandis to Congress.2
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 238-9

1

A volunteer corps organized by the Muslim League
For further developments, vide letters to Lord Ismay, “Letter to Lord
Ismay”, 5-4-1947 and “Letter from Lord Ismay”, 6-4-1947 and “Letter from Lord
Mountbatten”, 7-4-1947
2

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

229

232. TALK WITH MANU GANDHI
April 4, 1947
Whatever has been lately happening during the prayer meetings
is a measure of my own purity. I shall succeed to the extent that I am
pure. The responsibility lies as much on you. The success of my
action depends on you. We might have left Noakhali; but the yajna is
the same. I am being tested no doubt. But you are being put to a
greater test because the person conducting the prayers has his own
influence. If there is not the slightest negligence, the frequent
bleeding of your nose must stop. You must look after yourself as
much as you look after me and my belongings, for you too are one of
them. Then alone would you succeed.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 137

233. TALK WITH REFUGEES1
April 4, 1947
Q. You tell people to discard arms, but in the Punjab the Muslims kill the
Hindus at sight. You have no time even to go to the Punjab. Do you want us to be
butchered like sheep?

GANDHIJI: If all the Punjabis were to die to the last man without
killing, the Punjab would become immortal. It is more valiant to get
killed than to kill. Of course my condition is that even if we are facing
death we must not take up arms against them. But you take up arms
and when you are defeated you come to me. Of what help can I be to
you in these circumstances? If you cared to listen to me, I could
restore calm in the Punjab even from here. One thousand lost their
lives of course, but not like brave men. I would have liked the sixteen
who escaped by hiding to have come into the open and courted death.
More is the pity. What a difference it would have made if they had
bravely offered themselves as a non-violent, willing sacrifice! Oppose
with ahimsa if you can, but go down fighting by all means if you have
1

The Gujarati version in Biharni Komi Agman has been collated with the
report in Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase.
A group of refugees from Rawalpindi came along with Dr. Lehna Singh, and
Dr. S. D. Kitchlu, President, Punjab Provincial Congress Committee. Out of about
one thousand Hindus, only sixteen had escaped and that too by hiding.

230

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

not the non-violence of the brave. Do not turn cowards.
There was a time when the most casual remark from me was
honoured as a command. Such is not the case today. Man after all is
mortal. We are born only to die. Death alone is the true friend of man.
[Birth and death] are like the two sides of a coin.
How did we react in Bihar? Man’s claim to humanity consists in
his magnifying his own fault a million times and minimizing others’
faults correspondingly. You ought to know that I have been to villages
where death reigned supreme. But in spite of it if I feel like it I would
certainly go to the Punjab. But now I am doing the same work from
here. I believe I have calmed down Bihar to some extent. Naturally it
could be only with God’s grace, without which nothing happens. Why,
I had said to none else than Master Tara Singh that I was the true heir
of Guru Govind Singh and not be. . . .1 Matters can be mended only if
you try to understand this without getting excited.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. II, p. 97, and Biharni Komi Agman,
pp. 137-8

234. TALK WITH EGYPTIAN DELEGATES2
April 4, 1947
One of the delegates asked: “If the British quit, would you still provide them
with military facilities in India? And would India adhere to your policy of nonviolence after you attain independence? Would you welcome American aid for winning
India’s independence?”
With regard to the first, Gandhiji replied, he could, in certain circum- stances,
contemplate the possibility of Britain approaching independent India with that
request, as a friendly concession vital to her (Britain’s) existence. He hoped that in
that event India would consider the request on its merits, uninfluenced by the memory
of past wrongs.

Of course, today non-violence is no more to be found. But, I
hope, when the hurdle of foreign domination is removed everything
will be peaceful. I can never think of seeking foreign aid for the
attainment of independence. I believe in the dictum a known enemy is
better than an unknown one. I do not know what the national policy
of India after independence will be. But looking at the present state of
1

Omission as in Biharni Komi Agman
The Gujarati version in Biharni Komi Agman has been collated with the
report in Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase.
The delegates were accompanied by Jawaharlal Nehru.
2

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

231

affairs I do not think I shall live to see it. I would advocate the policy
of non-violence as far as we can stretch it. India can contribute
substantially towards world peace and progress leading to its
reconstruction. All the same, I would say that there are many militant
groups in India. India’s history also points in the same direction.
Naturally therefore our national policy is sure to tend towards some
kind of mild war policy. But I shall certainly die with the hope that
my efforts of the last thirty years will not be in vain and that there
surely will be a powerful section in the country that would hold
steadfastly to the doctrine of true non-violence. You have already met
my heir Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and his associates. I hope you have
had a discussion with him. But I have faith that a day will come when
the world will come to India in search of peace and India and Asia will
become the light of the world. I do not know whether I shall survive to
witness the day, for I might be consumed in the conflagration that is
raging now. But you who are all young men will live to see it.
[Laughter.] I tell you all that our ‘Jawahar’, meaning a ‘jewel’, is sure
to become one. And he will belong not only to India but will become
an ornament of the whole of Asia—of those countries from where you
all have come here to cultivate our friendship. However, without your
help nothing can be achieved. You have come here from distant lands
drawn by your love of him and he deeply appreciates it. I have also
had the privilege of meeting you. I sincerely thank you all.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. II, p. 98, and Biharni Komi Agman,
pp. 144-5

235. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
NEW DELHI,

April 4, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

Will there be peace today or are you going to repeat what you
did yesterday and the day before?
Voices came from all sides: “It is all quiet today. There will be no trouble
today. Please hold the prayer.”
Gandhiji asked again:

Are you sure you did not drown a voice or two in your own? Is
there anyone who wants to oppose?
232

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

A hand went up. Gandhiji said:

Very well. In that case, there will be no prayer today also. I shall
not hold the prayer so long as there is even one person who refuses to
understand or does not voluntarily leave the meeting. It serves no
purpose if the police seizes him and takes him away. People should
not gang up like this to suppress a smaller group. Even if there are
only a few who oppose, they should be persuaded. They should leave
the place if they disapprove of anything that happens here. They
should not create disturbance. If this one person is convinced of my
point and goes away from here I shall hold the prayer. Otherwise he
must sit through the prayer in silence.1
Are you all quiet now? Has the gentleman who did not want the
prayer to be held, left? I shall appeal to all of you that he should not
be threatened or bullied. What will happen to the poor man if the
police take him away? Whatever may be his opinion about himself, I
shall only pity him. Who will protect him if I do not? If a person calls
himself a Hindu or a Muslim and wants to stop me from holding the
prayer, why should he be attacked?
He says that I should not hold the prayer in this temple. But this
temple belongs to the scavengers who come to me and complain
against outsiders creating trouble in their temple. How can I console
my little brothers? I am their elder brother. I am an excellent Bhangi.
I do the external cleaning and clean the latrines, but our hearts too
need to be cleansed. A true Bhangi has to do the inner cleaning too,
which I am doing. If we do not cleanse our hearts, if we do not get rid
of the feeling of high and low, Hinduism is not going to survive. It has
survived so far because it is a great religion. It is still alive even though
it is gasping for breath. But if we do not give up the feeling of high
and low it would go on weakening even though it is a great religion.
Even Dr. Moonje2 has supported me in this. He has written me a letter
saying that even though he does not agree with me on other points—
he believes in the training of the sword—he is in complete agreement
with me in the matter of removal of untouchability and the feeling of
high and low.
Hence, those who oppose my prayer are destroying Hindu
dharma. They should understand that I am as much a Parsi, a
1

A pundit then requested Gandhiji to hold the prayers and appealed the people
to maintain silence.
2
B. S. Moonje

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

233

Christian and also a Muslim as I am a Hindu. What wonderful
meaning is conveyed by Auz-o-Billahi. I have not read the Yajurveda.
But a gentleman writes to say that everything is contains is to be found
in the Yajurveda. In that case why should you oppose it? Religious
sentiment whether expressed in Arabic, Sanskrit or Chinese, is always
noble. That is why I would like to ask that gentleman if he has
understood my point.
If he is not a Hindu and belongs to some other religion, let him
not attend the prayer. In any case only a few Muslims join my prayer.
The Muslims too have been asking me what right I have to recite
portions from the Koran. Yet they did not prevent me from doing so
in Noakhali. Could they not have stopped me?
But no one who belongs to Hinduism can have reason to
complain. We have 108 upanishads. One of them is the Allopanishad.
The wonderful thing about Hinduism is that it assimilates people from
outside. But its one great limitation is untouchability or the feeling of
high and low. This poison has spread in it. It can survive only if the
poison is removed. These people ntalk of saving Hinduism with the
help of the sword. They carry swords while doing their drills. Why?
For killing [their oppoents]? This is not the way to advance Hinduism.
A religion grows through truth alone. I have learnt this from
Hindu dharma. It has also taught me that “there is no religion greater
than Truth” 1 and that “ahimsa is the greatest religion”2 . Patanjali3 put
the five vows of non-violence, truth, non-possession, non-stealing and
brahmacharya on a scientific plane. These are to be found in the other
religions too. But Hinduism alone has provided a scientific basis for
them.
After this Gandhiji while narrating the story of the South Indian Harijan saints
Nandanar and Avvaiamma, said that Avvaiamma’s feet were stretched towards the
temple’s deity. When some Hindus found fault with her, she asked them to place her
feet where God was not present. But whichever side they turned her feet God was surely
there.

Idol worship is only one form of worshipping. But if God
resides in one’s heart, it hardly matters where one’s feet may be. Man
can worship with his feet, and he can also kick with them. If there is a
fire raging like a volcano it cannot be extinguished with water. If I
1
2
3

234

Mahabharata, Shantiparva, XI, 13
Mahabharata, Adiparva, XI, 13,
Propounder of the Yoga philosophy
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

control it with stones and standing on it save the lives of millions of
people I will certainly have worshipped God with the stones and my
feet. One can worship with one’s feet and hands and also with one’s
tongue. Worship should be sincere, no matter what method one
adopts.
That is why, if that gentleman is present here, I would like to
request him to allow us to carry on the prayer in peace.
I would like to emphasize that I am not at all angry with those
young men. How could I be angry with them? The Gita does not
preach anger. And right from my South Africa days I have been
reciting the Gita verses in the course of my prayers. I have learnt this
teaching of the Gita right from there and have carried it here with me.
Those who oppose it do not know what Hinduism is. Not realizing it
they indulge in devilish acts and forget God.
After this the people were quiet and the prayer was held in peace. Gandhiji said:

I am extremely grateful to God that today on the fourth day He
allowed us to have our prayer in peace. Let me also tell you that
nobody should think that no prayers were held during these days.
When you came here, I came here and we all sat in silence, it was as
good as praying, because there was prayer in our hearts.
Then, I am also indebted to those who tried to disturb our
prayers. I am grateful to them because I had an opportunity to look
into my heart. I had no opportunity before to examine my heart
about the question of prayer. I had to search within to find out where
I stood. Was there anger in my heart against them? Did my prayer
mean something different? God wants to test His devotees in ever so
many ways, and ultimately, He frees His devotee from his trouble as
you have just heard in the bhajan 1 . From this we must learn that
whatever we suffer is ordained by God. It is God’s grace that I have
passed this test today.
I am also grateful to the gentleman who was persuaded by the
pundit’s appeal.
God has saved me from a more difficult test. Once the prayer
was started, even if as few as four persons had asked me to stop, I
would have said: ‘You may cut my throat if you want, but I shall keep
on repeating Rama Rahim, Rama Rahim,’ and even at that moment,
instead of allowing myself to be overpowered by anger, I would have
1

By Mirabai, namely, Hari tum haro janaki bhir. Vide “Ashram Bhajanavali”

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

235

prayed to God to grant them good sense as was said in the Ramdhun.
Let me narrate to you one thing that happened at Noakhali. It
was with great difficulty that Ramdhun could be started there. Every
time I started my journey we used to sing Ramdhun and as we
approached some village we entered it with Ramdhun. We used to
explain to the people that Rama, Rahim, Khuda, Ishwar were all names
of God. In fact, God is known by millions of names.
If I explain to you the meaning of Auz-o-Billahi you would not
even know that it has been taken from Arabic. Would it then be a
crime if I pray in Arabic? Please do not reduce Hinduism to a
worthless faith by such acts. Hinduism is a great religions. It is an
ancient religion. Lokamanya Tilak1 has proved it to be ten thousand
years old. But in my view it is older than a hundred thousand years. It
is eternal. What is contained in the Vedas is the essence of dharma and
dharma has come into being with the functioning of human beings.
That is why the Vedas are said to be without a beginning. When men
realized those things they inscribed them in their hearts. They were
reduced to writing much later, because man learnt the art of writing
afterwards. Many of the writings too are lost. Thus a large part of the
Bible too is lost from memory. The same is the case with the Koran.
Many scholars of the Bible are of the opinion that it has a number of
interpolations. Thus, the Shastras are endless. The essence of the
Shastras, i. e., the Vedas, is that God is, and He is One. The essence of
the Koran and the Bible is the same. No one may say that the Bible
mentions three Gods. It mentions only one God.
I frequently visit the Viceroy. I am spending quite some time
there. But that time is not wasted. I do there what I would do in Bihar,
the Punjab, Noakhali and all the other places. For me the smallest
work is as important as the biggest. For me whatever is in the atoms
and molecules is in the universe. I believe in the saying that what is in
the microcosm of one’s self is reflected in the macrocosm2 . If I leave
out the Punjab, Bihar or Noakhali, I can do no work for India. For me
India lives only in such places.
Today I have explained so many things to you. I feel happy
1

Bal Gangadhar Tilak (1856-1920) ; patriot, scholar and writer; one of the
founders of the Deccan Education Society; was sentenced to six years’ deportation in
1908 ; launched Home Rule League movement with Annie Besant in 1916; started the
Congress Democratic Party in 1920; author of the Orion, The Arctic Home in the
Vedas and Gitarahasya
2

236

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

about it. I thank you for maintaining peace.
[From Hindi]
Prarthana-Pravachan—Part I, pp. 19-24

236. TALK WITH EUROPEAN VISITORS 1
April 5, 1947
Q. What can be India’s contribution to the elimination of violence in the

world?

If the Congress succeeds in its non-violent effort the
rest will settle down automatically. There are reports of quite a few
Congressmen being involved in the Bihar riots. At this stage I cannot
sift the truth in these reports. But how could such a rumour, even if
false, spread?
GANDHIJI:

One of them asked Gandhiji a question about his conception of free India’s
economic policy. Gandhiji replied:

I hope we shall never want to get rich by exploitation of others,
having passed through that experience ourselves. For instance, we
might export our textile manufactures to help a neighbouring country
that was suffering from a cloth shortage, as a friendly act, but not to
exploit indus-trially backward people. At present India exports raw
materials to the U. S. A. How much do we have to suffer on that
account? All our indus-tries have been ruined. How I wish Western
powers learnt to look upon India not as a country to be exploited but
as a country whose independence they should respect because it has
been won without the power of armaments. Good relations should be
maintained by both the parties. If you expect courtesy from me. I
ought to treat you accordingly. If we lacked the technical know-how,
they could provide it to us in a spirit of mutual help, not at a fabulous
price. At present you have brought us to such a pass that we cannot do
without your motor-cars and other luxury goods. You have crippled
us. Christianity that came to India from the West was a mixed affair. If
only Christian missions had come to render humanitarian service to
the poor village folk, without the proselytizing motive, they would
have earned their undying gratitude and proved themselves true heirs
and representatives of Jesus Christ. But I regret to say that this does
1
The Gujarati version in Biharni Komi Agman has been collated with the
report in Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase.
The visitors were accompanied by Dr. Sjahrir of Indonesia and Jawaharlal
Nehru.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

237

not benefit you. As for us we never stood to gain by it.
I would say to whoever assaults me that he may destroy my
home and hearth, why, even my person, but he would not be able to
destroy my soul. I would not defend my country with foreign arms. If
I could have my say I would place in the hands of the police hoe and
spade instead of bayonets so that they could take to farming. Besides,
a country wedded to non-violence is not bothered about foreign
aggression because every citizen will be prepared to lay down his life.
It is my belief that non-violence is not an entirely personal quality. It
is an easy way of spiritual as well as political action for all—individual,
society and country.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. II, pp. 98-9, and Biharni Komi
Agman, pp. 146-7

237. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
NEW DELHI,

April 5, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

It is a painful thing but for the remaining few days I shall have
to ask you if there would be any protest from any quarter against the
recitation from the Koran. If there are it will benefit neither you nor
your religion. Just as God, in spite of the many names that describe
Him, is but one, dharma although known by several names is but one;
because all religions have come from God. They would be worthless if
they had not come from God. Any religion which is not the religion
of God is the religion of the Devil, and cannot but be worthless. You
must, therefore, realize that if what has been happening for the last
three days continues, it would mean the end of Hindu dharma.
If I am a Hindu, why can I not recite from the Koran, or from
the Zend-Avesta? Besides, the Hindu mode of worship also is no less
diverse. Some would have recitations from the upanishads and not
from the Vedas; some would want the Gita and not the upanishads, a
third one would demand the Atharvaveda in preference to the
Yajurveda. In other words, each one is entitled to pray in his own way.
If you want to stop me, even today I am willing to accept defeat and
let you win. If anyone from among you so desires, he can give me this
cup of poison. If somebody does give it to me I would be glad to
drink it and you too should bear with it. You do not have to drink the
238

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

poison but you will please witness it. Do not be angry but please
understand that if this old man is forbearing he is doing the right
thing.
It is a good thing that you have come here in such large
numbers. But if even one of you is opposed to the recitation of Auz-oBillahi, I will abandon the prayer and you will have to go back
peacefully.1
I must thank you for maintaining the peace. Such peace was not
usual before. If indicates that we have not lost our dharma by what
happened during the past three days. If man does not live in peace, if
he never inwardly examines his thoughts, is caught in the mad rush of
life and remains excited all the time, he cannot produce what Shaukat
Ali Saheb used to call “cold strength”. Mohammed Ali Saheb also
used to say that we had to achieve independence by fighting the
British and the taklis would be our cannon and the cones our cannonballs. He had as much poetic imagination as erudition.
And all this happened in your Delhi. In those days I had been
staying with Rudra Saheb2 at his St. Stephen’s College residence. The
College has now been shifted to some vast premises, but I first met
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad in the same old building. There I met
Prof. Abdul Bari as also many other great Maulanas. After long
discussions it was decided that the Congress could join the Khilafat
movement3 only if the whole movement was conducted peacefully. If
was decided with God as witness that every activity of the Khilafat
movement would be peaceful. It was a matter of swearing by Ishwar or
Khuda. There was no distinction between Ishwar and Khuda. We are
going to be rewarded with the fruit of what we did then.
I mention this incident because tomorrow the National Week
begins. It was on this day 4 that India realized herself. India then
realized that she lived not in Delhi or Bombay or Lahore but in her
seven lakh villages. If there were a terrible earthquake destroying the
entire urban population, even then India would not die. Even if the
entire population of two crores in the cities perished, the 38 crores in
the seven lakh villages would continue to live. The terrible earthquake
that had rocked Patna 5 too caused damage only to the big cities,
1
2
3
4
5

The people reassured Gandhiji and the prayer went off peacefully.
S. K. Rudra, Principal, St. Stephen’s College, Delhi
Which was launched in 1919; vide “Comment on a Protest”
In 1919
In January, 1934

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

239

leaving the tiny villages untouched. Of course, if the Cosmic Being
described in the eleventh chapter of the Gita decides to swallow all,
none would escape. It is however clear that India is alive because of
her villages.
These seven lakh villages were suddenly aroused on the 6th
April, 1919. When I had issued an appeal on the 5th April1 I had not
imagined even in my dreams that India would be aroused to that
extent. On that day I was at Salem in the house of Rajagopalachari
who is your Minister now. I was thinking the whole day how to start
the satyagraha. Shri Vijayaraghavachari—who is no more—and others
too met me there. When the thought occurred to me I asked
Mahadev—alas, he too is no more—to send for Rajaji. Rajaji agreed
with me and we issued the appeal. Just by the appeal India was so
aroused that I was wonder-struck. In those days the Congress had
neither volunteers nor any means to carry messages, still it was like the
passing of an electric current.
We had appealed to the people to observe a fast and pray on the
6th of April. The Hindus observe fast for 36 hours where- as the
Muslims may observe a roza 2 for only 24 hours. The Hin- dus too
observe pradosha5 for 24 hours. We also decided upon a fast for 24
hours so that both Hindus and Muslims could observe it. During this
fast no food, milk, vegetables, etc., could be taken. One could take any
amount of water. I had instructed that the aged and the weak like me
could take fruit. But when you undertake the fast tomorrow you
should not take fruits like bananas which satisfy hunger. This would
be something like what my mother did, she used to put me on a fastdiet and feed me with puris 3 of kutu4 and gulabjamun 5 the whole day
long. I do not intend to pamper you as my mother pampered me.
Those who cannot observe a complete fast may take fruit juice.
The special message for the 6th April is Hindu-Muslim unity,
khadi and village work; but who would do it today? Today if there is
Hindu-Muslim unity anywhere, it is only in my heart. Even the
charkha is lying only by my side. You can also take up these things
1

Apparently the reference is to the appeal issued on March 23, 1919, when
Gandhiji was in Madras; vide Vol. XV, pp. 145-6. For the instructions issued on
April 5, ibid., “Speech at Prayer Meeting”, 29-3-1947
2
Fasting during daytime.
3
A fried delicacy
4
A cereal which may be taken
5
A sweetmeat

240

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

tomorrow if you wish. For doing this you must forget the past
happenings. No matter what atrocities had been committed by the
Muslims in the Punjab and by the Hindus in Bihar, both the
communities should forget these things and think in terms of
establishing brotherly relations. If you do not think along these lines,
are you going to pray to God that He should make you as fanatical as
the people in the Punjab and Bihar? Would you thus save yourselves
and your religions? That is why you should undertake the fast only if
your hearts are imbued with the spirit of 1919 and you would be able
to imbibe that spirit only if you remain peaceful and calm.
How would you attain peace? Spin for an hour daily and then
tell me if you do not find peace. Pattani Saheb 1 , Chairman of the
Bhavnagar Council, member of the Council of the Secretary of State
for India, could sleep after spinning for an hour at night when all
other remedies failed.
Hindu-Muslim unity can be established only through peace. I
know it is a difficult task. Out non-violence is tested when we can
remain calm even though a volcano may be raging in our hearts.
And what is the harm if all of us die by remaining peaceful?
Even if some Muslim kills me, he will be after all my brother. If we
fail to preserve peace and forcibly retain the country’s unity our
hearts will remain divided. And, if [the spirit of] Pakistan persists in
our hearts and we are not willing on any account to live with our
brothers peacefully, I warn you India will not be able to retain her
freedom.
Yes, in a way, Pakistan can be full of the nectar of nectar. But
why do you need pistols, spears and swords for it? A Pakistan forced
on others will be full of poison. Why should we force people to
swallow this poison? If I do not poison others’ hearts, have no poison
in mine and do not mind it if I have to die fighting all others, the
Pakistan [thus achieved] would be a thing of love and so would be
India. India will be full of the nectar of love when she belongs not
only to the Hindus but also to the Muslims, Parsis, Christians and
Sikhs in equal measure. And that Pakistan alone would be full of love
where there would be place for all the communities and no malice
against anyone. Because I am a believer in such an India and such a
Pakistan, I would recite Auz-o-Billahi even while I recite theGayatri 2
1
2

Sir Prabhashankar Pattani
A Vedic hymn invoking the creative energy of the sun; Rig-veda, III. 62,

10.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

241

and the Gita.
Today is the seventh death anniversary of Andrews Saheb1 . We
should remember his qualities. He lived a very simple life. We were
very close friends. He was a white man, but he was so simple and
mixed so well with the villagers that it was difficult to believe that he
was an Englishman. He did not even know how to dress properly. He
used to wrap a dhoti loosely round his large body. He was not
bothered about appearances. He had a heart of gold.2
In conclusion, Gandhiji said that he had received a letter, which he would
release to the Press, from the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh that they had had
nothing to do with the raising of objections to the prayer on the three previous days.
He was glad to hear that and believed it. No organization could protect life or religion
if it did not work absolutely in the open.

[From Hindi]
Prarthana-Pravachan—Part I, pp. 25-9, and Harijan, 20-4-1947

238. LETTER TO LORD ISMAY
BHANGI C OLONY, N EW DELHI,

April 5, 1947
DEAR LORD ISMAY,

Pandit Nehru gave me what you have described as an outline of
a scheme. What I read is merely a copy of the points I hurriedly
dictated, 3 whereas, as I understood from H. E. the Viceroy, you were
to prepare a draft agreement after the line of the points I had dictated.
Of course you were at liberty to amend them, add to them and omit
what you wished to omit.
I had a chat with Pandit Nehru twice during the day, the second
time when he handed a copy of the outline at 5 p.m.
The seventh point should read thus: “Within the framework
hereof Mr. Jinnah will be perfectly free to present for acceptance a
scheme of Pakistan even before the transfer of power, provided,
however, that he is successful in his appeal to reason and not to the
force of arms which he abjures for all time for this purpose. Thus,
there will be no compulsion in this matter over a province or a part
1

C. F. Andrews (1871-1940); British missionary, author, educationist and a
close associate of Rabindranath Tagore and Gandhiji
2
What follows is reproduced from “The Delhi Interlude” in Harijan.
3
Vide “Outline of Draft Agreement”, “Outline of Draft Agreement”, 4-4-1947

242

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

thereof.”
What I could not recall yesterday I now recall.
The eighth will read as follows: “In the Assembly the Congress
has a decisive majority. But the Congress shall never use that majority
against the League policy simply because of its identification with the
League but will give its hearty support to every measure brought
forward by the League Government, provided that it is in the interest
of the whole of India. Whether it is in such interest or not shall be
decided by Lord Mountbatten as man and not in his representative
capacity.”
I have finished dictating this at 8·45 p.m. I am anxious that it
reaches you tonight. Therefore, I have only made manifest correction
and addition. The outline is by no means complete. When a draft
agreement is prepared, many other points which should occur to any
draftsman will have to be covered.
I must add that Pandit Nehru has at least one vital objection to
the outline. But I will not tax you with its mention here. If the outline
appears workable to H. E. I would like to wait on him once more and
discuss Pandit Nehru’s objections. Before putting it before Q. A.
Jinnah I would like to show it to a few friends.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 237-8

239. LETTER TO LORD ISMAY
BHANGI C OLONY, N EW DELHI,

April 6, 1947
DEAR LORD ISMAY,

Many thanks for your letter of even date.1
The very thought that at the threshold of my friendship with
Lord Mountbatten and you, there can be any misunder- standing at all
fills me with grave doubts about my ability to shoulder the burden I
have taken upon my weak self. It is impossible, at every stage, to
reduce to writing conversations, and that would be, in my opinion, a
bar to friendship. I can only say that there must be some defect in my
understanding or my attentiveness if I misunderstand very simple
things. I do not feel inclined to reproduce the talk about this topic
1

Vide “Letter from Lord Ismay”, 6-4-1947

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

243

except to mention one thing, viz., that H. E. mentioned [V. P.] Menon
to you and said you should prepare something in conjunction with
him and I was to give you the points which were to become the basis
of the draft you were to prepare.
So far as you are concerned you correctly took down what you
heard from me. But as it did not answer what I wanted to say I have
given you my considered view about point 7.1
Now that I have seen Nos. 3 and 4 I must differ from you in
your view that with the new version of No. 7 and filling in of No. 8,
Nos. 3 and 4 become redundant. But of this later, if we ever reach the
consideration stage of the “outline”.
Since writing this Badshah Khan came into my room and I find
that he confirms the gist of the conversation with Lord Mountbatten as
described by me and adds that when we went to your office I told you
that I had only to give the points as I hastily thought of them in order
to enable you and your draftsman to prepare a draft agreement.2
yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 240-1

240. A TALK
BHANGI NIVAS, N EW DELHI,

April 6, 1947
Both of you should go to the Bhangi Colony and take up the
task of teaching the children and of sanitation and so on. No one can
afford to sit idle here. I would rather like Manu also to go there daily
but she is not keeping well and as it is I am making her work beyond
her capacity. Why worry about your husband’s loss of hearing? He
can very well look after the sanitation work and you can teach the
children. You will be learning something thereby. Then alone your
and my stay here will serve any purpose. Along with this you should
take interest in the prayer and study the opposition that is being
voiced during the prayer meetings. There are women too in the
opposition, and you should try to persuade them. I am surprised why
none of these things occurred to you or [Anand]. If you work only
1

Vide the preceding item.
For the Viceroy’s reply in this connection,
Mountbatten”, 7-4-1947
2

244

vide

“Letter From Lord

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

when I point it out to you, it has no meaning. One has to look for
work wherever one happens to be. There is no dearth of work here. If
there is any dearth, it is that of workers, not of work.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 151-2

241. TALK WITH ABDUL MAJID
April 6, 19471
“Bapuji is now going to drive us out of India in our old age,” Khwaja Abdul
Majid remarked to a member2 of Gandhiji’s party, affecting a laugh. “When India is
divided, I shall come to take asylum with you. You won’t let the Hindus murder me,”
he added playfully. Gandhiji, overhearing the remark, interjected:

If a fanatic should kill you, I shall dance with joy ! My
misfortune is that I have not many like you who would die bravely
and without anger.3 If I had even half a dozen [men] like you, the
flames that threaten to devour us would be put out and peace would
reign in India in no time.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. II, p. 100

242. A TALK4
BHANGI NIVAS, N EW DELHI,

April 6, 1947
What a great misfortune it is for us that two brothers should talk
to each other in English ! One of them claims that it is only in English
that thoughts occur to him ! We have become such slaves to the
English language. This slavery is of our own choice. I have openly
told the British that it was wrong on their part to educate Indians
through the English medium and in doing so they had caused
immense harm to our country. But I cannot blame them when in
1
Abdul Majid, a nationalist Muslim leader and a trustee of the Aligarh Muslim
University, met Gandhiji on this date ; vide also p. 218.
2
Manu Gandhi
3
Biharni Komi Agman here says : “It is a pity that no one kills persons like
you who would court death bravely. Otherwise all the dices would be cast in my
favour, won’t they ?”
4
This was addressed to two brothers whom Gandhiji happened to overhear
talking in English.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

245

normal course two Indians talk in English. For this we are ourselves to
blame. We consider it to be our good fortune to be able to speak
English. To fulfil that ambition we sacrifice endless time. If we speak
faultless English and an Englishman happens to compliment us, we
feel elated. If we were to count the hours we spend in learning English
we would realize that we thereby deprive the country of the precious
time that would have been otherwise devoted to its service, thus
resulting in the wastage of countless hours. Still we cannot ever fully
master English. I receive letters from persons holding high degrees,
whose English is simply awful. One feels disgusted by them. No
doubt, one should learn English as a hobby. It has a vast treasure of
literature. But one should not make indiscriminate use of it. Quite a
few dignitaries from among the delegates to the Asian Conference
came to see me. But they conversed in their languages, viz., Japanese,
Turkish, etc. There used to be an interpreter conversant with English
and their languages. It occurred to me that that was the occasion when
Hindustani could have become the language of the whole of Asia.
Under such circumstances the interpreter would have learnt the
language of the particular country as well as our national language. If
it happens, Asia, which at present is divided into different parts, will
witness one country developing cordial relations with the other as
members of one family. It would indeed be a magnificent
achievement. But to whom can I address my advice? You two brothers,
fully conversant with Hindi and Punjabi, continue to talk in English !
[ From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 154-5

246

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

243. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
NEW DELHI,

April 6, 1947
While I was listening to this bhajan 1 , as also to the Ramdhun, the
scene of my Noakhali days came vividly before my eyes. The party2
comprising these very men and women used to accompany me for
about half a mile while I proceeded on my tour in the morning.
I only wish to tell you that you should not give up your
goodness. If all the Muslims say that they wish to sever all connection
with the Hindus and wish to live separately, should we out of anger
start killing them? If we do that we shall be engulfed in such a
holocaust that we shall all be reduced to ashes and none will survive
Indiscriminate looting and arson will only spell disaster for the whole
country. Regular warfare also, I must say, causes only destruction and
nothing is gained thereby.
What has been said in the Mahabharata is of universal
application. It does not apply to Hindus alone. It depicts the story of
the Pandavas and the Kauravas. Though they were blood-brothers the
Pandavas worshipped Rama, that is, goodness, and the Kauravas
followed Ravana, that is, evil. Renouncing ahimsa they took to
violence and fought among themselves with the result that not only
were the Kauravas killed, but the Pandavas also were losers in spite of
their victory. Very few among them survived to see the end of the war
and those who did found their lives so unbearable that they had to
retire to the Himalayas. This is exactly what is happening in our
country today.
Today is the first day of the National Week. I trust you are
observing it as a day of fasting and prayer. There was mass spinning
also from 3 to 4 p.m. in which the Congress President, his wife, Pandit
Jawaharlal Nehru, Acharya Jugal Kishore and many others took part.
The spinning yajna having been completed so beautifully and
enthusiastically you will soon be breaking the fast but how good it
1
By Rabindranath Tagore. The purport of the bhajan was : “Let us all aspire
and say that our Bharat may rise to great heights in the world. It may attain eminence
in the field of religion and action. Again a new sun will rise above it.”
2
Which, besides Manu Gandhi, included the Press correspondents, Sailen
Chatterjee and Biren Sinha.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

247

would be if as a result of today’s rededication the names of Rama and
Rahim and the message of the bhajan are permanently engraved in
our hearts. But today all this remains but a dream in India.
I am being inundated with abusive letters and telegrams. This
shows how grossly some people misunderstand my ideas. Some think
I consider myself too big even to reply to their letters while others
think I am enjoying myself in Delhi while the Punjab is in flames.
How can they understand that I am working day and night for them
wherever I am? True, I cannot wipe their tears. God alone can do that.
Khwaja Abdul Majid, who is a trustee of the Aligarh University,
came to see me today.1 He has a lot of landed property but at heart he
is a fakir. He used to be my host whenever I went to Aligarh. Swami
Satyadev Parivrajak, who had been on a pilgrimage to the Himalayas,
used to accompany me. He was a very active worker but now God has
taken him away. He told me he would accompany me but he would
not join me if I dined with a Muslim. On hearing this Khwaja Saheb
said, “If that is what his religion enjoins, I shall make separate
arrangements for him.” Though the Swami was accompanying me
Khwaja Saheb did not mind when the Swami did not dine with him.
Would that those good old days were here again when there used to be
heart-unity among Hindus and Muslims. Khwaja Saheb continues to
be the president of the nationalist Muslims. Other nationalist Muslims
who had graduated from the Aligarh University in those days are
today ideal students of the Jamia Millia and are excellent workers.
They are like on oasis in the Sahara. Even if somebody killed Khwaja
Saheb he would not wish him ill. Such people may be few but we must
retain our innate qualities. When faced with bad characters we should
not stoop to their level. But we committed this mistake in Bihar.
Nationalist Muslims had been killed by Hindus there and Hindus
friends of Islam had been done to death by Muslims.
We should dispassionately think where we are drifting. Hindus
should not harbour anger in their hearts against Muslims even if the
latter wanted to destroy them. Even if the Muslims want to kill us all
we should face death bravely. If they established their rule after
killing Hindus we would be ushering in a new world by sacrificing our
lives. None should fear death. Birth and death are inevitable for every
1

248

Vide “Talk with Abdul Majid”, 6-4-1947
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

human being. Why should we then rejoice or grieve? If we die with a
smile we shall enter into a new life, we shall be ushering in a new
India. The Concluding verses1 of the second chapter of the Gita
describe how a godfearing man should live. I would exhort you to
read and understand those verses and ponder over their meaning. You
will then realize what our ideal is and how far short of it we are today.
Our independence is at our threshold and it is our duty to ask
ourselves whether we are fit to have it and sustain it. This week, while I
am here, I propose to administer you the dose which would make you
worthy of freedom. If we keep on quarrelling amongst ourselves we
shall lose our freedom even after attaining it.
[From Hindi]
Prarthana-Pravachan—Part I, pp. 29-32

244. TALK WITH DELEGATES FROM VIET NAM
April 6, 1947
If the Congress firmly implements the constructive programme
given by me, including khadi, village industries, prohibition, removal
of untouchability, communal harmony, uplift of women, adult
education, etc., it would become a truly non-violent body and
freedom would automatically come.
India’s contribution to the welfare of the allied nations and
world peace would be without compromising her adherence to nonviolence and truth and her goal of complete independence.
I believe that there is unnecessary delay in granting us
independence and irrelevant issues are being raised. The presentday
communal riots are also an unfortunate outcome of that policy. I,
therefore, say with certainty that thereby the British are harming
themselves. This is the moment of my greatest trial. The moment has
now arrived to demonstrate successfully my weapon of nonviolence.
And, in this quest I am not taking a moment’s rest. Day and night I
pray to God that He may give me light. There is considerable violence
in the hearts of Congressmen and they are no less selfish. I have
sufficient evidence of this. Even if Congressmen alone had imbibed
1

“ Speech to Prayer Meeting”, 8-3-1947

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

249

nonviolence and truth, freedom would have come sixteen years ago,
that is, in 1931, and our history would have been different. But I do
not wish to complain about that. I must manage with whatever knife I
may be having to cut this mosambi. If I do not have a knife I should
learn to cut it even with the blunt edge of a dish. How long can one
carry on with a borrowed knife? And, if I borrow a knife from
someone, I cannot refuse if in turn he asks for a precious thing from
me. That is why I flatly decline to seek help from any other country
to attain the independence of my own country.
[ From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 1578

245. MESSAGE FOR PEOPLE OF VIETNAM 1
[April 6, 1947 ]2
My heart is always with the oppressed peoples of the world, and
I have full sympathy with the cause for which the people of Viet Nam
are fighting.
The Hindu, 10-4-1947

1
This was sent through Tran Van Heun, leader of the Viet Nam Delegation to
the Inter-Asian Relations Conference, who called on Gandhiji on April 6, 1947; vide
the preceding item.
2
ibid

250

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

246. TELEGRAM TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
NEW DELHI,

April 7, 1947
S ATIS DAS GUPTA
KHAZIRKHIL
R AMGANJ
ALL
HARAN
OR

YOUR

BABU

2

(STOP)

PERISHING

YOU

WILL

CHOICE

PRECISE
IN

NOT

(STOP)

BUT

CASE

SEEMS

FLAMES
ADVISE

HOLD

WIRES 1

PAINFUL
OF
MY

COUNSEL

TO

BE

FANATICISM
COMING

WITH

ALSO
FOR

FROM
EXODUS

(STOP)

TO

ADVISE

WORKERS

AND

HOPE
ON
ACT

PROMPTLY.

BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 897, and Harijan, 20-4-1947

247. TELEGRAM TO H. S. SUHRAWARDY
BHANGI COLONY, N EW DELHI,

April 7, 1947
THE C HIEF MINISTER BENGAL
S UHRAWARDY S AHEB
C ALCUTTA
I

CONTINUE

LAWLESSNESS
WIRES3

OF

RECEIVE

NOAKHALI

STATISCHANDRA

DOLEFUL

(STOP)

I

DASGUPTA

WIRES

SUGGEST
AND

ABOUT

INCREASING

PROMPT

ATTENTION

PROMPT

ACTION

(STOP)

1

The addressee had informed Gandhiji that he had sent two telegrams to the
local authorities and the Chief Minister of Bengal. The one dated April 2, 1947 read :
“There have been five cases of arson between march 23 and yesterday. Yesterday‘s
case. . . was an attempt to burn alive three families consisting of twentyone persons
male, female, children. . . .” Another telegram dated April 5, 1947 read : “Have to
bring to your notice another case of arson last night. . . Haralal Bhowmik found
himself locked from outside in his sleeping room while all structures including
sleeping room were burning . . . . Request you thijk over these gruesome attempts of
burning alive the Hindus and shape Government policy by shaking off inactivity.”
2
Haranchandra Ghosh-Chowdhary; vide “Telegram to Haranchandra GhoshChowdhury”, 7-4-1947
3
Vide footnote 1, “Telegram to Satis Chandra Das Gupta”, 7-4-1947

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

251

AM

PUBLISHING

WIRES

(STOP)

GANDHII
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal. Also The Hindu, 8-4-1947

248. TELEGRAM TO HARANCHANDRA GHOSHCHOWDHURY
BHANGI COLONY, N EW DELHI,

April 7, 1947
HARANCHANDRA GHOSH C HOWDHURY
C HOUMHANI (NOAKHALI)
IF WHAT YOU
PERISHING
IN
CONSULT SATIS

SAY1 IS
TRUE
CLEAR
CASE
FOR
EXODUS
OR
THE
FLAMES
OF
MADNESS
AND FANATICISM.
BABU AND ACT UNITEDLY.2

GANDHII
From a photostate: G. N. 7826. Also Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

249. LETTER TO LORD MOUNTBATTEN
Personal and Immediate

BHANGI COLONY,
GANDHI,
NEW DELHI

April 7, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

I have pressing letters from friends in the Punjab asking me to
go there even if it be for a few days. Pandit Nehru agrees.
Nevertheless I would like you to guide me too.
1

The addressee’s telegram dated April 6 read : “Rehabilitation in Noakhali is
becoming increasingly difficult. Lawlessness, theft, burglary, house-breaking, night
raids, burning of houses, hay-stacks, becoming common.
Ploughing of fields in some areas obstructed. In about five hundred cases
involving loot, arson, murder, final reports submitted on pleas non-availability
sufficient evidence which under present circumstances can be had from riot vicitms
alone. Absconders and culprits moving freely reported holding meetings now.
People suspect foul play in original cases as all Hindu officers in charge affected
thanas transferred. Those officers who have timely submitted chargesheets against
good number of offenders also transferred. Proceedings drawn against officers who
attempted quell riots or arrested large number of culprits of whom ninety per cent now
bailed out. More than hundred counter cases against workers. Hindu police and army
staff are seriously enquired into and in some cases summoned or otherwise harassed.”
3
The draft of this telegram bears the following instruction in Gandhiji’s hand
4
: “Note for Arumanshu—if this is right it should be sent.”

252

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Then Noakhali calls. 1 If wires received by me during the last two
days are to be relied upon, there is increasing lawlessness in Noakhali.
Attempts at roasting people alive have been traced twice, and loot, etc.,
is going on. You will see my public statement in the press.2
This outbreak of violence is not a mere detail. If it cannot be
dealt with now, it won’t be fourteen months hence.2
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHII
HIS EXCELLENCY THE VICEROY
NEW DELHI
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, p. 242. also C.
W. 6523, 6524 and 6525, Courtesy: Mirabehn

250. LETTER TO DALAI LAMA
BHANGI COLONY,
R EADING ROAD,
NEW DELHI

April 7, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

I have three letters from different functionaries saying the same
thing. I thank you for them.
I advised the friends who saw me on your behalf to give up
secretiveness and superstition if Buddhism (which is but an attempt to
reform Hinduism) is to live.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHII
H. H. THE DALAI LAMA
TIBET
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

This sentence from the initial draft (C. W. 6523) was omitted by Mirabehn in
her copy (C. W. 6525). The draft (C. W. 6524) carries the following note by Gandhiji
: “ ‘Then N. calls’ was necessary. Punjab calls, then Noakhali. But I shall let it go as
it is.”
2
According to The Transfer of Power, Vol. X, the reference is to a report in the
Statesmen, 7-4-1947, of Gandhiji’s speech at prayer meeting on April 5, in which
“he reminded his audience of the folly of looking upon one religion as better than the
other. He said he was sure that recent happenings were due to the atmosphere of hate
that pervaded the land and he called on his audience to join him in fasting during a
‘National Week’ to begin the following day. “Vide “Speech at Prayer Meeting”,
5-4-1947
3
For the addressee’s reply, vide “Letter from Lord Mountabatten”, 7-4-1947

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

253

251. NOTE TO ARUNANSHU
April 7, 1947
You should understand properly all the steps.

1

From a photostat: G. N. 8030

252. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING 1
NEW DELHI,

Monday, April 7, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

I am constantly receiving letters accusing me of being
subservient to M. A. Jinnah2 and being a fifth-columnist. One
correspondent has accused me of becoming a communist. But I an
unaffected by such attacks. The verses of the Gita to which you listen
every day are always in my mind and give me the strength to put up
with such things. If my critics understood the meaning of these verses
they would not say such things. I am a sanatani Hindu and therefore
claim to be a Christian, a Buddhist and a Muslim. Even some Muslims
feel I have no right to recite from the Koran. They think by doing so
I am trying to beguile the muslims. They do not realize that religion
cannot be confined within the boundaries of language or script. I do
not see why I can’t read from the Koran or consider Mohamad as my
prophet. I have faith in the saints and prophets of every religion. I
pray to God that I may not lose my head over those who accuse me;
in fact I am ready to die at their hands. I firmly believe that if I am
steadfast in my faith I shall be serving not only Hinduism but also
Islam.
Today a Hindu from Rawalpindi narrated the tragic events that
had taken place there. Fiftyeight of his companions were killed just
1

According to the source the note was regarding the Noakhali situation.
It being Gandhiji’s silence day, his written message was to be read out. But
as the meeting began half an hour late and by then Gandhiji had broken his silence,
he addressed the gathering himself.
3
One of the letters bore the address “Mahmud Gandhi”. In one he was called a
communist, in another “Jinnah’s slave”. This only amused Gandhiji; he wrote : “Its
the people who have conferred upon me the titles of ‘Mahatma’ and ‘Bapu’. Shouldn’t
I welcome the new titles given by them ?”
2

254

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

because they were Hindus. He and his son alone could survive. The
villages around Rawalpindi have been reduced to ashes. What a pity
that Rawalpindi where Sikhs and Muslims once vied with one another
in welcoming me and the Ali Brothers has become a danger spot for
non-Muslims. The Hindus of the Punjab are seething with anger. The
Sikhs say that they are the followers of Guru Govind Singh who has
taught them how to wield the sword. But I would exhort the Hindus
and Sikhs again and again not to retaliate. I make bold to say that if
Hindus and Sikhs sacrifice their lives at the hands of Muslims without
rancour or retaliation they will become the saviours not only of their
own religions but also of Islam and the whole world.
I have been preaching truth and non-violence for the last thirty
years I had done the same thing in South Africa for twenty years and
I believe that the Indians there have been the gainers for following my
advice. Even here those who have trodden the path of truth and nonviolence have not been losers at all. True, the satyagrahis have
sacrificed their all. But what does it matter? They have gained a gem
and thrown away what was worthless. I am hesitating to go to the
Punjab as I am not sure what I would do there. Should I go there to
take revenge? The thought of taking revenge appears quite pleasing
but God tells me that it is not for me to take revenge. A number of
persons have advised me that I must go to the Punjab. But I have told
them that I am not going to speak in favour or retaliation because that
would be doing a disservice to Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims.
Let me tell the Muslims also that it is sheer madness to talk of
wresting Pakistan by fighting with the Hindus and Sikhs. Pakistan is
supposed to be the land of peace. M. A. Jinnah asserts that justice will
prevail there. Today why don’t we find justice there? What happened
in Bihar, he may ask. But the Bihar Chief Minister is miserable today.
‘Where had the Congress gone? What has it done?”, one may ask. It
is a big question. The Congress should exercise equal authority over
both Hindus and Muslims. But this is not the case today. I cannot even
think of Pakistan where there would be no peace and security for a
non-Muslim nor can I think of an India where Muslims may be in
danger. I went to Bihar and tried to pacify angry Hindus and to create
a sense of confidence among the Muslims in respect of the Hindus.
Happily a large number of Hindus expressed regret and promised that
such a thing would not be allowed to be repeated in future. Similarly,
I would appeal to Muslim leaders to ask their fellow-Muslims in

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

255

Muslim majority provinces to refrain from trying to wipe out nonMuslims in those areas. No matter how provocative had been the
language of Hindus and Sikhs in the Punjab, that was no excuse for
the barbarity and cruelty perpetrated on non-Muslims by Muslims in
the areas where they were in a majority.
During the last two days distressing news has again been
received from Noakhali. But in spite of everything it is wrong and
cowardly to seek police or military protection. Those who cry when
the disturbances break out are slaves and those who seek military
protection will remain slaves for ever. People do not like civil war nor
do they like to remain in slavery. In their letters Satis Babu and
Pyarelal have inquired what is to be done when thatched huts with
scores of people locked inside are set ablaze.
Haran Babu has also written in the same strain from
Chaumuhani and sent the information that some people in their
charge who were intending to leave have been persuaded to stay on. I
have telegraphed to the Chief Minister of Bengal that this is a
dangerous development.1 I have sent a message to the people that
those who have the fortitude and courage should sacrifice their lives
and let themselves be burnt. If they don’t find in themselves the
strength to do so they may migrate to other places.2 Many a great men
has resorted in the past to migration. Mohamed did it once. Whatever
people do, they should in no case call the army belonging to the
British, whom we wish to drive away. So many sons of England and
Japan died in the last War but their people didn’t grieve for them.
Theirs are brave races. To have a preference for British rule would be
a shame for us.
Will the land protected by the immortal Himalayas and irrigated
by the waters of the healthgiving Ganga ruin itself through violence? I
hope in my heart of hearts that we shall give up the very thought of
maintaining large armies. The armies are not going to do us any good
and so long as they remain our independence will be meaningless.
[From Hindi]
Prarthana-Pravachan—Part I, pp. 32-5
1

Vide “Telegram to H. S. Suhrawardy”, “Telegram to H. S. Suhrawardy”,
7-4-1947
2
Vide telegrams to Satis Chandra Das Gupta and Haranchandra GhoshChowdhury, “Telegram to Satis chandra Das Gupta”, 7-4-1947 and “Telegram to
Haranchandra Ghosh-Chowdhury”, 7-4-1947

256

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

253. TALK WITH GOSWAMI GANESH DUTT
April 7, 1947
I shall proceed to the Punjab as soon as there is a call from God.
Unless God urges me to visit the Punjab, I cannot leave my present
mission unfulfilled. I had gone to Noakhali and Bihar on my own
initiative and without waiting for an invitation from the sufferers in
these parts of the country. Rama’s call made me go. When He wishes
it, I shall immediately proceed to the Punjab.
Gandhiji asked Goswami Ganesh Dutt to see him next Friday again.

The Hindustan Times, 8-4-1947

254. A TALK 1
BHANGI NIVAS, N EW DELHI,

April 7, 1947
First of all, let us take up communal unity because that is the
crying need of the day. Had the 18-point constructive programme 2
been acted upon earnestly since the time I had put it forward, the
tragic events all over the country would not have overtaken us. I hold
that without communal unity we are simply crippled. If any one of the
functions in our body stops we are considered ill. The same thing
applies to our country. How can such a country achieve
independence? And even if it is achieved, how can it be preserved?
There are innumerable communities like Hindus, Muslims, Parsis,
Sikhs, and others in India and unless all the communities are united
we shall continue to be weak and sickly. That is to say we shall remain
slaves and even if we achieve independence there will be no happiness
in it. In fact that freedom will be worse than slavery. This is my
reading of the present situation.
My faith is being strengthened every day that no one need buy
an inch of cloth if everyone plies the charkha daily—just for half an
hour. Not only that, this is the key to the preservation of swaraj. If
crores of people devoted half an hour to spinning, its result would
amaze the whole world. There is no alternative to khadi for bettering
the lot of the famishing millions. A number of industries have
developed in the wake of khadi which provide livelihood to artisans
like carpenters, blacksmiths, peasants, weavers and so on. I compare
1
Two students from Santiniketan, who believed in communism, called on
Gandhiji and asked questions about the constructive programme.
2
Vide “Constructive Programme: Its Meaning and Place”, 13-12-1941

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

257

the charkha to the sun and say that so long as its wheel goes on
rotating, it spreads light throughout the whole country. The uplift of
India depends solely on the uplift of the villages. India lies in its seven
lakh villages, not in Bombay, Madras, Calcutta, Lahore or Karachi.
Third on the list is removal of untouchability. So long as untouchability remains we shall not be able to touch one another’s hearts.
How can people so estranged gain swaraj through non-violent means?
The gross indifference with which we treat our brethren who carry
night-soil is a blot on our country. If we believe in non-violence and
truth we should make no discrimination between high and low and
should have no false sense of superiority. We should regard the whole
world as a family and live like members of one family.
Intoxicants have impoverished us physically as well as
economically. Ours is not a cold climate where drinking of alcohol
may be necessary. Moreover an addict to intoxicants has no moral
sense and therefore the habit would put an end to spirituality in our
land. Then as the Gita says, “loss of memory ruins the reason” 1 . And
those who have lost their reason are as good as dead.
Woman in our scriptures is called ardhangini 2 . But instead of
treating her as an ardhangini we treat her as a plaything. Or in our
country she is still being treated like a slave. The birth of a girl
spreads gloom, whereas the birth of a boy is considered to be a festive
occasion. So long as this evil custom is not done away with root and
branch, women can make no progress whatsoever. Man and woman
will attain equality only when the birth of a girl is celebrated with as
much joy as in the case of a boy. Every worker, therefore, should
respect woman as his mother sister or daughter. The way we are
misbehaving with women and dishonouring them, about which one
hears daily, shows the extent of our shamelessness, meanness and
bestiality. I think there is no redemption from this sin.
So long as enough attention is not paid towards sanitation of
villages, the inhabitants will never have purity of heart and their
condition will be symbolized by the garbage dumps one finds in the
villages. Therefore, sanitation in villages is an equally important item
in village reconstruction.
I have seen that if we want to impart education with good
foundation, basic education is necessary. And it can only be given
through Nayee Talim. Unless we adopt Nayee Talim crores of India’s
children cannot be educated. Adult education will also come within its
scope automatically. Similarly we will have to adopt the national
1
2

258

II. 63.
Woman as an organic part of man

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

language. We are too much enamoured of English. Only yesterday I
have vent to my thoughts regarding English. 1 It is because of out
infatuation with English that we have neglected our national language,
which is inexcusable. A worker, who knows the national language, will
not bother himself about the controversy of Persianized Urdu or
Sanskritized Hindi but will speak a language which is easily
understood by local people. He will learn the local language of the
village selected by him and try to inculcate respect for the national
language among the people there. Thus one who learns a new
language loses nothing, on the contrary his knowledge increases
thereby.
In the end I would only say that under swarajya efforts should
be made for providing everyone at least with a square meal, enough
clothing to cover himself and a house to live in. At present while some
have utensils of gold and silver, others have not even post of clay—
some have garments of silk and brocade whereas others have not even
enough clothing to cover their nakedness. The constructive
programme, as presented by me, is the only solution for the removal
of such gross inequalities. Instead we are showing a leaning towards
Russian communism which draws its strength from the pistol. That is
the way of violence. Even there it has not proved successful as yet. If
we adopt that method here the handful of capitalists that we have will
become paupers, while a vast majority is already living in a state of
poverty. Instead, if we propagate economic equality through nonviolent means as suggested by me, these capitalists will out of shame
realize that they ought not to eat sweets and don brocades while their
brethren were without food and clothing. This will naturally foster a
feeling of fraternity and serve the larger interests of the nation.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 162-5

255. LETTER TO LORD MOUNTBATTEN
1 AURANGZEB R OAD, N EW DELHI,

April 8, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

Many thanks for your two letters2 of the 7th inst.
As to the first, I am glad that as I read it, whatever
1

Vide “A Talk”, 6-4-1947
Vide “Letter from Lord Mountbatten”, 7-4-1947 and “Letter from Lord
Mountbatten”, 7-4-1947
2

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

259

misunderstanding, if there was any, was of no consequence.
As to the second letter, the weather would not stand in the way
of my going to the Punjab. I must ask the voice within for the final
guidance. If I do go, I shall let you know the date.
Of course, you can rely upon my help no matter wherever I
happen to be at the time.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G. N. 10833.

256. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
April 8, 1947
CHI. SATIS BABU,

I have your telegram 1 . I want to make public use of all the
telegrams.
I would not be sorry even if everyone there gets killed although
innocent.
No letters from Pyarelal, Amtussalaam and others. I shall
enclose with this as many [letters] as possible.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostate of the Hindi: G. N. 8975

257. LETTER TO SUSHIL KUMAR
NEW DELHI,

April 8, 1947
BHAI SUSHIL KUMAR,

I have your cheque for the refugees. It has been sent to Satis
Babu, and the receipt to you.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 6758. Also C. W. 4501. Courtesy: A. K.
Sen.

1

260

Vide “Speech at Prayer Meeting”, 8-4-1947

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

258. INTERVIEW WITH SIR M. DERLING 1
BHANGI COLONY, N EW DELHI,

April 8, 1947
Q. It appears now the British are preparing to quit. Will they partition the
country? What type of government will be formed and which parties will be invited to
participate in it?
BAPU: My objective opinion is that the British should leave
without worrying about us. And this is in their interest as well.
America and England are, no doubt, big nations—advanced and
ambitious, but in comparison with the mute millions of Asia and
Africa, their eminence is just like dust. Until they wash clean the blot
on their faces they have no right to talk big. And equally true is the
fact that people are no longer going to be fooled by their tall talk. It
will be in their interest to earn the blessings of the millions of Africa
and Asia by giving them the human right of freedom.
I admit there will be chaos once the British leave India. Even at
present, strife is very much in evidence everywhere. But I believe if
they grant the country its independence in all sincerity and in an
orderly manner, all the quarrels will come to an end and the leaders of
all the parties will be able to come together and form a stable
government. But I do not know whether it is going to happen or not,
because I am aware of the fact that there is a large section in favour of
the vivisection of India. Who cares for the nation today? Everyone
wants to realize his ambition and grab power by creating dissensions.
This is the situation obtaining today.
However, I am an optimist. I therefore think that the sincerity
with which the British relinquish power will determine how well
organized the new Government will be. And the Congress, the Muslim
League and the States will be well represented in it.
It hurts me to talk about the partition of the country. What will
be the plight of a body if it is dismembered? Similarly,
dismemberment of a prosperous country like India will utterly ruin
the people. Today it is the country which is being divided, tomorrow it
may be Kashmir and the day after it may be the State of Junagadh in
the remote corner of Kathiawar. How is it all possible? Let the whole
of India be handed over to the League. I would not mind it. That is
why I believe that if, after the exit of the British power, the people of
2

Gandhiji gave the interview while having his meal.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

261

India are not awakened, India will become the battle-ground for the
Princes to fight among themselves and the big ones among them will
try to gain sovereignty by swallowing up the smaller ones.
My non-violence will not destroy anyone, it will only purify. I
therefore tell the Princes that they need not have any fears because the
Congress has always been in favour of coming to terms with them.
The Congress has adopted the policy of non-violence. The Princes
have to delegate power to the people’s representatives of their own
accord. Then the Congress will treat them with respect. We do not
want to do away with the Princes After all, they are also citizens of
India, aren’t they? The Princes have only to reform themselves and
become servants of their subjects. The Congress will be on their side
to help them. Unless they mend their ways they will be inviting their
own doom.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 167-8.

259. TALK WITH AMERICAN JOURNALISTS1
BHANGI COLONY, N EW DELHI,

April 8, 1947
If you are proud of your country and wish to convey that
impression during your visit to another country, you should
exemplify in your conduct, the innate good qualities and special
features of your nation. If, therefore, you, who have come here to
make a study, want to leave a good impression about your country,
you will have to bear yourself accordingly. Otherwise you are liable to
be misunderstood and might unknowingly be done injustice. I give
the same advice to Indians living abroad. There are many good
features in our country. Take for example non-violence and khadi
among industries. Therefore I cry myself hoarse telling the Indians
settled abroad that even if they did not ply the charkha here, it is their
duty to ply it regularly there. Even if they did not wear khadi here,
there they should wear it habitually. Instead, innumerable Indians
have become enamoured of silks and other things available in foreign
countries. The result is that the country does not gain in moral
strength. They should demonstrate to the women there that we can do
1

Three journalists, two men and a woman, from the U.S.A. had come on a fourmonth visit to India.

262

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

without brandy or cigarettes; they should tell them what an Aryan
woman stands for.
Addressing the woman journalist Gandhiji said:

Similarly you should show here that woman occupies an
important place in the world and she is not merely a plaything for
men, that she is courageous too. Try to leave upon the women here an
impress of your culture.
I would like to make a suggestion to you which I feel would
appeal to you. If you like it, you may keep it in mind and try to act
accordingly, otherwise forget it. I am obliged to you even for listening
to me. My suggestion is that women can play a very important role in
establishing peace. Instead of being carried away by science they
should follow the path of non-violence because women by nature are
endowed with the quality of forgiveness. Women will never succeed in
aping men in everything, nor can they develop the gift nature has
bestowed on them by doing so. They should neither allow their family
members to have, nor should they themselves have any connection
with anything relating to war. God has endowed women with hearts
overflowing with love. They should utilize this gift properly. That
power is all the more effective because it is mute. I hold that God has
sent women as messengers of the gospel of non-violence.
Gandhiji’s fair visitor was deeply moved: “If there is anyone in the world who
can point the way of deliverance to womankind, it is you . . . . We realize that what
you have told us today is also the answer to the challenge of the atom bomb. . . . Why
do you not visit our country?”
BAPU: Yes, I would indeed like very much to visit your country.
But at present I see no such prospect. If you want me to go there I
would request you to help me by devoting yourself to the service of
my coutnry. Try to quell the riots that are raging amongst us and help
in stopping the killing of women and children. I shall certainly be free
to visit your country provided you are successful in your attempt,
provided a democratic government is proclaimed here and the
millions of people here are as happy as you are in your country. But
this is like attempting to pluck a flower from the sky.

[ From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 169-71

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

263

260. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
NEW DELHI,

April 8, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

I find that you are nowadays so quiet that there is no need to
thank you every day. Today I wish to speak about my own sad plight
and I hope every word of mine will enter your ears and my message
will touch your hearts, that is, it will move you to the depths of your
hearts.
You must have seen the telegrams from Satis Babu and Haran
Babu in the newspapers yesterday. Today Satis Babu has sent a
telegram in reply in which he states that Jiwansingh, Pyarelal and other
co-workers of mine who have been working there have decided to
stick on till the last moment and everybody agrees that what I say is
right. Hindus will abide by my advice. The danger is very grave and
the risk to one’s life is constantly increasing. They are miserable but
are still preparing
themselves in a determined and peaceful manner. Now they do not
like the idea of running away in fear. They think that if they have got
to face death it is better to accept it as a gift from God. It means
laying down one’s life cheerfully, not dying after killing. All this is
the result of the work done so far.
I had asked them whether they desired me to leave my work
here and go to them. I have other important things to do. I have to go
to Bihar. Then there is the Punjab, too. They have written to me that I
should not think of going there at all.
All these people are working in different places. Satis Babu is
working in one place while Haran Babu is doing a difficult job at
Chaumuhani. Amtussalaam, Pyarelal, Kanu and Abha1 have selected a
village each. I am confident that they will all conduct themselves in
the manner I expect them to do. And, what is my expectation? I
expect that, as this girl sings in the Ramdhun, “May God grant good
sense to everyone”. I shall go on hoping that the people would realize
that nothing is to be gained by force and violence. If anyone does
gain something or gets something done by others through violence,
his gain would not last long. This is the way of robbers and bandits. If
1

264

Abha Gandhi, daugther of Amrita Lal Chatterjee, married to Kanu Gandhi

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

others resort to robbery, should we also do the same? No, we shall
certainly not go their way. If they want to kill us, we shall willingly
die.
I am happy to see that we have in our midst brave people who
are willing to meet death in this manner. Such people as well as the
country will benefit from their bravery. Even while dying they will
bear no ill will against those who kill them, nor will they wish to get
them punished. Those who kill are not going to escape punishment.
God will punich them. Who are we to mete out punishment? We would
not appeal even to God to punish them, because God is all merciful.
We would pray to Him for mercy for ourselves and also for our
enemies, and would meet death trying to bear goodwill towards all,
including those who might kill us. No matter what happens, in
whatever He does, God will only be merciful.
But if anyone from among these people dies, do you think I
would say: ‘Oh, what a tragedy !’ No I would not. I would rather say
that he had done well to have rendered such a great service. I would
say that he had served the Muslims too while carrying out God’s
work.
But death retreats from those who show courage and are ready
to die. We should hope that they do not have to die. There is
Suhrawardy Saheb and also other officer, big and small. God will
grant good sense even to those who have taken to robbery and they
will also take the warning and give up oppressing people. I even hope
that all the Muslims there would come together and take upon
themselves the responsibility of protecting their Hindu brethren and I
would receive telegrams from the Muslims everywhere that I should
have no worry and that there was nothing to fear from their side.
When this happens, I would dance with joy.
A friend asks why I, though a Hindu, say that I am a Muslim
[also]. This is an obvious thing. I have learnt this from the Gita. The
Gita says.
1

That is, “he who sees Me everywhere never vanishes from Me
nor I from him.” For instance there is Rama in the Koran, the Zend
Avesta and the Bible as well and god as worshipped by the Christains,
1

VI. 30

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

265

Ormuzd as worshipped by the Parsis and Khuda as invoked by the
Muslims are but different names of Ishwara. And, because I am a true
Hindu, believing in Hindu dharma, I am also a Christian and a
Muslim. This is no mere fancy or empty talk. This is the truth. The
Ishopanishad also says: “I am in everything and everything is in
me.” 1 It further says: “He moves and He moves not.”3 Thus God has
been described in various ways in the Gita and the upanishads.
In another letter I have been asked to explain why I call myself
a servant [of God] and if Rama and Rahim mean the same to me, why
do I not choose either one of them. I give this explanation because I
claim to be a servant of God. Lord Vishnu is known by a thousand
names. But God is known not by just a thousand but a hundred
thousand names. In fact I would say God has 400 million names.
Hence, why must call Him just Rama or Rahim? And then someone
asks whether I talk like this merely to appease the Muslims.
My answer is No. I have not formulated this prayer after any
deliberation. Abbas Tyabji’s daughter Raihana, who is a staunch
Muslim and also a Hindu, had asked me if she could teach me Auz-oBillahi. I consented and said she might as well convert me to Islam.
She declined and said that I was as good as her father and she was my
daughter. She called me a good Hindu and saw no need to convert me
to Islam. But she taught me Auz-o-Billahi and since then it has formed
a part of the prayer. In the same way, after [one of] my fasts Dr.
Gilder taught me a Zoroastrian hymn which too has been a part of the
prayer ever since. I always hunger for Ramanama. I will recite it in a
thousand ways and if someone comes and forces me to recite or not to
recite any particular name I will recite no names at all.2
Q. You said that those who have neither the courage nor the wish to die should
migrate. But where should they go?

These few men can be accommodated anywhere in this vast
country. In the first place they can create a settlement for themselves
in the Punjab itself, but if that is not possible this country is big
enough for them to find some place in it. I need not tell them where
they should go. Let it be remembered, however, that they should not
go about begging, stretching out their hands before others but should
rely on their own strength.
A.

1

Verses 6 and 5 respectively
After this Gandhiji replied to some written questions.
3
ibid
2

266

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Holding up to ridicule some letters in English, Gandhiji said that he himself
did not know English well and he was like the castor-oil plant being treated as a tree
in a desert. But if even he could find so many mistakes in their English how many
more mistakes would be found by an English expert? In any case, what was the need of
writing in English and typing the letters?
Q. Are you not ashamed of calling the police during your prayers?

I am really very much ashamed and every time the police
have attempted to restore peace during the prayer I have stopped the
prayer. Moreover, I did not beg of Sardar Patel to send the police for
my protection. But if the police do come in spite of this, they also
might learn a few good things form the prayer and Ramanama. Why
should we resent it?
A.

Q. From where did you bring non-violence into Hinduism? With non-violence
you are turning the Hindus into cowards.

I cannot think even in my dream that anyone has become a
coward because of me. Even the young girl Abha who used to be a
little afraid before has become brave after staying with me. I told her
that her husband would not be accompanying her. And now she visits
the sensitive spots all by herself. Would you call her a coward? She
goes there unarmed. She does not insist even on having a dagger
before proceeding to such places. She hardly keeps even a kitchen
knife. I have never said that the moment you hear a danger signal you
should run for your lives. We have to die and die without killing
others. Non-violence is the quintessence of Hinduism. Your Gita
teaches non-violence. I say the essence of Islam too is non-violence
and Christianity too teaches non-violence.
A.

[From Hindi]
Prarthana-Pravachan—Part I, pp. 36-40

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

267

261. TELEGRAM TO TARALIKA1
[On or after April 8, 1947] 2
C ARE KHADI P RATISTHAN
C OLLEGE S QUARE
C ALCUTTA
SHOCKED.

KEEP

MARWARI RELIEF

ME

2

.

INFORMED.
GOD

BLESS

ADVISE
PANCHU

SEEING
AND

KULARANJAN3

CARE

YOU.

BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 8725

262. LETTER TO JIVANJI D. DESAI
April 8, 1947
3

CHI. JIVANJI ,

Bhai Shivabhai Amin in East Africa wishes to write and publish
a book about me in the Swahili language. Please do the needful as
quickly as possible to give him the necessary permission to translate,
etc.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9975. Also C. W. 6949. Courtesy:
Jivanji D. Desai.

263. LETTER TO STUDENT
April 9, 1947
Students should go to their own villages and acquaint the people
with the happenings in the outside world. They should set up civil
defence squads. They should realize how ill-informed we are with
regard to shortages of food and clothing. They must find out how, if
we so desire, we can get over these shortages and then convince others
1

Satis Chandra Das Gupta’s daughter in her telegram dated April 8, 1947, had
sought Gandhiji’s blessings for her husband who was critically ill.
2
Ibid
3
Kularanjan Mukherjee, a naturopath of Calcutta
4
Marwari Relief Society
5
Manager, Navajivan Press

268

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

about it. They should teach the villagers, as best as they can, all the
processes of cloth-making starting with the sowing of cotton to the
weaving of cloth. They should give particular attention to sanitation of
the villages. They must get latrines put up at convenient places so that
people do not ease themselves just anywhere. People should be
instructed to cover night-soil properly with earth. The villagers should
be taught how night-soil can be turned into good manure. They
should be persuaded to take to adult education and to give education
to their children.
It is my belief that communalism is one of the many evils of
city-life. It is necessarily an outcome of urbanization. Such an
atmosphere is not to be found in the villages. The villages cannot even
afford to be communal. Our villagers are so poor that they constantly
need one another. Their mutual relations are such that they live in a
kind of family atmosphere. Hence the problem does not arise there.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 173

264. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
DELHI,

April 9, 1947
CHI. MRIDULA,

I have your letter. I have gone through it. You must write
without hesitation whatever you want. I cannot rush there in a hurry. I
am in touch with Jawaharlal and others. I have your telephone number
of course. Rajendra Babu saw me last night. He has asked for time.
Tomorrow morning, that is on Thursday, I am meeting him again,
when I shall know more. I know you will not panic easily. You must
be getting help from Dev and Hunar. Dr. Mahmud should devote full
attention to this work, if he is not doing so. Now you may be coming
yourself and so there is no need for me to write more. Badshah Khan
may go to Peshawar in a day or two. He is still agitated.
You have written nothing about the police trouble. I do keep
thinking about it.
As I see it the situation here is pretty grim. God will put things
right if such is His will.
I have written to you about coming a few days later. Come if
you can be spared from there.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11262. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

269

265. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
April 9, 1947
CHI. AMTULSALAAM,

Have you boycotted me? There is not a single letter from you.
Think over what happened on the last day. Forget that I was angry; try
to understand the reason behind it. Write to me about the conditions
there. How is your health?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 581

266. A TALK
BHANGI COLONY, N EW DELHI

April 9, 1947
Gandhiji remarked to Manu:

You should understand the whole episode as such incidents are
quite common.
Addressing the woman1 Gandhiji said:

Your husband has got the degrees of B. A. and LL. B. I would
still call him ignorant. He has behaved in a manner that does not befit
his education. The right course would have been to educate you and
remove your ignorance. But your husband played a trick on you and
you were gullible enough to believe him. I see nothing strange in it.
Women in our society take pride in being led by the nose by their
husbands. So long as people are not ashamed of resorting to such
mean conduct we shall not reach our goal. This I have said in your
defence. Now the main question is, what should you do in the present
circumstances? You should devote yourself to any work of service. If
you are not prepared for that you can go and join the classes that are
run under the Kasturba Trust. You should therefore prepare yourself
for service and forget that you were ever married.
Another alternative is, if you are not able to restrain yourself,
you should find an eligible partner and marry him. Such companions
are not easily found. Therefore be content in making the effort and if
1

Whose husband had remarried after tricking her into signing the divorce

papers

270

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

your efforts are good they are bound to be crowned with success.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 173-4

267. TALK WITH FRIENDS 1
BHANGI COLONY, N EW DELHI

April 9, 1947
The nearer we are approaching independence, the more
dependent on others, I believe, we are becoming. According to me
independence means that one should not seek anyone’s help for
fulfilling one’s own needs. Independence does not mean mere
physical indepen- dence.
A businessman desires his customers’ needs to go on increasing.
On the one hand our needs are on the increase and on the other there
is a class clamouring for ending capitalism. I fail to understand this.
For instance, you know that readymade food is available in England
and America. The trend has come here also. When people invite
someone for dinner they place an order with a hotel like Taj Mahal of
Bombay. The result will be that the class of women that used to take
up cooking as an art will gradually disappear. And I can even imagine
a time when perhaps cooking will be a forgotten art for women. Let
me give you a small example. If you ask my daughter her to make
bajra chapatis she won’t be able to prepare them. If the girls of today
are forgetting such small things, what would they not forget in future?
All laughed looking at Manu.

That is why I hold that if one wants to enjoy independence one
should oneself learn to produce the things one needs daily.
One should be able to do without the things one could not
produce oneself. This increases self-reliance and one’s progress. If we
are not able to make good use of political freedom, what purpose
would it serve? Self-reliance is the foundation of independence and
dependence on others is a sign of slavery. Such self-reliant persons
need never go to court or have any disputes. They settle their disputes
among themselves. They will impose a small tax upon themselves and
with its revenue a number of schools will be opened for children,
1

Who had come from Kathiawar

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

271

where teachers will earn their livelihood and also get the necessary
training. Such education will not be a burden on anyone. Where is the
need for army or police if we are able to protect ourselves? There are
progressive and enthusiastic workers in Kathiawar. They have to be
alert to shoulder heavy responsibilities in future. I have full faith that a
small State like Kathiawar will set an ideal for the whole country. And
the Kathiawaris have the capability to guide the whole nation. They
are not very knowledgeable but are courageous and wise.
At the same time Kathiawar has many defects. The Kathiawaris
as you know wear pugrees. According to a saying they have as many
twists in their hearts as they have in their pugrees. If that is so, that
very Kathiawar can prove to be a blot on the country.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 174-6

268. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
NEW DELHI

April 9, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

Last time when I was here you heard the same bhajan 1 which
Sucheta Devi sang just now. Its beautiful words were sung in a voice as
sweet as the words. Even today while listening to it I felt as though it
were new and I had not heard it before. How wonderful if our country
were as described in the bhajan and we could say that there was no
sorrow or suffering. But we know the country is in no such condition.
If one after another everyone becomes good as suggested in the
bhajan, the country would also become good. What is the strength of
an ocean? After all, it is made up of individual drops. Similarly, a
country too is constituted of its citizens. Today we are not in a
position to sing the bhajan with a clear conscience. Suppose we start
looking for such a country, where would we find one? Our body is
such a country and the atman residing within is the inhabitant of that
country. They bhajan describes the qualities that should belong to the
atman. We ought to imbibe these qualities in us. If we are able to do
so our country would surely be beautiful—whether it is known by the
name of Hindustan or Pakistan, whether it has 11 provinces or 21, or
1

272

Ham aise deshke vasi hain; vide “The Hymn”

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

any other number. We must all live in such a way that everyone lives
in comfort, none remains poor and none oppresses his fellow-beings.
To build such a country you have to live, all of us have to live,
in-cluding myself. But what is happening now is just the opposite. The
piles of letters I receive contain abuse as well all praise. We should
surrender all abuse as well as praise to God and have nothing to do
with either.
I think some of those who write these letters must be present in
this meeting. I am glad that they are hearing my words, because
listening to me they will understand me and work for the benefit of
the country.
We are going to attain independence. We have not yet attained
it. If we work unitedly, the Viceroy would leave this very day, or he
would entrust all responsibilities to us and silently watch us or would
stay on to do what we might ask of him, for his own satisfaction. He is
not the kind of man who would sit idle. He belongs to the royal
family and is extremely intelligent. His wife also is a talented lady. We
can utilize their talents to advantage. But this cannot be done under
the prevailing circumstances. He would continue to be here for
another fourteen months and testify whether India behaves well or
otherwise. It was with a view to seeing India that the delegates from the
Asian countries had come to attend the Inter-Asian Relations
Conference. But they went back with the impression that the Hindus
and Muslims were fighting with each other. Nobody knows why they
are fighting. I at any rate do not know what they are quarrelling
about.
Are the Muslims fighting for Pakistan? They say that they
would have Pakistan at any cost. Would they have it by compelling us
to give it? Would they take it by force? By force they cannot have
even an inch of land. By persuasion they may have the whole of
India. I would welcome it if Jinnah Saheb became the first President
of free India and formed his own Cabinet. But there would be one
condition, namely, that with God as witness, he should regard Hindus,
Muslims, Parsis and all others as equals.
One of the correspondents asks why I should not be called
“Muhammed Gandhi”? And then he hurls the choicest abuses, which
need not be repeated here. If we ignore the person who abuses us, he
will repeat his performance once, twice, thrice, several times—only to
tire of it. Being tired he would either keep quiet or, driven by anger,

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

273

kill us. But what would happen after he kills us? We would lose
nothing. One might ask: ‘Who would protect our wives and children?’
But he should realize that there is God to protect them. Why, then,
should we worry?
The best way to stop the agitation for the partition of Bengal1 is
to persuade the Hindus through reasoning and assure them right now
that they would not be forced to act one way or the other. By their
wholly impartial conduct the Muslims must prove that the Hindus
need have no misgivings about justice and fairplay in Pakistan, that no
favours would be shown to the Muslims just because they are Muslims,
and while selecting men for Government jobs merit alone would be
the consideration. If Suhrawardy Saheb acts in this manner, the whole
of Bengal would become an independent province. Then there would
be no question of dividing the province into three or four. By
placating the minorities he should thus win them over. He should treat
the Hindus in such a way that they insist on having Suhrawardy as
their Chief Minister. He should enjoy theirfull confidence.
But that is not the position now. Today I have received a letter
from Sushila 2 who was formerly running a school at Rajkot.
Describing the situation where she is now working, she says that there
was so much terror in the air that no Hindu woman ventured to go
there even if escorted, not to speak of going alone. When she herself
went there, the other women could go with her.
I cannot help saying that if Indians evince true courage the
coercive method now adopted to achieve Pakistan cannot but fail in its
purpose. I dare say the talk of achieving Pakistan by force and threats
is but an idle dream.
[From Hindi]
Prarthana-Pravachan—Part I, pp. 40-3

1

On April 4, the Executive Committee of the Bengal Provincial congress
Committee and the Bengal Provincial Hindu Mahasabha conference had made a
demand for the partition of Bengal.
2
Sushila Pai

274

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

269. DRAFT FORMULA1
[April 10, 1947] 2
1. So far as pakistan is concerned and so far as the Congress is
concerned nothing will be yielded to force. But everything just will be
conceded readily if it appeals to reason. Since nothing is to be
forcibly taken, it should be open to any province or part thereof to
abstain from joining Pakistan and remain with the remaining
provinces. Thus, so far as the Congress is aware today, the Frontier
Province is with it (Congress) and the Eastern part of the Punjab where
the Hindus and the Sikhs combined have a decisive majority will
remain out of the pakistan zone. Similarly in the East, Assam is clearly
outside the zone of Pakistan and the Western part of Bengal including
Darjeeling, Dinajpur, Calcutta, Burdwan, Midnapore, Khulna, 24Paraganas, etc., where the Hindus are in a decisive majority will remain
outside the Pakistan zone. And since the Congress is willing to
concede to reason every- thing just, it is open to the muslim League to
appeal to the Hindus, by present just treatment, to reconsider their
expressed view and to divide Bengal.
2. It is well to mention in this connection that if the suggested
agreement3 goes through, the Muslim League will participate fully in
the Constituent Assembly in a spirit of co-operation. It might also be
mentioned that it is the settled policy with the Congress that the system
of separate electorates has done the greatest harm to the national cause
and therefore the Congress will insist on joint electo- rates throughout
with reservation of seats wherever it is considered necessary.
3. The present raid of Assam 4 and the contemplated so-called
civil disobedience5 within should stop altogether.
1

Gandhiji wrote on this in Hindi “Gandhi’s draft”.
According to the letter to Lord Mountbatten dated April 11, 1947, vide pp.
254-5, Gandhiji discussed the formula with the Congress Working Committee
members on the previous night.
3
Vide “Outline of Draft Agreement”, 4-4-1947
4
The Muslim League had launched a large-scale invasion of Assam using
Muslim immigrants to alter the communal ratio of the population in the province.
5
The Working Committee of the Assam Provincial Muslim League had, on
March 30, decided to start a civil disobedience movement in Assam.
2

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

275

4. Muslim League intrigues, said to be going on, with the
Frontier tribes for creating disturbances in the Frontier Province and
onward should also stop.
5. Frankly anti-Hindu legislation hurried through the sind
Legislature in utter disregard of Hindu feeling and opposition should
be abandoned.
6. The attempt that is being nakedly pursued in the Muslim
majority provinces to pack civil and police services with Muslims
irrespective of merit and to the deliberate exclusion of Hindus must be
given up forthwith.
7. Speeches inciting to hatred, including murder, arson and
loot, should cease.
8. Newspapers like the Dawn, Morning News, Star of India,
Azad and others, whether in English or in any of the Indian
vernaculars, should change their policy of inculcating hatred against
the Hindus.
9. Private armies under the guise of National Guards, secretly
or openly armed, should cease.
10. Forcible conversion, rape, abduction, arson and loot culminating in murders of men, women and children by Muslims should
stop.
11. What the Congress expects the Muslim League to do will
readily be done in the fullest measure by the Congress.
12. What is stated here applies equally to the inhabitants of
Princes’ India, Portuguese India and French India.
13. The foregoing is the test of either’s sincerity and that being
granted publicly and in writing in the form of an agreement, the
Congress would have no objection whatsoever to the Muslim League
forming the whole of the Cabinet consisting of Muslims only or partly
Muslims and partly non-Muslims.
14. Subject to the foregoing the Congress pledges itself to give
full co-operation to the Muslim League Cabinet if it is formed and
never to use the Congress majority against the League with the sole
purpose of defeating the Muslims. On the contrary every measure will
be considered on its merits and receive full co-operation from the
Congress members whenever a particular measure is provably in the
interests of the whole of India.
From a facsimile: Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. II, between pp. 128
and 129

276

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

270. LETTER TO HENDERSON
BHANGI COLONY,
NEW DELHI

April 10, 1947
DEAR DR. HENDERSON,

I am glad to have your letter and to learn that we have
corresponded with each other before.
I am, I confess, surprised at your question. He who believes in a
living God never feels the slightest doubt about his mission, especially
in a country which has regained its lost independence.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
20 A G OLBURN S T.
S YDNEY
AUSTRALIA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

271. MESSAGE FOR PYARELAL1
April 10, 1947
I would not be able to guide him. He should act according to his
lights and consult Satis Babu. It is not desirable for him to come here
all the way from Noakhali merely to discuss things. I have already
given all the advice I could. He should now act as he thinks proper.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 180

272. TALK WITH MANU GANDHI
BHANGI NIVAS, N EW DELHI

April 10, 1947
These people [of Russia] believe in destroying their property so
that it may not fall into enemy’s hands. Not only that, they are all
1

Who had sought Gandhiji’s permission on telephone to come and discuss
with him the situation in Noakhali

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

277

praise for this scorched-earth policy and give it great importance. I
am surprised that learned people there praise this policy. But
somehow I do not as yet feel like saying anything in its favour. It is
possible that my knowledge is limited in comparison to theirs. This
trend is evident in our country as well. I see neither sacrifice nor
bravery in eliminating the capitalists. If I were to know that the enemy
were approaching I would leave my property intact instead of
destroying it. I believe that would be true sacrifice and this is how love
for humanity could be preserved in its noblest form. I claim that if we
behave in this manner the enemy cannot but become our friend. A
society as such cannot be treated separately from the individuals who
constitute it. Truly speaking, we are all like brothers. At present the
Government is trying to do its work as best as it can but it can refrain
from doing so at will. Then the responsibility will fall on those men
and women who constitute society. And if at that time we fail to
realize that we are like brothers and to act as such, there may be chaos
and anarchy and no one will benefit by it.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 178-9

273. TALK WITH MANU GANDHI
BHANGI NIVAS, N EW DELHI

April 10, 1947
If we are able to judge when to use a machine and when to avoid
it and if while using it we do so with understanding, quite a few of our
difficulties will be solved. For instance, if we are hurt tincture iodine
(poisonous medicine) is applied to the affected part. But if we are
down with fever we do not take tincture iodine orally. We should be as
careful in using machines as a doctor is in prescribing poisonous
medicines. Machine-power can make a valuable contribution towards
economic progress. But a few capitalists have employed machinepower regardless of the interests of the common man and that is why
our condition has deteriorated today.
While talking with some friends today we discussed the idea of
fitting rubber tyres in bullock-carts in our villages. I told them that to
me it was clear that rubber tyres will not make things easy for the
villagers; on the contrary they will increase their requirements and

278

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

make them dependent on others. And this will become another means
of their exploitation.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 179

274. TALK WITH WOMEN WORKERS

1

BHANGI NIVAS, N EW DELHI

April 10, 1947
I would prefer women and men to work in separate fields. The
work to be done among women is so much that sometimes owing to
paucity of women workers men have to work in organizations meant
exclusively for women. Our society has shown gross negli- gence
towards women. We desperately need intelligent and service- minded
women workers to work among them. However, I would advise you to
keep it in mind that there should be no rivalry between men and
women workers. Both and equally important and equally essential.
There should be no secrecy between them. Their con- duct towards
each other should also be natural and without inhibition.
A number of workers who in the past were staunch believers in
non-violence are, so to say, taking it lightly today. Even if people were
to renounce and condemn non-violence, truth, constructive
programme and khadi, etc., I shall continue to proclaim my faith in
them till my last breath, for I see no other way for India’s progress.
No progress will be possible unless we make the requisite effort for
implementing the constructive programme and learn to cultivate
goodwill towards wrong-doers. Eminent persons have made
experiments and invented armament but they fail to tempt me. With
the increase in armament my conviction is becoming deeper that the
power generated by non-violence is immense and incomparable. I
have been a votary of this power for the last 30 years. I am not going
to take this power lightly at a critical juncture as at present. Even if no
one is with me I am my own companion.
India has been disarmed against her will. But if everyone in
India cultivates the courage to face death bravely, India can proclaim
that she can defend herself and make progress not through the atom
1

The women workers had asked whether they should work only among women
or also among men.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

279

bomb but through non-violence along. Women alone can take the
lead in this, for God has endowed them with great power.1
Every village has to become self-reliant. Things required in a
village should be produced in the village itself. Only under special
circumstances should these be brought from outside. Every village
should build schools, community halls and dharmashalas from money
raised by the people from among themselves. If possible, even the
artisans should be from the village itself. You should ensure that
everyone in the village is provided with clean grain, clean water and a
clean house. Under the Nayee Talim scheme education should be
imparted to every child from beginning to end. Every activity should
be conducted on a co-operative basis. Disputes should be settled
amongst the villagers themselves. There should be no distinction of
high or low castes in villages. A committee or panchayat consisting of
five or seven elected adult men and women should be formed in each
village. The panchayat should look after the public activities and act
as the executive and legislature for the village.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 180-1

275. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
NEW DELHI

April 10, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

The bhajan 2 is as sweet as its meaning is sublime. If is of great
significance to you as to all of us today. The essence of the bhajan is
that even in the darkest hour we may not lose hope and faith. The
lamp that is alight might go out and darkness spread around, but we
must live through it. The flame that has ceased to burn, the life that is
lost, these do not come back. Hindus and Muslims might take to the
law of the jungle, but they ought to remember that they are not
invertebrate animals but men standing erect. Hence even in the worst
calamity they should not lose their faith and forget their dharma.
1

At this point the workers expressed a desire to understand Gandhiji’s idea of
village swaraj.
2
The Bengali bhajan ‘Yadi tor dak sune keuna ase tabe ekla chalore’ by
Rabindranath Tagore had been sung by Sucheta Kripalani.

280

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I have again received a number of letters today. A gentle- man
writes to say that both Hindus and Muslims have turned into beasts.
They are fighting each other. Is there no way out? There certainly is.
The one simple way out of the situation is for either of the two
communities to stop descending to the level of beasts. The
correspondent, however, mentions one more thing. He says the
important question is as to how the third party acts. He believes that
the Viceroy has come here definitely to transfer power to Indian
hands. If may be granted that he has come with sincere intentions; that
the British have deputed this illustrious soldier of the royal family
only to wind up their power spread far and wide in India and that the
British Ministers responsible for deputing him are also honest in their
purpose. But he still doubts the bona fides of the representatives of
British commercial interests here. They had done everything to
exploit this land. Till this day they had monopolized all our trade.
What would they do now? It is a pertinent question. If the Hindus and
Muslims together wish to keep them, would they stay on as our friends
or would the British businessmen force themselves on us even if we
did not want them? There is also the hold of the Civil Service. They
have come to have such a stranglehold over us that we are not sure
whether we would get freedom at all. It was by the grace of God that
we adopted certain methods and the circumstances too so changed
that the British are not talking of leaving. But the Civil Service is still
here and also the British soldiers. If they can earn their livelihood
here, why should they leave?
Another doubt is that the Viceroy’s offer might quietly be
withdrawn. To this doubt I can only say that under the present
circumstances we can say precious little. It is as yet only the dawn of
freedom; the sun has not yet come up. We have no idea how warm the
sun will be. At the moment we are shivering. Out hearts are full of
fear. Only when the sun shines forth will we be able to feel its warmth.
In this connection I want to say nothing to you. But I would appeal to
the British in India, whether civilians, soldiers or businessmen, to leave
India if they wish to preserve their good name. Till now they have
been riding on our backs, which was not fair on their part. They had
better climb down willingly. Lord Mountbatten has come here
precisely to help them do it and he is not alone. He represents the full
strength of the British people. Surely they will have to suffer some
losses in doing it. But they are prepared for it. In fact they have
already given some proof of their willingness. We said that the civil

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

281

servants should go and they are leaving, they are going to inflict
themselves on their own countrymen, that is, now it will be for Great
Britain to pay them their pensions, etc. On the one hand Lord
Mountbatten has summoned the Governors along with their secretaries
to be briefed about the true state of affairs.1 On the other hand
Churchill and his party will not give in without putting up resistance.
Even then the Viceroy maintains that he represents the British people
and as per their wish they should now withdraw. The Governors, the
British commercial interests and members of the Civil Services should
all help the Viceroy in this task and they should leave. Those who
wish may stay on with pleasure. But they should act very differently
from what they had hitherto been doing. In other words, instead of
exploiting us they should help us prosper. They will leave behind a
good name if they act in this manner.
But news is pouring in from all quarters that their mischief was
at the root of all these riots. Lord Mountbatten too has an inkling of
it. He is afraid lest this popular suspicion should prove true. The
British in India will now have to see to it that the suspicion of both
Hindus and Muslims that the British has a hand in the riots is not
substantiated. If this suspicion proves correct history will not spare
them. It will be recorded in history that they were plunderers.
But they can say let bygones be bygones and now they have
turned over a new leaf. Lord Mountbatten is honest in his intention
but his success is in the hands of the British commercial interests, the
British army and the British civilians. If they are not sincere, whatever
the Viceroy has done will be undone. Let us therefore pray to God to
grant them good sense. Whatever the trouble in quitting India, even if
they face a dark future ahead, still I would tell them that their good
lies in deciding to leave India.
Afterwards they can help us resolve our disputes, and they might
even succeed in doing so. Then it will bring them good name. I pray
to God that they quit India not as enemies but as true friends, and
leave us to cherish friendship for them in our hearts.
[From Hindi]
Prarthana-Pravachan—Part I, pp. 43-5

1

A two-day conference of provincial Governors was scheduled to begin on
April 15.

282

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

276. TELEGRAM TO SAMUEL M. LEVY1
April 11, 1947
CANNOT

CONTROL

NEWSPAPER

REPORTS.

DID

MENTION

MOSES.2

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

277. LETTER TO LORD MOUNTBATTEN
BHANGI COLONY, READING ROAD ,
NEW DELHI

April 11, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

I had several short talks with Pandit Nehru, and an hour’s talk
with him alone, and then with several members of the Working
Committee last night about the formula1 I had sketched before you,
and which I had filled in for them with all the implications. 2 I am
sorry to say that I failed to carry any of them with me except Badshah
Khan.
I do not know that having failed to carry both the head and
heart of Pandit Nehru with me I would have wanted to carry the matter
further. But Panditji was so good that he would not be satisfied until
the whole plan was discussed with the few members of the Congress
Working Committee who were present.
I felt sorry that I could not convince them of the correctness of
my plan from every point of view. Nor could they dislodge me from
my position although I had not closed my mind against every
argument. Thus I have to ask you to omit me from your
1
This was in reply to the addressee’s telegram dated April 7 which read : “At
the Pan-Asiatic Conference you did not mention Moses, the law giver who was the
father of monotheistic and human religions, whose precepts extended even to the Far
East.”
2
Vide “Speech at Inter-Asian Relations Conference”, 2-4-1947
3
Vide “Outline of Draft Agreement”, 4-4-1947
4
Vide “Draft Formula”, 10-4-1947

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

283

consideration.
Congressmen who are in the Interim Government3 are stalwarts,
seasoned servants of the nation and, therefore, so far as the Congress
point of view is concerned, they will be complete advisers.
I would still love to take the place that the late C. F. Andrews
took. He represented no one but himself. And if you ever need my
service on its merit, it will be always at your disposal.
In the circumstances above mentioned, subject to your consent, I
propose, if possible, to leave tomorrow for P ATNA.
I have not forgotten the book about tribal expeditions. I have
not yet been able to lay my hands on it for I cannot recall the name of
the author nor the year in which I read the book. As I told you it was
years ago in S. Africa that I came across it. My search will continue
wherever I am and as soon as I trace it, it shall be sent to you.
I must also confess a slip of memory I am answerable for in the
course of our talks. I was wrong in connecting Sir Francis Mudie1 with
the late Pandit Nehru2 . The incident I referred to was in connection
with Muddiman3 , not Mudie. The charge, almost universally believed
by Congressmen against the present Governor of Sind, remains
unaltered—in spite of my slip of memory.
I hope these constant interviews are not proving an unbearable
strain. 4
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 244-5

1

Namely, Jawaharlal Nehru, Vallabhbhai Patel, Rajenda Prasad, C.
Rajagopalachari, John Matthai, Baldev Singh, Jagjivan Ram Abul Kalam Azad and
C.H. Bhabha
2
Governor of Sind
3
Motilal Nehru
4
Sir Alexander Muddiman, Chariman of the Muddiman Committee, formed in
1925, to examine the working of the Montford Reforms.
5
For a report of Gandhiji’s interview with the Viceroy, vide “Interview with
Lord Mountbatten”, 12-4-1947

284

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

278. LETTER TO PRABHAKAR
April 11, 1947
CHI. PRABHAKAR,

I have gone through your papers. You should not have
undertaken the fast without my consent. It is good that you have
broken it. You had better do only such work as Shantabehn lets you
do. More if we meet any time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 9035. Also C. W. 9159. Courtesy:
Prabhakar.

279. TALK WITH KRIPAL1
BHANGI NIVAS, N EW DELHI

April 11, 1947
Living with me is like living on a razon’s edge. There is no
certainty about meals, nor are there proper beds for sleeping. These
girls have become accustomed to such hardships. They sleep like a
log even on a mat. While with me even such soft clothes [as you wear]
will not be available. One has to get up early in the morning and clean
lavatories. Prepare yourself for all this. You may join me when I go to
Sevagram. In the mean time you will, of course, come here whenever I
happen to be in Delhi.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi agman, p. 186

280. A TALK
BHANGI NIVAS, N EW DELHI

April 11, 1947
Your duty lies in remaining in bengal and rendering service
there. If anyone propagates any ism or forms any party, we need not
worry about it or discuss it. One who serves silently with all the
resources at one’s command—mental, physical and material—does
1

Daughter of Sir Datar Singh who had expressed her wish to serve Gandhiji.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

285

not do so in vain. Service consists in using Godgiven gifts in pleasing
Him, in utilizing them properly and thus keeping oneself happy and
contented. All else is hypocrisy.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 186-7

281. TALK WITH Y. M. DADOO AND
G. M. NAICKER
April 11, 1947
Truly speaking, it was after I went to South Africa that I became
what I am now. My love for South Africa and my concern for her
problems are no less than for India, because it was in South Africa that
I discovered the weapon of satyagraha, and it was there that I offered a
successful non-violent satyagraha. It encouraged me in my line of
thought and strengthened my faith.
India is now on the threshold of independence. But this is not
the independence I want. To my mind it will be no independence if
India is partitioned and the minorities do not enjoy security,
protection and equal treatment. Because the independence of my
dreams is altogether different. The country is not yet completely
independent. If what is happening today is an earnest of things to
come after independence, it bodes no good for the future. We have a
proverb saying that the cradle bespeaks the child’s future. I, therefore,
feel ill at ease. But I am content to leave the future in God’s good
hands.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 187

282. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
NEW DELHI

April 11, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

I am sorry to have to inform you that today I have suddenly
decided to leave for Bihar. You are aware that my field of work is
Noakhali and Bihar. It is not that I have chosen these places. I went to

286

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Noakhali just by chance or, say, at the call of God. I had to go to
Bihar also in the same connection. I could accomplish something
during the days I spent in Noakhali. The Hindus there smarting under
the reign of terror had some respite. But just as I worked for the
Hindus, I also worked for the Muslims there. Today it may not appear
significant; but in future when the climate changes the country will
realize the value of the work done there. In a way, some benefits of
the work can be noticed even now. Even today good Muslims have
come to accept their Hindu neighbour as their brothers. But the
number of such people has not grown as much as it should. Even so,
there is no doubt that the work that is being done there today will
bring many benefits in the future.
For the present I am needed not so much in Noakhali as in
Bihar. I have a telegram from a Muslim friend from Bihar saying that
I had stayed away from Bihar for a long time and should now return
there. He says that they would feel reassured only when I go there. It
is true that my decision to go to Bihar has not been prompted by this
telegram. But now my mind has turned to Bihar because I had told
them that I would do or die there.
By “doing” I mean that the Hindus and Muslims of Bihar
should live in amity like brothers. Even if there is frenzy raging like a
fire elsewhere, the Hindus and Muslims of Bihar should live in amity.
There are quite a few village in Bihar still untouched by the outside
fire. Not only in Bihar but in Noakhali and the Punjab, where there
has been so much trouble, there are some villages where people
continue to live together in peace and with mutual trust. You will
come across such village all over the country.
You can turn round and tell me that just a couple of days ago I
had talked of going to the Punjab. You can ask me why I now intend
going to Bihar. You can also ask me if my talks with the Viceroy are
over, as I had come here for that specific purpose. You can insist that
if my talks with the Viceroy are over, I should wait at least to see the
result. But why should I wait to see the result? It is not in my hands to
produce any results. There are other people to take decisions in the
matter. I wanted to discuss a few things with the Viceroy which I have
already done. I had said earlier that in Delhi I was a prisoner of two
persons, namely, the Viceroy and Pt. Jawaharlal Nehru. Rajendra Babu
had come to me. I have discussed the matter with him and also sent a
message for Nehru. I have decided to go to Bihar with their

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

287

permission.
It is my svadharma1 to go to Bihar. I worship the Gita. The Gita
ordains that one should perform one’s own duty and stick to one’s
own field of action. The Gita clearly states that better is death in the
discharge of one’s own duty and in one’s own field. Running after
another’s function is fraught with danger. Hence, staying in a place
like Delhi which is another’s domain is for me fraught with danger.
If I had had a call from God directing me to go to the Punjab I
would have certainly gone there. You may well ask me if it is God
who prompts me. That way, God does not come to me in person. But I
do hear an inner voice. One who becomes a devotee of God hears His
voice from within. I did not hear such a voice with regard to the
Punjab.
But let me tell you that I have thought enough about going to
the Punjab, and have come to the conclusion that my going there now
would not serve any particular purpose, because we do not rule the
Province. Even if the Muslim League had been ruling there, it would
have meant our rule, because if the Muslim League members come to
power there it would be on the strength of the votes of the people; and
then it would be our rule. A rule established by the votes of the people
would be the rule of the people. It is up to us to see whether such a
rule brings happiness or unhappiness.
Supposing it were our misfortune to have Hindu rule in one part
of the country and a Muslim-ruled Pakistan in the other, if both the
states take the attitude that the people of the other community may
not live in peace inn their land, the Hindu state would become a hell
and likewise Pakistan would be a Na-Pakistan2 . True Pakistan is a
place where there is proper justice, where there is no rule of force and
where everything is done and achieved by effecting a change of heart
in the opponents. But today we have forgotten our ideals.
But whether I go to the Punjab or not, I shall certainly work for
it. Whatever I want to tell the people after going there can as well be
conveyed to them from outside the Punjab. I want to teach only one
thing which I shall never tire of repeating. And it is that every Hindu
and every Sikh should resolve that he would die, but would never kill.
Master Tara Singh says the Sikhs shall kill. In my view what he says is
not proper. He should say that if they do not get what they want they
1
2

288

One’s own duty
Land of impurity

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

would die for it, even if they may be only a handful, and rest only
when they had achieved their goal. He should not talk in terms of
killing. I need not go all the way to the Punjab to say this.
I could have conveyed my feelings to Bihar also from outside,
but I feel that it is necessary to go there and persuade the people. For
the same reason I went round in Noakhali. I was warned that I would
be killed. But I tell you that even if all of you try to protect me you
will not be able to save me from death. Even doctors and hakims
would be of no avail. Even Hakim Lukman, quoted in today’s
bhajan 1 , says in despair that the grandeur of life is only transitory.
Why then should we try to run away from death? We ought to face
death with courage. We must conduct ourselves in such a way that the
world would condemn those who would attack us. Let the whole world
ask them how they would get Pakistan by adopting tyrannical means.
The essence of satyagraha is that the satyagrahi converts the
whole world to his view. I have said right from the beginning that we
need not send our workers to the United States or to Britain to carry
on propaganda for our cause. Truth will shine through our work right
here and the whole world will come to witness it. In the same way I
had won world sympathy while I was in South Africa and the British
as well as Americans had upheld my stand.
[From Hindi]
Prarthana-Pravachan—Part I, pp. 46-9

283. TELEGRAM TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
NEW DELHI,

April 12, 1947
S ATIS DAS GUPTA
R AMGANJ
GOING

PATNA

TONIGHT.

WELL

KEEPING

LOCAL

PUBLIC

INFORMED.

YOU
AUTHORITY

ARUNANSHU

HAVE
MINISTER

DONE
AND

ACCOMPANYING.

BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 9073

1

Hai bahare bagh dunia chand roz by Nazir Akbarabadi; vide “Ashram
Bhajanavali"

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

289

284. A JOINT APPEAL1
April 12, 19472
We deeply deplore the recent acts of lawlessness and violence
that have brought the utmost disgrace on the fair name of India and
the greatest misery to innocent people, irrespective of who were the
aggressors and who were the victims.
We denounce for all time the use of force to achieve political
ends, and we call upon all the communities of India, to whatever
persuasion they may belong, not only to refrain from all acts of
violence and disorder, but also to avoid both in speech and writing
any words which might be construed as an incitement to such acts.
M. K. GANDHI3
M. A. JINNAH

April 15, 1947
From a facsimile: Mahatma, Vol. VII, between pp. 448 and 449. Also
Harijan, 27-4-1947

285. TALK WITH SIKHS
BHANGI NIVAS, N EW DELHI

April 12, 1947
Once prejudice comes to dominate reason, it is difficult to get
rid of it. I hold Guru Govind Singh in high esteem. Excuse me, but
Imake bold to say that I am perhaps a truer follower of his than you
all. Many of his bhajans are sung during prayers at the Ashram. But
one cannot bring about any change in a person by law, it can be done
only through persuasion. Therefore, no one can ever become nonviolent through law. Violence is not obligatory under any religion, it
is non-violence that is enjoined by all religions. But why don’t you
understand that before asking others to respect one’s religion one
must give due respect to every other religion? It is a pity I am unable
to convince you about it today.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 191-2
1

This was signed by Gandhiji on April 12, 1947, at the suggestion of the
Viceroy and was issued tothe Press on April 15, 1947. Vide “Interview with Lord
Mountbatten”, 12-4-1947 also “Telegrtam to Lord Mountbatten”, 14-4-1947
2 Ibid
3
The signature is in the Roman, Devanagari and Urdu scripts.

290

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

286. MESSAGE FOR ARABS
April 12, 19471
The Jews are a persecuted people worthy of world sympathy and
India sympathizes with them. They are energetic, intelligent and
progressive. The Arabs are a great people with a great history and
therefore if they provide refuge for the Jews without the mediation of
any nation, it will be in their tradition of generosity.
The Hindu, 1-5-1947

287. ADVICE TO A CHINESE FRIEND2
April 12, 19473
Take to spinning. The music of the wheel will be as balm to
your soul. I believe that the yarn we spin is capable of mending the
broken warp and woof of our lives. The charkha is the symbol of
non-violence on which all life, if it is to be real life, must be based.
Harijan, 27-4-1947

288. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
NEW DELHI

April 12, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

Tomorrow is the last day of the national Week. April 61 was the
day of awakening. On that day we witnessed how the whole country
was united. The towns in any case have a kind of unity without which
they cannot function, but on that day we realized that India’s villages
too were united.
It is really remarkable that the villages should have been so
united. I had appealed to the people to fast on April 6 and the whole
nation followed my call. Who was I? But it was the voice of God. That
1

From Biharni Komi Agman
Reproduced from Amrit Kaur’s “With Gandhiji in Delhi”. The Chinese friend
had asked Gandhiji “how it was possible to find peace of mind in these troublous
times”.
3
From Biharni Komi Agman
4 In 1919
5
Ibid
2

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

291

was why all the villages from Madras to the Punjab and from the
Punjab to Dibrugarh in Assam were astir. India was awakened that
day. April 13 2 was the day of massacre in India. That was the day
when Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs were all massacred indiscriminately
in the Jallianwala Bagh. It was not really a bagh 3 but an enclosure with
walls on all four sides. It was not possible to escape from the
enclosure, as there was only one small exit. Here unarmed people were
slaughtered, bringing the death toll to two, or may be five, thousand.
The blood of Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs mingled at the place. No
one could tell how much blood of which community way spilt there.
If a blood sample were to be sent to the most experienced doctor even
he could not have determined whether it belonged to a Hindu or a
Sikh or a Muslim. In other words, all the Indians became fellowmartyrs in Jallianwala Bagh.
Do not turn round and ask me how they could be called martyrs
since they had not gone there with the intention of getting killed. It is
true that they had not gone there prepared to meet death but they
were all innocent people. Massacre of innocent people is a serious
matter. It is not a thing to be easily forgotten. It is our duty to cherish
their memory. So horrifying was the tragedy that the whole nation was
moved. It provoked Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore to write a letter1 to
the Government and he joined our ranks. You have, therefore, to
observe April 13 [as Martyrs’ Day]. I shall not be able to join you
here tomorrow. I am not happy about it, but I have now decided to go
to Bihar.
It may be asked why I could not postpone my departure by a
day. But, again, I am not going to Bihar for pleasure. There too I shall
be serving India to the best of my capacity. As for fasting, it can be
done even on the train. So, I shall be leaving today. You must fast
tomorrow and observe April 13 in the same manner as you had
observed April 6 on Sunday last.
If you have properly understood everything that was said during
these seven days, then those of you who have been coming here
regularly should resolve tomorrow that you would die but never kill.
Why should we say that we would die after killing? Why should we
also say that we would have the courage to die only if we have a sword
Garden
Addressed to the Viceroy, renouncing knighthood. It appeared in Young
India, 7-6-1919; vide “Letter to Maganlal Gandhi”, 6-6-1919
1
2

292

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

or a gun in our hands? Do you think it brings us any credit to say that
we would have no fear if we had a gun with us, but would feel afraid
without one? Let us discard lathis, swords and guns and go ahead with
God as our companion. Free from fear let us then go everywhere and
proclaim that we Hindus and Muslims would never indulge in mutual
strife.
But today we are fighting bitterly. I feel ashamed before the
foreigners when they come to see me. Still I tell them that those who
turn fanatics are only a few, that the entire population of 400 millions
has not gone crazy and that I have full faith that a day would come
when all the Indians would resolve to achieve their end not with the
might of arms but with the strength of reason. If India desires true
freedom, everybody should learn this lesson.
Another thing I want to tell you is that however loud our
protests might be, our Press refuses to mend its ways. Today one of
the newspapers has gone to the extent of stating that Gandhi is going
away because of his differences with the Congress Working
Committee, and now he is not able to get along with the Working
Committee. This comment has appeared not in some small,
insignificant paper but in a leading paper with a large circulation. I
feel ashamed to see how low our newspapers have sunk.
I have explained to you yesterday why I am going and that is
the real truth. What the newspaper says, despite my explanation, is
sheer nonsense. I am going, no doubt; but there is no quarrel among
us. Our relations are no less cordial. Maulana Saheb was here a little
while ago. Rajaji, the Sardar, Nehru and Kripalani were also here. We
were all talking amicably. Only Rajendra Babu 1 had not come; but
does his absence mean that he had quarrelled with me? Isn’t all this
gossip mischievous? It can certainly be said that we have our
differences. But was there any time when we had no differences? Such
differences have always been there. Even father and son have their
own differences. But this paper is not merely hinting at our
differences ; it clearly says that we have fallen out.
If I were going because of any quarrel, why should I have gone
to seek permission from the Viceroy? Why did I take permission from
Nehru and Kripalani? I would have just gone away without consulting
anyone.
Not only that, the Sardar asked me a little while ago about my
1

Who was down with fever.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

293

return. I replied that I would be back the moment I heard his
summons. Would I talk that way if we had quarrelled? If I choose to
be a rebel I can be a pretty tough one. If I would not listen to anyone
neither would I do violence to anyone nor persecute anyone.
But it is a trick of their trade to create panic among the people
and thus increase their sales. It is a very wicked thing to indulge in
order to fill this wretched tummy. I have also been a journalist and in
those African jungles where there was none to bother about the
Indians I had done a lot of journalistic work. If for earning their
livelihood these people fill the pages of their newspapers and thereby
harm the interests of India, then, they must give up journalism and
find some other occupation for their livelihood. In the English
language the Press is called the Fourth Estate. The Press can help or
harm the country in so many ways. If the newspapers do not maintain
a healthy attitude, what purpose would be served by India becoming
free?
We too have developed such a habit that we can do without the
Koran, without the Gita or the Ramayana, but we cannot do without
the newspapers in the morning. Even great men have become slaves to
the newspaper [habit]. If we do not get our morning paper we are
upset. The newspapermen have also created this dependence on the
papers by indulging in unfounded gossip. But all this gossip hardly
serves any purpose.
I would suggest that you throw away such useless newspapers. If
you want to get news you can enquire from people. You are not going
to lose anything by not reading the newspapers. If you must read a
newspaper take care to choose those which are published to serve the
interest of the country and call upon Hindus and Muslims to live in
amity. Then the journalists too would not be in such a mad rush to
work overnight and also forgo their rest during daytime. Then there
would be no rush for giving publicity to baseless rumours.
If good journalists happen to hear about any quarrel between
Gandhi and Nehru or Kripalani and Maulana Azad, they must first
verify it with Gandhi or Nehru before rushing to print it. Had they
come to us to verify it, we would have rebuked them sternly for
talking nonsense.
Today a Muslim friend has sent me a nice letter. A Hindu friend
has also written me a nice thing. The Muslim friend writes to say that
Satavlekarji’s interpretation of the verse from the Ishopanishad is

294

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

indeed sublime. Similar is the meaning of the verse Auz-o-Billahi, etc.
There is no difference between the two, only, one is in Sanskrit and
the other in Arabic.
My Hindu friend has asked me why, while I regard the Koran as
a scripture, the Muslims do not similarly regard the Gita and the
Upanishads. Why don’t they recite from these in the mosques?
The answer is clear. As a true Hindu I regard the Koran as a
book of religion because it contains words that praise Khuda. But
what is the logic in forcing Muslims to regard our scriptures also as
their books of religion? This would not be an act of goodness.
I hope to meet you again. I shall come back when Jawaharlal or
Kripalani or the Viceroy sends for me. I shall continue to work for
you and for the people of the Punjab, Bihar and Noakhali also. You
should always continue your prayers with the same devotion as you
have been doing all these days.
[From Hindi]
Prarthana-Pravachan—Part I, pp. 49-53.

289. TELEGRAM TO THE EDITOR “THE HINDU”,
MADRAS
[After April 12, 1947] 1
P RESIDENT
EDITORS’ C ONFERENCE
YOUR

WIRE.

MY

LAST

DELHI

ADDRESS

WAS

PURELY

FOR

JOURNALISTS. IN VIEW OF QUAID-E-AZAM JINNAH’S AND MY APPEAL 2
FOR

PEACE

AND THEREANENT

TO

JOURNALISTS

TO EXERCISE UNUSUAL RESTRAINT UPON THEIR
JOURNALISM

IN

INCITEMENT

TO

INDIA

WILL

RISE

ABOVE

IT
PENS.

BEHOVES
I

THEM

HOPE

THAT

COMMUNALISM

AND

STRIFE.

GANDHI
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1
From the reference to the appeal, jointly made by Gandhiji with M. A. Jinnah
which is dated April 12, 1947; vide “A Joint Appeal”, 12-4-1947.
2
Ibid

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

295

290. NOTE ON GRAMSUDHAR TRUST,
URULI-KANCHAN 1
ON THE TRAIN TO P ATNA,

April 13, 1947
The local Trust for Uruli may be kept separate from the original
Trust.2 Only then will you be able to carry on rural reconstruction
activities under it. Among these you may include farming, cowrearing, weaving, running indigenous oil-mills, etc. The Trust will be
called Gramsudhar3 Trust. Nature cure will be a part of its activities.
All the activities should be mentioned in the Trust deed. You may ask
Mangaldas Pakvasa to prepare the draft. Get it done soon. Even
Balkrishna4 may prepare it. I leave to the local workers the decision
whether the Trust should be an independent one or a sub-trust of the
original Trust. If you wish to have an independent trust, you will have
to be ready to stand on your own feet and shoulder all the
responsibility. If you make a sub-trust, you will have to work within
the framework of the original Trust’s constitution. You will not, then,
be able to take up rural reconstruction programme.
The trustees will be, beside myself, Dr. Dinshaw and Jehangirji
(if they are willing to be included among the Trustees of an
independent Trust), Maganbhai, Gulabi5 , Balkrishna and a local
worker, provided he is capable, Balkrishna will have to agree to be one
of the Trustees. Maganbhai is not one of the Trustees of the original
Trust. He has been included only on the Uruli Trust.
If farming, cow-rearing, running indigenous oil-mills and
similar activities are to be carried on through the Trust, they will have
to be self-supporting. You will have to be ready to run them all [in
that manner]. I should be happy if you can do without bullocks. For
goseva work, you should utilize the services of resi- dents of the
village. Our methods of work ought not to be like those of capitalists.
You may employ local workers who have the spirit of service in them
for farming, cow-rearing and indi- genous oil-mills, etc. The other
family members of these workers should also give their services. Oil1 Presumably this was addressed to Manibhai B. Desai who was with Gandhiji
on the train; vide “Letter to Chimanlal N. Shah”, 13-4-1947
2 All-India Nature Cure Trust
3
Rural reconstruction
4
Balkrishna Bhave
5
Wife of Dinshaw K. Mehta

296

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

engines must not be used.
For all these activities, you may get the money from Sevagram. I
will give a note to Chimanlal 1 . You cannot use the money of the
original Trust. And the expenditure should not exceed one lakh
rupees. If patients from the village do not seek admission to the
hospital, you may admit outsiders. Local patients should get priority
and the expenses on their treatment also should be borne by the
institution. You may fix a fee for patients from outside. The standard
of treatment for everybody will be simple. This should be laid down
among the objects of the Trust. If any men or women workers from
outside wish to join, they may come and stay in a spirit of service.
They cannot be paid any remuneration. Menial staff should be
employed from amongst the villagers and should be paid. You may
engage ten or twelve-year old children from the village and pay them,
and also arrange to teach them according to the Wardha Scheme. Get
a few service-minded workers from outside. Train some servants and
children from the village and admit only as many patients as you can
easily look after. The workers will be subject to the Ashram rules. For
the servants, you may frame lighter rules. There will be bye-rules
relating to such matters. If, after his marriage, Paramanand starts an
establishment of his own, we will pay him just enough to meet his
expenses. We may pay something to Gokhale, too, if he needs it. Fix
the amount in consultation with Balkrishna. The equipment for the
hospital should also be very simple. It would, of course, be best if you
got it made in the village itself. For tubs, you can even use large
containers made of baked earth. Or you can get them made of tin. For
beds, you may arrange bricks to form the four legs and place a plank
over them. This is merely by way of a suggestion. I am of the view
that non-vegetarian food has no place in the treatment. I am not here
looking at the matter from a religious point of view. Instead of tea,
you may serve Indian-style decoction. In any case, wheat coffee will
do. We cannot supply bidis. Don’t mind if persons addicted to these
things do not come for treatment. Try to explain the reasons to the
people. Patients suffering from tuberculosis, leprosy and other
contagious diseases may be admitted if there is provision for separate
accommodation for them. Non-violent honey should be extracted in
the village itself. Teach the local Vagharan1 the improved method of
extracting honey. You may even start bee-keeping. Make arrange1
2

Chimanlal N. Shah; vide “Letter to Chimanlal N. Shah”, 13-4-1947
Woman of a community of Gujarat

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

297

ments to supply cow’s milk and ghee. But in the absence of cow’s
milk, you can supply buffalo’s or goat’s milk.
You may send for Hoshiraribehn after she completes her
education. For preserving good health, more expenditure may be
incurred if necessary. Every inmate of the Ashram must put in at least
seven years of total work. I would not like anybody to be permitted to
cook his or her own meals. Decide about the Ashram rules after
discussion with Balkrishna. I will write about the subject when I get
time. It would be better if Bhagwat1 gives up the idea of visiting other
centres for the present.
The additional expenditure on account of the current
construction work should also be obtained from Sevagram. The
money may be kept in the custody of Dr. Mehta, if he agrees. It
would, however be better to keep it with a respectable banker in Uruli.
There is no need just now to call any meeting of the Trustees which I
must attend. This should be enough.
M. K. GANDHI
From a facsimile of the Gujarati: Mahatma, Vol. VII, between pp. 448 and
449. Also C. W. 2729. Courtesy: Manibhai B. Desai

291. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
ON THE TRAIN,

April 13, 19472
CHI. AMRIT,

This is just a line. The crowds were thin and extraordinarily
quiet. I slept the whole night without disturbance. It has been a rich,
novel and pleasing experience It gives me a new hope. And I am
without a police or any other guard.
The heat is great but quite bearable.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 3703. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also. G. N. 6512

1
2

298

A. K. Bhagwat
The date-line is in Hindi.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

292. LETTER TO NIRMAL KUMAR BOSE
ON THE TRAIN,

April 13, 1947
CHI. NIRMAL BABU,

Your letter is frank.1 It does you credit on that account, but it
makes me sad.
On your own showing, you were less than truthful. Had you
shown the requisite courage and spoken out, I would not have let you
go so abruptly as you did.
I see that I have lost caste with you. I must not defend myself. If
we ever meet and it you would discuss what I consider to be your
hasty judgment, we shall talk.
My Bengali continues, though slowly.
Love.
BAPU
My Days with Gandhi, p. 188

293. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
ON THE TRAIN,

April 13, 1947
CHI. VALLABHBHAI,

I forgot to ask you one thing. I could not find the time. I now
see that I must write something I Harijan . . . 2 I also notice that there
1

Stating the reasons for his abrupt departure the addressee had written :
“On 20-12-1946,. . . you said that. . . you had been telling Manu how your old life
had ended and a new chapter had begun. You were going to conduct a new experiment
in non-violence of the brave. . . I determined to serve to the best of my ability in this
new experiment. . .
The fact is that...small but significant series of events led me to believe that you
did not want to cut yourself away from your old moorings as much as I had been led to
expect. . . . you permitted yourself to be weak in respect of particular persons. Hence I
did not feel the same joy in work. . . as I had experienced in Noakhali. . . .
In the meanwhile, I had received a letter from the University that work was
suffering on account of my absence. . . I clearly felt that the quality or quantity or
work I was doing in Bihar was less than what I would be able to put in at the
University. Hence I came away on that ground.”
2
Omission as in the source. Gandhii had suspended writing for the Harijan
weeklies in November 1946 while he was touring Noakhali; vide “Talk with Women
Refugees”, 22-3-1947

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

299

are frequent difference between your approach and mine. Such being
the case, would it be advisable for me to meet the Viceroy even as an
individual?
Please think over this objectively, keeping only the good of the
country in view. If you like, you may discuss the matter with others.
Please do not see the slightest suggestion of a complaint from me in
this. I am thinking of my duty in terms of the country’s good. It is
quite possible that what you can see while administering the affairs of
millions may not be realized by me. If I were in the place of you all, I
would perhaps say and do exactly what you are saying and doing.
Blessings from

BAPU
S ARDAR VALLABHBHAI P ATEL
1 AURANGZEB R OAD
NEW DELHI
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro— 2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine pp. 352-3

294. LETTER TO SITA GANDHI
ON THE TRAIN,

April 13, 1947
CHI. SITA,

I will be reaching Patna today. Come and join me as soon as
you can get relieved there. Do not worry about anything.
Blessings from

BAPU
C HI. S ITAKUMARI GANDHI
KUMARIKA MANDIR
BENARES HINDU UNIVERSITY P.O.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 4999

295. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
ON THE TRAIN TO P ATNA,

April 13, 1947
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

Manibhai is on the train. I could have a full talk with him only
on the train. You may send from my personal account, without

300

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

consulting me, any amount up to rupees one lakh which Manibhai
may ask for the institution at Uruli. The money will be used for
meeting the expenditure on construction of buildings as also for
current expenses. If he needs more, he will try to raise the money
from the Uruli village. It is Manibhai’s resolve not to seek any
financial help from outside Uruli. What we shall do if I live to go to
Uruli and see things for myself, is another question.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C. W. 2730. Courtesy: Manibhai B. Desai

296. LETTER TO BALKRISHNA BHAVE
ON THE TRAIN,

April 13, 1947
CHI. BALKRISHNA,

I had a long talk with Manibhai.1
I understand about Manu. The consideration of possible effect
of an act on others is not important in itself. It has only relative
validity. And if we pay exclusive attention to it, we can make no
progress. It is, of course, necessary to be sure that there is no trace of
hypocrisy or untruth or pride in the reformer. More than this I need
not say just now.
The burden of Uruli will be entirely on Manibhai and you. Of
course, Dr. Bhagwat, Dhirubhai2 and Gokhale are there. But they have
to begin from the beginning Even if they join, only the two of you
will be there to serve till your last breath. If there is temperamental
incompatibility among the workers or if they lack the qualities
required for running institution, it is bound to fail. About you, too, I
have one condition, namely, regarding your health. Manibhai will tell
you all about that.
He will also tell you about my limitations at present. I see no
possibility of being able to free myself from them in the immediate
future.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 821. Courtesy: Balkrishna Bhave
1
2

Vide “Note on Gramsudhar Trust, Uruli-Kanchan”, 13-4-1947
Dhirubhai Dikshit

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

301

297. LETTER TO R. B. GREGG
ON WAY TO P ATNA, [ ON] TRAIN,

April 13, 1947
MY DEAR GREGG,

I have your letter. I see that for you there is no bed of roses. If
is all thorns. I suppose if we read aright the lesson that a ‘bed of
roses’ teaches us, we should do well, for there will be no discontent
nor quarrel with anybody. I wish that when this letter reaches you
Radha 1 will have made complete recovery. Of course you are coming
back to India as soon as both of you are in a position to do so.
Here things are in the melting-pot. Brother is fighting brother
when the English protest that they are withdrawing from India in
fourteen months’ time. I am straining every nerve to prevent this
wanton bloodshed. Behind this waste of blood there are unmistakable
signs of a sincere desire for peace. The result of this fight between
God and Satan is a certainty. Let us all stake everything for the
certainty.
Love to both.
BAPU
From a photostat: C. W. 4522. Courtesy: Richard B. Gregg

298. A LETTER
April 13, 1947
. . . talked to me about your temper, and also your nonconformist conduct. A member of an organization who acts
independently of it ultimately harms it. An organization can exist,
sustain itself and progress only when the workers observe its rules to
the letter and work within its framework.
You have ample capability. You have a fair knowledge of nature
cure. But all your good qualities will be in vain if you lack the quality
of fitting yourself in an institution . . . 2
1

[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 196
1 Addressee’s wife; Gandhii had given her this name and the addressee
“Govind”.
2
Omissions as in the source

302

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

299. A LETTER1
ON THE TRAIN

April 13, 1947
CHI. . . . ,

. . . . is with me. I have a lot to write. Let us see when I shall be
able to do so. Right now I am submerged in work.
. . . came and met me. I had a frank talk with him. I am not
convinced. There is some untruth somewhere. But if you feel satisfied
you can ignore my view.
I am still thinking about nature cure. My views tend to become
stronger. The Uruli Trust should be independent and separate. It
should include the whole programme of village uplift together with
nature cure. I would like . . . to be associated with the Trust. It may
not be necessary to trouble Nargisbehn2 . She may join if she wants to.
The development of Uruli should be along distinctive lines. The limit
of its expenditure has been fixed. It is decided to accept outside help
to the extent of Rs. 1 lakh, and that, through me. If anything more is
needed, it should be provided by the people of Uruli. Or we may
curtail our activities. Foreign equipment, etc., cannot be permitted.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 196-7

300. A LETTER
April 13, 1947
I have no doubt that the poor should never be robbed.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 197

1
2

Omissions in the letter are as in the source.
Nargis Captain, Dadabhoy Naoroji’s grand-daughter

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

303

301. LETTER TO REGISTRAR, VISHVABHARATI
ON WAY TO P ATNA,

April 13, 1947
SIR,

Received your letter dated 24th March. I humbly accept the
honour which the Senate has decided to confer upon me.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
R EGISTRAR, V ISHVABHARATI
P.O. S HANTINIKETAN
DT. B IRBHUM (BENGAL)
From a copy of the Bengali: C. W. 10621. Courtesy: Vishvabharati,
Shantiniketan.

302. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
[On or after April 13, 1947]1
CHI MANILAL,

I am dictating this letter in reply to yours of March 23. Sushila
and you are faced with a difficult problem. Shanti having left, Sushila
will now have to think where she should stay. You have been very
considerate. If you can really do without Sushila I think it would be
well for her to remain here. She and Sita will be meeting me in a few
days at Patna. I will know more then.
Dadoo and Naicker met me in Delhi2 . But it was just a courtesy
call. We could have no talk. However, they have promised to call
again.
It is getting very hot in Patna. I am able to cope with the burden
of work by snatching a little sleep every two hours. I have stopped
touring for the present. I will resume it if necessary.
The task here is of course very difficult. It is never easy to
change people’s settled ways and make them see their own errors. The
task has become all the more difficult in the present situation.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 4998
1

Evidently the letter was written after Gandhiji arrived at Patna on April 13,

1947.
2

On April 11, 1947; vide “Talk with Y. M. Dadoo and G. M. Naicker”,
11-4-1947

304

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

303. TELEGRAM TO LORD MOUNTBATTEN
P ATNA,

April 14, 1947
H. E. VICEROY
JUST RECEIVED MESSAGE1 .
MANY THANKS.
I HAD COMPARATIVELY
QUIET JOURNEY.
AM OF OPINION PRESIDENT CONGRESS
SHOULD
ALSO
SIGN.
YOU
SHOULD
KNOW
REASON FOR
EXCLUSION
PRESIDENT
CONGRESS.
HOWEVER
I LEAVE FINAL DECISION YOU
AND PANDITJI. 2

GANDHI
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, p. 246

304. LETTER TO DENIS HAYES CROFTON
P ATNA,

April 14, 1947
DEAR MR. CROFTON,

Many thanks for your offer. But it would be perhaps quicker if
you will kindly send the enclosed message1 by wire.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, p. 246

305. A LETTER
April 14, 1947
I returned here yesterday evening and read again your letter of
March 12, 1947. I have an impression that I have already written
1 Which read : “Mr Jinnah is perfectly ready to sign statement deploring acts
of violence, etc., which you signed before you left Delhi provided that your and his
signatures are the only ones that appear on the document. As you mentioned that you
thought Mr. Kripalani’s signature might also be added, though I gathered that you did
not make this a stipulation, I am not issuing statement until I hear from you. Pandit
Nehru is agreeable to leaving matter to my discretion, but I feel I must have your
views. Unless statement bears you signature alone Mr. Jinnah will not sign. May I
therefore appeal to you to agree. Please reply urgently.”
2 The addressee wired in reply : “I am glad to inform you that Pandit Nehru also
agreed to leave the decision to me. I consider it so vital that the appeal should issue
that I thought it best that is should go out over the signatures only of yourself and
Mr. Jinnah.“
3
The addressee, Secretary to the Governor of Bihar, who was going to Delhi
by plane had offered to take Gandhiji’s reply to the Viceroy; vide the preceding item.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

305

something to you. Or have I omitted to write? If your insistence on
certain policies had raised you high and if it is now pulling you down,
you should take it that basically your insistence was obstinacy and that
you had not at all risen high. There are some big men who hold this
view. They think that the teaching of non-violence has proved
disastrous. They believe that the way of the spinning-wheel would
only take us back to the medieval ages. They think the same of village
industries and Nayee Talim. Could it not be that there was something
basically wrong with me which led me to have a misguided view of
things all through? However, my views are the same as they have,
always been.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 198

306. A LETTER
April 14, 1947
We shall be able to meet in thought when we have achieved
identity of thought and when our thinking has become absolutely
pure. When that happens we shall have conquered even death. Such a
state cannot be attained without sacrifice and effort. Let us at least
have an ideal. God will one day grant us the strength to attain the
ideal.
[From Hindi]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 198

307. A LETTER
April 14, 1947
It is futile to argue in terms of ifs and buts. It is wrong to say
that it would have been better if such and such a thing had been done
in such and such a way. And this particularly applies to one who
claims to be guided by God. Only a person whose heart is pure can
claim to be guided by God. I try my best to keep my heart pure.
Hence I bring God into the picture.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 198

306

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

308. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING1
P ATNA,

April 14, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

You maintained good silence during the prayer. Kindly remain
as peaceful till I finish speaking. In the first place I must tell you
about my journey. Things went on smoothly right from Delhi so that
I could sleep comfortably throughout the night. Even though a big
crowd had gathered at Kanpur the people were peaceful. I was fast
asleep and did not know about the gathering. It was all very peaceful
till I reached the Bihar border, but with my entry into Bihar the
disturbances began. This was so at least in my view. I can sleep even
during the day if only people would let me. I had work to do and I
went on doing it. I would ask the Biharis not to behave in the manner
they did. There is a limit even to love. It serves no purpose going
beyond a limit. Love should not be expressed in such a way as to
upset the other person.
I had gone to Delhi to meet the Viceroy. I discussed with him
many things. He seems to be a man of honest intentions. He kept
repeating that he was the last Viceroy and that he would be in office
only till 30th June next year. But this does not mean that he has
nothing to do till then. He is preparing for his departure. It is my
impression that he is keen on going, whether or not we continue to
fight among ourselves. The British have ruled us for more than a
century. They have given us education, but have we learnt only to
quarrel? On the one hand our independence is approching and on the
other we continue to fight among ourselves. A good deal of
discussions were held in Delhi. Panditji, Rajaji, Vallabhbhai and all
others are trying to think of ways and means to consolidate our
independence which we are about to attain. They are making efforts
so that there may be peace and calm in the country and the defects of
foreign rule may be removed.
People ask me why I did not go to the Punjab. All I can say in
reply is that I can neither go nor refrain from going anywhere at
somebody’s bidding. For this I need a call from within, in other
words, the inner voice. There were quite a few people who said that I
should go and as many advised to the contrary. I listened to both the
views. But then my inner voice told me that my work lay in Bihar and
Noakhali. “Better is death”, it is said, “in the discharge of one’s
1

Held at the Bankipur Maidan

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

307

duty, another’s duty is fraught with danger.” The Gita says that one’s
duty, however small, is better than another’s, however great. I felt that
I should come here, and so I consulted the Viceroy, Panditji and other
leaders. This does not mean that I shall never go to the Punjab. I shall
go there when I feel I should.
I had said at Noakhali that I would either do or die. Maybe I will
die, not in Noakhali but in Bihar, or, I might die not even in Bihar but
in the Punjab. It would be just as well if I succeed in Noakhali, for it
would have its good effect all round. If the Hindus and the Muslims
of Bihar tell me that my work here is over and that I should leave, then
I shall go to Noakhali. Those Muslims who are writing abusive letters
to me should be able to say that although the Hindus have misbehaved
they would not do so any more. If these Muslims feel reassured, they
would certainly be able to say so. Let the Hindus of Noakhali also say
the same thing. When I was in Delhi, the Muslims of Bihar were asking
me why I did not go to Bihar. It pained me that they did not say that
they had restored brotherly relations with the Hindus and I need not
go to Bihar. And now, what about Noakhali? Suhrawardy Saheb says
that because Gandhi released to the Press so many telegrams it
probably led to the communal explosion in Calcutta. What Satis Babu
has written makes everything clear. It is another matter if the charges
are false and cannot be proved. But if they are true, it will be known to
everyone. What is the point in hiding the guilt? It would be better if
the newspapers publish the outrages committed by both Hindus and
Muslims. People should know who has committed what crime. This
will show what is the truth and what is the untruth and the poison will
come to the surface. Just now people only make guesses while the
poison works within. Suhrawardy Saheb says that his officers give him
such reports. This is not a good practice. This is what the British too
used to say. They also used to believe their officers’ reports that all
was well. The officers in Bihar and Bengal have given similar reports,
but they are not reliable. Satis Babu and Suhrawardy Saheb are old
friends. Satis Babu used to go round with him during the disturbances
in Calcutta. Whatever he says is only after proper investigation. It is
not right to say that he gives wrong information. He gives full details
of arson and looting. It is futile to say that these are lies. Because
Noakhali and came here to serve the Muslims I have a right to go on a
fast. When I was in Bengal I had said that I would undertake a fast
unto death if the riots in Bihar did not stop.1 I have a similar right [to
1

308

Vide “Blessings to Syed Mehbob”, 14-3-1947

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

fast] on behalf of the Hindus of Noakhali. But it is not easy to
undertake a genuine fast. I do not mean that I am going to undertake
a fast right from today. It will please me very much if the reports sent
to me about Noakhali are proved exaggerated and Suhrawardy Saheb
in right in saying that the Hindus have not suffered any loss. But what
would happen to me if the fear proves will-founded and something
happens to the Hindus who have stayed on on the assurance from
Satis Babu and Haran Babu? I have told everyone that I would go to
Noakhali, so I shall have to do something. Surely I cannot take poison
nor hang or shoot myself. I can end my life only by fasting.
Suhrawardy Saheb says the Hindus are in a minority in Bengal but the
difference in the numbers of the Hindus and the Muslims is very
small. The proportion may be 55 to 45 per cent. The Hindus of West
Bengal have decided that Bengal should be divided. If I were in
Suhrawardy Saheb’s place I would have gone to the Hindus and asked
them not to have any fears. I would have asked them what their
trouble was. Why do the Hindus want separation? Let him satisfy
them. You may have Pakistan or Hindustan, but it is wrong if the
Hindus say that they would force the Muslims to stay on. And if the
Muslims say that they would achieve their goal by resorting to force I
would say that they would not get an inch of land from us. I would
tell them they could turn the whole of India into Pakistan by
persuading us and converting us to their view. I had said the same
thing in Delhi. But what can we do in a situation as at present? Shall
we also resort to violence? No, we shall lay down our lives, but we shall
not let them have their way by force.
Bengal entered its New Year yesterday. India has a number of
New Year days. I expect a day will come when the whole of India will
observe the same New Year Day. By the grace of God may the
Bengali New Year bring peace and comfort to the whole of Bengal. In
the coming New Year the Hindus should learn new things. They
should learn to die. They should learn to die not while engaged in
plunder and arson but while pursuing dharma and serving others, for
service of man is service unto God. Let all Bengalis learn this. The
Muslims do not follows the Bengali year now. At one time they used
to follow it. But even if only the Hindus of Bengal learn to follow the
new path from the New Year, I would say it would be for the benefit
of all and they to would stand to gain by it.
[From Urdu]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—III, pp. 5-8

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

309

309. TALK WITH MUSLIM LEAGUE MEMBERS
April 14, 1947
I firmly believe that if only the British quit India, we would
almost be united. Why cannot the Muslim League see that the first
thing for all is to end India’s slavery? We may talk about partition
after that. Either the Muslims regard India as their home or they do
not. If they do, then this senseless massacre of innocent people should
stop, the British should be made to quit and our own Government set
up. We can then settle the question of partition by mutual persuasion
or fight it out amongst ourselves, if necessary. But I do not understand
why thousands of innocent people are being killed treacherously. And
if the Muslims do not regard India as their home, the question of
Pakistan does not arise.
The Muslim League friends replied that they also condemned such killings.
Bapu said:

Then you should issue a statement to that effect on behalf of the
local Muslim League and write to Jinnah Saheb. That would be true
service rendered to the Muslim League, and thus you will not
subjected to unwarranted suspicion.1
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 200-1

310. LETTER TO A TEACHER2
April 15, 1947
Students must not be given corporal punishment. But there
should be such a rapport between the teacher and the taught that if the
teacher punishes himself in some way the children, because of their
affection for him, should feel sorry, their hearts should melt and they
should change for the better. I am not talking in the air. This has been
my personal experience. Mothers also can reform their children in the
same way. In South Africa I had looked after Hindu, Muslim and
Parsi boys and girls. During those days I remember having only once
beaten a pupil.1 But it was my experience that my non-violent method
was more successful. If the children have affection for their teacher
1 After the members of the League had left, Gandhiji remarked that, in spite of
their assurances, he was afraid nothing would come out of it.
2 The addressee, a believer in non-violence, had posed the problem of
reforming some of the difficult students without corporal punishment.
1 Vide “an Autobiography”

310

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

they are bound to feel sorry when they find the teacher suffering on
their account. That would soften them. But if in spite of that there is a
difficult pupil, we should non-co-operate with him. But that is another
method. The former is the better method.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 202-3

311. TALK WITH MANU GANDHI
ANDHI C AMP, P ATNA,

April 15, 1947
Socialism is a term of the modern age but the concept of
socialism is not a new discovery. Lord Krishna preaches the same
doctrine in the Gita. One need have in one’s possession only what one
requires. It means that all men are created by God and therefore
entitled to an equal share of food, clothing and housing. If does not
require huge organizations for the realization of this ideal. Any
individual can set about to realize it. First of all in order to translate
this ideal into our lives we should minimize our needs, keeping in
mind the poorest of the poor in India. One should earn just enough to
support oneself and one’s family. To have a bank balance would thus
be incompatible with this ideal. And whatever is earned should be
earned with the utmost honesty. Strict restraint has to be kept over
small matters in our lives. Even if a single individual enforces this
ideal in his life, he is bound to influence others. Wealthy people
should act as trustees of their wealth. But if they are robbed of this
wealth through violent means, it would not be in the interest of the
country. This is known as communism. Moreover, by adopting violent
means we would be depriving society of capable individuals.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 201-2

312. TALK WITH SHAH NAWAZ KHAN 1
GANDHI CAMP PATNA ,

April 15, 1947
I have high hopes of you. I have to convert you into a perfect
non-violent soldier with the sole weapon of non-violence. You were
1

During the morning walk

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

311

decorated with the rank of Colonel while serving under Netaji. I wish
to make you a Colonel of non-violence. If you qualify to receive this
honour, I shall have no doubt about the establishment of communal
unity. Win over everyone with love. You should learn spinning.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 203

313. A TALK
GANDHI CAMP PATNA ,

April 15, 1947
There is a highly sensitive balance in science for weighing
minute particles of dust and even a hair can be weighed by it. We
should have a similar balance that would indicate even a hair-like
minute slip in the observance of truth and non-violence. We have to
put ourselves to this test and pass it. It does not therefore behove a
man of non-violence to imagine anything about another person.
There is no reason to believe that anyone who criticises us must be
against us. For example, if misunderstanding crops up between two
friends or brothers, they do not cease to be brothers or friends. There
are many instances like this. For example, water is two parts hydrogen
and one part oxygen. Still we should experiment both ways by
separating the elements and integrating them again, and if as a result
we get water only then our inference about water will be regarded as
correct. Similarly, in our everyday life on many occasions what
appears clear as daylight may turn out to be an illusion. We decidedly
violate truth and non-violence if we draw an inference without making
proper enquiries. Having taken the vow of truth and non-violence we
have to be extremely cautious and alert at every moment. I meet Rajas
and Maharajas with due respect and welcome them, in spite of my
knowledge of their numerous shortcomings. They are themselves not
responsible for them, it has become their nature owing to the
circumstances. We can change them only through love and then alone
will they accept us as their friends; thus on several occasions they were
ready on their own for atonement.
You know that Deenabandhu Andrews used to be treated with
discourtesy by Government officials. But in spite of that he continued
to visit them off and on with the result that some of them came to

312

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

regret their conduct. Only if I succeed in my experiment in truth and
non-violence here amongst you can I go to the Punjab and Sind and
then I am bound to achieve success everywhere. Therefore one who
has embraced non-violence should always be vigilant and constantly
examine himself.
Pointing to the figurine of three monkeys Gandhiji said:

This guru of mine always teaches me never to see evil in others.
That is why it has its eyes closed. The other one has closed its ears
because one should hear no evil of others. [The third one] has closed
its mouth because one should neither speak evil of others nor utter a
single word which might hurt anyone.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 205-6

314. TALK WITH SYED JAFAR IMAM1
April 15, 1947
Gandhiji told him that if there was an order that the League volunteers should
leave the camp, they should do so, otherwise it would be very difficult for him to
plead for them with the Government.
JAFAR IMAM: We bow before your affection. The Government wants to remove
the League from the camp in order to destroy its influence amongst the refugees. That
would render the refugees helpless and force them to go back under pressure of
Government threat. We feel that to attempt to weaken our organization in this
fashion is not proper.
Gandhiji assured him that no one could destroy the influence of the League that
way. He had even declared that he would gladly have Jinnah as the first President of
free India. He had no quarrel with the League though it regarded him as its enemy. Such
things only amused him. He related how in Delhi a Muslim League leader had openly
declared him to be an enemy of the Muslims, but the wife of this gentleman with her
sister came and had a friendly and cordial talk with him the next day. If he was sincere,
he added, others were bound to understand him one day. They had fallen on evil days
but he had full faith in God.
GANDHIJI: Then

let us meet again and discuss the whole affair.

JAFAR IMAM : We are all going to Delhi and will not be back till the 20th
1 President, Bihar Muslim League. He explained to Gandhiji that they were not
obstructing the rehabilitation work in the interest of the masses, that the
Government had ordered all the refugees to go back to their villages, otherwise their
rations would be stopped. The Magistrate would be going that day to get the order
executed and if no settlement was arrived at, his volunteers would court arrest.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

313

April.
GANDHIJI: Then

depute somebody who can act on your behalf.

JAFAR IMAM: There will be nobody here. You kindly get the order stayed till

the 20th. When we are back we shall discuss the matter with you and arrive at a
decision.
GANDHIJI: I shall talk the matter over with the Ministers, and
understand their point of view. If after talking to them I feel that your
volunteers should leave, will they do so?
JAFAR IMAM : We pray that you don’t go there. If somebody misbehaves, if
would be very painful to us. We would not like you to be disobeyed.

One of Gandhiji’s secretaries intervened at this stage and explained that the
Government order only for the time being was that the volunteers would not get
Government rations or be allowed to sleep there. The order applied equally to all
volunteers and was not directed against any particular community or organization.
JAFAR IMAM : Night is the only time when women and children require

protection.
GANDHIJI: Suppose I or any of my representatives goes and
sleeps there, would it not serve the purpose?
JAFAR IMAM : We do not want you to take this trouble upon yourself at this
age. We would only request you to get this order stayed till the 20th. That would
prevent many unnecessary complications.

Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, pp. 323-4

315. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
P ATNA,

April 15, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

While I was in Delhi I had received many letters from Bihar,
some containing abuses, some in praise and few expressing doubt
whether I would at all return to finish the work in Bihar or whether I
had forgotten all about Bihar. The doubt expressed has no
foundation. He who follows his own dharma commits no mistake.
Praise is wholly unnecessary for him; dharma for him is a duty. One
must return a hundredfold what one receives.
We must put up with the abuses hurled at us. They do not affect
me. Do or Die is my motto and I must lay down my life doing my
work wherever it might be. Some persons have accused me of leaving
Noakhali and coming to Bihar not at the request of a Hindu but at the
314

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

behest of a Muslim so that the Muslims may do what they like in
Noakhali. But you know I have come here at the invitation of Dr.
Mahmud. He is the son-in-law of the late Mazhar-ul-haq and is an
able person. He has rendered great service to the Congress and has
been a member of the Congress Working Committee. I knew his
father-in-law Mr. Mazhar-ul-Haq even before I had heard of Rajendra
Babu or Brijkishore Babu. He was my fellow-student in England. I
had come to Bihar at the instance of Rajkumar Shukla and my prior
acquaintance with Mazhar-ul-Haq proved to be a great advantage. I
have known Dr. Mahmud since the days when there was no HinduMuslim tension of the sort which has now developed. I have come
here at his invitation for he is an old friend of mine. According to me,
by summoning me here Dr. Mahmud has done good both to the
Hindus and Muslims. Bihar after all is my land, it has made me. My
coming here is not a new thing. I have worked here and have become
attached to it. My attachment to it is as pure as to a mother. It is true I
have come here at the instance of Muslims but it is sheer folly to say
that Muslims are devils and have drawn me away from Noakhali to do
what they please there. How is it possible for Dr. Mahmud, who has
done so much work and whose father-in-law has served the country so
well, to do any such thing? Are all the Muslims in the world bad?
Muslims also may say that all the Hindus are bad. So long as there is
even one good man in the world the world belongs to the good. If
everyone turns evil, the world will go to Satan. But Satan has no real
existence. In fact Satan is a name or evil. On reflection we will realize
that even if there is one good man the world will go on as a result of
his noble endeavour.
I stay in Dr. Mahmud’s house and all the persons in my party
are treated as members of his family. Mr Muztuwa, Dr. Mahmud’s
secretary, takes great care to make us feel at home. Both Dr. Mahmud
and Qaiyum are your ministers. Are they good for nothing? If you
recognize that they are not true servants of the Congress you may
remove them but they have been chosen by Hindu ministers.
Ministries can be formed without Muslims being included if no honest
Muslim is available: but it would be dishonesty not to have them when
honest Muslims are available. Our good lies in taking all good men
along with us. The Muslim League people who met me also say that
non-League Muslims are not their enemies. The Bihar Muslim League
President, Jafar Imam, is in fact a good friend of Dr. Mahmud.
Badshah Khan is also a Muslim but he is a fakir. Khudai Khidmatgars

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

315

are also Muslims but they have given complete protection to the
Hindus though the Hindus there are fewer even than the Muslims
here.
People may write to me what they like but this you must
understand, that whatever may be the deterioration in the situation in
the Punjab, Bengal and Sind, Hinduism will be saved if Bihar at any
rate follows the right path. Even if the Muslims in the Punjab, Bengal
and Sind harm the Hindus there, and if Bihar shows true courage in
protecting and comforting Muslims and their children, Bihar will have
raised India in the estimation of the world.
To protect the minorities is not to appease them. This I expect
from Bihar by right of service and because of its people’s deep
devotion to Rama. I have been constantly on the move but the doctors
have advised me not to tour in this heat; they want me to go to a
cooler place during summer, but I shall tour as long as my health
permits. The tours will have to be curtailed. A lot of work remains to
be done in Patna. I do not want to leave in a hurry.
I have many more things to tell you. But since these things must
be properly explained I shall try to tell them tomorrow or some other
day. 1
[From Hindi]
Bihar Samachar, 17-4-1947

316. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
P ATNA,

April 16, 1947
CHI. LILI,

I am happy that you are with Sushila.
You did well to let me know your ideas. I do not approve of
them. But where is the time to explain why? Moreover, your ideas are
fleeting. You do give vent to your feelings. There is no harm in your
doing this before me. But behave like a grown-up before others.
Since you wish to keep nothing secret, I don’t mark your letters
as confidential. I apply the rule strictly to Sushila’s letters.
Write to me regularly.
I hope you understand that it is for your own good that I have
1 Gandhiji’s speeches at prayer meetings were published by the Bihar
Government in Bihar Samachar, a daily bulletin, for distribution in the villages.

316

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

forbidden you to come here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9607. Also C. W. 6579. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

317. A TALK1
P ATNA,

April 16, 1947
The way to true repentance lies in making a firm resolve not to
soil one’s hand with evil in future. If ever again you happen to
commit a wrong you should not sleep over your confession. If is
human to err. Therefore one is bound to commit an error, but that in
itself is not a very grave matter. The danger lies in hiding that error.
When a person resorts to untruth to hide his error he commits another
folly. If one continues to make mistakes one after another, it can be
very harmful. If there is an abscess in the body, one can press it and
remove the pus. But if the poison is not removed and it spreads in the
body it may result in death. The same in true of a person who
commits a sin but does not confess it. A sinner may commit many sins
but if at the last moment there is sincere repentance, God forgives
him. One should pray for the well-being not only of human beings
but of all creatures, which also are the creation of God. And the only
way to attain this strength is to meditate upon God morning and
evening. The prayer for the welfare of all includes our welfare as well.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 209-10

318. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
April 16, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

I can only tell you this today. While I was in Delhi I met the
Viceroy a number of times. I also met him just before coming here.
He showed me an appeal 1 which he wanted me to sign. I told him I
2
1

To a person who had confessed his guilt
Vide “A Joint Appeal”, 12-4-1947

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

317

could do so with the consent of Pandit Nehru and the Congress
President. Quaid-e-Azam Jinnah was also to sign it. The purport of the
appeal was that we are both in agreement that the recent acts of
lawlessness and violence have brought the utmost disgrace to the fair
name of India and the greatest misery to innocent people and
unleashed a reign of terror everywhere. We are not to consider who
were the aggressors and who the victims. We denounce for all time the
use of force to achieve political ends and we call upon all the
communities of India, to whatever persuasion they may belong, not
only to refrain from all acts of violence and disorder but also to avoid
both in speech and writing any word which might be construed as an
incitement to such acts.
To obtain my signature on such an appeal is not of very great
significance, for I have all along been saying the same thing and will
go on repeating it. But it is significant that the Quaid-e-Azam has also
signed it. Everyone should now take care that riots do not take place.
Though they break out even now we have now a right to expect that
the riots will not occur in future. The Muslim League people are also
here. They can assure me that my work has been completed and that I
could now return and resume my work. My signature was not
necessary at all, for I represent nobody. I am your servant because I
have served Bihar. It is for you to tell me that having committed a sin
once your will not repeat it. You may ask me why Pandit Nehru and
Kripalani did not sign the appeal. I do not want to go into this matter
but you must realize the significance of my signature. It will be very
bad if you now kill any Muslim. It should not be that you applaud me
and kill innocent people. Such applause would be my undoing. How
long would you applaud me?
I had said the other day1 that I had a right to undertake a fast on
behalf of Bihar but after coming here I have earned a similar right in
case of Noakhali also. It is a different matter if I do not go to
Noakhali or don’t exercise my right. But the Hindus and Muslims of
Noakhali must know that I have got that right and I may sacrifice my
life for them. I have also received an anonymous telegram which says
that if I have to go on a fast I should do so immediately. But I do not
act at other people’s bidding. I shall undertake a fast when my inner
voice prompts me to do so, for the inner voice is the voice of God. I
have signed the Viceroy’s appeal. The implication of my signature is
that I shall be responsible if Hindu-Muslim riots break out anywhere
in India. I have no power, no army, I have only my life which I can
sacrifice. I do not represent the Hindus. I claim that all religions are
equal. You just heard in the prayer about equality of religions, which
1

318

Vide “Speech at Prayer Meeting”, 14-4-1947

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

means all religions are equal and I shall have to atone for the crimes
committed by the people irrespective of their religions. I have taken a
tremendous responsibility on my shoulders. You should realize my
responsibility; Hindus and Muslims should live like brothers for ever.
I can make a similar claim on behalf of Shri Jinnah also. Today he
speaks for the Muslims alone but there was a time when he was
regarded as a representative of the whole country. He was a
Congressman and had a high position in the Congress. He had put up
a brave fight against the Governor of Bombay single handed and the
latter had to yield.2 The Jinnah Hall in Bombay stands as a memorial
to his good name. He can speak for everyone even today because the
appeal is addressed to all the communities irrespective of their faiths.
I would also appeal to the Press to refrain from publishing
reports which would incite one against another. A great burden has
fallen both upon Shri Jinnah’s shoulders and mine, since the appeal
has been signed only by the two of us. Had the appeal been signed by
25 persons the burden would have been less. It is now the duty of
every Hindu and Muslim to realize this and explain it to others.
The Viceroy has taken a very good step; we must thank him for
it. But it would have been much better had Shri Jinnah and I drafted
the appeal jointly and signed it. It would then have been a great thing.
But the Viceroy who is an outsider had to initiate it. How good it
would be if we agreed to act upon it ! How great would India’s
reputation be ! Let us bear no more ill-will against each other nor hurt
others by any thought, word or deed of ours. Lest the world should
look down upon us we should not profess one thing and practise
another. We should admit our mistake and decide not to lose our
heads again.
My understanding of the situation is that the Congress and the
League should together open a new chapter. It would have been
excellent if they could have arrived at an agreement without the
intervention of a third party. However, I hope there would be no
enmity or misunderstanding between the Congress and the League
even if they were brought together through the good offices of the
Viceroy.
[From Hindi]
Bihar Samachar, 18-4-1947
1 Presumably the reference is to the anti-Willingdon demonstrations held to
protest against the Governor’s provocative statements regarding the Home Rule
League leaders at the Bombay provincial War Conference on June 10, 1918 Vide
“Speech at Public Meeting, Bombay”, 16-6-1918

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

319

319. TALK WITH WOMEN WORKERS
GANDHI CAMP PATNA ,

April 17, 1947
You should have faith in yourselves and in God and thus build
up your self-confidence and courage. Everyone frightens the timid.
Therefore if you continue to be timid you will not be able to make
any use of the strength with which God has blessed you, the strength t
cultivate courage in oneself. In order to utilize your strength you have
to realize the power inherent in you.
God only knows who invented the word abala 1 for the women
of India. To call them abala is to condemn the inherent strength of
women; in my view it is an insult to them. If we peruse the history of
the Rajput, Mughal or Mahabharata period of our country we shall
come across marvellous instances of bravery shown by women. They
not only exhibited their bravery through arms, but by building up
their moral courage they developed immense strength. If women
resolve to bring glory to the nation, within a few months they can
totally change the face of the country because the spiritual
background of an Aryan woman is totally different from that of the
women of other countries.
We hear reports, not only from Bihar or Noakhali, but from
everywhere about goondas having molested or abducted women. I
feel terribly upset hearing such sorry tales. I wonder why our women
have become so timid. Their glory has been diminishing and for this
you women are yourselves responsible. You should have such
boundless faith in God, as Draupadi and Sita had. You should get rid
of the distinctions of Hindu, Mussalman, Parsi or Jew. Follow the
religion which appeals to you. Who are the persons who violate the
honour of women? Are they not your brother, father or son? After all
they are all our countrymen, aren’t they? You should restrain your
menfolk from committing such atrocities and warn them that if they
violated any Muslim woman it would be tantamount to violating your
honour, because she is after all your sister. But today even women
have stopped thinking on these lines. Instead, some women take pride
in their son, brother, father or husband killing or molesting other
women. I have seen a number of such cases. But remember that those
1

320

Weak, helpless

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

who are dishonouring other women today will treat you in the same
way tomorrow. As a result even a brother and sister might be forced to
follow immoral ways. As I see it, this will be the outcome of the
massacre that is going on. I do not wish to live to witness thing. I
would plead with you not to become an instrument in dragging
India’s ancient culture into the mire. You are only twelve or fifteen
but you are all workers. If you can carry my voice, I would like to
convey my anguish to every woman in the country.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 214-6

320. TALK WITH CONGRESS WORKERS 1
GANDHI CAMP PATNA ,

April 17, 1947
Only this morning I poured out my anguish before some sisters.
I did not expect that you also would be the cause of similar pain. It is
a bad habit with us that whenever we call a meeting to discuss some
work, we start indulging in personal recrimination, lose our tempers
and thus waste our time. It seems there is a growing inconsistency
between the public and private life of a Congress worker. The result is
that goondaism, lack of discipline and carelessness are increasing day
by day. As preparations are afoot for transferring the Government
into our hands, our responsibility is also increasing. We must get rid
of anger, intolerance, etc., otherwise we will not be able to stand on
our own. Not only this, we might be caught up in a bigger bondage. I
want a swaraj in which the millions of illiterates in our country will
realize its benefits. You have to cultivate the strength to achieve that.
The government [under swaraj] should be such that people may
clearly see the distinction between the arbitrary and autocratic British
rule and the democratic government run on non-violent lines. I am an
optimist. I maintain that once the reins of Government are transferred
to us we will realize our responsibilities and all the artificial barriers
existing at present will vanish.
My faith in non-violence and truth is being strengthened all the
more in spite of the increasing number of atom bombs. I have not a
1
The workers who had called on Gandhiji in the afternoon started accusing one
another. Gandhiji listened to them for some time but when things went our of hand,
he gave them a piece of his mind.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

321

shadow of doubt that there is no power superior to the power of truth
and non-violence in the world. See what a great difference there is
between the two: one is moral and spiritual force, and is motivated by
infinite soul-force; the other is a product of physical and artificial
power, which is perishable. The soul is imperishable. This doctrine is
not my invention; it is a doctrine enunciated in our Vedas and
Shastras. When soul-force awakens, it becomes irresistible and
conquers the world. This power is inherent in every human being. But
one can succeed only if one tries to realize this ideal in each and every
act in one’s life without being affected in the least by praise or
censure.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 216-7

321. MESSAGE TO MAHARAJA OF DARBHANGA
April 17, 1947
Be a servant to your subjects. And spend no more than you
need from the State exchequer, considering yourself a trustee of the
entire property.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 217

322. TALK WITH REPRESENTATIVES OF JAMIAT- ULULEMA
P ATNA,

April 17, 1947
BAPU: Instead of being anxious to find out how many Muslims
were killed by the Hindus, your primary duty is to find out how many
Hindus the Muslims had killed and where and persuaded them not to
commit such atrocities. Similarly you should go among the Hindus
and serve them. You should assure them that all Muslims are not bad
and thus remove their fear. If the nationalist Muslims of India did just
this at the risk of their lives they would raise Muslims and Islam to
greater heights and Khuda would shower His choicest blessings on
them. But today who listens to me? If out of the four crore Muslims I
could have only a hundred such brothers and sisters, they would be

322

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

able to render great service to the forty crore Hindus and Muslims of
India. Now, tell me, is any one of you prepared to take up this
mission?
What our brethren are doing is, of course, wrong but we never support them.
BAPU: It is our sorrow that we always think in terms of mine and
thine. You should realize that a wrong committed by even a child of
India is a wrong committed by each one of us. Till we imbibe this
spirit, we shall not have peace.

[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 217-8

323. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
April 17, 1947
Explaining why he was late by 15 minutes Gandhiji said that he wanted the
prayers to start 15 minutes later than scheduled because it was the time for namaz for
the Muslims. He also said that even if the Muslims came in small numbers we must
keep their namaz in mind.

We should respect all religions. In our prayer we also recite
some portions from the Koran. I have heard that some boys ridicule
the recitations from the Koran. We should not ridicule anybody’s
religion. If we do so, other people will ridicule our religion, too, and
that would lead to strife. I cannot give up reciting from the Koran in
the course of my prayer. The whole prayer consists of recitations
from several scriptures. Not a single item can be omitted from it even
if it comes to discontinuing the whole prayer. Even if you do not
participate in the prayer, you must listen to it carefully, and even if
you do not understand it you should not ridicule it.
After the prayer Gandhiji said:
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

Some Muslims came to see me today and they gave me some
painful new. They said that in P ATNA city the Hindus have done
considerable harm to the Muslims, and are still not repenting what
they have done, and that they continue to threaten the Muslims. I had
a similar report about Bihar-Sharif. There too the Hindus bully and
threaten the Muslims in the same way and the Muslims are afraid to
return. It is our duty to rebuild the houses that have been destroyed.
How can this be done when the Hindus harass even those who go there

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

323

as labourers? What would the Muslims do? This is a very complicated
question. I was surprised to hear this and felt ashamed. At one time
the Hindus and the Muslims of Bihar used to live as brothers. But now
they treat each other as enemies. I have received complaints from
other places too. I could not go to Monghyr and Bihar-Sharif, but I
hope to go to other places. I have grown weak and it would be more
difficult on account of the heat. There was time when I did not bother
about these things. But I have now grown old. You can spare me that
trouble if you wish. If you can carry my voice up to Bihar-Sharif, tell
the Hindus there that they should not go on troubling an old man like
me. My work can become easier if you wish. Some Muslims have
demanded rifle licences. Personally, I would not like anyone to have a
rifle. A rifle may be used for hunting. But we have no danger of tigers
here Today rifles are used by the Hindus and the Muslims to kill or
intimidate each other. If proper arrangements are made, rifles and
guns would not be needed at all. It is said in the Bible that we should
look forward to an age when no swords would be needed and the
material used for making them could be diverted to make other useful
things. It is said in the Ramayana That when Rama was asked how he
would fight against Ravana, Rama said that he would have the armour
of purity and his noble endeavour would stand by him. In my view
the Muslims should not even think that they can have protection
against the assaults from the Hindus if they possessed rifles. The
Hindus should tell them that so long as they are alive no harm will
come to the Muslims. They must tell the Muslims that their sisters and
daughters are as much their own sisters and daughters and they will
protect them.
Some big Hindu landlords came to see me today. Then some
Muslim landlords also met me. I do not wish to convey to you
everything they said to me. I shall speak about these things to the
Ministers who can do something about them. Even so, I do wish to tell
you a few things. I have come to know that the peasants and the
workers have started thinking that they have become the rulers, and
therefore they are free to abuse the landlords. They think that they
can withhold the revenue and deprive the landlords of their due. This
would do them no good. The peasants are harming their own interests.
Even if they kill a few landlords, how is it going to help? The peasants
and workers are too many and the landlords too few. What is the point
of riding roughshod over the landlords and wanting to finish them
off? It is said that the peasants are doing everything in the name of

324

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

disobedience to law. But disobedience to law as taught by me does not
involve ruining and annihilating others. I am leaving aside the
Muslims just now. We cannot win freedom in this way. We must be
friendly to all. Granting that the landlords had been plundering the
peasants till now, it does not mean that now that we have achieved
power we should plunder the landlords. Will the peasants remove the
landlords and occupy their positions? We should do everything in a
proper manner. If we follow violent methods we shall only spread
violence. And, when that happens you yourself would turn round and
ask if that was what Ramarajya meant. You would say that you were
comfortable during the British rule and have no peace now. I should
like to tell all the peasants and workers that they should not create
chaotic conditions. Let them not think that they are the sole masters of
the country. They should not think that just because the railways
belong to us they can pull the chain and bring the trains to a halt
wherever they want, or that they can travel without tickets and rob
others. This is not a proper thing to do; it is rowdyism by which we
can achieve nothing. We therefore must do everything possible to stop
such things. Let us go to those who indulge in such activities and
persuade them to desist from such actions and explain to them that no
one stands to gain by acting in this manner.
[From Hindi]
Bihar Samachar, 19-4-1947

324. LETTER TO BALVANTSINHA1
P ATNA,

Evening, April 17, 1947
CHI. BALVANTSINHA,

I have your letter. I understand what you write about Hoshiari. I
am enclosing a letter for her, too.1 In my opinion there is no need for
you to go to Khurja. Your duty lies in staying on at Sevagram and
doing whatever you can. Gajraj3 , I hope, is doing well. I am pleased to
1 The addressee, being unhappy about the deteriorating condition of the
Ashram dairy and not having enough work to keep him occupied, had requested
Gandhiji to come and set right the affairs at Sevagram or permit him to go back and
work in the villages near Khurja.
1
The letter is not available.
2
Hoshiari’s son

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL 1947

325

know that Krishnachandra is making good progress under Vinobaji.
What can I say about the dairy? It is almost impossible for me to go to
Sevagram in the near future. It will be possible only if I can free
myself from Bihar and Noakhali. It is very hot here. Let us see how
God keeps me.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 1974

325. LETTER TO H. S. SUHRAWARDY
P ATNA,

April 18, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

Many thanks for your letter of the 9th instant.
I cannot endorse your insinuations. I have never subscribed to
hush-hush policy. Publication of false news I hold to be a crime
against humanity. If true news gives rise to conflagration there is
something wrong with society and its leaders.1
I began publishing the wires received from Noakhali when I
despaired of getting a hearing from you and when living outside
Noakhali I felt helpless. Probably my presence in Noakhali would
have made no difference in the situation. Only I would have derived
the satisfaction from the fact that I was in Noakhali sharing the trials
of its people and my co-workers.
It surprises me that you should discount the statements of facts
supplied by Shri Satis Chandra Das Gupta. The culprits may never be
traced but the facts of arson and loot could not be disputed, nor could
the community from which the culprits are derived by disputed. The
rulers whether democrats or autocrats—whether foreign or
indigenous—forfeit the right to rule when they fail to deal properly
with crimes even when the culprits are able to defy detection.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: G. N. 9074

3

The addressee had banned throughout Bengal publication of the wires
exchanged between Gandhiji, Satis Chandra Das Gupta, Haranchandra GhoshChowdhary, and himself, on the ground that their publication would havse brought
about “another conflagration”. Vide “Telegram to H. S. Suhrawardy”, 7-4-1947

326

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

326. LETTER TO PREMA KANTAK
April 18, 1947
. . . 1 Even to avoid causing pain to dear ones, one cannot stop
what one considers a yajna. But where one is both the doer and the
deed one must realize the difficulty of a neutral attitude and accept
any step that may be taken against one. My ideas are what they have
always been. In fact I am becoming more and more convinced about
them. I see nothing wrong about them. . . .2
From a copy of the Gujarati: G. N. 10460. Also C. W. 6898. Courtesy: Prema
Kantak

327. LETTER TO M. S. ANEY
April 18, 1947
DEAR BAPUJI ANEY 2 ,

Only today I am able to attend to your letter of March 16. I
read your loving message for the New Year3 the moment it arrived, but
had no opportunity to write a reply. I could have certainly found time
but I do not keep all my papers with me while travelling. The result
has been that the letter remained unanswered till today.
The situation here is quite serious. People have ceased to trust
each other. In such a situation any message from a person like me can
only be a cry in the wilderness. I take consolation by reminding
myself of the last words which Vyasa had put in the mouth of
Dharmaraj4 and which you had once conveyed to me.
Is it possible to do anything there 5 ? Did the Asian Conference
have any impact?
[From Hindi]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 221-2
1

Omissions are as in the source.
Ibid
3
Madhav Shrihari Aney (1880-1968); member, Congress Working
Committee, 1924-25 and 1931-34, acting President of Congress, 1933; member,
Central Legislative Assembly; India’s High Commissioner in Ceylon, 1943-47;
Governor of Bihar, 1948-52
4
According to the Saka calendar Chaitra Sud 1, which fell on March 23
5
Yudhishthira, the eldest of the five Pandava brothers
6
In Ceylon
2

V0L. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

327

328. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
April 18, 1947
CHI. JAWAHARLAL,

Who will now sign the cheques concerning the Jallianwala Bagh1
since Malaviyaji2 is no more? As the Sardar happens to be there,
consult him and let me know.
Blessing from
BAPU

[From Hindi]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 222

329. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
P ATNA,

April 18, 1947
CHI. SATIS BABU,

Arunanshu Babu writes to you, so I do not write. He is thinking
of going over there; it is good.
You have to preserve your health for the sake of service. Write
to me if you feel you need my presence there. I think if I can achieve
anything here it will surely have its effect there. But there are
difficulties everywhere.
Blessing from
BAPU

[PS.]
What shall I write about Taralika becoming a widow? Out of our
selfishness we regard death as a cause for grief. I have written to
Taralika.3 I hope Hemprabha is calm.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 9075

1
2
3

328

Jallianwala Bagh Memorial Trust
Madan Mohan Malaviya
The letter is not available.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

330. LETTER TO MOHAMMED HUSAIN KHAN
P ATNA,

April 18, 1947
BHAI SAHEB,

Maulana Saheb gave me your letter of April on the very day I
left Delhi. I read it after reaching P ATNA. I read all the enclosures too.
The whole matter is painful. I am doing whatever I can. The result is
in the hands of God.
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

331. TALK WITH SYED MAHMUD AND OTHERS
GANDHI CAMP PATNA ,

April 18, 1947
You should make it a point to meet the Muslim families whether
they belong to the Muslim League or not, take them into your
confidence, talk to them and win over their hearts. Rioters are not the
only murderers. Bigger culprits are those who instigate these riots and
are still regarded as honourable men. If we can reform these
gentlemen, the poor people will be prevented from acting as their
instruments, since they commit the misdeeds merely from greed for
money and not because they relish them. It would be a great
achievement if you could win the confidence of these Muslims. You
should also have a talk with Ansari.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 220

V0L. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

329

332. TALK WITH MANU GANDHI

1

GANDHI CAMP PATNA ,

April 18, 1947
I will have no regrets if the money invested in these machines is
reduced to dust. True India lies in its seven lakh villages. Do you
know that big cities like London have exploited India and the big
cities of India in turn have exploited its villages? That is how palatial
mansions have come up in big cities and villages have become
impoverished. I want to infuse new life into these villages. I do not say
that all the mills in cities should be demolished. But we should be
vigilant and start afresh wherever we happen to make a mistake. We
should stop exploiting the villages and should closely examine the
injustice done to the villages and strengthen their economic structure.
I have no doubt that we have gained much strength through
truth and non-violence. The country would never have risen high had
it not adopted the weapon of non-violence. But truth has not been
followed by the people to the extent it ought to have been. I am often
surprised to see so much untruth prevailing in the country. No doubt
our practice of non-violence is far from perfect, but if we had not
adopted it, we would not have progressed so much. Our goal is truth
and truth can be reached only through the observance of nonviolence. Non-violence is only a means. Speaking truth is a habit I
have formed right from my childhood, but I had to make efforts to
practise non-violence. If we adopt non-violence, truth can be followed
along with it. Sometimes good comes out of evil, but that is divine
dispensation. Human experience is that as good comes out of good,
only evil comes out of evil. Retaliation cannot end violence. If
humanity is to rise above violence there is no alternative but to adopt
non-violence. Love alone can conquer hatred. The principles of truth
and non-violence are nothing new; they have been in existence from
the beginning of creation. After 60 years’ experience my faith in
these ideals is growing stronger day by day.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 220-1

1
Manu Gandhi asked Gandhiji what would be the fate of factories in big cities
if people adopted village industries, following his advice.

330

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

333. TALK WITH ZAMINDARS
GANDHI CAMP PATNA ,

April 18, 1947
Zamindars or capitalists will not be able to survive if they
continue to suppress peasants and labourers. Now you should behave
towards them not as their masters but as partners and friends, and act
as their trustees; then alone can you survive. For a long time during
the British regime you have been exploiting the labourers and
peasants. Therefore I advise you in your own interest that if you do
not see the writing on the wall, it will be difficult for you to adjust.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 222

334. TALK WITH PEASANT AND LABOUR LEADERS
GANDHI CAMP PATNA ,

April 18, 1947
If labourers aim at asserting their rights, they can do so only by
co-operating with zamindars, not by harassing or killing them.
Abolition of zamindari is not a very difficult task. We have only a
handful of zamindars here. But if you take the law into your own
hands you will be striking at the root of your own interest. You can
place your complaints before the Government but you cannot take the
law into your hands and resort to violence. One who seeks to destroy
others invites one’s own doom. There are numerous such instances.
The best known is that of the Yadavas1 . If you work whole-heartedly
during your working hours, your employers will have to pay you
your proper wages. But if you harass them in any manner you will not
earn anybody’s sympathy. I told the zamindars who were here a little
while ago what I thought right and I tell you the same. It is my nature.
I cannot act otherwise. I must tell you what I think proper.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 222-3
1
Shri Krishna’s kinsmen, who destroyed themselves in internecine fighting.
Vide also the following item.

V0L. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

331

335. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
P ATNA,

April 18, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

Some landlords came to me yesterday and brought several
complaints, one of which was that the peasants and labourers were out
to ruin them. In this connection I said yesterday that this was a
dangerous thing to do. By indulging in such acts they are only
harming themselves. Abolition of zamindari is but a small matter.
When the zamindars and the peasants develop cordial relations the
former need not be eliminated. The landlords are like a drop in the
ocean. It is no great problem to dispense with them. But this should
not be done by force. The Mahabharata tells us that the Yadavas were
themselves annihilated when they were out to destroy others. They
took to drinking, and fighting among themselves destroyed each
other. Similarly, if the peasants and labourers will think of destroying
others, they will themselves be ruined.
A gentleman told me today that I was not fully aware of the
situation. He said that the peasants and labourers did not try to force
their way, still the landlords oppressed them. I told him that if the
landlords and the capitalists still exploited the peasants and labourers,
they were harming their own interests. They would never survive if
they behaved like masters. They could if they agreed to act as trustees.
If I am a millionaire, I should spend my wealth on those who
help me in my accumulation of the millions. It is only when I do this
that I can be called a trustee. But I cannot be called a trustee if I
appropriate Rs. 1,000 and indulge in luxuries when I actually need
only Rs. 5 or Rs. 50. I can also take money for the upkeep of my
children as for my own. But I cannot give my children shares worth 5
or 10 lakhs so that they own four or five cars and live in grand style.
You should not find fault with me if I say that I cannot manage on Rs.
5, that I cannot take sattu 1 and need fruit and milk in order to be able
to work. You should let me have the money to meet my needs. But I
should not take even a pice more than I need. I had demonstrated in
Champaran how labourers could assert their rights. The indigo
planters virtually ruled the place. They had their separate colonies and
1

332

Flour of roasted grain

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the poor were not supposed to cross their way. But I saw that their rule
came to an end. People did not set fire to the houses of the planters to
end their rule. Nor did they kill the planters. They only refused to
work. Today also the proprietors must march with the times.
Some visitors told me today that a punitive tax had been
imposed on them. A punitive tax is one imposed by the Government
on the people of an entire village or neighbourhood. Suppose we
harbour three goondas in our village and they misbehave with and kill
the Muslim women and children of the village, the Government
cannot arrest us because we are respectable people. Even if we are
arrested the courts will acquit us for want of evidence. The rowdies
also cannot be arrested because we harbour them. And so, the
Government imposes a collective fine on the whole village by way of
punishment. If some of us confess the crime and undertake to pay the
tax, then the Government would not impose the tax on the innocent.
But we do not reveal the names of those guilty of arson and assaults.
The visitors also complained that the persons responsible for the
riots, who had attacked the Muslims and ruined them, were still at
large and moving about freely. They said they could not return to
their villages. I had said at Jahanabad that those who had caused the
ruin and destruction should themselves help rebuild the houses they
had destroyed. We should go to the Muslims and confess our guilt
and ask for their forgiveness. We must reassure them that we would
now protect them and act as their guards. We should ask them to
return to their homes and should offer to meet their expenses. The
people of the villages where the punitive tax has not been imposed
should also inform the Government of their willingness to pay the tax.
They should tell the Government that they would rebuild the houses
of the Muslims and ask the Government to provide wood and bricks at
the villagers’ cost. But the Government should not sell it at a profit.
This will be Bihar’s atonement for the grave crime committed by it
and it will thereby rise to great heights.
The villages harbouring such culprits should confess their
crimes and seek forgiveness. For the Government can arrest a few
criminals, but how can it apprehend a mob of thousands mounting an
attack? If this is done the Muslims also would not clamour for
retaliation against the Hindus. And if some miscreants create trouble,
the other Muslims would stop them. Even the Muslim League
supporters would stop them because Jinnah Saheb has expressed his

V0L. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

333

view against the use of force in politics. Newspapermen should also
refrain from inciting one community against the other. They can
render great help in maintaining peace if they so desire.
If we honestly admit our crimes we would be reducing the
burden on the Government. Just now the Government is
overburdened. The present Government is a people’s government. If
the Ministers are not leaders but servants, they must inspire such
confidence among the Muslims that they would testify that they would
never leave Bihar, that they had nothing to fear here and that they
would continue to live here of their own will.
There is a third point which, God willing, I shall talk about
tomorrow.
[From Hindi]
Bihar Samachar, 20-4-1947

336. TALK WITH MUSLIM STUDENTS
GANDHI CAMP PATNA ,

April 18, 1947
I greatly value the magnificent role played by students in the
fight for freedom. But today this enthusiasm has taken a different
direction. If you make a firm resolve you can be of great help in my
effort for Hindu-Muslim unity. Befriend the Hindu students. Treat
their sisters as your own sisters. If they are in difficulty, go and share
their misfortune and build your character. You are the architects of
the future India. It was from amongst people like you that prophets
like Mohammed Saheb came. Why need I go further? There are living
examples right in front of your eyes, aren’t there? The non-violent
and truthabiding workers like the Maulana1 and Khan Saheb2 are from
amongst you. Now they have grown old. You have therefore to
develop the strength to shoulder the responsibility of running the
government when it is transferred to you. And to acquire this strength
you should have strength of character.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 223-4

1
2

334

Abul Kalam Azad
Abdul Ghaffar Khan

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

337. TELEGRAM TO KAINARAYAM
[On or after April 18, 1947] 1
INTERVENTION DIFFICULT
WITHOUT
KNOWLEDGE
PARTICULARS.
ADVISE
SUSPENSION PENDING INFORMATION. SECRETARY SHOULD
RESIGN
UNDER
CIRCUMSTANCES
MENTIONED.

GANDHI
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

338. LETTER TO E. STANLEY JONES
P ATNA,

April 19, 1947
DEAR DR. JONES,

I got your letter this morning and am so glad to learn that you
were able to visit Sabarmati and renew your recollections. I remember
well how you missed a looking glass in the room that was alloted to
you, and how philosophically you took the absence of the article
considered so useful in the West.
When the British troops, that powerful emblem of British rule, is
removed from India that very fact will be a triumph, besides which
every other pageant that can be conceived, must fade into
insignificance.
I have no notion when I shall be able to leave my present haunt.
I fully appreciate your prayerful sympathy in the task before me.
Please pass on my love to Mrs. Stanley Jones whenever you
write to her. I don’t know whether she is in India at present or whether
she is in U.S.A. Please tell her that I remember the promise I hastily
and lightly made to her that I will, when I got the necessary leisure,
write out a dialogue for the use of children in the many schools she
was conducting. I never got the leisure. But what is more true is that
the task was much more difficult than I had imagined and to this day I
do not know how I could deal with the delicate subject of the evil
1
This was in reply to the addressee’s telegram of April 18, 1947 which read:
“Shaligram Shukla with wife fast unto death Harijan temple entry since sixteenth
before temple owned by District Congress Secretary and Assembly member. Two
others followed. Pray intervention.”

V0L. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

335

habits of children.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: C. W. 11344. Courtesy: Mrs. Eunice Jones Mathews

339. LETTER TO JIVANJI D. DESAI
P ATNA,

April 19, 1947
CHI. JIVANJI,

There was a wire from the Sardar today stating that neither you
nor anyone else in our circle has any objection to my writing in
Harijan. I should like to interpret this to mean that you want me to
write. If that is true, there should be no restrictions whatsoever.1 I do
not regard myself the proprietor of Harijan. You people there are the
real proprietors, for it is you who keep it running with your
conscientious work. I am fully aware that whatever right I have is
purely moral.
I am getting ready to start writing, but please do not hesitate to
let me have your views.
When should an article reach you at the latest? Pyarelal is far
away from me, and so it is I who will have to look after all this.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9976. Also C. W. 6950. Courtesy:
Jivanji D. Desai

340. TALK WITH WORKERS 2
GANDHI CAMP PATNA ,

April 19, 1947
We cannot fully enjoy the freedom of our country unless we
bring about a fundamental change in our education system.
Education should be imparted through the means of crafts. Today we
pass our examinations studying the text-books prescribed for us.
1
In February 1947 portions of Gandhiji’s prayer speeches in Noakhali,
referring to his experiment in brahmacharya, were not published in Harijan. Vide
“Letter to Vallabhbhai Patel”, 1/2-2-1947
2
Of the Hindustani Talimi Sangh, the All-India Village Industries Association
and the All-India Spinners’ Association.

336

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Instead of wasting time over those worthless books we should carry
out experiments. For example, we should study how to grow cotton
and make experiments in all the processes, right from cotton-growing
to weaving of cloth. And then we can find out the names of the
different varieties of cotton grown in various countries and also show
their samples to children. Knowledge of history, geography,
arithmetic and language can easily be imparted through this craft.
And thus we can get rid of the lethargy that has overtaken us and can
become industrious. If this craft is made compulsory in a large
number of schools, we can easily achieve our object. University
education does not serve much purpose. On the contrary it is harmful
because an educated young man then can think of nothing except
taking up a job. There are quite a few such young men who, to my
knowledge, are totally ignorant in spite of their education and are
unable to earn a single pice. On the other hand an illiterate artisan is
quite capable of earning at least Rs. 6070 a month. These collegeeducated young men without jobs are driven from pillar to post. They
do require, nonetheless, a minimum standard of clothing, shoes, etc.,
to suit their education. Thus parents first spend money on their
education and then spend as much again to keep up their ‘position’
even during their unemployment. Our students today are in such a
state of bankruptcy—and as a result the plight of the people is equally
miserable. In order to improve the lot of our people, therefore, it is
essential to launch a campaign for education through crafts. But such
changes cannot be brought about merely by making speeches or
issuing official circulars. No doubt they will help to some extent. But
if the leaders, i.e., those in power, were to devote regularly an hour or
so daily to some craft, it would have a tremendous impact. How was it
that a handful of Englishmen could keep us in bondage for so many
years? One of the reasons was that they introduced a system of
education that could produce only clerks.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 225-6

341. TALK WITH ENGLISHWOMEN 1
GANDHI CAMP PATNA ,

April 19, 1947
The foreign power will be withdrawn before long, but for me
real freedom will come only when we free ourselves of the domination
1

Two Englishwomen had come to see Gandhiji.

V0L. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

337

of Western education, Western culture and Western way of living
which have been ingrained in us, because this culture has made our
living expensive and artificial, both for men and for women.
Emancipation from this culture would mean real freedom for us.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 226-7

342. TALK WITH BIHAR MINISTERS
April 19, 1947
1. Ministers and Governors should, as far as possible, use
articles manufactured in India, have khadi alone to wear for
themselves and their family members and keep the wheel of nonviolence going and help the crores of poor earn their bread.
2. They should learn both the Nagari and Persian scripts,
abjure use of English among themselves and use Hindustani for all
public occasions. They should also encourage the use of provincial
languages. Hindustani should be their medium for all official
purposes and all their office orders and circulars should be issued in it
so that the enthusiasm to learn Hindustani grows and it may
automatically become the lingua franca of India.
3. They should be completely free from the taint of
untouchability, casteism, and nepotism. Those holding high positions
should be impartial towards all, whether the person be his own brother,
son or an ordinary citizen, be he an artisan or a labourer.
4. Their personal lives should be models of simplicity. They
should perform body-labour for at least an hour daily either in the
form of spinning or growing food or vegetables to help the country to
make good the food shortage.
5. They should not live in bungalows or have cars. They
should live in simple houses. They might make use of a motor-car but
sparingly, only for special reasons, such as going long distances.
Although the need for a motor-car will always be there it should be
used as sparingly as possible.
6. By living in one place or close to one another, Ministers,
their families and their staff would come into closer touch with one
another. This would ensure better co-ordination among them.
7. They and their family members should, as far as possible,
avoid the use of servants and do their own domestic chores.

338

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

8. The use of costly foreign furniture, sofa sets, almirahs,
glossy chairs, etc., should be avoided, particularly in view of the
prevailing conditions when, let alone carpets, crores of people do not
have enough to cover themselves.
9. The Ministers should be free from all vices and addictions.
If they set an example in plain living and high thinking, they
would need no bodyguards. I am sure people themselves would
provide all the security they might require instead of their having to
take security measures in the form of half a dozen policemen.
Ministers wedded to non-violence ought to feel embarrassed by such
arrangements. This would mean a lot of saving.
But who will heed my advice? Nevertheless I cannot remain
silent as I do not want to be an unprotesting witness to what is taking
place around me in the country today. It is up to the Bihar of Dr.
Rajendra Prasad to set an example in this regard.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 227-8

343. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
P ATNA,

April 19, 1947
I intended to talk to you about two letters that I have received.
One of the letters is written by a Bihari gentleman. He has mentioned
his name but not his address. He writes: “There is no doubt about
your being a great man. Everyone calls you Mahatma. And you are a
god because people worship you. Who would challenge you in
politics?” Poor Chanakya’s 1 spirit must be running from place to
place in fear ! Then he suggests that I should retire to the Himalayas.
He asks me, “What is the crime of the Biharis?” Again, if the Hindus
of Bihar have oppressed the Muslims, why don’t I look at the Punjab
where the Muslims are perpetrating so much tyranny? He says I am
turning the Hindus into cowards. The other letter is from a woman
from the Punjab, well known to me from her very young days. She
tells me that she had till now believed in my creed of non-violence but
1
Also known as Kautilya ; Prime Minister of Chandragupta Maurya and author
of Arthashastra, a treatise on politics

V0L. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

339

believes in it no longer. Her letter expresses her anguish. Then she
goes on to say that we need brave men today. Both these persons have
written with great consideration. Of course they are both angry. The
second chapter of the Gita says: “Wrath breeds stupefaction,
stupefaction leads to loss of memory, loss of memory ruins reason
and ruin of reason spells utter destruction.”1
Those who are possessed by anger would find even my plain
words harsh. It is said that women’s honour can be protected if their
menfolk are brave and always keep their swords drawn. But let me tell
you this is not true. Even if there are millions of brave men around,
strife persists in the world. Even if India’s 400 million men turn brave
nothing can be expected to happen, unless the women themselves
become brave. When the women become brave no one will dare raise
his eyes to them. You have seen how the people of Champaran
suffered hardships for a century because of the custom of tinkathia.
The indigo planters who ruled the province were not concerned about
them at all. But when the peasants and labourers fought non-violently
against their rule of terror, in six months their rule came to an end.
The people of Bihar do not have to go far. They can learn a lot from
Champaran.
Now, I too have signed the peace appeal along with Jinnah
Saheb. God alone knows what the result will be. What I am doing in
Bihar today is something which cannot be postponed or dismissed. I
am serving Bihar more this time than I did during the Champaran
days. I appeal to you to give up this madness and make genuine
atonement which will help Bihar raise the reputation of the whole
country and set an example to the world.
The meetings of the Charkha Sangh and the Talimi Sangh will
be held from today and will continue for the next four or five days.
Today was the first meeting of the Charkha Sangh. I want to tell you
something about khadi. The late Jamnalal Bajaj had started the khadi
work while I was still in prison. He had also set up the Khadi Board. In
the early days khadi was given primary importance in the Congress.
But later the parliamentary programme was given priority and the
constructive programme secondary importance. Khadi was made the
centre of the constructive programme. Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru called
1

340

II. 63

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

khadi “the livery of freedom” 1 . Our flag also carries the emblem of
the charkha. From the time the Congress evolved its flag I had been
saying that we would win swaraj with the help of the charkha. Today it
appears that the British rule over India would end more or less within
the next twelve months. The British soldiers will also leave the
country. The British could stay on in free India but as our friends, as
servants of India. Whether people accept it or not, khadi has
contributed greatly towards our free-dom. Had all the people truly
believed in khadi, every Indian would have been wearing khadi today,
and there would not have been a single textile mill in the country.
Khadi found a place in the Congress, but we did not give it the place
in our hearts we ought to have. Today the khadi work is progressing
very well and because of khadi several crores of rupees have gone to
poor men and women.
You must understand the place of khadi very well. Khadi is
widely used in Bihar. But if everyone had known the real significance
of khadi we would not have witnessed the madness that prevailed here.
People in the Punjab, Bengal, Bombay and Ahmedabad had fallen
victims to a similar madness. They are in the grip of such madness
even today. The hearts of those who wear khadi should be as spotless
as the khadi they wear. Had people sincerely adopted khadi they
would not have let themselves be swept away by such frenzy. Khadi
shows to what extent we are non-violent at heart, although God alone
knows what we are truly at heart. But we ourselves cannot know our
own hearts. He who does is the wise one. There is a saying in English
that he who knows himself knows all. This means that we do not know
ourselves.
Khadi is a symbol of non-violence. Hence, right from the time
khadi came into vogue I have been saying that khadi ought to spread
to the seven lakhs of villages of India. Once I was asked if khadi,
being a sacred thing, could be used by prostitutes. I said it could be.
Khadi is for wearing as food is for eating, whether by the pure or the
impure.
Those who wear khadi should never commit an impure act. You
might say that there would be barely half a dozen such individuals in
the country. That is why I say that everyone should wear khadi.
Today people wearing khadi caps are respected. They make their way
1

Vide “Letter to Vallabhbhai Patel”, 30-7-1937 & “Livery of Freedom”

V0L. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

341

into the assemblies and the Congress. Some people even deceive
others by wearing khadi. I have heard that in Bihar people wearing
khadi have even committed murders. Today we do not give khadi the
respect due to it. That is why such things have been happening.
Khadi is a symbol of non-violence. Man makes God in his own
image. Good makes man, no doubt; but man also makes God. They
God of the murderers prompts them to commit murders. We have
made great efforts to make khadi the symbol of non-violence. In spite
of my being a member of the Charkha Sangh, I must admit that even
though much work has been done to propagate khadi, much more
remains to be done.
[From Urdu]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—III, pp. 21-4

344. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
P ATNA,

April 20, 1947
CHI. AMRIT,

I have your letter. I am quite clear that Dr. Ambedkar’s 1
demands cannot be conceded. Please look up what is known as
Macdonald Award2 at the Round Table Conference which was born of
a wicked conspiracy against Indian nationalism. For the first time it
created a division amongst Hindus and Hindus while granting separate
electorates for the so-called scheduled classes. It was against this
vivisection of Hindu society that I had prophesied revolt.3 As a result
reservation of seats was very considerably increased and primary
elections were separated but the total separation was undone. In my
opinion this was the utmost that could be conceded to the separatist
tendency and the attempt to break up Hinduism. The opposition and
the influence of caste Hindus in joint electorates is in my opinion
nonsensical. Joint electorate means the influence of the party with
which the electorate becomes joined. Such evil as there is in joint
electorate can be obviated only by right type of education and
1

B. R. Ambedkar
Announced on August 17, 1932. Vide Vol. L, pp. 383-4.
3
Vide “Speech at Minorities Committee Meetting”, 13-11-1931 Gandhiji
went on fast against the Award on September 20, 1932 and broke it on September 26.
Vide
2

342

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

enlightenment. If Dr. Ambedkar’s objections were upheld for any
length of time, be it ever so little, it would undermine Hinduism. The
fear of boycott, therefore, should produce no consternation.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 3704. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6513

345. LETTER TO B. M. DAS
P ATNA,

April 20, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

I am surprised that you, an M.A. and Solicitor write a letter
without knowing full facts. They are all to be gleaned from written
records available to every student of modern political literature. I must
therefore be satisfied myself by saying that you should study that
literature and you will find that you will be unable to prove me guilty
under any of your many counts. Incidentally I may add that whatever
I am saying here to the Hindus I said unequivocally to the Muslims of
Noakhali. For your sake I hope that no newspaper has cared to
publish your very irresponsible letter. Why not write to me in Hindi
and in the absence thereof in Bengali?
B. M. DAS, M. A.
7 OLD P OST OFFICE S T.
C ALCUTTA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

346. REMARK TO MANU GANDHI
GANDHI CAMP PATNA ,

April 20, 1947
If there is some misunderstanding I expect you also to remove it
and bring about reconciliation.1 You have this ability in you and
should make use of it. Mahadev was like that. This is an ordinary
1
Two workers of the Talimi Sangh who had called on Gandhiji earlier had been
complaining against each other.

V0L. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

343

matter. Mahadev had an amazing capacity to reconcile the parties
even in serious matters. Pyarelal too can do that. But this quality
deserves to be cultivated particularly by women, for I have no doubt
that if women develop this quality, they can serve the nation through
the families or the communities to which they belong.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 231

347. TALK WITH WORKERS 1
GANDHI CAMP PATNA ,

April 20, 1947
I give more importance to cultural education than to knowledge
of the three R’s. Good cultural background should be evident from
the minutest detail of children’s daily behaviour—from the way they
sit, talk and dress, and so on.
I go a step further. In a poor country not a single pie should be
spent unnecessarily, otherwise no distinction would be felt between
our Government and the British Government.2 Even a foreign pin
should not be used in our offices. If we need pins we should use
Indian pins, or else do without them, i.e., we should stitch papers
together with needle and thread. This is only by way of an illustration.
I go even to the extent of saying that Ministers and Governors should
take a vow along with their oath of allegiance that they will insist on
only swadeshi goods being used for their personal and office
requirements.
But who listens to me today? Maybe I am growing old and
perhaps even senile. (Bapu laughed heartily.)
If I were the Chief Minister of Bihar, my first act would be to
make the wearing of khadi compulsory for all Government servants
and the people at large, not by purchasing it from the khadi shops but
by making it a rule that no ration-card holder would be entitled to
1

The Gujarati version in Biharni Komi Agman has been collated with the
account in Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase.
2
The workers had sought Gandhiji’s opinion regarding the use of the
A.I.V.I.A. products by the various Ministries.

344

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

draw his ration unless he span for half an hour daily.
It was clear to him, he said, that if they all learnt to spin and to weave, India
could not only become self-sufficient in the matter of cloth without dependence upon
mills but could even clothe the world. It was simple arithmetic. And if knowing all
that, they could not get even that much done, what were the Ministers good for and
what was their statecraft worth? He was afraid, they had developed the habit of making
simple things which admitted of very simple solutions unnecessarily difficult and
complicated. What they needed was not costly and elaborate machinery or highly paid
technicians and experts, but plain common sense, combined with the will to go down
to the masses, share their lives, think in their terms and win their confidence. They
should teach them by personal example how they could in the immediate present
provide themselves with what they so sorely needed but had hitherto lacked. The
masses would instinctively feel that the era of the common man had arrived.
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 231-2, and Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol.
II, p. 123

348. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
P ATNA,

April 20, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

Today again I shall talk to you about khadi. The second
meeting of the Charkha Sangh was held today. Had I been your Chief
Minister like Shri Babu and had I been in a position to have ministers
of my choice I would have told you plainly that you would get no
mill-cloth. I would have given you all facilities for the purpose. I
would have provided you cotton, spinning-wheels and all the other
things. I would have also arranged for the repair of the spinningwheels when they went wrong. And I would have told you that you
had to make your own clothing as also your own slivers and weave the
cloth as the Assamese women do. Assamese girls cannot find grooms
unless they learn weaving. But the weaving in Assam is very poor.
Assam grows a lot of cotton but it is not of good quality. However,
things are improving now. The Trustees of the Charkha Sangh are
very efficient and they are now introducing changes to improve the
weaving. If our country can make good progress in weaving, we
would be able to clothe the whole world because ours is a vast

V0L. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

345

country. In the past we used to import Japanese textiles in large
quantities. But now Japan is almost out of picture. Even Great Britain
does not produce enough cloth to meet the requirement of the whole
world. Just as we arrange to cook our own food at home we should
also do the same to meet our requirement of clothes. At one time it
used to be so in our country. It was so during the medieval period. We
often call it the dark age, but I do not agree. No doubt there were
some disgraceful practices prevalent then. But we cannot describe the
present age, either, as the age of truth. Today the black market thrives
throughout the world. We should not close our eyes to the remarkable
features of that age by calling it a dark age. Let us forget its bad
points and follow the good ones. Even today, if we start substituting
homemade roti by the biscuits manufactured in Britain or in India, we
are going to ruin our health. As in the case of food, we should stop
getting our clothing too from outside. Had I been in Shri Babu’s
place, I would put a stop to black markets. No accounts are kept for
the roti cooked in the house. The flour is made in the house and so
also the roti. In the same manner, we would provide a charkha to
everybody and there would be cloth for everybody. But no one is
going to make me a minister! I have tto address my words to those
who are already occupying the ministerial chairs. I would tell them
that no new textile mill should be set up in Bihar. The existing mills
should not be burnt down, but all the cloth produced by them should
be exported. In this way people all over the world would be happy
and would praise us for sending to them finished textile goods while
opting for handwoven material for ourselves. Thus we should earn as
much foreign exchange as possible. But if we let black-marketing
flourish even in this trade the result would be bad. Even now if the
people resolve to manage with a few clothes only and cut down their
requirement, something can be achieved. Today Bihar has been left
completely free. It means now the work has been decentralized. The
work of the Charkha Sangh in Bihar is now being looked after by
Lakshmi Babu and his colleagues who have been entrusted with the
entire Charkha Sangh work in the province. They may produce as
much cloth as they like. They may work with the help of Shri Babu
and his colleagues so that khadi is produced in the villages and
consumed locally.
You might ask what the people of Patna would have for

346

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

themselves. But the villagers can provide khadi for the citizens of
Patna too. But even if they do not you can produce your own khadi if
you wish. There are many schools and colleges here where boys and
girls go to study. The boys go to study the English language but
hardly achieve anything worth while. They may obtain the M.A. or
B.A. degrees, but most of them cannot write English. They just
manage to speak a little English, and consider themselves great. If all
the students learn spinning and weaving for an hour or two daily they
would be doing all the work themselves in a few days. If even those
who are not studying give an hour or two to khadi work while sitting
idle at home they can produce more khadi than they would need.
Khadi does not need coercion. If you do this work voluntarily, you
can produce khadi of every kind. The village people have been
exploited enough. The townspeople consume the cloth produced by
them. But I wish villagers to consume the cloth they produce. It
should be so even for the townspeople.
Everything that goes with the mills comes from outside; so
much so that even the spindle of the mill’s spinning-wheel is not
produced here. The textile engineers also come from outside. But all
the components of the charkha can be produced here. If khadi is
woven in the villages, every village can become selfsufficient and meet
its own requirements of food and clothing.
Bihar is now free from [the supervision of] the Charkha Sangh.
Lakshmi Babu will demonstrate how decentralization works. If he fails
I shall ask him if the people of Bihar are capable only of plunder and
massacre and can do nothin5g good.
[From Hindi]
Bihar Samachar, 21-4-1947

V0L. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

347

349. LETTER TO SUDHIR AND SHANTI GHOSH1
P ATNA,

April 21, 1947
CHI. SUDHIR AND SHANTI,2

I have had all your letters. The work in front of me leaves little
room for correspondence that is not absolutely necessary. I have little
to say to you. I have to listen to what you may have to say. You must
have seen all I had to do with the Viceroy. We have come to like one
another. Events will show of what he is made. He is certainly working
hard as behoves a naval man.
Both of you are on your trial there. I have no doubt you will
come out well through the ordeal. How is Shanti keeping in health?
What is she learning there?
My work is very difficult. I have no business to grumble. When
I approached it, I knew the difficulty. I suppose you are getting some
Indian papers.
Give my love to Agatha3 and other friends. I do hope Carl Heath
is better.
Love to you both.
BAPU4
S HRI S UDHIR GHOSH
INDIA HOUSE, A LDWYCH, W. 62
LONDON, S.W. 1
Sudhir Ghosh Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

1
A copy of this letter sent to the addressee carries the following postscript in
Gandhiji’s hand: “This is a copy of the letter that was posted to you yesterday
stupidly to the wrong address. Not wishing to run the risk of delay I had the text
copied out. The original was written in my own hand.”
Later the original letter was also received by the addresee.
2
The superscription is in the Devanagari script.
3
Agatha Harrison
4
The subscription is in the Devanagari script.

348

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Z350. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL GANDHI
P ATNA,

April 21, 1947
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,

Please do not worry about Manu in the least. Her mind has
improved considerably, but not to my satisfaction. I think her health
depends on her mind. She seems to be keeping back something, but I
have not been able to understand what. Perhaps she herself does not
understand. I think of her all the time. My hopes are very high. This
is enough for today.
Pyarelal is working hard in Noakhali. But we do not understand
why he has not written to anybody here. I see that Manu’s mind is
completely normal now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M. M. U./XXIV

351. LETTER TO MADALASA
P ATNA,

April 21, 1947
CHI. MADU,

I have your letter. Radhakisan1 and Jajuji are here. You know
there was a meeting of the Charkha Sangh.
Get rid of your unsteadiness and your stupidity. If you
submerge yourself in Shriman your own self will be revealed to you.
For you there is no other way but this. Have you understood this man
who signed a blank sheet for you?2
Blessings from

[From Gujarati]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, pp. 332-3

1

Radhakrishna Bajaj
The addressee’s husband, Shriman Narayan, had given her a signed blank
sheet, when she asked him for a reward, to be filled in by her at will.
2

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

349

352. A NOTE
GANDHI C AMP, P ATNA,

April 21, 1947
Saralabehn1 is the wife of a mill-owner but she has embraced
poverty for the sake of the country and that too not under any
pressure but voluntarily. It can be truly said of her that there is no
woman equal to her in India. She ought to be taken on the Board of
Trustees 2 because then alone the attitude of mill-owners will undergo
the change I desire. I know that my friends in the Charkha Sangh will
not agree with me. Saralabehn perhaps is the first woman among
Gujaratis who is rendering service silently. She is a good worker and
an equally efficient housewife. She is the wife of a millionaire but she
is the living image of simplicity and sacrifice.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 234

353. LETTER TO SARALADEVI A. SARABHAI
April 21, 1947
The day before yesterday the Board of Trustees discussed your
name. They were nearly unanimous that at a time when khadi was
under a cloud and when the khadi policy was obviously operating
against the mills, the inclusion of the wife of a textile king on the
Board was sure to cause an uproar. In spite of it the Board of Trustees
might have agreed to your appointment if I had insisted on it. I
refused to ask for a favour in this manner. The Trustees were happy. I
therefore withdrew your name. But my calculation in this case went
slightly awry. I have often of late noticed that my word does not carry
weight with my co-workers and colleagues as it once used to do. In a
way it pleases me. Maybe, I was stifling their reason before and it has
now found its freedom! Or, is my thinking out of tune with the times?
Be that as it may, I have fully opened my mind to you. Such is my
regard for your purity. What I expect of you is that you will continue
to take interest in developing the science of khadi as if you were
actually a trustee of the Spinners’ Association and belie the doubts
1
2

350

Wife of Ambalal Sarabhai
Of the A.I.S.A.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and fears of the sceptics by showing to them that the wife of a millowner can be as much a lover of khadi as the most ardent of khadi
workers.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 234-5

354. A LETTER
April 21, 1947
The kind of work which had to be done before attaining
independence was different and now that swaraj is on its way we need
the co-operation of each and every Indian to carry on the affairs of
the nation. For instance, Girijashankar Bajpai. You do know, don’t
you, how in 1942 he had circulated blatant lies regarding Ba’s death,
not to mention those about me. But now we ought to utilize his talents.
And it is being done. This is how organizations for the constructive
programme should function. It is essential that everyone should give
up past prejudices and contribute one’s mite in laying the foundation
of a strong country. That is why I wanted. . . 1 to be taken on the
Board of Trustees.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 236-7

355. A LETTER
April 21, 1947
The words “I have lost interest in everything” are not proper.
One who regularly recites Ramanama cannot say any such thing.
Where is happiness? Where is unhappiness? What is happiness? What is
unhappiness? Are you rendering service? I see no obligation for you
to go to Gujrat 2 . I would have gone but I was prevailed upon not to
go. I shall talk about it some other time. If I could fulfil my duty here,
it will certainly have an impact on Gujrat, rather, on the whole world.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 236
1
Omission as in the source. The reference is to Saralabehn Sarabhai; vide the
preceding item.
2
A district in the Punjab

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

351

356. A LETTER
April 21, 1947
Why were you worried by the young man’s vulgar words? If
you are a brave woman you will die before anyone molests you. We
are all prepared to die; that alone is our duty. You have the armour in
the form of Ramanama. How can you have any fear? . . . 1
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 236

357. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
P ATNA,

April 21, 1947
CHI. SATIS BABU,

I have your letter.
(1) It is necessary to make arrangements for rehabilitation, but
if the Government or the Muslims do nothing what can we do?
(2) What work can we possibly offer if the Government extends
no help?
(3) It is my firm belief that we will not get mill yarn. What little
[yarn] we might get will not serve our purpose. We should produce
hand-spun yarn. The weavers should spin themselves and so should
others.
(4) If all the detenus are released we should not bother about
bringing as action. It is outside our field.
(5) I read Abha’s letter. I attach no importance to it.
Dr. Mahmud has arrived there. Let us see what he does.
I am eager to go there. I am watching the situation here.
Will it be better if I write in English? I can also get Sailen to
write in Bengali. I shall do as you say.
What shall I write about Amiya?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 9076

1

352

Omission as in the source

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

358. LETTER TO SHALIGRAM SHUKLA
P ATNA,

April 21, 1947
BHAI SHUKLA,

What is this telegram?1 Do fasts have to be undertaken for such
things even now???
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

359. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING2
April 21, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

Today also I wish to speak to you about khadi. Its secret lies in
hand-spun yarn. Spinning used to be the occupation of women who
were regarded as slaves. Who would pay the poor souls the wage that
was their due? In the middle ages women were compelled to spin for a
mere pittance. Except in Assam, weaving everywhere was considered
to be man’s occupation. Weaving has survived even today, but if
hand-spinning is not revived weaving too is certain to die out in
course of time.
If every man and woman does not regard spinning as his or her
dharma, that is, does not do carding , or make slivers and spin himself
or herself, khadi is bound to die. I shall not call it khadi if a few wear
it by way of fashion. My definition of khadi is that it should replace
mill-cloth throughout India. I do not have the words to describe the
strength it is bound to generate.
This will remain but a dream if men do not spin by way of
atonement and the injustice done to women does not cease. The wages
payable to women for an hour’s spinning should be the same as are
paid to men. There should be no inequality in the wages paid to men
and women. The times have changed when man was regarded as
1

This was from Ananddas, Secretary, Raipur Ashram, informing Gandhiji
about the addressee’s fast for Harijans’ entry into a temple owned by a Congressman;
vide also “Speech at Prayer Meeting”,1-5-1947
2
It being Gandhiji’s silence day, his written speech was read out.
VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

353

woman’s master. That we do not admit this is a different matter. God
has made man and woman one complete whole. One must not lord
over the other. An endeavour is being made to establish this truth
through khadi.
Time will come when a mill-owner’s wife will herself become a
worker and a carding woman. Then there will be no need for millcloth. Women should prepare themselves to hasten the advent of such
a day.
[From Hindi]
Bihar Samachar, 24-4-1947

360. TALK WITH MANU GANDHI
GANDHI C AMP, P ATNA,

April 21, 1947
I am against machines just because they deprive men of their
employment and render them jobless. I oppose them not because they
are machines but because they create unemployment.
That boy will grow into a courageous, healthy and serviceminded boy, provided he gets a wholesome environment.1 His body as
well as his mind will develop in right proportion. He will be free of
any fraud or immorality. Staying in the village he will serve the
villagers and will be content to live on the subsistence provided by the
villagers. Through his service and the knowledge acquired by him he
will provide proper gui-dance to the people around him and thus train
more young men. I expect that a student trained under the Nayee
Talim would develop on these lines.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 228

361. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
P ATNA,

April 22, 1947
CHI. NIMU,

Sita and Sumi arrived last night. Sumi’s health seems to have
improved. She is enjoying herself and wants to stay for a few days. I
1

Manu Gandhi had asked how a boy would shape if he got training under the
Nayee Talim up to the age of 14-16 without going to any school.

354

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have laid down the condition that she could stay only if I was present
and it had the approval of you both. Sita shall be leaving for Akola
tomorrow.
Hope you are keeping good health.
I have no time to write more.
Blessings to you both from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

362. A LETTER1
GANDHI C AMP, P ATNA,

April 22, 1947
Excessive liberty leads to terrible consequences. Those who wish
to go in for a love-marriage may get engaged provided they have
their elders’ approval but should avoid any personal contact for a
least three years and should continue doing their respective work
during that period. I have no doubt that young men and women who
act on these lines are bound to be happy in life.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 239-40

363. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
P ATNA,

April 22, 1947
CHI. BRAJKISAN,

I have your two letters. My going there is not certain. Do not
believe the newspapers.
If I invite the Socialists there will be an outcry in the country. It
would be better the Jayaprakash sees me whenever necessary. The
whole situation is getting out of hand. No one knows how it can be
remedied. You should not worry. It will be God wishes.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I got the list.
1

The addressee wanted to marry a college mate of hers.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

355

From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 2502

364. LETTER TO GOVIND DAS
P ATNA,

April 22, 1947
BHAI` GOVINDDASJI,

I have your letter. Congratulations on getting a grandson. May
your grandson have a long life and may he become a true worker.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI GOVIND DAS
R AJA GOKULDAS MAHAL
JUBBULPORE, C.P.
From a photostat of the Hindi: C. W. 10422. Courtesy: Seth Govind Das

365. DISCUSSION AT HINDUSTANI TALIMI SANGH
MEETING
P ATNA,

April 22, 1947
ZAKIR HUSAIN 1 : In the morning session we heard the reports from the

provinces. The budget was sanctioned and the question of how much aid we should
seek from the Government was discussed.

The Government would be prepared to give us as
much as we ask for. But the very move to seek Government aid would
mean the end of Nayee Talim.
GANDHIJI:

ZAKIR HUSAIN: No, the question was only regarding the students’ fees. The

point under discussion was how many students should we admit. If we take more
students it will naturally help us in meeting the expenses but then we would be
ruining our cause.
GANDHIJI: Of course, that is obvious. We should take only as
many students as we want—not more. I have quite a few things to say
about the budget. I would like Ashadevi and Aryanayakum to sit and
discuss it with me and make whatever alterations they possibly can in
it. After three years nothing should be expected either from me or
1

356

President, Hindustani Talimi Sangh

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

from anyone else. If we fail to achieve this, Nayee Talim will not
work. If you want to make it self-supporting you should prepare you
budget accordingly. And if at the end of three years we do not
succeed we will have to declare our bankruptcy before the country.
We should not keep silent lest we lose the credit we have earned. True
credit lies in success.
ZAKIR HUSAIN : We have received a request from Madras 1 that the Talimi

Sangh should run a school there. The Government is prepared to bear its expenses.
They have asked for Ramachandran to take up the responsibility of conducting Nayee
Talim under the Ministry.
GANDHIJI: Ramachandran hasn’t come, has he? I shall have to
talk with him about this. As regards the school we should take up the
task only if we are capable of fulfilling it, other- wise we shall be
putting the Government in a fix. Today we have our ministries and
crores of rupees have come into our hands. We can spend the amount
any way we like. If our own conscience does not question it, perhaps
no one else would. This can work for a year or two. But in the absence
of any concrete achievement it is not going to last long. I would,
therefore, advise you to accept this responsibility only if you feel you
are competent enough to shoulder, it. If we are not, we ought to admit
that we can teach [ Nayee Talim] only at our centre and that the
provinces are beyond our reach. Instructors from Madras are welcome
to come and have a look at the work going on at Sevagram.
Our system of education has three aspects. It leads to the
development of the mind, the body and the soul. The ordinary system
cares only for the development of the mind. Our system, I claim,
purifies the mind and is conducive to its harmonious development.
Moreover, it provides nourishment to the soul as well. What does it
matter if we do not impart religious instruction? Religious teaching—
that again from books—is not indispensable for the soul. Through
practice we shall teach the boys the noble principles from all the
religions.
Nayee Talim is not confined to teaching spinning and sweeping.
Though indispensable, these in themselves are not sufficient for our
purpose. We shall have to give them up unless they promote the
development of the soul. Here I am engaged in other tasks. But Nayee
Talim has never been out of my mind.
1

From Avinashilingam, Education Minister

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

357

The charkha occupied an important place much before Nayee
Talim was even conceived of. I knew almost nothing about the
charkha when I first referred to it in South Africa in 1908. It was only
later on that I learnt more about it. Afterwards came the days of civil
disobedience and the Ali Brothers, and the charkha continued to hold
an important place. Yesterday in my prayer meeting 1 I had drawn
before you the picture of khadi as I visualize it. Khadi of my
conception is that which can take the place of all mill-cloth. I would
not insist on including khadi in Nayee Talim, if you could suggest
some other means for the eradication of poverty. In that case I would
gladly admit my mistake. I had discussed this point with Vinoba,
Krishnadas2 and Narandas. To me it is a simple calculation. I feel that
if everyone spins for an hour daily all would be able to have the cloth
required. If, however, it would require six hours a day from
everybody to achieve this, khadi was bound to perish. For people have
to do other work also. They have to produce food and do some
intellectual work as well. Moreover, Nayee Talim would lose its
meaning if one was ever to toil like a bullock under it. An hour spent
in spinning is an hour of self-development for the spinner. When
Saiyidain Saheb3 said that at least in the post-basic stage the
mechanical processes in the mills would have to be taught, I could not
accept it. I hold that if khadi is sound as a foundation for basic
education, it ought to be further developed during the post-basic
stage. Yesterday Dev Prakash showed me an article which he had
written on the takli and the broom. He has done some work under
Nayee Talim. If all that he writes is true, a lot of knowledge—
including the knowledge of higher engineering—can be gained
through Nayee Talim. But only when we have assimilated all this
knowledge can we impart it to others. We have not evolved the science
of these essential crafts. The British cloth mills evolved out of our takli
and loom. They planned the mills because they wanted to exploit us.
We do not want to exploit anyone. We do not, therefore, need mills,
but we must build up the science of the takli and the loom. If India
were to copy Europe in this matter, it would mean destruction for
India and the world. Of course, if you are in favour of mills then let us
talk about them.
ZAKIR HUSAIN : [The difficulty is that] the boys who graduate from our
1

Vide “Speech at Prayer Meeting”, 21-4-1947
Son of Chhaganlal Gandhi
3
Khwaja Ghulam Saiyidain
2

358

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

schools look to the mills for employment.
GANDHIJI: The boys that will come out of the school of my
conception will not look to the mills for employment. As a matter of
fact mill-cloth should not sell side by side with khadi. Our mills may
export their manufactures. In Lancashire you do not get the cloth
manufactured there. The whole of it is exported. But perhaps our
mills may not be able to sell their product for long even in foreign
markets.
You are right when you say that you cannot help it if the whole
atmosphere around is surcharged with the idea of mill-cloth, and even
our own ministers are interested in opening mills. The way for us is to
die in living up to our faith. If we believe in the truth of khadi we
must spread it and convince the ministers that we are doing the right
thing and will continue to do so. We are not going to accept defeat.
The Congress created the Talimi Sangh but never took any interest in
it. Similarly the Congress was instrumental in setting up the Charkha
Sangh but it never adopted its programme. Who cares for these
institutions today? When Congressmen had a little money and some
experience they paid some attention to the constructive work. No
doubt, they did some constructive work too. Today, however, the
entire Government has come into their hands. They have not yet
digested the power it has brought. They will take time to do so.
ZAKIR HUSAIN: We are faced with a great difficulty. To run a school under

Nayee Talim means bringing about a new order. Moreover, all the power is in the
hands of the ministers who do not fully share our views.

No doubt about it. After all schools in the cities
cannot be created out of nothing.
GANDHIJI:

ZAKIR HUSAIN : Either you help to co-ordinate the

activities of the

Government and the Sangh or let us be on our own.
GANDHIJI: I

confess I no longer command the same influence as
I used to . I do not blame the Government for this. They have
inherited a set machinery which they have to work. If I had been a
minister, perhaps, I too would have acted similarly. Still, I am talking
things over with Jawaharlalji and others. I have to talk and convince
them about the work of the Talimi Sangh, have’nt I? I pray to God
either to call me to Himself or endow my words with such power that
they are able to carry conviction to the people and their
representatives.
VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

359

You should give up Nayee Talim if you do not believe that it is
full of potentialities. Some people come to tell me that now my work
is over. So far ahimsa was followed but now the time has come for me
to leave. They are not going to listen to me any more.
ZAKIR HUSAIN: But Bapuji, the Congress ought to have explained its policy

regarding the Talimi Sangh to the ministers. It never did. I met Maulana Saheb before
coming here. He had expressed sympathy and said that he would like to meet the
Sangh. The Sangh has now decided to see him.

They should have invited you before this. Let Mr.
Sargeant work but he should work under your guidance. In fact I
have advised them to invite Zakir Husain Saheb and suggested that
only after discussing things with him should they plan their work.
GANDHIJI:
1

ZAKIR HUSAIN: We feel that with a little effort it could have been done but we

never did make that effort.

Today the whole machinery of the Congress is
crumbling into pieces. Everyone does not realize it but I do.
GANDHIJI:

ZAKIR HUSAIN: In my view facilities should be provided and time apportioned

for religious education in our schools, so as to enable those well versed in religion to
come and teach there. If the Government decides to undertake more than this it would
only increase misunderstanding and friction. Supposing Maulana Saheb prepares the
curriculum, not everyone will be prepared to accept it.
GANDHIJI: You should talk it over with Maulana Saheb. I do not
subscribe to the view that the Government should provide religious
education. If there are some Mussalmans who want to give religious
education of the wrong type, you cannot prevent it. If you try to do
so, the result can only be bad. Those who want to give religious
education, without expecting any remuneration for it, may do so on
their own. We will only teach ethics based on the fundamental
principles of all religions.
ARYANAYAKUM: One more question remains to be discussed. We have to

grant certificates to the boys who have just completed their seven years’ course. What
should we state in the certificate and what name should we give it?

Please prepare a draft in Hindustani and have it in
both the scripts so that it is understood by all. Clearly state the boy’s
qualifications in it. Supposing we mention that our boy is more
GANDHIJI:

1

360

Sir John Sargeant, Educational Adviser to Government of India

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

qualified than a matriculate, we have to be specific about it. The name
should correspond with the qualification certified therein. Giving a
thing a high-sounding name when its worth does not correspond to it
reflects no credit on the giver.
ZAKIR HUSAIN: We may certify that the boy has completed a full course of

basic education.

I would rather have a precise word for it just as the
Hindi [Sahitya] Sammelan has precise names for its different
diplomas.
GANDHIJI:

AVINASHILINGAM: Though the Talimi Sangh follows the policy of co-

education, we in the South do not want to introduce it there.
GANDHIJI: In that case you have the option

to say that as it will
not be convenient for you to adopt Nayee Talim fully in Madras you
will be implementing it only partially. If you have co-education in
your schools, but not in your training schools, the children will think
there is something wrong somewhere.
AVINASHILINGAM: I think there is no harm if we have co-education among

the grown-ups, when they know their own minds. But, in my view, it is not proper for
girls of 15 or 16 when they join our training camps.
ZAKIR HUSAIN : The Sangh has not made co-education obligatory for the

training schools.
GANDHIJI: Your (Avinashilingam’s) arguments, I am afraid, fail
to convince me. Even if my children have a tendency to go astray, I
would let them run the risk. We shall have to rid ourselves one day of
this sex mentality. We should not seek examples from the West. Even
in the training schools if the teachers are competent, pure and filled
with the spirit of Nayee Talim there is no danger. If, unfortunately,
some accidents do take place, we should not be frightened. They are
bound to be.
ZAKIR HUSAIN: We are not familiar with the conditions prevailing in Madras.

If you feel that the atmosphere there is not favourable for co-education you should
wait till it changes in its favour. For the time being you can send your girls to
Sevagram.
AVINASHILINGAM: Another difficulty facing us is that we do not have the

requisite literature for Nayee Talim. If we can have it ready at one place, it can be
adjusted according to the needs of the different provinces. The Talimi Sangh should
VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

361

take up this task. It can get the blocks made at cheaper rates, have the pictures printed
and do such other jobs.
ARYANAYAKUM: There were ten such persons, among those who attended our

last training camp, who were competent to produce the literature. Two of them are in
Madras. Let us have them for this job.
AVINASHILINGAM: With your permission I would suggest that these books

should have beautiful get up.
GANDHIJI:

Basic education does not imply work of inferior

quality.
AVINASHILINGAM: The books should have such a get up that they attract the

children by their very appearance.

[From Hindi]
Harijan Sevak, 9-11-1947

366. TALK WITH BIHAR MINISTERS
GANDHI C AMP, P ATNA,

April 22, 1947
I am seriously considering what is my dharma in the present
circumstances. Nevertheless, it is my firm belief that God will show me
the way through it all. What I say regarding non-violence has no
impact today. I do appreciate the love people shower on me. But the
only way for me to return that love is that I should place before the
world the truth as revealed to me by God. We adopted the weapon of
non-violence to drive away the powerful British Government from
India. Now if we resort to violence against our own brethren we will be
regarded as cowards and will be condemned by the world. You are
wearing crowns of thorns on your heads, not of diamonds and pearls.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 243

367. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
April 22, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

Till yesterday I talked to you about khadi because the meetings
of the Charkha Sangh were being held all this time. Today there was a
362

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

meeting of the body formed for Nayee Talim, viz., the Hindustani
Talimi Sangh. I wish to tell you about Nayee Talim today. Through
you it would be known to the people of Bihar and then the
information would spread throughout India. Nayee Talim is now
seven years old. There is Congress rule in many provinces. In some
provinces1 the Muslim League is in power. But actually, in all
provinces, it is the people who rule.
The Congress introduced the Nayee Talim. Actually the Nayee
Talim scheme was prepared some time earlier, but the Congress put its
own stamp on it. Let us assume that where the Congress is in power
the scheme of Nayee Talim would be carried out by its own workers.
We shall carry it out since we have decided to do so. Even if the
Congress does not adopt it, those who have accepted Nayee Talim
would carry it out. Others would follow if they are convinced.
Now if everyone in Bihar understands how Nayee Talim works,
no other scheme can be implemented. If we teach khadi work to all
the boys and girls according to the Nayee Talim scheme we shall be
able to produce khadi without difficulty. And then Nayee Talim
includes many other things as well. People say that the Congress does
not carry out all those things. The Charkha Sangh and the Hindustani
Talimi Sangh are the Congress organizations; then, why does the
Congress not carry out those things? For the present I do not wish to
go into this controversy. During the day today the Nayee Talim
workers held a meeting. Dr. Zakir Husain was also present. Zakir
Saheb is all in all at the Jamia Millia.2 He has also received training
abroad. Without his whole-hearted devotion the Jamia Millia could not
be run as it is run now. The Jamia Millia came into being during the
Non-co-operation days, when we had called upon boys and girls to
come out of their schools and colleges. During those days the trustees
of the Aligarh Muslim University said that the students were free to
leave the University if they wished. A large number of Muslim
students then gave up studies. Then came the problem of their future.
It was then that the Jamia Millia was born. I also played some part in
it. The Ali Brothers were then with us. Zakir Saheb was not there. But
people had their eyes on him. When he came he took upon himself
the responsibility and developed Jamia Millia into a great institution.
Aryanayakum and Asha Devi of the Hindustani Talimi Sangh
have also come here. Nayee Talim includes a great many things. I
1
2

Namely, Bengal and Sind
He was the Vice-Chancellor of Jamia Millia Islamia.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

363

shall not talk about all of them. Nayee Talim means training our boys
and girls through the medium of such handicrafts as are to be found
in India and thus contributing to their growth and development. There
should be harmonious development of the body, mind and soul. If
everyone is given this type of training, there would be no fighting
among ourselves such as is going on in the country today. Countries
like England, Germany, Japan, Italy, etc., rely on the sword. Hence
training of their children also follows the same pattern. You would be
convinced if I explained all the points to you. These countries train
their people in the light of the course they want them to follow. Under
such training there is almost no scope for spiritual development. It
emphasizes only physical development and the people with such
training are appointed to high posts in the army and the government
departments.
We have followed the opposite course here. We followed the
path of non-co-operation and achieved our aim through non-violence
and truth. This in itself was Nayee Talim. When I called upon students
to come out of their educational institutions I hardly had an idea
about what was to be done with them. When we attained power, which
was hardly of any use, I thought about our course of action and then
we hit upon Nayee Talim and it came into being.1 The most wonderful
thing about Nayee Talim is that under this scheme the students have to
spend nothing on their training. Another remarkable thing is that it is
self-supporting, i.e., it does not need funds from outside to run it. I
shall elaborate on this point tomorrow. Only if everyone understands
the importance of Nayee Talim, it can become true training. It does
not need investment of crores of rupees. It is said that we would
require crores of rupees if we try to train everyone in the country. But,
in my view, it is futile to talk in terms of millions and billions of
rupees. That is not the way to go about training 400 million people.
From where are we going to get so much money? Nayee Talim has so
many possibilities that it costs nothing [to carry it on]. These days
education costs a lot, but true Nayee Talim is one which would be selfsupporting.
[From Hindi]
Bihar Samachar, 24-4-1947

1

364

The Hindustani Talimi Sangh was formed on April 23, 1938.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

368. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
P ATNA,

April 23, 1947
DEAR DAUGHTER,

I have your two letters. What you say is not right. I can say what
I had said in Delhi laying stress on what was reported from Kanti and
Devdas. I never bestow undeserved praise still. I will say nothing about
you, if you cannot stand what I say.1
Your stomach must return to normal. It is imperative to boil the
water. Utensils should be cleaned with boiling water.
Abha should consider it a sin to remain in ignorance. How long
will she stay with you?
As desired by you, I tore up your letter of yesterday. Your
second letter is good.
If the Muslims have cleansed their hearts and the Hindus have
regained confidence as you say, there can be no cause for worry. But
then what about the reports from Satis Babu? Did you have a talk with
Satis Babu?
Sita and Sumi2 are here. Today Sita is going to Akola.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 582

369. TALK WITH MUSLIM LEAGUE MEMBERS
GANDHI C AMP, P ATNA,

April 23, 1947
If the League wants to make progress it has to change its
objective. I request you to search your conscience. Although the
League has joined the Interim Government,3 still things are not
running as smoothly as they should when two brothers work in perfect
1
According to a report in Harijan, referring to the addressee in his prayer
speech on April 8 Gandhiji had said she was “physically frail but a true Muslim and a
Hindu too”.
2
Sumitra, Ramdas Gandhi’s daughter
3
The Muslim League had joined the Interim Government on October 26, 1946.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

365

unison. If you are true representatives of the League you should
frankly tell Jinnah Saheb or Liaquat Ali Saheb that they are going in
the wrong direction; only then you would be serving the League
faithfully. Noakhali, Bengal and the Punjab are still witnessing
massacres by Muslims. I do not deny that Hindus too are perpetrating
such crimes, but both Jawaharlal and I have been strongly
condemning their misdeeds and publicly appealing to them to desist.
Has any representative of the League made any such appeal to
Muslims? Let the leaders fight if they want Pakistan. But how is it
possible to carry on if everyone takes the law into his hands? Quaid-eAzam Jinnah Saheb has given the assurance that full protection would
be given to the minority community. But I must tell you that so far
this assurance has not been fulfilled. I claim to be a faithful friend of
all and I have to prove that friendship. It is my sincere appeal to you
to treat Hindus as your own brethren. It will lead to your progress.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 244-5

370. DISCUSSION AT HINDUSTANI TALIMI SANGH
MEETING
P ATNA,

April 23, 1947
ZAKIR HUSAIN: The report from the U.P. was read out to us. Everyone felt that
we should take over the basic schools from the local boards and run them ourselves.
In a way it is desirable that the local boards alone should run such schools. But you
are aware how they work. Even now it is the Government that plans out the
programmes whereas the local boards are expected to implement them. The local
boards embezzle funds and do not make regular payments to the teachers. It would
therefore be better if the Government ran these schools.

GANDHIJI: At present I know nothing about them. Only after
examining the working of the local boards will I be in a position to
say something on this point. Just now I won’t commit myself to
anything. I would only suggest that if the Government feels that it can
shoulder this responsibility and the local boards are willing to hand
over the schools, it should take them over.
ZAKIR HUSAIN: Then the report about the post-basic education was read out.
After one month’s [training] the trainees are equipped to earn 8 as daily by working

366

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

for 5 hours. Moreover, we have just commenced our work. Only after some time would
it be possible to make a correct estimate about it. The third point is regarding being
self-supporting on which Jajuji will speak to you.
JAJUJI : Seven years have passed since we introduced Nayee Talim. Even now it

is doubtful whether the students passing out of the basic schools can be selfsupporting. The wages they can earn very from craft to craft. A student can earn two to
three rupees if engaged in carpentry whereas spinning is a much less paying
occupation. These days one earns much less if one does with the hands the work
otherwise done in mills. They can, of course, earn 6 or 8 as, a day at the Charkha
Sangh rates. But if we succeed in opening basic schools all over the country, the
Charkha Sangh will not be in a position to buy all the yarn produced in these
schools. Even today there is a large quantity of yarn which the Sangh is unable to buy
And we shall get very little if we sell the yarn at the market rate. The Government may
buy all the yarn spun in these schools. Under such circumstances which craft, do you
think, should we adopt?
GANDHIJI: We should not think in terms of money as we do now.
Khadi is the centre of our activities because we all need cloth and we
have before us the question of clothing the seven lakhs of villages.
Today, we get our yarn woven by offering higher wages to lure the
weavers. It was wrong of me not to have insisted on everybody
weaving as I did in the case of spinning. It must, however, be seen that
it does not require more time than can be spared for it. If it takes up
all the time one can spare we shall have to think anew. The teacher
under Nayee Talim will be a craftsman, not merely a wage-earner. His
wife and children too must join him in his work. Only then will true
co-operation be born. It would be a great achievement if we could
take Nayee Talim to every village in India.
Some people ask me why agriculture could not be the centre of
Nayee Talim. The answer is that through agriculture no handicraft can
be taught. The function of Nayee Talim is not merely to teach an
occupation, but to develop the whole man through the teaching of
handicrafts. It aims at helping the students to understand the essence
of life. Nayee Talim endeavours to remove the imperfections of man.
But though I do not begin with agriculture, it is bound to come
in ultimately. We cannot do without it. One, of course, gets enough
mental training in learning to grow fruits and vege- tables. Moreover,
we also have to grow wheat for the students and provide them milk.
All this cannot be accomplished under the old system. The field of
Nayee Talim is more comprehensive. It has to determine the pattern

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

367

of a whole life. A teacher of Nayee Talim should be a first-class
craftsman. All the boys of the village will naturally live in the village
and in co-operation with the teacher produce all they need in the
village itself. In this way, the education would automatically become
free and universal.
Today the condition of India is such that the vegetables and
fruit grown in a village are not consumed by the villagers themselves.
The villagers of Travancore cannot use the coconuts that are grown
there. They are collected at one place and sent to the towns. In the
places where basic schools are opened the fruit grown will be first
available to the villagers and then to others. Again, today we cultivate
cash crops such as tobacco, cotton, indigo, etc. Those trained in Nayee
Talim will cultivate crops which are essential for life.
ZAKIR HUSAIN : The All-India Congress has appointed the Constructive
Programme Committee with Nayakum, Jaju, Kumarappa, Shankarrao Deo, Jugal
Kishore, Prafulla Babu1 , Jairamdas Doulatram and Sucheta Kripalani as its members2 .
In a meeting of the Committee held at Allahabad it was decided that the Talimi Sangh
should run a training school and a basic school for a specified area in every province.
JAJU: In accordance with the programme chalked out it was agreed that the

work should be carried on by the Provincial Congress Committee, which would be
allowed to raise funds for it. In this way we plan to train one lakh students in the
country who will be self-supporting as regards cloth.
GANDHIJI: Today the Congress organization is not functioning
smoothly. Wherever the Congress is in power, the Provincial Congress
Committee and the Government should work in perfect co-operation
and be a source of strength to each other. Today, each wishes to have
his own way without having any regard for the other. They should
work as one organic whole.
SAMPURNANAND 3 : This is not feasible. The Congress Ministries are keen to

take up such tasks; you should get the work done by them. But you cannot accomplish
this work through the Congress Committees. Today, the Congress Committees want
to boss over the Government and this cannot be.
GANDHIJI: It might be suggested that the Government should
define their area of jurisdiction. Today, we cannot raise funds from
the people. They would refuse to pay as they would have already
made their contributions to the Government. We should tell the
1

Prafulla Chandra Ghosh. The source has “Nirmal”, evidently a slip.
The Committee appointed on March 7, 1947, also included R. R. Diwakar
among its members.
3
Minister for Finance and Education in the U. P.
2

368

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Ministers that so much funds are required for such and such
constructive activity. If they refuse, we should protest to them and put
before the people the correct position. But we cannot ask the public to
donate for the work which the Government is capable of undertaking.
AVINASHILINGAM: We do collect funds for the Harijans, don’t we?

GANDHIJI:

That is a different matter. It is our atonement.

AVINASHILINGAM: The Government do not have enough funds to execute all

the plans.
GANDHIJI: Of course, people should take up such work as the
Government cannot, and also raise funds for it.1
If we want to serve, our service should be in one direction alone.
We have to cross an ocean. This is the time of our trial. We have
to disperse the thunder-clouds gathering from all sides. There is no
better guide than the Supreme Helmsman who can help maintain the
balance and steer our ship in the right direction. Therefore everyone
of us should gird up his loins and be prepared to perform his duty
without finding fault with others.
[From Hindi]
Harijan Sevak, 9-11-1947, and Biharni Komi Agman, p. 246

371. TALK WITH PEACE COMMITTEE MEMBERS
GANDHI C AMP, P ATNA,

April 23, 1947
We all want freedom. The Congress has ceaselessly striven to
attain it and made tremendous sacrifices for it. I feel we have become
indifferent in our loyalty to such a noble organization. If it is true, we
had better disband the Congress or sever our connection with it. Do
we want to let the splendid achievements of the Congress slip out of
our hands? If you do not have the courage to follow the path of nonviolence but whip the person who has flogged you, I can understand.
But how can an Indian, being afraid of those who flog him, commit
the crime of flogging the innocent by way of revenge? Even the use
of violence is subject to certain rules ad regulations and failure to
respect them leads to one’s own destruction. If I am unable to make
you see this point which is clear as daylight, the fault is mine. If a man
1

What follows is translated from the Gujarati in Biharni Komi Agman.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

369

can meet death in the right manner, I would regard it as the fulfilment
of his life. But the ill omens I am seeing before the advent of freedom,
will lead to a greater slavery than the one you have been subjected to
for the last 150 years and you will never get peace.
The peace prevailing in Bihar at present is due to the force of
the military, and I do not call it peace at all. When your peace brigade
is able to influence people and they realize of their own accord that
every Hindu or Muslim is their brother, sister or daughter, then alone
will this peace endure. But you will be able to exercise your influence
only if your dedication is one hundred per cent true, otherwise it
would serve no purpose. Please do nothing just to please me. You are
welcome to leave me alone if my words fail to carry conviction with
you. But if after joining the peace brigade its soldier continues to
think of revenge of any kind whatsoever, it would deeply hurt me. If
either in retaliation or to avenge some evil done, you stoop to kill
people professing religions other than your own, it would be regarded
as an unmanly act and you will be endangering the freedom of India.
If you want to cultivate the non-violence of the brave, you have
to purify your hearts and discard cowardly thoughts from your
minds. Why should one who has adopted non-violence be afraid of
anyone? He will clearly explain his viewpoint to others without losing
his temper at all. Therefore if you have any doubts, you can certainly
ask me or Shribabu. I am happy to see Muslim brothers here in the
Peace Committee. I will advise them also to frankly state whatever they
consider proper and right. They should have the courage to tell
Jinnah Saheb publicly that by following the way of fighting and
violence he will not be able to make Pakistan a holy land. If we
continue to fight among ourselves we will have to forget freedom and
some third power will come to subjugate us. Have you ever paused
and thought what a golden land our India is? Instead of fighting over
petty matters we should broaden our outlook. We have rich minerals,
valuable metals and untold wealth of material in our country. We
should make India prosperous by utilizing our time in discovering all
this wealth. Instead, whither are we drifting, have you ever thought?
Others will take advantage of our folly. If you have grasped what I
have said, think over it and follow it in your lives This will
automatically help the people come into their own. A great moral
responsibility lies on the shoulders of the workers. If you lack the

370

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

requisite strength, admit it humbly otherwise carry on the
responsibility you have undertaken, faithfully utilizing all your
resources, physical, mental and material.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 246-8

372. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
P ATNA,

April 23, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

I keep my eyes closed during the prayer. Hence, I do not know
if people take part in the Ramdhun. But Manubehn tells me that the
women do not join the Ramdhun, nor do they beat time correctly.
Those who come for the prayer meeting must abide by the rules of
the gathering. Ramdhun is a collective prayer. When all men and
women present at the prayer collectively utter Rama’s name and
meditate on it, they feel the love of God kindled in their hearts. If all
the people do not join the Ramdhun its purpose is not fulfilled. One
must practise the Ramdhun even at home.
Ramdhun occupies an important place even in Nayee Talim.
Nayee Talim begins at the age of seven and till the fourteenth year
basic training is imparted. But what should a child do till he is seven
years old? Actually, the mother should start training the child from
the time she is carrying him inside her. This is not my experience but
of the whole world, that while the child is still in the womb the
mother’s work and discipline have a great influence on the child’s
life. This means that the mother can train the child from the time of
conception till he is seven years old. This is followed by basic training
till the child is fourteen years old. But Nayee Talim is necessary even
for the old, in fact, for every man and woman as also for a labourer.
But from where to get crores of rupees for educating the entire
population? India is a very poor country. And we must spread literacy
among the whole population of 400 million and the education of the
child is to start from the time he is born One’s head starts reeling
when one thinks about making all the necessary arrangements, finding
so many teachers and the resources to pay them. You might ask me if
my head too starts reeling. I should say, no. You might then think that
either I am a stupid fellow who understands nothing, or I am very wise
and know everything about it. This, in fact, is true. My head does not
VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

371

reel. Nor am I given to talking in the air. Congress Ministers are
ruling in seven Provinces. In some Provinces the Muslim League is in
power. Let them be considered separate for the time being, though I
do not regard them as separate. One day they are bound to be united
with us. True, they might not agree to give this type of training and
the Congress wants to implement the programme of basic education.
But how can I tell Suhrawardy Saheb that I want to impart basic
education in Bengal? He would ask me what right I had to make any
such suggestion. I can also work a lot in Sind. If we can give basic
education to the people there the whole face of the province would
change. The Hindus want to run away from there. They come to me
and ask me what they should do. What they should do is another
thing.
All this time we had been having foreign education which also
imposed a foreign language on us. This was because the British
needed men to carry on their work and wanted their empire to
expand. They needed clerks. I would have done the same thing if I
were in their place. If I had needed doctors, engineers, etc., from
where could I have found Englishmen for all these professions? How
could Englishmen have communicated with the people of Bihar or
those of Madras who speak Tamil? And so, they established big
colleges and universities for the spread of English education. They
started producing doctors and engineers, but in fact, they were turning
out only loyal slaves. Even today we are living in the same age. Times
cannot change merely by wishing. We are still enamoured of the
English language. Work even in the Congress offices is being done in
English. The notices I receive are also in English. Things have taken
such a course that we cannot free ourselves from English easily. For
that very reason the scheme of basic education has been prepared. It is
a living education and a true education. English has not been given a
place in it. A boy who has had basic education comes to his parents
and proudly tells them what he has learnt. But if I study in an English
school and my father from the village asks me what I learnt I would
tell him only about England and the English people. If he asks me
anything about my own place, about Bihar, I would not be able to tell
him anything. But it does not imply that I should go on abusing the
English people. As it is, I do not abuse anyone. The English say that
this is our country and that they are going. When recently the Viceroy
asked me to sign the peace appeal I said that I would sign in Hindi,
Urdu, and I put my signature in Hindi, Urdu and English. This
pleased the Viceroy.
Our average income today is Rs. 60-62 a year. Some people
have an income of Rs. 60,000. This means that out of 400 million

372

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

there must be so many without an income and they must starve. How
can we educate all of them? Today we are almost paupers. How can
we go on if our children do not get ghee, milk and clothing? We have
to increase our income with the help of the right kind of training.
Today our men and women have nothing to cover themselves with. I
saw the same thing in Noakhali too. And let me tell you, in the old
days—when I was in Champaran—the women had nothing but a
single sari. The women told me that they did not have more than one
sari. How then could they bathe and what could they have to wear?
And things were then far better compared to the present. Today cloth
is so scarce. Food is also scarce. You must all get food to eat and
clothes to wear. But the Government will not provide all these things
for you. You must produce the grain yourselves. You must produce
ghee and milk. You must make your own clothes. Your children
would help you.
You have to make education self-supporting. Otherwise you
cannot yourself become self-reliant. This virtue is to be found in
Nayee Talim. The aim of Nayee Talim is not to make our children
slaves. Nor does it aim at making them leaders. Its aim is to make all
of them Indians.
There should be food for everyone; but food does not mean
only a handful of grain, a pinch of salt. As a matter of fact everyone
ought to have pure ghee and milk and enough clothing. Today all this
appears to be a mere dream. But it would not remain a dream. Nayee
Talim will not make all students barristers, engineers or doctors. It
aims at developing the students into good human beings. And we have
to make them nothing less than good human beings.
[From Urdu]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—III, pp. 33-6

373. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
P ATNA,

April 24, 1947
CHI. LILI,

I have your letter. I have written to Su. at the hospital address. I
did not remember Pya. Gupta’s address.
You are silly. I have not forsaken you. When you feel that you
VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

373

can no longer stay away from me, come over. I myself am without
any home just now. But come wherever I am. You have served Sushila
but that’s in your nature. Work hard without being impatient and read
carefully and intelligently, and you will pass with good marks. There
is no reason at all for you to give up hope or feel defeated. If you lose
one year, there will be no harm. You will learn more.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9608. Also C. W. 6580. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

374. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
P ATNA,

April 24, 1947
CHI. SATIS BABU,

I have your letter. You have done the right thing. It is no use
trying to hide what has happened.
I have been summoned to Delhi again. I shall have to leave on
May 2. I hope that now there will be no need for my presence there.1
Even here I am doing what needs to be done there and I hope I shall
be doing the same in Delhi.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 9077

375. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
P ATNA,

[April] 24, 1947
2

CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

I hope to leave this place early in the morning on May 2 and to
reach there on the 3rd. I had a telegram from Panditji.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 2501
1
2

374

In Noakhali
From the contents. Vide the preceding item.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

376. TALK WITH HOULTON1
GANDHI C AMP, P ATNA,

April 24, 1947
We should have only one colony set up for the refugees. You
need not build pucca houses. You can have the houses built with mud
and mortar as is the usual practice in villages. I would rather wish that
people built such houses themselves and the Government paid them
their proper wages. I consider it a sin to distribute food free.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 250

377. ADDRESS TO WORKERS
S ADAQUAT ASHRAM, P ATNA,

April 24, 1947
Lakshmi Babu’s complaints against the workers are a shame for
Biharis. The subject of decentralization2 is being discussed for the past
three years. I had mentioned it after my release from jail.3 There was
some mental reservation about it in the beginning. But now it is all
clear to me. Lakshmi Babu had welcomed my suggestion right at the
beginning. Only if you explain to me your difficulties in the plan for
decentralization will I know where the trouble lies. It is not that the
sales can be pushed up only under the patronage of the Charkha
Sangh. It would only mean the ruin of khadi. Let khadi be for those
who spin, so that there could be only genuine khadi-wearers. And I
need only such genuine workers. This would mean the saving of the
crores of rupees invested in the Charkha Sangh. Bihar has greatly
increased the importance of spinning in India. The age of machines
started only 200 or 300 years ago. Before that we used to do all the
work with our hands and cheerfully too. With the advent of the
machine age our hands have been cut off. Handicrafts and body
labour are disappearing with the result that we have become lazy.
Khadi will lose all its value if we turn the Charkha Sangh into a
commercial body. People, whether in towns or in villages, should spin
1

The Relief Commissioner. The source however has “Walton”, a slip.
Of khadi work
3
On May 6, 1944. Vide “Letter to Secretary, Home Department, Government
of Bombay”, 6-5-1944
2

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

375

and wear khadi. It should be as natural as cooking one’s own food
which is done in every home. This is not a very big thing. We shall all
perish if we do not practise this. We are facing starvation because we
do the things we ought not to do. India is a country poorer than even
China. We appear to be human beings, but actually we live like
animals. What would happen to the cow if human beings turn into
animals? If every village in India became self-sufficient in the matter
of food and clothing, we would easily save a billion rupees. I have no
doubt about this. We would require no help from anyone, and the
whole of India would become a co-operative enterprise. There are cooperative organizations in Japan and Germany. We too have among us
ideal men like Lakshmi Babu and we must strengthen his hands.
Decentralization is a teaching in itself. It has a wonderful significance
like the daily lighting of the stove in every home for the day’s meals.
If we are all ready for it and become self-sufficient in our khadi
production, the experiment which Lakshmi Babu wants to carry on
may well be the first of its kind in independent India. Vichitra Babu1
in the U. P. has also made some efforts. But it would all be in vain
unless we make all our villages self-sufficient.
It is possible to develop yet another industry here. It is possible
to produce beautiful cloth out of the stems of linseed. I have not the
time, otherwise I would have proved that mill-cloth is like poison in
effect, while khadi is like nectar. Khadi is meant for everyone. Even a
depraved man, a sinner, a drunkard, a gambler, anybody, can wear it.
But the sacred quality of khadi is that it is a symbol of freedom.
Those who wish to live in free India ought to wear khadi. And those
who wear khadi will be satyagrahis. They must be sattvika in the true
sense of the term as described in the Gita. 2 Khadi carries that quality.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 250-1

1
2

376

Vichitra Narayan Singh
“Letter to Esther Faering”, 12-2-1920

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

378. TALK WITH HARIJAN WORKERS
S ADAQUAT ASHRAM, P ATNA,

[April 24, 1947] 1
In the meeting with the workers of the Harijan Sevak Sangh. . . a challenging
poser was presented. The Harijans were asking why, if the caste Hindus were sincere
in their professions of equality between the “touchables” and [the] “untouchables”,
no inter-marriages were being celebrated. What should be the caste Hindus’ answer to
that? Gandhiji replied that the Harijans had a right to ask that question. He had already
conceded their point. Marriage was a strictly personal affair. While nobody could be
compelled to contract a marriage against his or her will, on the ground of caste there
should be no bar to such inter-marriages. He reminded them how he had long ago made
it a rule not to be present at, or give his blessings for any wedding unless one of the
parties was a Harijan. Untouchability in the sense of pollution by touch had already
become a thing of the past. What was needed now was the cultural and economic uplift
of the Harijans, so that the very distinction between “touchables” and “untouchables”
would be obliterated.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. II, p. 121

379. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
P ATNA,

April 24, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

Today I kept my eyes open during the Ramdhun to find out
who among the women beat correct time and joined the Ramdhun. I
found some women moving and clapping their hands, but they were
not keeping the time! This wouldn’t do. I had told you yesterday that
if all of you want to recite the name of God in unison and with singleminded concentration, you must learn the rules of collective prayer.
When everyone recites the name of God with genuine feeling and with
one voice, the blissful notes would give rise to a very pleasant,
1

From Biharni Komi Agman

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

377

delightful feeling. I can see the women because they sit right before
me. But the men stand at a distance and I am not able to see them
well. The dais on which I sit has been made like the stage in a theatre.
There is special lighting arrangement so that people can have a good
view of me, as of an actor on the stage. But the men stand in the dark.
The light should be directed at the people. After all we are all in a way
actors on the stage of life. I cannot see their hands but I can make out
from the sound that they do not all join the Ramdhun. This is not
good and it should not be.
Some Harijan workers came to me this afternoon. I talked to
them for an hour. We had a long discussion. Then I went to the
Sadaquat Ashram where a meeting of the Harijan Sevak Sangh was
held. The Harijan workers told me that there was very little feeling of
untoucha-bility in Bihar. But I have heard that it is not true. Yesterday
a shameful thing happened here. I came to know later that a few
Harijan women had come to the prayer meeting, but some women did
not allow them to sit down. They let their contempt by known and the
Harijan women left the place. Had I known it yesterday, I would have
talked about it. Today Hari-jan workers, both men and women, came
to me. After hearing their tales I felt sad realizing that if those who
considered themselves high caste, did not give up their fancied
superiority and did not discard their unfounded pride, we would not
be able to preserve our freedom even if it came.
I say this not only for Patna or Bihar, but for the whole of India.
Your Ministers are your elected representatives and they ought to
guide you. Some people asked me if it was enough to touch the
untouchable. I said no. The feeling of untouchability cannot be wiped
out just by touching the untouchable.
There was a time when the Hindus who considered themselves
high-born never even touched the untouchables. But the people are
now fairly enlightened. It is because of this awakening that we are now
at the threshold of freedom. People no more mind inter-dining. But
inter-marrying is still unmentionable. There are a number of highplaced men in Bankipur. If the untouchables come to their houses
they are received with respect. They consider these men worthy of
honour. But the untouchables cannot go to the houses of orthodox
Brahmins or sanatani Hindus. These distinctions of touchable and
untouchable are man made. Otherwise there is no such label of
untouchability tagged on to anyone. I ceaselessly go on telling

378

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

everyone that unless the blot of untouchability is removed Hinduism
would be completely wiped out. I hope that the activities of the
Charkha Sangh and Nayee Talim would be very useful in this field
too.
Actually we have committed a great crime, for which we ought
to atone. I am sticking to this place in the hope that Bihar will do as
much good as it has indulged in wrongs. The Hindus should so
placate the Muslims by their conduct that they should be convinced
that the Hindus committed a mistake once but that they are really not
such senseless people.
Another thing is that we must completely eradicate
untouchability. I have already told you that Bihar is now independent
of the Charkha Sangh. The headquarters of the Charkha Sangh are at
Sevagram. Now Bihar has withdrawn itself from the central body and
is free to produce as much khadi as it wants. Now you must think how
Bihar should work. Bihar should take a concrete step in the right
direction. I told you yesterday that Nayee Talim was a lofty tree and
under its cool shade we could live in great comfort.
Let the women remember that they should not repeat their
mistakes. And those who committed the mistake should make amends
by each one bringing with her one untouchable woman a day.
[From Urdu]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar— III, pp. 37-9

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

379

380. TALK WITH BIHAR MINISTERS
April 24, 1947
. . . says one thing to me, and does something else. We shall not
be able to preserve our freedom at this rate. After all, how have you
people reached such a high position? By whose efforts have you done
it? Have you not been trained by me? If there can be such confusion
in Bihar which belongs to Rajendra Babu, it seems I shall be able to
say nothing to anyone. I do not like it. It pains me that even . . . 2
Babu is not able to clarify the matter. He is efficient and noble
hearted. If he is seeking only my guidance, why are these strange
things happening? Do people say yes to me merely to please me? If
you do so, you would betray your own country. It makes no
difference to me, but betrayal of the nation would bring no good.
There is no reason to believe that all that I say is correct, but saying
yes to whatever I say would make both of us guilty. Your
consent should spring from your heart. If you are not convinced by
my words you must try to persuade me. But we should not agree with
anyone just in order to please him. The things that are happening in
Bihar are extremely shameful. Please note it down in your diary that if
things go on like this, once again India will have to be under the
domination of the big three, viz., Britain, the United States and the
Soviet Union. It would not be wrong if I say that the events in Bihar,
Bengal and the Punjab are hindering India’s freedom. You are the
leaders here. If the leaders themselves lack unity, harmony and
principles, how can I expect these in others?2
1

[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 252

1

Omissions are as in the source.
ibid
3
According to Mahatma Gandhi —The Last Phase, Vol. II, when the Ministers
met Gandhiji again on the last day of his stay in Bihar, he made amends by telling
them that what he had said to them on the previous occasion must not be taken as
condemnation but only as a measure of his jealous concern for them. “I do not hope to
be able to find better colleagues than you. I entertain high hopes of you. It hurts me,
therefore, when I hear anyone criticizing you with good reason.”
2

380

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

381. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL1
P ATNA,

April 24, 1947
CHI. VALLABHBHAI,

There is a telegram from Jawaharlal that I should go there in the
beginning of May. I therefore propose to start from here on the 2nd 2 ,
arriving there on the morning of the 3rd. I will have the same people
with me, and stay as usual in the Bhangi Colony. Please inform
Ghanshyamdas, Maulana and others.
I hope you keep good health.
I received your telegram about Harijan.3 I am now preparing to
start writing. I wrote to Kishorelal and Jivanji4 .
Just now we have been having meetings of the Charkha Sangh
and the Talimi Sangh.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 353-4

382. LETTER TO SYED ABDUL AZIZ5
April 25, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

Many thanks for your letter and the pamphlets. I must take time
to read the latter.
1

According to Biharni Komi Agman this was written after 10 p.m.
From Biharni Komi Agman. The source however has “27”, obviously a slip.
Vide “Letter to Satis Chabndra Das Gupta”,24-4-1947
3
Vide “Letter to Vallabhbhai Patel”, 13-4-1947
4
Vide “Letter to Jivanji D. Desai”, 19-4-1947
5
In reply to the addressee’s letter which read: “Your opposition to the
formation of small colonies in which the Muslims. . . could live [in] safety and your
determination to disallow even a few guns to the needy Muslims have deeply
depressed me and many others. . . . You have. . . repeatedly said. . . that you could not
allow anyone the right of private defence. . . . Muslims faced with overwhelming
majority in seven out of eleven Provinces, feel that your law, if practised, would spell
disaster for them.”
2

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

381

It is impossible not to admire your courage in surviving your
cruel disability and retaining your mind unimpaired. Mine was no
mere social call. It was a pleasure to meet you and listen to you. I
never expected you to return that call. You have but to tell me that
you would like me to see you again and I would gladly do so.
I must confess that I had never realized until I came to Bihar the
extent of damage to life and property by man become fiend for the
time being. Let us hope that the awful scene will never be repeated in
Bihar. My opposition to the formation of colonies is restricted to the
Government co-operation even to the extent of land acquisition. I
would have no objection to affected Muslims congregating in Muslim
areas. There should be no check on free movement or congregation.
Your legal acumen should have prevented you from making the
sweeping remark that I had ever denied the right of self-defence. That
right does not and ought not to carry with it the licence to bear arms.
A moment’s reflection would show you its futility. What you want
probably to convey is that it is the right of the citizen, however
humble he or she may be, to demand protection by the State against
the thieves, robbers and miscreants. A Government that fails to
perform that duty forfeits all claim to govern. Let me add, too, that
neither during my stay in England nor for 20 years in S[outh] Africa
did I ever know a Westerner feeling incompetence to defend himself
without arms when and if the occasion arose. Like several
superstitions, this one you name seems to be confined only to this
unhappy land of ours. Your gibe at the ministers and incidentally at
me, though wholly irrelevant to your argument, is well deserved.
I am wholly at one with you in your desire that the Congress
and the League should live at peace with each other.
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

383. A LETTER
April 25, 1947
I too have been watching with an anguished heart what you write
about the Congress. Let us hope that ultimately it will be God’s will
that will be done and Satan will be overcome.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 255

382

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

384. TALK WITH ENGLISHMEN1
GANDHI C AMP, P ATNA,

April 25, 1947
Sooner or later India is bound to get its freedom. Having made
such tremendous sacrifices our earnest endeavour is not going to end
in failure. But if the League co-operated with us we could win
freedom tomorrow. The League representatives who have joined the
Interim Government at present have not done so willingly. It would be
a happy union if only it is a sincere union. The world today needs
action, not speeches. Our beliefs will have any value only if we put
them into practice. Otherwise it is difficult to achieve anything. We
have no doubt fought our battle with the weapons of truth and nonviolence. Though, I must confess, I have not reached the ideal of my
conception—as far as preparing the people on those lines is
concerned, but so far as I know my own conscience I have myself
striven through thought, word and deed to reach the ideal and am still
striving to do so. If unconsciously I have been guilty of a lapse, I am
not aware of it. But no society of men can ever be happy at all without
following the path of non-violence. This doctrine is not of my
invention, it is something that has been followed from time
immemorial. A country like Russia which stood by the rights of its
people has been caught up in establish- ing an imperialistic State. How
tragic it is! I hold that he who invented the atom bomb has committed
the gravest sin in the world of science. The only weapon that can save
the world is non-violence. Considering the trend of the world, I might
appear a fool to everyone; but I do not feel sorry for it. I rather
consider it a great blessing that God did not make me capable of
inventing the atom bomb.
It is wrong to say that the people in the West have gone crazy
about the atom bomb. There are also people among them who are
having second thoughts about it. I can make this assertion in full faith
and with conviction that people will be happy and content only where
truth and non-violence are followed. Though at present both appear
to have disappeared they have not disappeared entirely. You inquired
about foreigners. I may say that ultimately they can stay here only if
they are willing to stay as Indians. Otherwise there is no place for
them here. After India achieves freedom, we have to cultivate
1

Gandhiji had a talk with two Englishmen during his morning walk.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

383

friendship with the people of other countries and avoid all discord. We
are aware that we might commit many mistakes and face innumerable
difficulties in safeguarding our freedom. It is quite possible we may
fall short of the expectations of our people. But I see no danger in
that. We will learn only through our mistakes and trials. But if the
Congress renounces truth and non-violence, its moral strength and its
prestige are bound to suffer. But truth and non-violence have to be
followed willingly. Then alone can they endure. Nothing done under
compulsion will endure. Such rules are not written in a constitution. I
can go to the extent of saying that just as it is essential to wear
clothes—irrespective of whether they are good or bad—and we have
accepted the principle of covering our body, similarly it is imperative
that every human being should adopt truth and non-violence.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 253-4

385. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
P ATNA,

April 25, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

I am going to speak to you today about something which has
just come to my notice. It is a subject close to the hearts of the Hindus,
viz., cow-protection. I wrote a book called Hind Swaraj1 when I was in
South Africa. That was in 1909 2 ,that is, 40 years ago. In those days
too I held the same views as I do now. There was a statement in the
book saying that I considered the cow as our mother and I have an
honoured place for her in my heart because she gives me milk. If I
want to protect myself, I must also protect the cow. The cow is
worshipped even in Bihar. But, as I wrote in 1909, even though we
claim to protect the cow, in fact we are killing her. Many Hindus were
angry with me for making such a statement. But I was firm in my
view.
Nowhere else in the world is the condition of the cow as poor as
in India. If we look at the way we treat our cows, it would be clear to
us that even though we claim to worship the cow, in our hearts we have
no true respect for her. We treat the cow very harshly. Look at it from
1
2

384

Vide
The source has 1908, a slip.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

my point of view and think of the hard work we extract from the
bullocks. It is a mute animal and cannot complain. But we yoke the
bullocks to the cart and load it so heavily that we do not even bother
to think that the cart might give way. And, when the bullocks cannot
move we beat them mercilessly. We give no thought to the health of
the bullocks. When I see their bones sticking out, I wonder how they
manage to walk at all. The bullocks’ condition is similar to the poor
people’s. Just as a poor man does not get ghee, milk, and so on, the
cattle too do not get proper fodder. Experts say that either the animal
world will destroy us, or it will be our duty to kill them in order to
survive. If that happens people will ridicule us that we, the cowworshippers, have taken to cow-slaughter.
However, for protecting the cow, instead of laying down our
own lives we kill others. And whom do we go and kill? The British?
Of course not. How can we kill them? They are powerful, and even
though they are few in number, they are the rulers. They possess
arms. They consume as many cows as they wish. They trade in beef.
They take away from India any number of cows of healthy and good
breed to slaughter them. These cows are not sold by the Muslims, for
they do not keep cows in such large numbers. It is you who sell the
cows to them. Then they sell beef tea to us which we consume. Our
children consume it too because the doctors recommend it. I have a
Vaishnava friend who had beef tea saying he had to take it because his
doctor said that he would not survive without it.
I have heard some Bihari Hindus complain that the Muslims
slaughter our cows. Why then should the Muslims not be killed, they
ask. Even in 1908 when I was in South Africa I used to be amused at
the Hindus’ claim that there were several societies for cow-protection.
Here too people go about collecting funds for cow-protection. But
how can we protect the cow when we kill our own brethren? You
cannot kill the British because they are strong. Today if they are
going it does not mean that you have grown stronger or that they have
grown weaker. They have decided to leave because the force of our
satyagraha has compelled them to go. It will have to be accepted that
they are honest, because in the matter of leaving the country they have
shown much honesty. When they came, you could have told them that
they should not eat beef. You could have told them that if they ate
beef, cow’s ghee or milk would not be available and that they could
manage to live without beef. But in America and England where
people freely eat beef the cow is very well protected. They raise the
cows very well and milk them properly, and they sell pure milk. But as
for you, you sell ghee by adulterating it with fat. You also sell
vegetable ghee. You consume beef tea and beef extract too; but if the
VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

385

Muslims eat beef you kill them. I once stayed with Maulana Abdul
Bari Saheb of Firangi Mahal at Lucknow. He left us long ago. He said
that if the cow was so useful to us, it was our duty also to protect her.
In those days the Hindus and the Muslims used to be united and they
had no quarrels. Had we maintained the same friendly relations, the
Muslims would have given up beef-eating. You also said that a large
number of cows were saved in one year. Nowhere in the Koran is it
said that it is one’s duty to eat beef. But if we forcibly stop the
Muslims it would become obligatory for them to eat it. I wish to tell
you about it because complaints have been made not by one but
many Hindus. If we wish to create an atmosphere of harmony, we
ought to give up such methods of coercion.
Some work of cow-protection is being done in the U.P., Bihar,
Gujarat, the C.P. and other places. For that matter there are also some
Hindus who insist on eating beef. They also quote a Sanskrit shloka
which shows that in the ancient times even Brahmins used to eat beef.
That is not incorrect either. It is another matter if the passage is
interpreted differently. No one ever mentions cow-protection in
Andhra and Madras. If we want to protect the cow we must know our
dharma, know what true compassion is, learn how to look after cattle.
In our country this is not done properly even in the dairies. I have had
a hand in the setting up of the Goseva Sangh.1 It is our duty to protect
the cow. In fact, I would say it is the duty of every human being,
because taking cow’s milk and ghee is beneficial to everyone. Even
the non-vegetarians have to take ghee, milk, and so on. Buffalo’s milk
is not as good as cow’s milk. But that does not mean that I do not
wish the buffalo to exist. If the cow is saved, the buffalo would be
saved too. But the cow cannot be saved in the way we are trying to do
it at present. We are blinded by selfishness and a feeling of animosity.
We ought to learn from England and America how to rear cattle. Our
knowledge of the subject at present is very poor. There is need for us
to learn from other countries how to rear cattle, what fodder we should
give them and the proper way to milk them. First of all we must try to
cultivate humility in order to protect the cow. Let us not be angry with
anyone. On the contrary, let us try to protect the cow by persuading
others. That alone would render our efforts successful.
[From Urdu]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—III, pp. 40-3

1

386

In February, 1942. Vide

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

386. TALK WITH SITA AND SUMITRA GANDHI1
GANDHI C AMP, P ATNA,

April 26, 1947
One may give up everything but not prayer. Prayer is the broom
that sweeps clean our minds. If we stop praying, all the rubbish and
cobwebs will accumulate in our minds and make our inner being
impure. I expect all of you who are in the college to get up early and
create an atmosphere for prayer. It has been my wish—and will always
be wherever I am till I breathe my last—that every member of the
Ashram, boy or girl, man or woman, wherever he or she may be,
should create the atmosphere of the Ashram. If nothing else, at least
spinning, simple food, simplicity, khadi and prayer ought to become
the permanent features in one’s life after one has stayed in the
Ashram. But what can you do in this respect? Not all the desires of
man are ever fulfilled. It seems the fault is only mine and this is only a
reflection of my imperfection.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 257-8

387. LETTER TO HORACE ALEXANDER
P ATNA,

April 26, 1947
DEAR HORACE,

Your letter. You may expect me in Delhi (D.V.) on 3rd proximo
at the latest.
BAPU
F RIEND HORACE ALEXANDER
24 R AJPUR R OAD
DELHI
From a photostat: G. N. 1444

1

Who could not get up in time to attend the morning prayer

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

387

388. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
P ATNA,

April 26, 1947
CHI. SUSHILA,

I have been working under such heavy pressure that I could not
find time even to write a letter to you and send it with Sita. I meant to
write yesterday but could not. I read just now Manilal’s letter which
you had sent to Kishorelal and which the latter had for- warded to me.
Such is my condition. God, however, has preserved my health so far
and will preserve it as long as He wants to take work from me.
Since Sita had come and met me, she herself told me that there
was no need for me to write a letter, but that an oral message would
suffice. I agreed with her. I have discussed the matter with her as fully
as possible. There is no need whatever for you to worry about her.
You must have seen the letter she wrote to Krishnakumar and the one
I wrote to him. You will learn everything from them. Please therefore
do not worry about her at all. And as Kishorelal suggests, it is now
desirable that you should go and join Manilal. If you wish, you may
come and see me. I shall have to go to Delhi on May 2. You may
come and see me there if you like. But it is very hot now. If you wish
to escape the heat and don’t wish to come, you may not. We may
discuss the more important problems through correspondence and
should be satisfied with that.
I am returning Manilal’s letter. My heart endorses the different
view which you two have taken. Since I am the property of the masses,
they have a perfect right to search me inside out. But, even so, if the
masses seek to press their point of view on me, I would feel
suffocated.
About Kishorelal and others it is a different matter. They are,
after all, co-workers who seek guidance from me. If they disapprove
of any action or views of mine today, they should have the right to
discuss them fully. The painful thing in this matter is that their
approach and mine to the question seem different. Conduct based on
such [different] approach is bound to be at variance [with their views]
and cannot but give pain. My ideas and conduct are not new. I can
say that they go back to fifty five years ago. It is possible that I might
not have been able to express my ideas clearly in my writings or talks.
388

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I don’t say positively that I have written on the subject, only because
if I could spare the time to go over all my writings I might be able to
quote the statements I have made from time to time. But what is to be
gained by doing so? The action has already been abandoned for the
present. As for my views, Kishorelal and I have been discussing them
[through letters]. That discussion need not be stopped, nor need it
upset anybody. If there is any error in my reasoning, the discussion
may help to remove it. Or, if there is no possibility of either of us
changing his view, we will put up with the difference in our views and
also in our conduct. I am hopeful that that will not be the outcome.
One or the other will correct his error and both will come to the same
view. I am hoping, however, that Kishorelal and others who are nonco-operating with me partially will withdraw their non-co-operation.
I hope you are all unperturbed.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 5000

389. LETTER TO CHAMPA MEHTA
P ATNA,

April 26, 1947
CHI. CHAMPA1 ,

I got your unhappy letter. I was surprised to learn that Shashi 2
and you had to suffer so much. But we should never think of
happiness or unhappiness. The incident shows that for those who have
linked their fate with mine, Sevagram is the only place. Those who are
resolved to live or die there will alone swim. The rest will sink.
I sent two wires, one to you and the other to J. A. Bulsaria. The
latter has been writing to me. If you have been able to see him, the
problem must have been solved.
God alone knows whether or not you did right in sending for
Gatimama from Rajkot. If he has arrived, his presence will certainly
comfort you.
Write to me occasionally and keep repeating Ramanama.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1054. Courtesy: Champa Mehta
1
2

Wife of Ratilal P. Mehta
Addressee’s son

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

389

390. A LETTER
April 26, 1947
I have gone through your report . If it had been a statement
expressing your personal views I would have complimented you and
would have made some important suggestions too. You are a great
economist and a learned man and you are running a flourishing
business. But I know more about village industries. Hence we have
proceeded on the understanding that I am qualified to instruct you.
Even if there were no such understanding, I, at any rate, have
proceeded on that assumption. In doing so I have not been prompted
by my ego. But such is the situation today. What I have read concerns
the Committee appointed by the Government of Bombay, and you are
presiding over it. From that point of view I have much to say about
the statement. Fortunately we had here meetings of the Trustees of the
Charkha Sangh and members of the Nayee Talim in which
Kumarappa2 and Dhotre3 were present. Hence I could exchange views
with both of them. . . . 4 I am not able to look up Harijan at present. I
do not send for the matter before it is printed. Pyarelal too has not
been writing for it.
I do not approve of the very resolution which has led to the
appointment of the Committee. In my view Lakshmidas5 and Dhotre
cannot function under that resolution. Before passing the resolution
the Government of Bombay should have consulted the Charkha
Sangh, the Gramodyog Sangh and the Hindustani Talimi Sangh. You
are probably not aware that all these three organizations have the
backing of the Congress and are known as Congress organizations.
No other organization in India has or is likely to have more
experience in the field of village industries. But I still cannot say how
such a mistake could happen. Considering your intelligence I feel that
you ought to have stopped Lakshmidas and Dhotre from signing the
report. I would also say that even you could not have prepared such a
report by yourself, because, if you prepare a report disregarding
certain basic facts, it would be like raising a structure on sand. This is
what has happened with regard to this report. At the moment I am not
in a position to suggest anything more. If you have the courage I
1

1
2
3
4
5

390

Of the Gramodyog Samiti. Vide Also the following item.
J. C. Kumarappa
Raghunath Shridhar Dhotre
Omission as in the source
Lakshmidas Asar

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

what has happened with regard to this report. At the moment I am not
in a position to suggest anything more. If you have the courage I
would suggest that you write to the Government of Bombay that the
report is incomplete and should not be implemented straightaway.
Dhotre has withdrawn his endorsement. He must have sent you a copy
of his letter. I have a lot more to write but don’t have the time. Why
say more to a wise person?
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 259-60

391. LETTER TO LAKSHMIDAS ASAR1
April 26, 1947
. . . must have written you a detailed letter. You have given your
name for the Gramodyog Samiti of the Government of Bombay. But
in my view you could not have done so as the Samiti would be
functioning under the instructions of the Government. Moreover, you
should have consulted the Charkha Sangh, the Gramodyog Sangh and
the Talimi Sangh and sought their opinion. There is much to be said
about its merits and demerits, but I leave it out. It your views have
undergone a fundamental change, it would be an altogether different
matter. But I do not think this is the case. In my view, you must put
your signature to the letter Dhotre has written to Balasaheb 2 . Before
the Government starts acting on the report, it must clearly understand
our policy. I have also written to Bhai. . .
You must be keeping good health. Does your health permit you
to do your full work?
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 260

1
2

Omissions in the letter are as in the source.
B. G. Kher

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947

391

392. A LETTER1
April 26, 1947
CHI. . .,

I have your letter of the 20th. I am awaiting your detailed reply.
Your words breathe love. I need not say anything if you feel the same
way I feel towards you all. But your letters have left a different
impression on me.
I have come to the conclusion after reading your letters that . . .
should go to. . .
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 261

393. A LETTER2
April 26, 1947
I myself can do nothing about Chi. . . . Pandit Jawaharlal is
scrupulously fair. All those applications are considered on merit. No
recommendation would be necessary for . . .
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 261

394. LETTER TO ARUNANSHU
P ATNA,

April 26, 1947
CHI. ARUNANSHU,

I have your postcard. You have made a good attempt to write in
Hindustani. How nice it would be when I shall be able to write as
much in Bengali. My Bengali lessons continue and nowadays Bisen is
my instructor. Manu sings a Bengali bhajan in the morning. Let us
see what happens in the end.
I learnt from Satis Babu’s letter that Nirmal Babu will be here in
a day or two. If he does come it will be fine.
1
4

392

Omissions in the letters are as in the source.
ibid

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

It is pretty hot here. We have screens of khas 1 put up on the
windows, which makes the heat bearable. I shall have to go to Delhi
towards the end of this month. I do not know how long I shall have to
stay there.
Didimony2 has not written anything to me. Does she remain
very sad? Or does she avoid writing to me in order to save my time? If
it is so, tell her that I do not want to have my time saved in that
manner.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 8727

395. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
P ATNA,

April 26, 1947
CHI. SATIS BABU,

I have your letters. Now I know that Nirmal Babu will be here in
a day [or two]. I will have a clear picture of the situation there when
he comes.
I am afraid arrangements are being made for my going to
Delhi. Perhaps I may have to leave as early as the 30th. Let me see
what happens. I hope now there will be peace in Noakhali.
I hope you are well. You must preserve your health. What is the
arrangement for water supply in this hot season ?
Abha needs must improve her health. She is a very delicate
person.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I have a telegram and shall therefore leave on the 30th.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 9079

1
2

Roots of a kind of grass used in summer as screen for cooling the air
Taralika. Vide “Letter to Satis Chandra Das Gupta”, 18-4-1947

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

393

396. A LETTER
April 26, 1947
Received your letter. Why is it in English? If you do not know
Hindustani, you could have written in Marathi. I am so far away.
[From Hindi]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 261

397. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
P ATNA,

April 26, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

Since I have to visit the Muslim brethren I do not wish to give
you the whole of my time today. You must have heard of Maulana
Shafi Daudi. I came to know about him when I had come to Bihar for
the first time. Later I went to his house also. On his invitation I have
promised to attend a meeting of the Jamiat-e-Islam. I therefore wish to
leave early.
Please remember what I told you about the cow yesterday. I told
the goshala people who came to see me today that they should all
come to me together. Then I would tell them what could be done to
improve the breed of the cow. They too agree that the condition of
the cow anywhere in India is not as bad as in Bihar. This is an
exaggeration, for the condition of cattle in some other parts of India is
found to be worse than in Bihar. All the same, according to me, it
would suffice to say that the condition of cattle in India is the worst in
the whole world. This is a matter of great shame and a blot on us since
we call the cow our mother and worship her. If we had been following
our dharma India’s name would not have been tarnished. We must
remove this blot.
I hope you will think over what I have told you, for I shall say
no more today.
[From Urdu]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—III, p. 44

394

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

398. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
[After April 26, 1947 ]1
CHI. SUSHILA,

I am sending herewith a copy of the letter I wrote to you. You
did get the letter. If you had sent that to Kishorelal, send this to
Manilal.
Su. has already written about Sita.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 5001

399. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
P ATNA,

April 27, 1947
CHI. AMRIT,

This I am writing after prayer and my Bengali lesson and Gita
for Manu. It is now 5.50. I must be off for the walk at 6 a.m.
Meanwhile these lines to tell you what you know already. I hope to be
there the morning of 1st May.
The heat is trying here, must be there too. I keep myself in good
order by sleeping several times during the day and reducing food
rigorously.
Hope you are all well.
The rest when we meet.
Love.
BAPU
S HRI R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
C/ O S ARDAR P ATEL
1 AURANGZEB R OAD
NEW DELHI
From the original: C. W. 3705. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6514

1

This is written below the letter to the addressee dated April 26, 1947.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

395

400. LETTER TO TARALIKA
P ATNA,

April 27, 1947
CHI. DIDIMONY,

1

I do not know how best to address you.
I have been daily expecting your letter. It comes today.
You will come whenever you wish. I am off to Delhi on 30th for
a few days.
Hope the girls are composed.
Am glad Charu is with you. You must even from now apply
yourself to some service of man and through him of God.
Love to you all.
BAPU
S HRI DIDIMONY
3 ALIPORE P ARK AVENUE
ALIPORE
BENGAL
From a photostat: G. N. 8728

401. A NOTE2
April 27, 1947
1. The land will belong to the village organization and will be
under the control of the Housing Society. Building work should be
carried on subject to the Society’s approval. Those shareholders will
become members of the Society who will pay their contribution and
will abide by other conditions. Such members as pay their
contributions, be it just one rupee, will alone be entitled to put up
buildings. First a co-operative bank should be formed and then the
work should be started. But such a bank will not be like a commercial
bank. Loans will be raised partly from the people. We will pay interest
at the rate of 3 per cent. If more money is needed I can be
approached. The workers of the Housing Society will act as its trustees
and will not make profit in a commercial manner.
1
2

396

The superscription is in the Devanagari script.
Regarding Sevagram

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

2. It may not be right to divide the newly purchased land into
plots and sell them. This will be a commercial practice. Nor should
buildings be put up with a view to earning rent. It does not matter if
we are required to pay land revenue. Proper arrangements must be
made first. So long as this work is not carried on the principle of
trusteeship, it should be kept pending. Earning money is certainly not
the underlying idea. In the meantime [ the society] can take up cooperative farming.
3. Let the work of revenue collection be carried on in the name
of the village organization. There is no harm in drawing from it
whatever money may be needed for the expenses.
It should be remembered that all my views are ex parte . . . . 1 I
have not heard the other side.
It is my view that we must make the whole village a health resort.
The hospital has no place in it. We must be satisfied with what little we
may be able to do in the prevention of disease. Present-day doctors
have no place in the scheme of my conception. We must be content
with medical herbs available in our villages and fields. Ramanama is
the unfailing remedy.
M. K. GANDHI

[From Hindi]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 264-5

402. TALK WITH MUSLIM WOMEN
GANDHI C AMP, P ATNA,

April 27, 1947
Now we can hope that India is shortly going to become free. If
women were to make a resolve, they could demonstrate the
remarkable strength bestowed on them by God. And it is essential for
it that you should pray daily. But today prayer has come to be
regarded either as a pastime of old women or of those who have
retired from life. And I can quote such instances where young men
and women regard prayer, bhajans or discourses as something
ridiculous and worthless. This has led to our present degeneration. But
if we can understand the secret of prayer, we would realize its
wonderful power. Our indepen-dence will be stable if we attain it
through prayer. But spiritually in-clined men and women should also
1

Omission as in the source

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

397

understand the secret of non-violence. We should realize that if our
non-violence is the non-violence of the weak, our independence will
not be stable. And it will further prove that we cannot protect
ourselves even with weapons, for we have neither arms nor training in
their use. We have the wonderful and unrivalled weapon of truth and
non-violence. Not only for winning freedom but also for preserving it
there is no alternative to ahimsa. Those who regard us as their
enemies, can be won over by love and non-violence alone. Women
can easily accomplish this. Let me give a simple example. You marry
your daughter aged fourteen, fifteen or sixteen into a strange new
family and hand her over to a stranger; the girl becomes one with the
new family or after a short while even becomes the mistress of that
household. How does this happen? God has blessed her with a loving
heart. She can win over everyone with her love, affection and nonviolence. This is our every-day experience. Similarly in the larger
context of society, if you learn to treat your Hindu sisters as your
friends and try to emulate their good qualities they will certainly
reciprocate. Women have the remarkable capacity for sacrifice.
Under varying situations in life and in order to advance or
strengthen your country you should learn to efface the self and meet
death bravely with prayer in your heart, whenever the occasion
demands it. In order to cultivate the courage to meet death, prayer is
the first and the last mantra of the art of dying. Implicit faith is
essential for it. Without faith, no satyagrahi can ever succeed. Rama,
Rahim, God or Allah—call Him by any name you like, His Law is
universal.
Think over what I have said. You have come in purdah but the
real meaning of observing purdah is that you should guard against
lust, anger and attachment. That is, one has to exercise restraint over
oneself. This outward purdah is mere hypocrisy. Its observance is
meaningless if one’s heart is impure.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 266-7

403. TALK WITH I. N. A. MEN
April 27, 1947
Should we not refer to the I.N.A. as non-violent I.N.A.? this is
because you cannot expect to hear anything else from me. Subhas

398

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Babu was like my own son. Even though there were differences in our
views, I admire his capacity for work and his patriotism. We shall be
able to win freedom only through the principles the Congress has
adopted for the past thirty years. We should not look upon anyone as
our enemy. We must give up the feeling of animosity and
vindictiveness and we shall have to become sthitaprajna1 . As I am
saying this you may be thinking that you are not mahatmas after all.
But this principle is not meant for mahatmas alone. Anyone who
wishes to be happy has no alternative but to adopt this principle in his
life.
It is all very well that you fought with arms in foreign countries.
But you saw the result. You have gained nothing thereby. Of course,
you faced many hardships with courage. But Netaji himself has said
that while in India you have got to work within the Congress. Just as
you had tried to defend your army with force of arms in Burma and
prepared for the attainment of freedom, you must now work to wipe
out communal differences with the force of love and non-violence.
You must eschew all differences of caste and creed and considering
every woman your mother, sister or daughter you should accomplish
the task which Netaji began. A remarkable spirit which Netaji has
inculcated in the I.N.A. is that there are no distinctions among the
soldiers. You must carry that spirit to every home.
You must thoroughly convince yourselves that developing
spiritual strength is a thousand times more difficult than developing
the strength of the sword.
As far as food, sleep and so on, are concerned, there is no
difference between human beings and animals. Even so, today we
have a choice only between human life and animal existence. We in
India have wonderful religious treatises. But let me tell you that all
that spiritual preaching has been of no avail. We are not able to
translate anything from those scriptures into practice. I venture to state
with all humility that the path of non-violence is the path leading to
God and only the brave can follow it as the poet2 says: “The path of
God is for the brave.” Who is this God? He is not a corporeal human
being. You should develop this strength of the brave. You will then be
able to perpetuate Netaji’s name in every village and every corner of
India and keep it alive for ages to come. That means that Netaji lives
1
2

Man of steadfast awareness
Pritam

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

399

even though he may not exist in the body. It is wrong to think that
only an embodied person exists and that a dead person does not. A
person whose name has become immortal, who rendered
incomparable service and who used to rush to help the poor, lives for
ever even after death.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 267-8

404. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
April 27, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

The bhajan 1 you heard just now was sung before also. I want to
give you something of the background of this bhajan. It first echoed
in my ears when I went on a fast while in jail. But while fasting one’s
memory becomes weak. None of my co-workers remembered the
bhajan fully either. And so I sent a telegram and the bhajan was sent
to me telegraphically in the Roman script. The bhajan delighted me
so much that I forgot my fast. My grandson Kanu was with me at the
time. At my request he sang it for me. There is nothing special about
this bhajan by Tulsidas. He only says that he lives by two syllables2 .
Everything, he says, is accomplished only with the help of Rama. All
other gods are amenable to offerings. For, when people go to worship
the deities they offer a couple of pice before offering their prayers.
The mother of a sick child offers a little money before praying for the
recovery of her child. Another woman offers money to Lord
Mahadeva pleading to be spared the nightmares she goes through.
Some other woman who has too many daughters prays for a son. But
all this is futile. Tulsidas says that God needs no flattery.
I told you yesterday that I was going to a meeting of Muslims. It
was a function of Jamiat-e-Islam. In a way it is an association of fakirs.
But they are not the fakirs who live by begging. They do not beg for
money but they are fakirs at heart. If they eat at somebody’s cost,
1

2

400

Namely, Ra and ma

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

they first do some work for him. They say that all human beings are
servants of the One God and all should abide by His command. One
cannot meet God merely by visiting a mosque or a temple; the real
thing is to do His work.
I felt that someone might now think that since Bihar has just 13
or 14 per cent Muslim population and the rest are Hindus, why placate
the Muslims? But I say that if the Muslims invite me with love I shall
go to them even barefoot. But, born though I am in a Hindu family
and brought up in the Hindu tradition, I will not go to visit a big
Hindu if he orders me to do so. But here the Muslims are few in
number, and so I would walk barefoot to their houses. Yesterday I
went in a car because I had to go very far and I would not have
otherwise reached there in time. If the Hindus think that I am trying to
give undue importance to the Muslims, they are mistaken. I have
come here only to see that they get what is their due. The Congress is
in power here and it was not strictly necessary for me to come and see
to it myself; but I came just the same.
It is also wrong to quarrel with anyone over the names—Rama
or Rahim. For, whether we say Rama or Rahim, Krishna or Karim,
God or Allah, we mean the One God.
There was a mention of the child Rama in the bhajan which was
sung yesterday. Tulsidas has sung to the glory of Ramanama so much
that you would find his Ramayana recited wherever you go in the
country. Although there are many other epics in India they are not so
steeped in devotion. On seeing an image of Krishna, Tulsidas is
believed to have said: “Tulsi’s head would bow down to you only if
you take up the bow and arrow1 .” He was a devotee of Rama. Hence
he insisted that he would bow to Krishna only if he appeared before
him in the form of Rama. Even you, if you are worshippers of Rama,
should love everyone. There was a time when it used to be said that if
one wanted to know what true religion was, one
should visit India. That was because the Hindus did not kill anyone.
But now there are robbers, dacoits and also murderers among the
Hindus. Let me warn you, however, that if you let the fact of the
Hindu majority turn your head and attempt to eliminate other people,
Hinduism is not going to benefit in any way. On the contrary, it would
perish.
Let me wind up by referring to the point about two syllables. If
1

Weapons associated with Shri Rama

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

401

you are worshippers of Rama, you must also accept that Rama belongs
to all. He is the Saviour of all, whether Hindu, Muslim, Christian or
Parsi. And whoever wishes to worship Rama should do so sincerely.
[From Urdu]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—III, pp. 45-7

405. A NOTE
P ATNA,

April 28, 1947
I have read the note left with me by Mr. Houlton 1 . I am quite
clear in my mind that those Muslims in the affected areas who by
reason of fear or the distressing memory of their dead kinsmen do not
wish to return to their homes should have the option of settling where
they like even outside Bihar against compensation being given to
them for loss of land and tenements, which will revert to the State.
Compensation will consist of the sum fixed by valuators at the present
rates of land and habitable tenements in place of those destroyed by
the rioters. The valuation of the tenements must not exceed Rs. 1,000
at the outside. The above having been conceived purely in the
interests of the sufferers, it presumes every previous effort being made
by the State to dispel all fear of repetition of tragedy by adequate
police protection and ridding the place of known marauders, etc.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C. W. 10561

406. LETTER TO SYED ABDUL AZIZ
P ATNA,

April 28, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

Of course there could be no question of annoyance caused by your letters. You
are too courteous to cause any. Where frankness is the common article of exchange
nothing but good can be the result in the end.

If any of my actions were based on the attitude of the ministers,
1

The Relief Commissioner had expressed the fear that “if the Government
declared that in all cases where a refugee refused to go back to his old home, he would
be given the cash value of his land and house, . . there would be a temptation . . . to
take the money and go to another province”.

402

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I should be of little use here. 1 I have come, if I can, to serve the
Muslim minority in Bihar as I was in Noakhali to serve the Hindu
minority. In so doing my fond belief was and is that I should serve the
majority too. Thus I was and am against pockets promoted by
authority in either case and so against firearms. That way lies strife,
not friendship whose roots are firmly fixed in love, not fear. Man can
but perish in the attempt. Success is from God.
If the Hindus are to be considered as a hostile community for all
time, I confess that the segregation is the safest policy. That is the
logic of Pakistan which I have opposed, knowing full well that I might
find myself in the minority of one.
When ministers and I cannot live without armed guards, you
undoubtedly prove our cowardly impotence but do not sustain your
argument for possession of firearms by impotent men.2 Fancy me
carrying a pistol for self-defence ! ! !
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

407. LETTER TO SECRETARY, MUSLIM LEAGUE
April 28, 1947
. . . Such Muslims as regard India as their home will always be
welcome to stay here and it will be the duty of the Government to give
them full protection. At the same time the Muslims too should be
conscious of their own duty and must realize that if they continue to
harbour hatred in their hearts against the Hindus, it will jeopardize the
future of the crores of Indian Muslims. I have received complaints
that the harassment of the minority community in the Muslim
majority areas of Bihar has the passive support and sympathy of other
Muslims. I see no good coming out of it, if it is true.
[From Gujarati]
3

Biharni Komi Agman, p. 270

1

The addressee had written: “If your opposition to the formation of colonies is
based on the attitude of the Bihar Government and not on the merits of the
proposition, we would feel that you have not exercised your vast influence with
them.”
2
The addressee had referred to Gandhiji and Ministers having armed guards.
3
Omission as in the source

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

403

408. LETTER TO SHIV BALAK BISEN
April 28, 1947
CHI. BISEN,

I read your letter again. I do not wish to lose any of you.
Whoever goes, will go of his own accord. You do have the capacity to
work. I like that, but the lack of harmony among you all pains me.
You ought to be keen to have it removed.
I see no need to do anything [ in this matter ] till I return from
Delhi. Nor do I wish to show your letter. This is a matter which you
should discuss with them. You should listen to what they have to say.
If you do not have the courage nor the desire to do so you should
forget the thing. If you wish to come to a decision before I leave for
Delhi, you should yourself discuss the matter with them immediately
today, or take whatever other action you wish to.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 7725

409. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
P ATNA,

April 28, 1947
CHI. LILI,

I have your postcard. You are studying, but you have not learnt
to use your common sense. You wrote to me and asked me to write to
you at the Hospital address. I did so, and now you complain of not
having received any letter from me. Sushila is ill, and so I try to write
daily. If you are going to value my love from the number of letters I
write or your being able to meet me, I must acknowledge defeat right
from the beginning. I write to Manilal at long intervals and only when
necessary. To my own sister I never write, and to Devdas I write once
in four to six months. Tell me now, with what are you going to
measure my love? Do learn to use some common sense.
I still do not know whether or not you have gone to the
Hospital.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9609. Also C. W. 6581. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar.

404

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

410. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
P ATNA,

April 28, 1947
CHI. SATIS BABU,

I have your letter. Now I can go there only after my return from
Delhi. We shall know more after Nirmal Babu’s arrival.
There is a report in the Hindustan Standard about some
incidents in Comilla. Do you know anything about it? I have passed it
on to Sailen. Dr. Mahmud has not yet returned. He is coming on
Wednesday. Perhaps he will travel with me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 9078

411. ADVICE TO STUDENTS
P ATNA,

April 28, 1947
If we could shake off our lethargy we would be true socialists.
But we haven’t yet done that. If I were to ask you I am sure to get the
reply that all fifteen of you have servants in your homes.1
Well, then I fail to understand your desire to serve others —
which you call socialism—when you do not do your own personal
work in your homes. If you want my advice, I may
tell you that students while they are studying should not involve
themselves in any ism. They may by all means read about every
school of thought, think over it, put as much of it into practice as
possible, but they should not endeavour to become leaders. If we want
to banish exploitation and violence from our society, we ought to do
body-labour and manual work. And naturally it ought to be
undertaken by all. Unemployment is rampant in our villages which
were [once] regarded as happy and self-sufficient units; this is because
of our subjugation and feelings of high and low as also caste
distinctions.
1

All the fifteen students replied in the affirmative.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

405

Our political slavery is now nearly coming to an end. Hence we
now need to become all the more vigilant and in this process the
students can prove very helpful. For example, (1) when you get up in
the morning you can roll up your own bedding; (2) help in preparing
your breakfast and milk, etc., whatever you take, without waiting for
your mother or anyone else to prepare it and serve you; (3) give a
helping hand in sweeping and scrubbing; (4) do your own
laundering; (5) help your mother with the cooking and cleaning the
dishes; (6) make your own cloth by spinning regularly every day; (7)
keep your books clean and neatly arranged, economize on exercisebooks as much as possible; (8) learn to do with a pen-holder and ink
costing two annas, instead of a fountain-pen costing Rs. 50.
If you adopt a number of such rules in your life you will not
need to bother with any ism. And if every student in the country does
it, I am sure the guardians’ burden will be lightened a thousand times
and without making any other effort we will be called socialists. But I
doubt if you will follow what I say. All the same, when you return
home please reflect if there is any sense in the few lines that this
experienced old fellow wrote out for you on his day of silence.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 270-1

412. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING 1
P ATNA,

April 28, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

I am sorry to let you know that I shall have to go to Delhi by the
morning train the day after tomorrow. There is a call from Pandit
Nehru. Congress President Shri Kripalani has also sent a telegram
from Rajputana that I should be in Delhi by the first of May. The
Congress Working Committee is to meet there the next day. It pains
me to have to leave you at this stage. I do not relish the idea of leaving
Bihar unless the Mussalmans have completely shed their fear and both
the communities allow me to leave cheerfully. I felt the same thing
when I left Noakhali. For both these places I have the same motto
before me “Do or Die”. The cause in both the places is the same. My
1

406

It being his day of silence, Gandhiji’s written speech was read out.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

non-violence bids me dedicate myself to the service of the minorities.
It would be a new birth for me and would give me new strength if the
Hindus and the Mussalmans of both these places become friends and
shed their animosity. God alone knows what will happen ultimately.
Man can only try and perish in the attempt to do God’s work. God is
all in all. We are only zeroes. The same mission takes me to Delhi, that
is, to work for Hindus and Muslims. I hope to return within a short
time and be among you.
You may be astonished to learn that I continue to receive letters
charging me with having compromised the interests of the Hindus by
acting as a friend of the Muslims. How can I carry conviction with the
people by mere words if the sixty years of my public life have failed
to convince them that by trying to befriend Muslims I have only
proved myself a true Hindu and have rightly served the Hindus and
Hinduism? The essence of true religious teaching is that one should
serve and befriend all and should be enemy of none. I learnt this in
my mother’s lap. You may refuse to call me a Hindu. I would only
quote a line from Iqbal’s famous song which means “Religion does
not teach us to bear ill will towards one another”.1 It is easy enough to
be friendly to one’s friends, but to befriend the one who regards
himself as your enemy is true religion. All else is mere business.
[From Urdu]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—III, pp. 48-9

1

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

407

413. REMARK TO MANU GANDHI 1
GANDHI C AMP, P ATNA,

April 28, 1947
How can we afford to forget the charkha? The spirit behind
spinning implies equality of all. The charkha teaches us the unique
lesson of identifying ourselves with the forty crores and be in perfect
harmony with them. It will not admit of any distinction of high and
low, master and servant, which is the cause of conflict in the world
today, isn’t it? The charkha warns us against it. How can we, therefore,
fail to worship God in the form of the charkha?
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 273

414. LETTER TO SYED ABDUL AZIZ
P ATNA,

April 29, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,

In acknowledging your kind letter2 of even date, I must say that
my impression was that our correspondence was meant for knowing
each other better. But I have no objection whatsoever to your
releasing the correspondence to the Press. I wish to add that what I
have said to you about pockets and firearms I have said publicly
many times in Bihar and elsewhere.
You are less than right when you say that “the policy of the
Govt. . . for good” 3 . My policy is no firearms to civilians in the
ordinary course and perfect protection to every citizen be he poor or
1

Gandhiji had gone to sleep at 9.30 p.m. and since he was exhausted on
account of the extreme heat Manu Gandhi did not remind him about spinning. After a
little while, however, Gandhiji got up and made this remark while spinning.
2
In which the addressee had desired that the correspondence between him and
Gandhiji should be released to the Press so that the Muslims would know about
Gandhiji’s views that they would neither be helped to form ‘pockets’ nor be granted
licences for firearms.
3
The full quotation from the addressee’s letter read: “The policy of the
Government supported by you should help Muslims to decide either to surrender
completely to the Congress or abandon the Province for good.”

408

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

rich. If I know anything of the Government of Bihar, they do not want
Muslims or anyone else to surrender to the Congress or leave the
Province for good.
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

415. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
P ATNA,

April 29, 1947
CHI. MANILAL,

Yesterday I got your letter of the 14th. Who knows when the
final deluge will come? Sooner or later that day also will come. Why
need we worry whether, when it does come, one or two will have
survived or all will have perished? If we but do our duty from moment
to moment, we shall be able to face the Supreme Judge.
I think Sushila will now join you at the earliest opportunity. If
Sita keeps her promise, four or five years will soon pass. I think she
will keep her promise. I will look after her. None of you, therefore,
need worry about her.
I should, of course, be very happy if you could live on boiled
vegetables and fruit. It should be quite easy to do without ghee, oil
and butter, since you eat curds. If you eat them in sufficient quantity,
together with vegetables and fruit they make a balanced diet. That diet
will sustain your energy and keep your brain perfectly clear. The
vegetables and fruit to be consumed should be properly selected. Do
you eat dry fruit or nuts? If you do, which ones? I shall be happy if
you write to me in detail, for am I not taking special interest in nature
cure? This diet must make a change in your complexion too. Dadoo
and Naicker have not called again. I am leaving for Delhi tomorrow.
Perhaps they may look me up there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 5002

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

409

416. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
P ATNA,

April 29, 1947
CHI. SUSHILA,

I got your letter of the 26th, together with Manilal’s. I have
enclosed a reply to Manilal, which please forward to him. You will
learn about yourself also in that letter.
I think I shall know about Arun’s1 result in the next letter. Why
don’t you ask them both to write to me? Do not let them be lazy.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 5003

417. LETTER TO SHARDA G. CHOKHAWALA
P ATNA,

April 29, 1947
CHI. BABUDI,

I got your unhappy letter just now. I will only say this about
you for the present. If Chokhawala willingly permits you, you should
go to Sevagram with a resolve that you will not return to Chokhawala
if you do not get will. Stay at Sevagram in whatever condition you
may have to. At present Sankaran is in charge there. Others also are
there. Go there first, we may be able to think of something else there.
Chokhawala himself is so busy that he cannot attend much to
you. We shall have to think about Anand2 . If he can be looked after in
Surat and if Chokhawala is eager to bring him up, you may leave him
there. For doing all this, you will need firmness of mind.
Forget for the present about Calcutta.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 10077. Courtesy: Sharda G. Chokhawala

1
2

410

Addressee’s son
Addressee’s son

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

418. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
P ATNA,

April 29, 1947
DEAR DAUGHTER,

I got yesterday your letter of the 6th which you had sent to R.
K. It is a good letter.
I think what you write about Abha is correct. I am writing to
Kanu.
What you write throws a new light. If rice is being hoarded, how
can I stop that? You should have a talk with Satis Babu. Or do you
want me to pass on your letter to him ?
It would be good if you could utilize the whole amount
collected from the Muslims also. I shall write to Satis Babu.
If you can get money from Bhagirath1 you can take it.
I have been able to write this much with great difficulty.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 583

1

Bhagirath Kanodia, an industrialist

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

411

419. TALK WITH MANU GANDHI
GANDHI C AMP, P ATNA,

April 29, 1947
I am surrounded by exaggeration and untruth. In spite of my
search, I do not know where truth lies. But I do feel that I have come
nearer to God and Truth. It has cost me quite a few of my old friends
but I do not regret it. To me it is a sign of my having come nearer to
God. That is why I can write and speak frankly to everyone. I have
successfully practised the eleven vows undertaken by me. This is the
culmination of my striving for the last sixty years. You have become
an instrument in this. In this yajna I got a glimpse of the ideal of truth
and purity for which I had been aspiring. And you have fully
contributed towards it. Still, being so young, you cannot at present
realize the implications of this yajna. I daily go through your diary
which reminds me of Mahadev. Seeing what you write and study these
days and the ability you have to understand the yajna I feel that had
Mahadev been alive this girl would have developed differently. I can’t
give you enough time much as I would like to. Mahadev surpassed me
in certain qualities. Since no one is accompanying me during the walk
today, I had the time to tell you all this.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, p. 274

412

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

420. DISCUSSION AT PEACE COMMITTEE MEETING 1
P ATNA,

April 29, 1947
Q. What should be the attitude of the Peace Committee towards the culprits

who have not been arrested and those who are under suspicion? Should the workers of
the Committee co-operate in getting such persons arrested and prosecuted and in
carrying on the investigations ?
GANDHIJI: The duty of the Peace Committee is to supply all the
information to the authorities. If the officers are corrupt the Ministers
should be informed. The matter should be brought to the notice of
the Press. Let those who have seen with their own eyes murders or
other criminal acts being committed give the culprits’ names to the
police. The members of the Peace Committee could even try to
reform the offender and persuade him to go to the police and confess
his crime. The Government should take public opinion into
consideration. Suhrawardy Saheb says that the police who are the eyes
and ears of the Government do not report any untoward incident,
whatever Satis Babu might say. I say that the police are the deaf ears
and blind eyes of the Government. It is our task to awaken the police.
If in the face of arson, murder and abduction of women an officer
maintains that for want of evidence culprits cannot be arrested he
deserves to be dismissed. How can a helpless victim produce any
evidence? And if anybody says that he himself set his house on fire, it
is sheer nonsense. Would the poor man burn his own house? He is too
terror-stricken to do so.
If the Government were not to trust public opinion it would
mean heavy expenditure and inconvenience. It would then need
C.I.D. men in large numbers. That is the way of the alien
Government. Under a swadeshi government the people are the C.I.D.
for the government. If there is popular rule there would be fewer
rogues. Otherwise, the Government would be in the hands of rogues.
A government full of rogues can also function, but where I cannot
say. Even the Congress Government can turn out to be such a
government.
1

The meeting held at Gandhiji’s camp in the evening was attended among
others by Sarju Prasad, Secretary, Peace Committee.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

413

You have mentioned lack of workers for the Peace Committee.
It only means that we have no influence over the masses. And if we
haven’t, what is the reason behind it? It implies that something is
lacking in us. And we ought to get over our limitations.
Q. Occasionally we receive news about trouble in various places. Even where
there have been no riots people are in panic because of the vitiated atmosphere, and
are running away. Some mischief-mongers have gone into hiding in other places and
are misleading the people. How should the workers of the Peace Committee proceed
under these circumstances ?

Whatever news we receive is not all correct. But no doubt
there is trouble in some places. The Peace Committee should help the
Government in every way. Most of the people present here would, of
course, be Congressmen. If so, it is their duty to help the Government.
And if they do not do so it means that the Government does not have
popular support. If would be shameful to say that our public opinion
reflects a mob mentality. It is our duty, not the Government’s, to
mould public opinion. The Government’s responsibility is to quell the
riots and punish the offenders. But a government obliged constantly
to mete out punishment for every little thing cannot be called a good
government.
If some work could be done in the riot-affected areas, things
would settle down even in places where the situation is tense and
people are fleeing in panic. Vitiated atmosphere implies that we have
not done our duty well.
It is a function of the Peace Committee to trace the offenders
and inform the police. If some mischief-mongers have gone into
hiding in some other places and are misleading the people the
members of the Peace Committee should also go and work there. I
had heard that the [Hindu] Mahasabha President had been giving
protection to Mathura Singh. The former is the Secretary to the
Maharaja of Darbhanga and is a big shot in his own right. When he
had come to me I had asked him if my information was correct. He
told me it was not. Being President of the Mahasabha how could he do
such a thing, he protested.
A.

Q. People come to us saying that a particular person under arrest is innocent
and that we should have him released. What should we do in such matters ?

A. If innocent persons happen to be arrested, you can arrange
legal help for them.

414

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Q. How far can the Government help the Peace Committee in its work ?

The Government can give financial help to the Peace
Committee. But such help would be given not for everything but for
what the Government considers proper. The Government’s resources
are limited. If the Government is not discreet in disbursing help we
have to bring it to their notice. But necessities have got to be provided
by the Government and whatever they cannot provide, should be
arranged for by the Peace Committee. This is a function of private
charity. The Friends’ mission1 is functioning along these lines. They
are working in the places where the Government cannot reach. The
work of the Friends’ mission can serve as a model for us. They have
done a good deal of work in Midnapore and Noakhali. They had only
a few workers but they did a lot of work. Some Hindus and Muslims
too had joined them. The Muslims were very few but they were
remarkable workers. It is enough if you are sincere, and so many of
you are honest workers ready to help the helpless.
The Government will help as far as it can. It will certainly do so
if you win its confidence. But it is not enough just to be Congressmen
to deserve that confidence. Whatever the Government cannot provide
will have to be met by collecting funds from private sources.
A.

Q. What should we say to those who seek our help for procuring rifles ?

A. I am absolutely opposed to any demand for rifles. Even in
Noakhali I was opposed to it. Wanting a rifle implies the desire to
fight. Actually the police and the Government should function
efficiently. I would even suggest that all nice and decent people
should surrender their licences. People say that the Muslims are
bringing in arms clandestinely. Quite possible; but they will not be
able to keep them. Anyway, the Government should not supply arms.
I am absolutely firm about it. If the Government wants to do it, it
should arm the whole nation and that cannot be done in a day. Our
freedom would be meaningless if it cannot be preserved with nonviolence.
Maulana Minnat Allah Saheb asked whether or not Government should provide
alternative accommodation to the people where there had been a heavy loss of life and
property or where the Muslims were in a very small minority and still afraid to return
to their homes on any account.
GANDHIJI:
1

By all means, the Government should get houses built

Friends’ Service Unit

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

415

for them.
The Maulana then asked if the people should be given rations till they found
employment and if the Government should help them in finding employment.
GANDHIJI: The Government should certainly help them. Those
who have lost their means of livelihood like the loom, etc., should be
provided these things so that they can stand on their own feet once
again.

[From Urdu]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—III, pp. 53-6

421. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
April 29, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

This is my last evening here. Tomorrow I shall have to go to
Delhi. I beseech you not to come to the station to see me off. I do not
like people shouting and making noise. My ears cannot stand noise. If
there is no noise around I can even sit down to work as there is always
a lot of work pending with me. But if a lot of people gather round and
raise a din I cannot work. Nor can I rest when I want to. Two or three
persons who would be escorting me would be enough. I grant that
people come out of love. But forming such big crowds is no sign of
true love. What is that love which makes a nuisance of itself ?
Major General Shah Nawaz came to me today. He is working in
Masaurhi. The Muslims who are going to settle down there are being
looked after by him. The Government is no doubt doing all this work
but help from those who can give it is also welcome. Shah Nawaz
Saheb is doing this work very well. He talked to me about his work. I
asked him to put down his points in writing. I shall give you the gist
of what he has written down for me:
A meeting was held at Atarpur at which a panchayat of the local
Hindus and Muslims was formed. The head of the Panchayat came to
Patna and exhorted the Muslim refugees to go back to their homes.
He told them that they should regard him as their friend as before and
trust him. He assured them that he would protect them at the cost of
his life. His words had some effect and some fifty Muslim families
returned to their villages. They are now living there is peace and they

416

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

no longer require police protection. The Government also provides
them food through General Shah Nawaz. When he distributed the
foodstuffs to the Muslims, the Hindus protested. They said the
Muslims had suffered at their hands and so they would arrange for
their food. And they have been doing it. The local Hindus are also
helping the Muslims in harvesting their crops.
Shah Nawaz Saheb also went to Bir. A Muslim from that place
went up to him and said that he wanted to return to his village. But he
saw danger in going three. The General permitted him to go and,
providing him a police escort, asked him to proceed without fear. But
as he was going a few Hindus of the village Panchayat stopped him
and asked why he had the police escort with him. The Muslim villager
was scared. He said he was frightened to go alone. The Hindus said it
was a shame on them that he should go under police protection. They
urged him to trust them and said that they would look after his safety
and he should not have the police to escort him. The Muslim villager
was persuaded at last. He realized that the Hindus were after all his
friends and he sent back the escort.
The third thing is that there are also some Sikhs working with
Shah Nawaz Saheb who are discharging their responsibilities very
well. One among them is Lt. Kartar Singh. He carried the beddings of
the returning Muslims to their respective houses. The Muslims
appreciated this gesture. They thought they need not be afraid of men
who had been offering such services to them. When somebody died in
one of the Muslim families, Kartar Singh dug the grave all by himself.
This has been very largely removing the fear from the hearts of the
Muslims. And the work is proceeding well. But that does not mean
that things are going on equally well in all places. If, in all the places
where the Hindus have committed grave crimes, work is done along
the lines followed in these three places, the Muslims would certainly
return to their homes. There is no doubt about it. The Government
would of course rebuild the houses that have been destroyed or
damaged. But you too should help in putting up the houses again.
All the houses should be ready by June. This is what Shah
Nawaz Saheb also desires. Hence you must give your full help.
If all the Hindus here start treating the Muslims in a friendly
manner, the fire that is raging today would be extinguished. This fire
should be put out at once. If no attempts are made to extinguish the
fire at its source it would reduce everything to ashes. Bihar is a big

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

417

province. If all is well here Calcutta and the other places which are
going through fire will return to normal.
I wish that when I return from Delhi your hearts would have
changed so much that all the Hindus and Muslims of this place would
be able to tell me that I need not stay here and that I could go back.
[From Urdu]
Gandhijike Dukhe Dilki Pukar—III, pp. 50-3

418

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I
CLEMENT ATTLEE’S STATEMENT 1
February 20, 1947
It has long been the policy of successive British Governments to work
towards the realization of self-government in India. In pursuance of this policy, an
increasing measure of responsibility has been devolved on Indians, and today the
civil administration and the Indian armed forces rely, to a very large extent, on Indian
civilians and officers. In the constitutional field, the Acts of 1919 and 1935 passed
by the British Parliament, each represented a substantial transfer of political power.
In 1940, the Coalition Government recognized the principle that Indians should
themselves frame a new constitution for a fully autonomous India and, in the offer of
1942, they invited them to set up a Constituent Assembly for this purpose as soon as
the war was over.
The declaration of the Prime Minister of 15th March last, which met with
general approval in Parliament and the country, made it clear that it was for the Indian
people themselves to choose their future status and constitution and that, in the
opinion of His Majesty’s Government, the time had come for responsibility for the
Government of India to pass into Indian hands. . . .
The Cabinet Mission . . . proposals, made public in May last, envisaged that
the future Constitution of India should be settled by a Constituent Assembly
composed in the manner suggested therein, of representatives of all communities and
interests in British India and of the Indian States.
Since the return of the Mission, an Interim Government has been set up at the
Centre. . . . In all the Provinces, Indian Governments, responsible to legislatures, are
in office. . . .
His Majesty’s Government are anxious to hand over their responsibilities to
a government which, resting on the sure foundation of the support of the people, is
capable of maintaining peace and administering India with justice and efficiency.
It is therefore essential that all parties should sink their differences, in order that they
may be ready to shoulder the great responsibilities which will come upon them next
year. . . .
Cabinet Mission . . . obtained . . . the method by which a Constitution
1

Vide “Speech at Prayer Meeting”, 23-2-1947. Only extracts are reproduced

here.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

419

should be worked out. . . . His Majesty’s Government there agreed to recommend to Parliament a constitution worked out in accordance with the
proposals made therein by a fully representative Constituent Assembly. But if
it should appear that such a constitution will not have been worked out by a
fully representative Assembly, before the time mentioned in paragraph 7, His
Majesty’s Government will have to consider to whom the powers of the Central
Government in British India should be handed over, on the due date, whether as a
whole to some form of Central Government for British India or, in some areas, to the
existing Provincial Governments, or in such other way as may seem most reasonable
and in the best interests of the Indian people.
Although the final transfer of authority may not take place until June 1948,
preparatory measures must be put in hand in advance. It is important that the
efficiency of the civil administration should be maintained and that the defence of
India should be fully provided for. But, inevitably, as the process of transfer
proceeds, it will become progressively more difficult to carry out, to the letter, all the
provisions of the Government of India Act of 1935. Legislation will be introduced in
due course to give effect to the final transfer of power.
In regard to the Indian States, as was explicitly stated by the Cabinet Mission,
His Majesty’s Government do not intend to hand over their powers and obligations
under Paramountcy to any government of British India. It is not intended to bring
Paramountcy, as a system, to a conclusion earlier than the date of the final transfer of
power, but it is contemplated that for the intervening period, the relations of the
Crown with individual States may be adusted by agreement.
His Majesty’s Government will negotiate agreements in regard to matters
arising out of the transfer of power with representatives of those to whom they
propose to transfer power.
His Majesty’s Government believe that British commercial and industrial
interests in India can look forward to a fair for field their enterprise under the new
conditions. The commercial connection between India and the United Kingdom has
been long and friendly and will continue to be to their mutual advantage.
His Majesty’s Government cannot conclude this statement without
expressing, on behalf of the people of this country, their goodwill and good wishes
towards the people of India as they go forward to this final stage in their achievement
of self-government. It will be the wish of everyone in these islands that,
notwithstanding constitutional changes, the association of the British and Indian
peoples should not be brought to an end; and they will wish to continue to do all that
is in their power to further the well-being of India.
The Indian Annual Register, 1947, Vol. I, pp. 142-3

420

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX II
LETTER FROM J. B. KRIPALANI 1
March 1, 1947
. . . These matters are, I find, beyond my depth. Moreover I have enough to do
to keep myself morally straight to sit in judgement on others and specially those who
are morally and spiritually miles ahead of me. I can only say that I have the fullest
faith in you. No sinful man can go about his business the way you are doing. Even if
I had a lurking suspicion, I would rather distrust my eyes and ears than distrust you. . .
.
Sometimes I thought that . . . you may be employing human beings as means
rather than as ends in themselves. But then I take consolation in the thought that
that consideration cannot be absent from your mind and that if you are sure of
yourself, no harm can come to them. Then knowing you to be a great student of the
Gita I have wondered if you are not doing violence to the principle of lokasangraha
(conservation of social good), wisely propounded therein. But this consideration,
too, I am sure, must not be absent from your calculations, in this experiment of
yours. . . . I know your attitude to woman is the only right attitude as you are one of
those who consider her an end in herself and not merely as a means. You have never
exploited her.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Bk. II, p. 221

APPENDIX III
LETTER FROM SIR HUGH DOW 2
GOVERNOR’ S CAMP,
BIHAR,
March 17, 1947
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

Thank you for your letter of today’s date. I have always held that no public
man can hope to reform other people and make them better unless he searches his own
heart and devotes his first attention to trying to become a better man himself. I do
not know why you should have been so surprised at this view being held by what you
call a bureaucrat: it is probably not rarer among them than among other loosely
labelled classes.
1

Vide “Letter to J. B. Kripalani”, 24-2-1947. Only extracts are reproduced

2

Vide “Letter to Sir Hugh Dow”, 17-3-1947

here.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

421

I do not wonder that my Ministers reacted strongly to your summary of our
conversation. May I put your points a little more fully:
(1) From the beginning of the riots I thought my Ministers should have at
once declared their intention to compensate those who had suffered
damage in them. Had it been done immediately, I think a good deal of the
organized hostility against the Ministry’s measures would not have
arisen. At it was, it was only after considerable delay that an
announcement was made.
The Prime Minister is well aware of my views about this. On my
part, I quite realized the difficulties he felt about making a commitment of
unknown financial liability.
(2) I think it is true that some officials drew from this the inference that the
Ministry did not regard the matter as urgent. When I visited Chapra in the
middle of January, no money or materials had actually been distributed,
although the riots had taken place at the end of October, and the debris
was just as the rioters had left it.
I told the Prime Minister my impressions on my return, and I am
glad to say that he took the necessary steps at once by impressing on
district officers that rehabilitation was the most urgent work before them.
I believe the Prime Minister has always realized this, and I certainly did
not intend to convey to you, that the Ministry themselves were in any
way half-hearted about it. But for some months, in my opinion, this view
was held by many subordinate officials, because of the original delay in
getting off the mark.
(3) I have no recollection of having touched at all on the topic of punishment
of the guilty. Perhaps, as you have been seeing so many people in rapid
succession, you have attributed to me views given by some of your
visitors.
Actually, my views on this are rather the reverse of those suggested.
I do not think it is going to be possible to punish, judicially, any but a
tiny fraction of the culprits, and that a lot of time of police and
magistrates, that might be better spent, is likely to be entirely wasted in
the attempt. In my opinion, the only effective way in which this matter
could have been effectively dealt with was by the imposition of collective
fines.
(4) I do not think the Ministry has turned down League demands merely
because they were League demands. But I think the Hindu public of Bihar
was, and perhaps is, averse from treating Muslim refugees more
generously than they think Hindu refugees are treated in Bengal, and in

422

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the beginning there was a tendency to wait and see.
I think we have been unwise in taking a hostile attitude to “pockets”. What we
should have done was to have been prepared to consider such proposals on their
merits, and to place on the Muslims themselves the responsibility for suggesting
definite schemes and carrying them out if they were sanctioned. I have discussed this
with the Prime Minister who is aware of my views and I think not hostile to them.
When we have paid compensation to a sufferer, it should be left to him to decide where
and how he will spend it, just as it would be if he had drawn his compensation from an
insurance company.
As regards the question of minorities in general, differences between me and
my Ministers have never, I think, gone to a stage when they were not resolved by
friendly discussions. In this particular matter of the recent disturbances, I have never
had occasion to think of exercising any special powers in opposition to ministerial
advice. The question of restoring confidence between the two great communities is
one of extraordinary difficulty, and I should not like you to get the impression that
there has been any lack of co-operation between me and the Ministers on this subject.
As regards the mica industry, I will send you a note as soon as I can prepare it.
But my personal concern in this is not about the condition of the working men in the
industry, about which I know little, but about the way in which child labour is
exploited.
Yours sincerely,

HUGH DOW
M. K. G ANDHI, ESQ.
P ATNA
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 229-32

APPENDIX IV
N. K. BOSE’S LETTER TO KEDAR NATH AND OTHERS
P ATNA
March 16, 1947
MY DEAR . . .,

. . . Swami Anand asked me this morning if he could say to his friends that I
disapproved of Gandhiji’s action. It is with reference to this question that I should try
to make my position clear. Hence this letter.
. . . From a serious study of Gandhiji’s writings I had formed the opinion,
which was perhaps not unjustified, that he represented a hard, puritanic form of selfdiscipline, something which we usually associate with mediaeval Christian ascetics
of Jain
recluses.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

423

So, when I first learnt in detail about Gandhiji’s prayog or experiment, I felt
genuinely surprised. I was informed that he sometimes asked women to share his bed
and even the cover which he used, and then tried to ascertain if even the least trace of
sensual feeling had been evoked in himself or his companion. . . .
But when I learnt about this technique of self-examination employed by
Gandhiji, I felt that I had discovered the reason why some regarded Gandhiji as their
private possession; this feeling often leading them to a kind of emotional unbalance.
The behaviour of A, B or C, for instance, is no proof of healthy psychological
relationship. Whatever may be the value of the prayog in Gandhiji’s own case it does
leave a mark of injury on the personality of others who are not of the same moral
stature as he himself is, and for whom sharing in Gandhiji’s experiment is no
spiritual necessity.
This has been the reason why I have sometimes spoken or written strongly to
Gandhiji on the subject of repression and its effects upon those who come under his
influence either in private or in public life. But, you will see, this charge is quite
different from the one to which you or your friends subscribe. This is also the reason
why I have drawn a distinction in the case of Manu, whose relation to Gandhiji is of a
completely different order.
I hope my position is quite clear. But if it is not, please do not hesitate to
write.
Yours sincerely,

NIRMAL KUMAR BOSE
Post-script
Even with regard to the ‘experiment’, I would stand by Gandhiji, if—
1.

the other party were a willing agent, voluntarily entering into the
experiment with a knowledge of the possible consequences upon her own
personality;

2.

and the public knew about the experiment and expressed their mind over
it.

The second is otherwise unnecessary, but has only been called for because
Gandhiji himself invited public opinion on this subject twice in his prayer speeches
in Noakhali. He expected the public to express an opinion even when they did not
know the entire details of the situation. But, even if after knowing everything, the
public thought that Gandhiji was in the wrong, while he considered himself to be
right, I would stand by him.
My Days with Gandhi, pp. 173-5

424

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX V
LETTER FROM N. K. BOSE 1

MASAURHI,
March 18, 1947
BAPUJI,

After receiving your letter written yesterday in the train, I had about an hour’s
talk with you in which I tried to refute the charge against me that I had formed
judgement hastily without giving A or others any chance of presenting their case
fully. . . .
Personally, I have practised the Freudian technique of dream analysis on
myself and have derived immense benefit, as it has helped to bring to the surface
submerged desires which had been causing trouble, and thus helped me to deal with
them satisfactorily. . . .
Bapuji, you originally called me to service under you while you were in
Bengal. The University gladly granted me indefinite leave so long as you needed my
services. But the interest of my students has also been suffering. When I have to
choose between the amount of service I can render to you here in Bihar and for science
in the University, I would place the latter first. But if it had been in Bengal, I would
have sacrificed the latter interest, because I would then have known that so far as
translating your speeches into Bengali was concerned, I would have been more useful
than most of your other assistants. But now that you are in Bihar, men like
Pyarelalji or others would be in their elements with their mastery over Hindustani and
their undoubtedly great ability for secretarial work. So I would love to make room for
anyone whom you may choose.
When once more you are in Bengal and feel the need of my services, the
University will gladly grant me leave for service under you without hesitation.
Hence my plan is to leave for Calcutta even tonight if you do not object.
Yours affectionately,

N. K. B.
My Days with Gandhi, pp. 178-81

1

Vide “Letter to Nirmal Kumar Bose”, 18-3-1947. Only extracts are reproduced

here.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

425

APPENDIX VI
CONGRESS WORKING COMMITTEE’S RESOLUTION
ON THE PUNJAB1
During the past seven months India has witnessed many horrors and tragedies
which have been enacted in the attempt to gain political ends by brutal violence,
murder and coercion. These attempts have failed, as all such attempts must fail, and
have only led to greater violence and carnage.
The Punjab, which had thus far escaped this contagion, became six weeks ago
the scene of an agitation, supported by some people in high authority, to coerce and
break a popular ministry which could not be attacked by constitutional methods. A
measure of success attended this, and an attempt was made to form a ministry
dominated by the group that had led the agitation. This was bitterly resented and has
resulted in increased and wide-spread violence. There has been an orgy of murder and
arson and Amritsar and Multan have been scenes of horror and devastation.
These tragic events have demonstrated that there can be no settlement of the
problem in the Punjab by violence and coercion, and that no arrangement based on
coercion can last. Therefore, it is necessary to find a way out which involves the
least amount of compulsion. This would necessitate a division of the Punjab into
two provinces, so that the predominantly Muslim part may be separated from the
predominantly non-Muslim part.
The Working Committee commend this solution, which should work to the
advantage of all the communities concerned, and lessen friction and fear and
suspicion of each other. The Committee earnestly appeal to the people of the Punjab
to put an end to the killing and brutality that are going on, and to face the tragic
situation, determined to find a solution which does not involve compulsion of any
major group and which will effectively remove the causes of friction.
The Indian Annual Register, 1947, Vol. I, pp. 118-9

1

426

Vide “Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru”, 20-3-1947
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX VII
INTERVIEW WITH LORD MOUNTBATTEN1
Top Secret

April 1, 1947

Mr. Gandhi . . . gave me his views on the origin of Hindu-Muslim animosity,
and though he did not hold the British responsible for its origin, he said their policy
of “Divide and Rule” had kept the tension very much alive, and that I should now reap
what my predecessors had deliberately sown.
He urged me whatever happened to have the courage to see the truth and act by
it, even though the correct solution might mean grievous loss of life on our departure
on an unprecedented scale.
Finally, he gave me the first brief summary of the solution which he wishes
me to adopt:
Mr. Jinnah should forthwith be invited to form the Central Interim
Government with members of the Muslim League. This Government to operate under
the Viceroy in the way the present Interim Government is operating.
Any difficulty experienced through Congress having a majority in the
Assembly to be overcome by their able advocacy of the measures they wished to
introduce.
I need not say that this solution coming at this time staggered me. I asked
“What would Mr. Jinnah say to such a proposal?” The reply was, “If you tell him I
am the author he will reply ‘Wily Gandhi’.” I then remarked, “And I presume Mr.
Jinnah will be right?” To which he replied with great fervour, “No, I am entirely
sincere in my suggestion.”
At this moment the A. D. C. reported that the Tibetan Mission had arrived, and
our conversation therefore had to be terminated until the following day.
I did however obtain Mr. Gandhi’s permission to discuss the matter
with Pandit Nehru and Maulana Azad, in strict confidence, the next time they came to
see me.

ADDENDUM:
During the course of the discussion Mr. Gandhi gave it as his considered opinion as a student of history and of world politics that never
before, in any case of history he had read about in recent or past times,
had so difficult or responsible a task been imposed on any one man as that
which now faced me. I thanked him sincerely for realising the position in which
I was placed.
From a photostat: C. W. 11020. Lord Mountbatten Papers.
Broadlands Archives Trust. Also The Transfer of Power, Vol. X, p. 69

Courtesy:

1

As recorded by Lord Mountbatten. Vide “Interview with Lord Mountbatten”,
1-4-1947

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

427

APPENDIX VIII
INTERVIEW WITH LORD MOUNTBATTEN1
Top Secret

April 2, 1947

The meeting lasted from 2.30 p. m. to 4.30 p. m.
To begin with we discussed the question of holding enquiries in Bihar and
Bengal. I told him the views of the Governor of Bihar, of Sardar Patel and of myself,
that enquiries were a waste of time and money, as well as a potential source of further
communal strife.
He flatly disagreed, and said that it was, in his opinion, essential that the
Congress Government in Bihar should in all events show good faith by holding an
enquiry which would reveal the appalling excesses committed by the Hindus in Bihar.
We both agreed, however, that this was really a matter for the Provincial
Government to settle, and I suggested that he should discuss the matter in the
meanwhile with the Home Member, Sardar Patel.
After this Mr. Gandhi came down firmly for his great plan, which he had
revealed to me originally on Tuesday. I will repeat it here in greater detail.
He wants me to invite Mr. Jinnah to form a new Central Government for India,
which will be the Government to which I am to turn over power. He suggests I should
leave it to Mr. Jinnah to select the Ministers, if necessary entirely from the Muslim
League, but if he feels so inclined he can of course then make it a coalition
Government by including Nehru and other Congress Ministers as well as
representatives of Minorities. In fact he suggests that Jinnah would be well advised
to try and get the highest class team together and one likely to enjoy the greatest
confidence of the Assembly.
He assured me that the Muslim League had many men of greater calibre than,
for example, Nishtar and Ghazanafar Ali Khan.
The essence of the scheme was that it should be put through quickly
in order that I might have as many months as possible as Viceroy and President of the Cabinet, and, by retaining the right of veto, continue to exercise
complete control in the interests of fair play. The fact that I should be there
to see fair play for the first few months would ensure Mr. Jinnah’s Government not doing anything foolish which would prejudice its reputation in the
Assembly or in the country; and he felt that I could guide them along in a manner
which would ensure their continuing along the straight and narrow path after I left in
1

As recorded by Lord Mountbatten. Vide “Speech at Prayer Meeting”,
3-4-1947

428

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

June 1948.
If Mr. Jinnah refused this offer, then, Mr. Gandhi pointed out, the offer would
have to be made to the only other great party in India—Congress. He hoped that
Congress would invite Ministers from all shades of opinion including the Muslim
League to participate in a Coalition Government.
I twitted him that he really desired me to form a Central Government run by
Congress, to whom I would turn over power, and that the preliminary offer to Jinnah
was merely a manoeuvre.
He assured me with burning sincerity that this was so far from being the case
that he then and there volunteered to place his whole services at my disposal in trying
to get the Jinnah Government through, first by exercising his influence with the
Congress to accept it, and secondly by touring the length and breadth of the country
getting all the peoples of India to accept the decision. He convinced me of his
sincerity, and I told him so.
He agreed that I should discuss this plan with Maulana Azad and Nehru.
Finally, he said that he proposed also to discuss it with those two and with
Mr. Kripalani. He agreed as to the supreme importance of complete secrecy,
particularly as far as the Press were concerned.
He asked if he might quote me as being in favour of this plan, to which I
replied that the most he could say was that I was very interested by it, but that I would
require an assurance from some of the other leaders that they considered it capable of
being implemented before I would commit myself to its support.
We discussed alternatives, and I told him I favoured the Cabinet Mission plan
most of all, and he replied that he too would be in favour of it if it could be revised.
Finally I discussed the possibility of turning over power to the areas of India
in accordance with the wishes of the majority of the residents in those areas. Broadly
speaking this would make a Hindu India with a Congress Government in Delhi, a
truncated Pakistan, and the large states like Mysore, Travancore, Hyderabad,
Kashmir, and groups of States, each having separate power turned over to them,
owing allegiance to a Central authority for Defence, External Affairs,
Communications, and possibly food.
He agreed that whatever the decision, it should be taken soon and implemented
as early as possible, and that meanwhile it would be an excellent thing if I remained
in charge of the Central Government with the power of veto until June 1948.
From a photostat: C. W. 11021. Lord Mountbatten Papers. Courtesy:
Broadlands Archives Trust. Also The Transfer of Power, Vol. X, pp. 83-4.

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

429

APPENDIX IX
INTERVIEW WITH LORD MOUNTBATTEN1
Top Secret
April 3, 1947
The meeting lasted from 2.30 p. m. to 4.30 p. m.
We continued our talks on Mr. Gandhi’s great scheme for the All-India Jinnah
Government. He informed me that those of the leaders of the Congress he had spoken
to had all agreed that it was feasible and would support him, but that he had not yet
had time to talk to Pandit Nehru, which he intended to do that evening.
He was more than ever intense about his scheme as being the best solution.
But he agreed that if I was unable to decide on that solution, he would support me in
any other solution which I could put before him as being in the best interests of the
Indian people.
He agreed that if the Muslim League were completely intransigent, partition
might have to come, though he was most anxious to retain as strong a Centre as
possible in this case.
He agreed that an early decision was vital to end communal conflict and to give
time to implement the decision. And finally he reiterated his desire that whatever
happened I should retain firm charge at the Centre till June 1948 at the very earliest,
in order to act as an umpire and exercise a guiding hand during the early stages of selfgovernment.
He said that his great friend Badshah Khan was staying with him. I had never
heard the name and asked him to elucidate. He referred to him as the Frontier Gandhi,
and I then recognized him to be the same person as I knew under the name of abdul
Ghaffar Khan, brother of Dr. Khan Sahib the Premier of the Congress-Muslim
Government in the N. W. F. P.
Mr. Gandhi said that Abdul Ghaffar Khan had informed him that the Governor,
Sir Olaf Caroe, had demanded the resignation of his brother, Dr. Khan Sahib and had
shown himself to be very partial towards the Muslim League and to influence the
British officials in that Province accordingly.
In view of the fact that Lord Ismay had just returned from a visit to the N. W. F.
P. I sent for him, and Mr. Gandhi repeated his allegation.
Lord Ismay explained the position as he saw it, and pointed out that there must
have been misunderstanding.
I invited Mr. Gandhi to bring Abdul Ghaffar Khan at 2.30 the following day to
meet Lord Ismay and myself.
From a photostat: C. W. 11022. Lord Mountbatten Papers. Courtesy:
Broadlands Archives Trust. Also The Transfer of Power, Vol. X, pp. 102-3
1

As recorded by Lord Mountbatten. Vide “Speech at Prayer Meeting”,
3-4-1947

430

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX X
INTERVIEW WITH LORD MOUNTBATTEN1
Top Secret

April 4, 1947

The meeting lasted from 2.30 p. m. to 4.30 p. m.
Mr. Gandhi brought with him as promised Abdul Ghaffar Khan. Lord Ismay
attended the meeting.
Abdul Ghaffar Khan gave a very forthright denunciation of the Governor of the
N. W. F. P. and all his officials, particularly the political officers dealing with the
tribes. . . .
I asked Mr. Gandhi for his views. He said he feared that there were many
British members of the I. C. S., particularly among the highly placed ones, who cold
not bear to see the British leave India, and who had clung all along to the theory that
if they could only support the Muslim League actively, to the point at which it could
be held that the British could not leave India to civil war, then the British would be
compelled
to stay.
He pointed out that the views held by Mr. Winston Churchill were so well
known that had he been in power or had there been any chance of his returning to
power, the line taken by all those I. C. S. officials would have achieved its object. . .
.
I asked Mr. Gandhi for some more examples of biassed officials. He said that
although he did not know Sir Francis Mudie personally, all his friends in Sind told
him that he was extremely pro-Muslim League and much too friendly with his
Government.
I pointed out that he had previously agreed with Abdul Ghaffar Khan that Sir
Olaf Caroe was insufficiently friendly with his Congress Government in the N. W. F.
P., and now he accused Sir Francis Mudie of being too friendly with the Muslim
League Government in Sind.
Mr. Gandhi replied that he did not wish Governors to be biassed one way
or the other; their friendliness with their Government should be the impartial
friendliness which a constitutional monarch should bestow upon any government
which came to power.
He advised me most strongly to get rid of any officials who could not be
brought to see that they must remain impartial and helpful during the final stages.
After this Mr. Gandhi spoke about the Princes. He said that the
Princes were really the creation of the British; that many of them had
1

As recorded by Lord Mountbatten. Vide “Outline of Draft Agreement”,
4-4-1947

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

431

been gradually created up from small chieftains to the position they now held,
because the British realized that they would become strong allies of the British under
the system of paramountcy
In fact he maintained that the British had, from the imperialistic point of
view, acted very correctly in backing the Princes and the Muslim League, since
between these two, had we played our cards really well, we could have claimed it was
impossible for us even to leave India. He appreciated that my task was rendered all
the more difficult by the line taken by my predecessors.
He considered it wicked of Sir Stafford Cripps not to have recommended the
turning over of paramountcy to the Central Government representing the sovereignty
of the Indian nation.
I replied that although I could see the argument for turning over paramountcy
to a really strong Central Government representing the whole of the Indian nation, I
had not yet seen any workable scheme for producing a really strong Central
Government, and in fact the chances of there being anybody to whom paramountcy
could be turned over seemed to me to be remote.
Only one scheme would achieve this, and that was the famous Gandhi scheme.
I therefore asked him to explain this once more for Lord Ismay’s benefit. On
conclusion I asked Abdul Ghaffar Khan if he really thought that Congress would
accept this scheme, and that it would be workable. To this he gave a very definitely
affirmative reply.
I then invited Lord Ismay to take Mr. Gandhi to his room and put his scheme in
writing.
From a photostat: C. W. 11023. Lord Mountbatten Papers. Courtesy:
Broadlands Archives Trust. Also The Transfer of Power, Vol. X, pp. 120-1.

APPENDIX XI
LETTER FROM LORD ISMAY 1
Personal

THE VICEROY’ S HOUSE,
NEW DELHI,
April 6, 1947

DEAR MR. GANDHI,

Thank you for your letter of 5th April. It was very kind of you to dictate it at
such a late hour in order that it might reach me last night.
I think that there has been some misunderstanding about the form of
the short note which I prepared last Friday.
As I understood it, Lord
Mountbatten, on the conclusion of his talk with you, asked if you would be so
1

432

Vide “Outline of Draft Agreement” and “Letter to Lord Ismay”, 6-4-1947
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

good as to spare a little more time for a talk with me about your plan, in
order that I might prepare a short note summarizing its salient features in general
terms. He had no intention, so far as I know, that I should attempt anything formal or
elaborate. I have now shown him your letter and he confirms that my interpretation
of his wishes was correct.
I have prepared a revised copy of my note substituting your version of point 7
for the original and including your point 8. This covers much the same ground as my
original points 3 and 4, which therefore now become redundant.
Lord Mountbatten has asked me to say that he much looks forward to having
another talk with you about your plan before you leave.
May I conclude with an expression of my personal thanks for having spared
me so much of your time last Friday.
Yours sincerely,

ISMAY
[PS.]
The Viceroy assures you that he will not mention your plan to Mr. Jinnah until
he has had a further talk about it with you.
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 239-40, and
The Transfer of Power, Vol. X, p. 140

APPENDIX XII
LETTER FROM LORD MOUNTBATTEN 1
THE VICEROY’ S HOUSE,
NEW DELHI,
April 7, 1947
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

Ismay has shown me your letter to him of 6th April, and we both are most
upset to think that any act, or omission, on our part should in any way increase the
great burden you are bearing. I therefore think it right to send you the following
personal explanation.
As we were parting last Friday afternoon, I said that your plan had many
attractions for me and I asked you if you would be so good as to explain it to Ismay,
who had not been present when you first propounded it. On your agreeing to do so, I
asked Ismay to make a note of its salient features, and I authorized him to talk it over
in confidence with the Reforms Commissioner. I am extremely sorry if by these
observations I gave you the impression that I wished your plan reduced to the terms of
formal agreement.

1

Vide “Letter to Lord Ismay”, 6-4-1947

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

433

As I explained to you during the many talks that we have enjoyed,
my aim has been and is to keep a perfectly open mind until I have had
the advantages of discussions with important Indian political leaders with the object
of seeking an agreement between all parties, so that peace can be restored in the
country and an acceptable basis for the transfer of power be worked out. When these
preliminary conversations have been completed, I shall then have to make up my
mind as to what I am going to recommend to His Majesty’s Government and, before I
do so, I shall most certainly take advantage of your kind offer of further discussion
with you.
Yours sincerely,
MOUNTBATTEN OF BURMA

M. K. G ANDHI, ESQ.
BHANGI C OLONY
R EADING R OAD
NEW DELHI
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 241-2, and
The Transfer of Power, Vol. X, pp. 145-6

APPENDIX XIII
LETTER FROM LORD MOUNTBATTEN 1
THE VICEROY’S HOUSE,
NEW DELHI,
April 7, 1947
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

Many thanks for your letter of today. I find it difficult to advise you. Though
the root causes of the disturbances in the Punjab still exist there has been a
considerable measure of success in dealing with immediate disturbances, and I doubt
whether you ought to exhaust yourself by undertaking any tour in the Punjab at this
time of the year.
I quite agree that those outbreaks of violence are not a mere detail. What we
have to secure is a settlement between the parties at the centre and, if possible, a
combined front against violence. It is the effort to find a solution which will occupy
all my efforts in the near future, and I know I can rely on help from you wherever you
may be .
I enjoyed meeting you so much and found all you had to say of the greatest
interest.
Yours sincerely,

MOUNTBATTEN OF BURMA
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 242-3, and
The Transfer of Power, Vol. X, p. 147
1

434

Vide “Letter to Lord Mountbatten
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX XIV
INTERVIEW WITH LORD MOUNTBATTEN1
Top Secret

April 12, 1947

The meeting lasted from 11.45 a. m. to 1.45 p. m.
I thanked him for the letter he had sent me the previous day saying that he had
been unable to get his great plan for a Jinnah government through responsible
members of Congress, and had therefore had to withdraw it. He regretted his failure
very much, but said he thought I could still go ahead on the plan myself if I ardently
believed in it.
I told him that however much I believed in it I couldn’t possibly go
ahead with success in a matter in which he had already failed himself with the
Congress.
I then told him I wanted to report to him in strict confidence all my
conversations with Mr. Jinnah, to put him in the picture.
I then said that although my mind was still open I was now particularly
studying two alternative solutions:
(a) the Cabinet Mission plan; (b) a truncated Pakistan. I asked him how much he
personally favoured a united India, and of course he said he was extremely anxious for
it. I asked him how far he thought Congress would go towards accepting the Cabinet
Mission plan and warned him that Mr. Jinnah was bitterly opposed to the Cabinet
Mission plan and therefore Congress would have to go at least as far as Mr. Jinnah
wanted before he would even consider it.
Mr. Gandhi said that the whole bone of contention was the interpretation
of the meaning of the Cabinet Mission plan, and he suggested that I should call
in the High Court to interpret it. I told him that the differences of opinion had
already been resolved by the statement of the Cabinet of the 6th December; but
he held that the people who drafted the statement were not the people who had to
interpret it, and gave as an analogy Acts of Parliament. He said that if a difference of
opinion arose as to the meaning of a particular clause in law, it was the judge who
settled the meaning and who interpreted the law and not the people who framed
the law. He seemed convinced that the Congress would accept any interpretation the
High Court gave.
I told him I did not see how we could possibly have a different interpretation put on the meaning of the Cabinet Mission plan to that which the
Cabinet Mission themselves had announced on December the 6th after
1

As recorded by Lord Mountbatten. Vide “Letter to Lord Mountbatten”,
11-4-1947 and “A Joint Appeal”, 12-4-1947

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

435

taking legal advice.
I then discussed the joint statement calling for a truce and a denunciation of the
use of force to obtain political ends. He said he would gladly sign the statement
shown to him or any similar statement if Mr. Jinnah and I wished him to do so;
though he must point out that the statement, to have any value, should be signed by
Mr. Kripalani on behalf of the Congress as a whole.
He said he had told Pandit Nehru that if indeed I could get Mr. Jinnah to sign
and abide by this statement, I should have taken the greatest step politically in the
recent history of India, and one which he hoped he had been instrumental in putting
into my head.
Although I have absolutely no recollection of Mr. Gandhi making any such
suggestion, I felt it would be politic not to point this out. For although I believed it
to have been my own idea, I am only too delighted that he should take the credit.
In the meanwhile Lord Ismay came down at my request with the Cabinet
Mission plan and the Statement of December the 6th. Mr. Gandhi appeared never to
have read this statement although he knew of its existence. He thought he was at
Noakhali at the time and did not have time to read it. After reading it very carefully he
came back to his original point of view that the Cabinet Mission statement should be
submitted to the High Court for interpretation, and he felt sure the Congress would
abide by their decision.
Lord Ismay pointed out that it was less a matter of finding out what the actual
legal interpretation was than of ascertaining what common interpretation would be
acceptable both to the Muslim League and the Congress; and to this Mr. Gandhi
unreservedly agreed.
Meanwhile he called upon me to renounce the use of the British Army, and said
that he included the British officers of the Indian Army in that term; in other words
any of the armed forces under my orders.
I pointed out that except for the Punjab, which is under a Section 93
Government, in all other provinces it was the local Government that called out the
troops, and that if he wanted that practice to stop why didn’t he make a start by
talking to the Congress Government in Bihar where he was off to that evening. He
said sadly he had already spoken to them, and that if they had had a strong conviction
of non-violence they would offer themselves as sacrifices rather than allow these
massacres to continue of trying to stop them by the use of troops
I did not altogether follow his argument here, and may have misquoted him.
But since it appeared to be purely academic, and a matter he was going to put before
the local Congress Government in Bihar, I did not pursue it.
He then said that he advised me to go on strengthening the Interim
Government, and making them function correctly for the next 14 months;
after which he considered I should hand over power to the Interim Government. This

436

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

staggered Lord Ismay and myself, and we both pointed out that that meant handing
over power to one party, namely Congress, to the grave disadvantage of the other
party, the Muslim League, which would not fail to produce strife, possibly leading to
civil war.
Mr. Gandhi, with a wily smile, pointed out that if Mr. Jinnah indeed signed
the paper we were sending round to him he could not again use force for political
purposes.
I must say I was speechless to find that he proposed, if Mr. Jinnah indeed
meant to sign and stick to the statement, to take advantage of this to impose a
Congress Government over the Muslims. Here again I find it hard to believe that I
correctly understood Mr. Gandhi.
Finally, after substituting the word “communities” instead of “peoples” and
having the declaration of truce retyped, Mr. Gandhi appended his signature in all three
scripts: English, Urdu and Gujarati; and Lord Ismay took the paper for Sir Eric
Mieville to take round to Mr. Jinnah.
From a photostat: C. W. 11024. Lord Mountbatten Papers. Courtesy:
Broadlands Archives Trust. Also The Transfer of Power, Vol. X, pp. 211-3

VOL. 94: 17 FEBRUARY, 1947 - 29 APRIL, 1947.

437

