1. NOTES
DOG IN THE MANGER

The volume of information being gained daily shows how
wickedly the salt tax has been designed. In order to prevent the use of
salt that has not paid the tax which is at times even fourteen times its
value, the Government destroys the salt it cannot sell profitably. Thus
it taxes the nation’s vital necessity, it prevents the public from
manufacturing it and destroys what nature manufactures without
effort. No adjective is strong enough for characterizing this wicked
dog-in-the-manger policy. From various sources I hear tales of such
wanton destruction of the nation’s property in all parts of India.
Maunds if not tons of salt are said to be destroyed on the Konkan
coast. The same tale comes from Dandi. Wherever there is likelihood
of natural salt being taken away by the people living in the
neighbourhood of such areas for their personal use, salt officers are
posted for the sole purpose of carrying on destruction. Thus valuable
national property is destroyed at national expense and salt taken out
of the mouths of the people.
Nor is this all. I was told on entering the Olpad taluka that
through the poor people being prevented from collecting the salt that
was prepared by nature or from manufacturing it they were deprived
of the supplementary village industry they had in addition to the
spinning-wheel.
The salt monopoly is thus a fourfold curse. It deprives the
people of a valuable easy village industry, involves wanton destruction
of property that nature produces in abundance, the destruction itself
means more national expenditure, and fourthly, to crown this folly, an
unheard-of tax of more than 1,000 per cent is exacted from a starving
people.
I cannot help recalling in this connection the hue and cry that
was raised when I first proposed the burning of foreign cloth. It was
considered to be an inhuman, wasteful proposal. It is generally
admitted that foreign cloth is harmful to the people. Salt on the other
hand is a vital necessity. Yet it has been and is daily being wantonly
destroyed in the interest of a wicked exaction.
This tax has remained so long because of the apathy of the
general public. Now that it is sufficiently roused, the tax has togo.
How soon it will be abolished depends upon the strength the people
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

1

are able to put forth. Happily the test will not be long delayed.
EXAGGERATED S TATEMENTS

Paragraphs have appeared in the Press to the effect that 18 of
my companions have become ill and incapacitated. This is a gross
exaggeration. It is quite true that that number had to take two days’
rest at the Broach Sevashram. But that was because they were fatigued
and footsore. With the exception of the case of smallpox which
proved to be quite mild, there was no illness worth the name. One of
the companions certainly had strong fever. But that fever too proved
to be due to overzeal in marching. He had a wiry constitution and was
over-confident about his ability to pull through without resting. He
would not therefore rest till nature absolutely compelled him. But
both are quite well now though being weak they are still being made
to rest a few days. They expect to join the company at Surat. A third,
though still a little footsore, insisted on walking, but had to rest at
Ankleshvar. All the others are fit and marching daily. It has become
necessary to make this statement in order to prevent anxiety on the
part of guardians and friends. It would be ungrateful not to mention
here the great attention the villagers are paying to the satyagrahis and
the exceptional care that was bestowed upon the smallpox patient by
the Charotar Education Society at Anand and on the footsore men by
Dr. Chandulal’s staff at Sevashram.
A moral may also be drawn from these accidents. The modern
generation is delicate, weak and much pampered. If they will take part
in national work, they must take ample exercise and become hardy.
And no exercise is as good and as effective as long vigorous marches.
Gymnastics and the like are good and may be added to walking. They
are no substitutes for walking, justly called the prince of exercises.
Our march is in reality child’s play. Less than twelve miles per day in
two stages with not much luggage should cause no strain. Those who
have not been footsore have gained in weight. I may add too that the
hot Condy’s fluid, baths and wet sheet packs are proving a most
efficient remedy for smallpox.
THE TRUE S PIRIT

Shrimati Khurshedbai Naoroji came the other day to Sandhier, a
halting station during the march. She was accompanied by Mridulabehn, the daughter of Sjt. Ambalal Sarabhai, Madalasa, the little daughter of Jamnalalji, Shrimati Vasumatibehn and Radhabehnfrom the
2

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Ashram. They had to await a lift for Sandhier. They wanted to turn to
national account the time at their disposal. They saw that the surroundings of the place were not overclean. They therefore decided to
clean up the rubbish and so asked for brooms from the surprised
villagers. As soon as the villagers realized what had happened, they
also joined these national scavengers, some of whom were drawn from
aristocratic families and the village of Sayan perhaps never looked as
clean as when these sisters utilized their spare time for scavenging. I
commend this true service, this mute speech of the sisters to the army
of young men who are pining to serve and free the country. Freedom
will come only when we deliver a simultaneous attack on all the weak
points. Let it be known that all these sisters have enlisted as civil
resisters and are eagerly, even impatiently, awaiting marching orders.
In this campaign of swaraj by self-purification, it will be nothing
surprising if the women outdo the men.
MOTILALJI’S MUNIFICENCE

The palatial Anand Bhavan, the pride of the Nehrus, is to be
national property from 6th instant, the national Satyagraha Day.
Motilalji has much service to his credit. Jawaharlal is his living gift to
the nation. There was no need to add brick and mortar. But I know he
has been pining to part with that spacious house which has
the historical associations now made known to the public. Truly,
Motilalji has spent as he has earned. Let us prove worthy of his
services and his gifts.
Young India, 3-4-1930

2. REMEMBER 6TH APRIL
This will be in the readers’ hands on Thursday 3rd instant. If
there is no previous cancelling, they all may regard this as the word
from me that all are free and those who are ready are expected to start
mass civil disobedience regarding the salt laws, as from 6th April.
Let me gather up what has been said in these pages at various
times.
The only stipulation for civil disobedience is perfect observance
of non-violence in the fullest sense of the term.
Mass civil disobedience means spontaneous action. The workers
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

3

will merely guide the masses in the beginning stages. Later the masses
will regulate the movement themselves.
Congress volunteers will watch developments and render aid
wherever needed. They will be expected to be in the forefront.
Volunteers may not take sides in any communal quarrels.
Wherever there is a violent eruption, volunteers are expected to
die in the attempt to quell violence.
Perfect discipline and perfect co-operation among the different
units are indispensable for success.
If there is true mass awakening, those who are not engaged in
civil disobedience are expected to occupy themselves and induce
others to be engaged in some national service, such as khadi work,
liquor and opium picketing, foreign-cloth exclusion, village sanitation,
assisting the families of civil resistance prisoners in a variety of ways.
Indeed if there is a real response about civil resistance regarding
the salt tax, we should by proper organization secure boycott of
foreign cloth through khadi and secure total prohibition. This should
mean a saving of 91 crores per year, and supplementary work for the
millions of unemployed. If we secure these things, we cannot be far
from independence. And not one of these things is beyond our
capacity.
Young India, 3-4-1930

3. PROHIBITION
Pandit Dev Sharma “Abhaya” proposes to launch a prohibition
campaign in the area around Hardwar. I have given him my approval
saying that if he has the self-confidence he should certainly take up
the work. The idea of non-co-operation was born out of the spirit of
self-purification. That is why in 1920-21 such a great campaign for
prohibition became possible and even succeeded. The campaign had
later to be halted, or one may say it stopped by itself, because
impurity, that is, coercion, had entered it.
This time people have realized that coercion will not bring lasting results. Therefore, in areas where there is no risk of violence and
where workers in sufficient numbers are available, prohibition
campaign can and should be launched.
This campaign can be carried on in three ways:
1. by visiting the homes of addicts and dissuading them from
4

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

drinking;
2.by persuading the liquor-booth owners to close their business;
and
3. by picketing the liquor booths.
All these three can also be taken up simultaneously. In the first
two there is no risk whatever. In the third a risk of violence exists. In
regard to this the Government may issue prohibitory orders. If such
orders are issued we should not be frightened. The easiest way to offer
civil disobedience is to disregard them.
Clearly, everyone cannot do picketing nor can it be resorted to
everywhere. So the campaign will be somewhat restricted in area. But
even though it is restricted it is good work and it may also bring good
results. Therefore if those who have the self-confidence take up such a
campaign, it can only give me pleasure.
[From Hindi]
Hindi Navajivan, 3-4-1930

4. LETTER TO KAPILRAI MEHTA
Midnight [April 3, 1930] 1
CHI. KAPILRAI,

I got the news about you. There is no hurry. Come on Saturday,
but only if you have no temperature. They will send you back from
Navsari. Do not apply the wet-sheet pack any longer. Do take milk.
There is no harm in taking hot-water bath. As for the cough, consult
the doctor. He says that you should remain in Surat for at least ten
days. I also see no harm in your coming on Saturday if you have no
temperature on that day.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Show this to the doctor.
C HI . K APILRAI S AINIK
ANAVIL ASHRAM, S URAT
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1594. Courtesy: Kapilrai Mehta; also G.N.
3972
1

From the postmark

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

5

5. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING, VANJH 1
April 3, 1930
Only two days now remain before we conclude this march. We
shall then set to work. A large number of people will be present. I told
you about the scarcity of water in Dandi. We shall have to use water as
if it was milk, like the Jain sadhu who lived in the forest. I must also
tell you that they are finding it very difficult to arrange for our meals.
So after reaching Dandi all that you will be given three times a day
would be _ seer of gram, _ seer of puffed rice, and boiled water with a
tola of ghee and jaggery added. You shall get used to this for we have
to lead austere lives.
Another piece of information that I have received is that the
Government intends to use fire-engines to stop us. We have prepared
ourselves for death from cannons and guns, compared to which this is
nothing. Of course, even with jets of water, the Government can kill us
through torture. It is certainly painful. However, you must bear in
mind that not one of us will retreat. I do not think the Government
will be so cruel, but we must be prepared.
[From Gujarati]
Prajabandhu, 6-4-1930

1

6

Held at 4 a.m.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

6. SPEECH AT NAVSARI
April 3, 1930
Navsari is the headquarters of our Parsi brethren. The total
number of Parsis in the world is less than a hundred thousand and of
these the majority live in the Bombay Presidency, chiefly in Navsari
and Bombay.
If I come across a Parsi friend anywhere in the country while
touring, I never fail to recognize him.
An English writer called Lang while comparing charitable attitudes the
world over has established that in generosity Parsis, if we consider
their number, top the list. The Parsi brethren who are like a drop in
the ocean, have made the world talk of their generosity. History
records no other instance of a community having practised such
dispassionate generosity. Whenever I have stretched out my hand
before Parsis, it has never returned empty.
In the satyagraha in South Africa too, Parsi brethren were in the
forefront. Sheth Rustomji sacrificed his all. That is why I have sung
his praises like a minstrel.
How can I repay this debt to the Parsis? Being a beggar, how can
I repay my debts with money? I am not a saheb or a Viceroy that I
may give them high offices or titles. Hence, today, having come to
Navsari, I shall sing their praises and take away something from them.
Parsi brethren are, of course, there in this struggle. A Zoroastrian
friend who is like a brother to me and who is suspected of having
cancer, is nevertheless dying to take part in this struggle.
Take the case of Dadabhai’s grand-daughters. These sisters are
just crazy and impatient to join the struggle. What more then need I
say about the assistance from Parsis? However, I want something
special.
You may take it that the salt tax is as good as abolished. Ever
since I set out from the Ashram, at various places Parsis have showered
blessings on me and said: “May you triumph. God is with you. And
come back after securing swaraj.” And I shall return, if I am alive,
after winning swaraj.
You can make the largest contribution if, instead of joining in
the salt struggle, you participate in the prohibition movement.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

7

We ruin ourselves by spending Rs. 25 crores on liquor. Because
of this evil habit our homes have been destroyed. Although I was a
lawyer in South Africa, I moved about a good deal among our labouring brethren there. These labourers also came to see me about their
problems. And, since I had made myself part of their lives they told
me their joys and sorrows, their tales of woe. And they would break
down and cry while telling me how they had ruined themselves
through drink. I know from experience that many of my labourer
brethren in Ahmedabad are in a similar plight. Those who are given to
drink often cannot distinguish between wife, mother and daughter.
Man degenerates into brute. Whoever gets entrapped in this vice becomes an animal. I have with my own eyes seen the captain of a ship,
when drunk, rolling in vomit. I ask my Parsi brethren to help me
rescue addicts from this vice.
Mithubehn saw people given to drink. It moved her and leaving
her mother, her home and her belongings she has plunged into the
cause of prohibition. However, the sacrifice by one Parsi lady is not
sufficient to complete this task. The heart of every Parsi must be
touched for the sake of this cause. And, where it seems necessary,
persons like me may even have to offer satyagraha. Parsis are intelligent and capable and they earn crores of rupees. They are godfearing. If, from today, Parsi owners of liquor booths give up this
trade on realizing that to do business in liquor is a sin, other
liquor-booth owners will certainly follow their example.
When we save thus 25 crore rupees we shall have rehabilitated
crores of poor homes. The gods will then shower flowers upon us.
If you can enter the hearts of people and make them give up
liquor, it will generate such power that we shall be able to achieve
whatever we want.
I ask the ladies in particular to help in this. They should visit the
homes of those who drink and plead with them. I have seen women of
the Salvation Army do this. Why should not the women of India do
the same? Are they—the Hindu, Muslim and Parsi women—less
capable of doing good? Are not those who are caught in the vice their
own brothers? If I go and reason with them, they will quarrel with me
as they will with other men. They will not, however, be disrespectful or
insulting to any woman. They are not such beasts that they will not
understand you. As soon as they come in contact with you they will
be awakened, they will step back and, seeing the love and affection
8

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

pouring from your eyes, they will conclude that it is some sati or
yogini confronting them and ashamed of themselves they will give up
liquor.
When you sisters come to know the wives and daughters of
drunkards, when you make friends with their ignorant, straying
children, when you see that they continue to drink although they own
nothing but the sky above them and the earth below, you cannot but
feel inspired to take up this sacred cause.
I leave this message for the sisters in case the Government
whisks me away to prison. Gujarati women are trained in such matters.
Women in no other part of India have received as much training as
they have. Hence all you sisters must plunge into the field which has
already been prepared by Mithubehn.
In this non-violent struggle, women can play an even
greater part than men because they are the very embodiment of renunciation and compassion, i.e., of non-violence. A man understands the
dharma of non-violence through his intellect whereas a woman has
imbibed it even before her birth. A man escapes with very little
responsibility, but women have to serve their husbands, their children
and other members of the family.
Parsis have laid me under a crushing burden of debt to them.
They have made a slave of me by their words of love. And a slave
enjoys the right to demand more from his master. In this yajna of
self-purification, I shall not be satisfied even if you drown me in
money or provide me with volunteers. I shall be satisfied only when
the entire Parsi community hears my appeal and when Parsi brothers
and sisters identify themselves with the work that Mithubehn is doing.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 13-4-1930

7. SPEECH AT DHAMAN
April 3, 1930
Many people from this taluka were my clients in South Africa.
Many people from the surrounding villages also had contributed their
share in South Africa. Of the eighty of us many are from Baroda
State, since this state is spread all over Gujarat. Hence we cannot make
any distinction between the two. The natives of this place gave me
much help in the Satyagraha in South Africa. Their leaders also were
Muslims. Right to the present moment the Congress has pursued the
policy of having a certain number of people from this community in
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

9

its higher echelous. In South Africa, however, this was not the practice.
Among the Muslims there was Ahmed Kachalia who roared like a
lion. He was a man of his word and I can say as a satyagrahi that I
have not come across a single Hindu or Muslim in all India who could
surpass him in courage and integrity. Kachalia qualified himself as a
satyagrahi even in difficult circumstances. He put up with everything
in order to keep his word. His son Ali too studied under me in South
Africa. I knew him quite well.
I have greater expectation from Dhaman because I have
found here thirty spinning-wheels. I am happy that there are so many
here. The fact is that although the subjects of Indian States
cannot participate in this struggle, they can work for khadi and prohibition to their hearts’ content. Secondly, I should like to congratulate
you that your village has not been guilty of the cruel and stupid practice of many parents who get their children married without understanding the implications of the Sarda Act. Amongst the Antyajas of
this village, nine men and ten women have vowed not to take liquor or
carrion. In such things women must go along with men.
[From Gujarati]
Prajabandhu, 6-4-1930

8. LETTER TO REGINALD REYNOLDS
BIJALPUR,

April 4, 1930
MY DEAR REGINALD,

I was delighted to have your letter. There is no question of
restoration of confidence, for it was never lost. Assimilation of true
ahimsa is a slow and sometimes painful process. And very few realize
that there is such a thing as mental himsa and that it needs to be
eradicated. It is to me a great joy that you saw the thing at once. I do
not mind the other letters you have written. I should be glad if you
will make another promise to yourself, viz., never to write for the Press
for the time being. Let Young India be your sole vehicle for the time
being. What do you say to your writing a brief note in Young India
repenting of the unconscious indiscretion?1 I understand what you say
about your engagement.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: C.W. 4533. Courtesy: Swarthmore College, Philadelphia
1

10

No such note appeared in Young India.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

9. SPEECH IN VIJALPORE
April 4, 1930
After this meeting is over, I have to make two more speeches
before I reach my destination. I shall make a speech at Dandi if I have
to. Forty-one Headmen have handed in their resignations and the
President of the Taluka Committee has congratulated them. Besides
the 47, I have been informed today of some seven more.
Bharat Bhushan Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya has resigned
from the Legislative Assembly and six others have followed him.
These six are also well-known men. On the one hand Bharat Bhu-shan
Malaviyaji has resigned, on the other the Headmen have resigned. The
action of the latter is more valuable, for Malaviyaji was not a
Government servant. He had entered the legislature with a view to
serving the coun-try if possible. I can think of no one who has served
the country with such single-minded devotion as Malaviyaji has.
Nevertheless I assign greater value to the resignations of the Headmen
of Gujarat. The reason is that Malaviyaji has not been a part of the
administration of this country. The latter is run by these Headmen and
Malaviyaji in fact only lends a gloss to the administration which we
fear. The gloss can always be separated from the utensil. Headmen,
however, are not a gloss which can be separated. They along with the
Talatis are the two legs on which this Government rests. An
enumeration of the Headmen and Talatis in the seven lakh villages of
this country would give us fourteen lakhs of such legs and in this
manner the resignation of each Headman would amount to the loss of
one leg. It is for this reason that these resignations have value. This is
so, however, only if they have been tendered sincerely. Sardar, who
once had an income ranging bet-ween Rs. 1,000 and Rs. 2,000 a
month has to beg for his meals today. For him, it was not easy to
resign. The poor Headman, on the other hand, receives a paltry sum
of Rs. 50 or 51-8-0 by way of a bounty. What are the Headmen then
clinging to? If they want to be loyal to Sardar they will have to be
disloyal to the Government.
I am going to Dandi. But I would request you not to follow me
there. If you do, come as soldiers carrying your food on one shoulder
and water on the other. Come with the intention of doing some work.
Do not come with the idea of having a picnic. The stock of khadi is
fast being exhausted. You must use it sparingly in the same manner as
you use ghee. If you cannot obtain khadi, it is your duty to come clad
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

11

only in loin-cloths made of khadi, but on no account must you come
clad in foreign cloth. Those who drink must not come to take the
pledge.
[From Gujarati]
Prajabandhu, 6-4-1930

10. STATEMENT TO ASSOCIATED PRESS
DANDI,

April 5, 1930
God be thanked for what may be termed the happy ending
of the first stage in this, for me at least, the final struggle for freedom.
I cannot withhold my compliments from the Government for the
policy of complete non-interference adopted by them throughout the
march. After the graceless and childish performance in the matter of
Mr. Vallabhbhai’s arrest and imprisonment and equally unprovoked
arrest and imprisonment of Mr. Sen Gupta, I was wholly unprepared
for this exemplary non-interference. I am not so foolish as to imagine
that the Government has suddenly lost their proved capacity for provoking popular resentment and then punishing it with frigh-tfulness. I
wish I could believe this non-interference was due to any real change
of heart or policy. The wanton disregard shown by them to popular
feeling in the Legislative Assembly and their high-handed action leave
no room for doubt that the policy of heartless exploitation of India is
to be persisted in at any cost, and so the only interpretation I can put
upon this non-interference is that the British Gove-rnment, powerful
though it is, is sensitive to world opinion which will not tolerate
repression of extreme political agitation which civil disobedience
undoubtedly is, so long as disobedience remains civil and, therefore,
necessarily non-violent.
It remains to be seen whether the Government will tolerate, as
they have tolerated the march, the actual breach of the salt laws by
countless people from tomorrow. I expect extensive popular response
to the resolution of the Working Committee. I have seen nothing to
warrant the cancellation of the notice I have already issued, that all
committees and organizations throughout the length and breadth of
the land are free, if they are prepared, to commence from tomorrow
civil disobedience in respect of the salt laws. God willing, I expect with
my companions (volunteers) to commence actual civil disobedience at
6.30 tomorrow morning. 6th April has been to us, since its culm12

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

ination in Jallianwala massacre, a day for penance and purification.
We, therefore, commence it with prayer and fasting. I hope the whole
of India will observe the National Week commencing from tomorrow
in the spirit in which it was conceived. I am positive that the greater
the dedication to the country’s cause and the greater the purification,
the speedier will be the glorious end for which millions of India
consciously or unconsciously are striving.
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, p. 761

11. A MESSAGE
DANDI,

April 5, 1930
I want world sympathy in this battle of Right against Might.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: Mahatma Gandhi (Album), p. 87

12. MESSAGE TO AMERICA1
DANDI,

April 5, 1930
I know I have countless friends in America who are in deep
sympathy with this struggle but mere sympathy will avail me nothing.
What is wanted is concrete expression of public opinion in favour of
India’s inherent right to independence and complete approval of the
absolutely non-violent means adopted by the Indian National Congress. In all humility but in perfect truth I claim that if we attain our
end through non-violent means India will have delivered a message
for the world.
The Bombay Chronicle, 7-4-1930

1

This was given to S. A. Brelvi, correspondent of the Eastern News and Press
Agency, New York.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

13

13. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
DANDI,

April 5, 1930
CHI. MRIDU,

I have received your letter. I have never had any doubt that we
have to do real service only in the villages by living in villages. I have
thought about a special work for women. You will read about it in
Navajivan1 . If you like it, there is courage in it, and there is bravery.
May God shape you into a first-class volunteer.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 11178. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

14. LETTER TO KANTIPRASAD C. ANTANI
April 5, 1930
BHAI KANTIPRASAD,

May the conference 2 be a success. If there is nothing else you
can do, you should at least do khadi work.
MOHANDAS GANDHI

[From Gujarati]
Purusharthi Kantiprasad Chandrashankar Antani, p. 83

1
2

14

Vide “To the women”, 6-4-1930 and “To the women”, 13-4-1930.
The Anjar Prajakiya Parishad which was to be held on April 20, 1930
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

15. SPEECH AT DANDI
April 5, 1930
When I left Sabarmati with my companions for this seaside
hamlet of Dandi, I was not certain in my mind that we would be
allowed to reach this place. Even while I was at Sabarmati there was a
rumour that I might be arrested. I had thought that the Government
might perhaps let my party come as far as Dandi, but not me
certainly. If someone says that this betrays imperfect faith on my part,
I shall not deny the charge. That I have reached here is in no small
measure due to the power of peace and non-violence: that power is
universally felt. The Government may, if it wishes, congratulate itself
on acting as it has done, for it could have arrested every one of us. In
saying that it did not have the courage to arrest this army of peace, we
praise it. It felt ashamed to arrest such an army. He is a civilized man
who feels ashamed to do anything which his neighbours would disapprove. The Government deserves to be congratulated on not
arresting us, even if it desisted only from fear of world opinion.
Tomorrow we shall break the salt tax law. Whether the Government will tolerate that is a different question. It may not tolerate it,
but it deserves congratulations on the patience and forbearance it has
displayed in regard to this party.
If the civil disobedience movement becomes widespread in the
country and the Government tolerates it, the salt law may be taken as
abolished. I have no doubt in my mind that the salt tax stood
abolished the very moment that the decision to break the salt laws was
reached and a few men took the pledge to carry on the movement
even at the risk of their lives till swaraj was won.
If the Government tolerates the impending civil disobedience
you may take it for certain that the Government, too, has resolved to
abolish this tax sooner or later. If they arrest me or my companions
tomorrow, I shall not be surprised, I shall certainly not be pained. It
would be absurd to be pained if we get something that we have invited
on ourselves.
What if I and all the eminent leaders in Gujarat and in the
rest of the country are arrested? This movement is based on the faith
that when a whole nation is roused and on the march no leader
isnecessary. Of the hundreds of thousands that blessed us during our
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

15

march and listened to my speeches there will be many who are sure to
take up this battle. That alone will be mass civil disobedience.
We are now resolved to make salt freely in every home, as our
ancestors used to, and sell it from place to place, and we will continue
doing so wherever possible till the Government yields, so much so that
the salt in Government stocks will become superfluous. If the
awakening of the people in the country is true and real, the salt law is
as good as abolished.
But the goal we wish to reach is yet very far. For the present
Dandi is our destination but our real destination is no other than the
temple of the goddess of swaraj. Our minds will not be at peace till we
have her darshan, nor will we allow the Government any peace.
Those Headmen who have resigned their posts should prove
themselves true to their word and should regard it as a sin to serve this
Government till freedom is won.
For the last four or five days, I have been speaking about other
constructive activities also, and they should be taken up immediately
in this Jalalpur taluka. Surat district is notorious for the drink habit,
and the Jalalpur taluka is particularly so. Now that the wind of
self-purification is blowing here, it should not be a difficult task to
eradicate the drink evil altogether. There is sin in every leaf of the
palm tree. Its only value lies in the ruin it brings us. This plant is like
poison to us. All palm trees should therefore be cut down.
There should not be a single person in Jalalpur taluka wearing
foreign cloth. Everyone who comes to Dandi should come with the
intention to participate in, and offer his mite to, this swaraj yajna.
I would not like anyone coming to Dandi wearing foreign cloth.
If it is our wish to turn Dandi into a place of pilgrimage or a bulwark
of swaraj, everyone coming here should be dressed exclusively in
khadi. I know that the stocks of khadi in the khadi stores are about to
be exhausted, and if, therefore, you fail to get a full-length sari or
dhoti and come wearing only a khadi langoti, you will be welcome
here as a civilized person. If, ignoring my suggestion, any of you
come to Dandi wearing foreign cloth, I shall have to place at the
points of approach to Dandi, volunteers who will kneel before you
and request you to wear khadi. If you feel offended by their doing so
and slap them in the face, those satyagrahis will let themselves be
slapped.
Dandi was chosen not by a man but by God. How otherwise
16

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

could we have chosen for the battle-field of satyagraha such an
out-of-the-way place—a place where no food grains are to be had,
where there is scarcity of water, where thousands can assemble only
with difficulty, walking ten miles from the railway station, and where if
you are travelling on foot, you have to negotiate creeks full of slush
and mud? The truth is that in this struggle we have to put up with
suffering. You have made the road from Navsari to Dandi famous
throughout the world by arranging for free drinking-water at frequent
intervals all along it. If this struggle did not have your approval, your
blessings, why would you be doing this?
Dandi should be a sacred ground for us, where we should utter
no untruth, commit no sin. Everyone coming here should come with
this devout feeling in his heart. If you brothers and sisters come
forward as true volunteers and commit civil disobedience of the salt
law, no matter what force the Government threatens to use against you,
and if you do whatever else you may be required to do, we shall have
in us the power to attain in a single day what we hold to be our birthright. Time was when I was infatuated with British rule, as British law
taught that the person of every individual is sacred. According to that
law, the police cannot kill or manhandle a man even though he might
be guilty of murder. It is the duty of the police to produce the man
alive before the court. Nor has the police any authority outside the jail
to seize from a person even goods alleged to have been stolen. But
here the very opposite is true. How otherwise can the police have the
authority to decide whether I hold a handful of salt or pebbles?
Every man’s house is his castle. Our body also is a fort of a
kind. And once salt has entered that fort, it should not be allowed to
be forced out of it even if horses are made to trample on your heads.
From today we should begin cultivating the strength of will to see that
a fist holding salt does not open even if the wrist should be cut off.
Unauthorized entry into a house is a barbarous act. It is for a
judge to decide whether I hold in my hand salt or dust. The English
law holds the human person to be sacred. If every official assumes the
authority of a judge and enters our homes, he would be acting as a
robber.
But the officers in India, when they feel impelled, throw the
English laws to the winds or ignore them completely at their sweet will
and, resorting to the Act of 1818, render them all ineffective.
They have started arresting one leader after another. But
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

17

according to the principle of this struggle, that the leader is one who
endures the utmost suffering, one of those left outside should assume
leadership and take the movement forward.
This is a struggle not of one man but of millions of us. If three
or four men can fight and win swaraj, they will rule the country
afterwards. Hence, in this struggle for swaraj millions should offer
themselves for sacrifice and win such swaraj as will benefit the vast
masses of the country.
The Government is taking away from us all the eminent leaders
one after another. If we get ready to follow in their footsteps and do
the duty shown by them, we can smile at what the Government is
doing, but if we fail to do our duty we should feel ashamed. The
leaders are behind the bars, and now we in our turn should take their
place.
It is true that many of the leaders in and outside Gujarat have
been jailed, that many volunteers have been wounded because they
would not part with the salt in their hands, and that, at places, some
were beaten so hard that they became unconscious. But I remain
unmoved. My heart now is as hard as stone. I am in this struggle for
swaraj ready to sacrifice thousands and hundreds of thousands of men
if necessary. Since we have embarked upon a movement which will
send thousands to jail, how can we weep over their imprisonment? In
this game of dice we are playing, the throw has been as we wanted.
Should we then weep or smile? This is God’s grace; let us remain
unmoved and watch His miracles.
If in spite of our breaking several salt laws the Government takes
no notice of the camp here till the 13th, we shall disband it after that
date and go somewhere else. But this plan depends entirely on the
Government. For the present, we can but take what the Government
gives.
If you have not yet gone out to remove salt, let the whole village
get together and go. Hold the salt in your fist and think that you are
carrying in your hand salt worth Rs. 6 crores. Every year the
Government has been taking away from us Rs. 6 cores through its
monopoly of salt.
You can today take the pledge not to eat salt supplied by the
Government. You have a mine of salt right at your doorsteps.
There is at Rohtak a humble, brave and selfless publicworker
named Lala Shyamlal. At the time of the non-co-operation movement
18

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in 1921 he gave up his law practice but resumed it whenthe tide was
low and earned thousands of rupees. However, his heart melted once
more after the Lahore Congress and he pleaded to be taken into the
Ashram. He also expressed his eagerness to join this march of satyagrahis to Dandi. But why should I exchange this gold mohur for a
mere pice? So I sent him back to Rohtak. As he writes to me, he took
leave of me after he had understood the value of non-violence better
than before. He has now vowed never to give up non-violence and
never to prove disloyal to the Ashram principles. This Lala Shya-mlal
has now been arrested on a charge of spreading disaffection against
the Government.
He must have made some speech on the lines of my writings in
Young India in which I preach disaffection as our moral duty. In the
first place, they should apply Section 124A to the person who has
been every moment praying for the destruction of the Empire and has
also been attempting to destroy it—apply it, that is, to myself. But the
true position is that Section 124A can be applied only to a person who
wishes to overthrow the Government by rebellion or armed action. It
can never apply to a person who wishes to destroy the Empire through
self-suffering by following the path of non-violence and truth. But I
am no judge. I have even been disbarred.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 13-4-1930

16. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
DURING DANDI MARCH,

[Before April 6, 1930] 1
CHI. NARANDAS,

If Reginald has asked for a name and if you call him Angad2 the
name is quite appropriate.
Send money to Krishnadas as and when he asks for it. You need
not consult me so long as he asks for Rs. 100 at a time and the total
does not exceed Rs. 1,000. If you yourself feel like asking me, you
may do so.
1

From the contents it appears this was written before the letter to the addressee
dated April 6, 1930.
2
A Vanara messenger in the Ramayana
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

19

You should remove all luggage from Jamna Kutir and similar
buildings in which in any case there is hardly any luggage and which
require no watch.
If Giriraj is not restless, he should remain there for the time
being and look after the tannery. It is necessary that we go on making
shoes, etc. If, however, he is keen on coming, he may. I am writing to
him.
It is difficult to say what we should do about the money which
we receive for the satyagraha campaign. My view is this. The money
which has been received from villages during the march should be
handed over to the Provincial Committee. The other sums which we
receive may remain in the Ashram for the present. However, do as
Mahadev advises. If you have doubt, consult Vallabhbhai. His word
should be final.
I am of the opinion that if Bhansali keeps watch at the Ashram
at night, you should let him do so. He is a man of a frank nature. He
sleeps very little at night. His keeping watch will be a pure action, and
he will probably catch the thief. However, discuss the matter with
Imam Saheb, Mahadev and Mirabehn.
We have given to the Labour Union school Rs. 25,000 from the
Birla Fund. Whatever the figure, send a date-wise statement of account
to Gordhanbhai Patel, Secretary of the Mill-owners’ Association. Send
a copy to me too.
Blessings from

[PS.]

BAPU

Send it immediately. We shall get that money.
From Gujarati: C.W. 8095. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

20

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

17. EXTRACTS FROM SPEECHES IN SURAT DISTRICT 1
[Before April 6, 1930]
It is within your power to remain peaceful and at the same time
set Sardar free before his sentence of three months and three weeks
expires. I ask one hundred per cent of the Headmen, and not fifty per
cent of them, to resign. The same applies to the Talatis also. These two
are the two pillars on which the Government rests. The political
structure of India is supported on these. If these crack, the whole
structure will crumble and mingle with the dust.
*
*
*
Beware! Burn up all false resignations. We can do without these.
If there are people who think that since I am a Mahatma and have
practised penance, and since Sardar is on my side, they will be able to
go back to their posts in a couple of months, they are in for
disappointment. Swaraj may be won within a couple of months or
may take a lifetime. It may be that we shall not win swaraj even after
my bones and those of Sardar are reduced to ashes. Now, however, we
have become outlaws, and that too of a kind that cannot be
disregarded. We have become outlaws by refusing to co-operate with
an Empire on which the sun never sets. This Empire is a mass of untruths, however large that mass may be. It will bow at the very touch of
the breath of truth. However, this can only be accomplished when
such truth is kindled within us. Hence today, at the very outset, I wish
to make up my accounts and warn you not to betray us. To betray me
is to betray Sardar, Mother India and yourselves. No one craves for
your resignations. Do not tender them under the assumption that the
task will be accomplished in a trice. Resign only on the understanding
that you will never again get back your posts as headmen or Talatis.
*
*
*
The women sang the song “It is easy to win swaraj”, but that
has yet to be demonstrated. I have said so much about salt, now I shall
add a couple of lines about the spinning-wheel. Do not conclude from
this that whereas swaraj lies embedded in a mountain of salt, it does
not lie concealed in a strand of yarn. In fact, swaraj lies in the latter
1

Extracted from “Swaraj Gita”. The source does not mention either the places
or the dates of the speeches.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

21

only. There is no other means of bringing happiness and peace to
millions of human beings. Whether all of you come forward to prepare salt or not, keep chanting the mantra of khadi. And what about
liquor? Mithubehn is crazy about this cause. We should be ashamed
of continuing to drink when a Parsi lady gives up her home because
of it.
*
*
*
I am tired of repeating the conditions for swaraj every day. Let
me now practise the dharma that still remains even in addition to it. I
have only to point out your dharma to you As I had decided that regardless of what happened in the country, I should lay down my life or
win swaraj through civil disobedience, I invited others to accompany
me and I have set out. If I am alive tomorrow, I shall set out from here
also after receiving your blessings. I invite those of you who are ready
to accompany me. The others who do not do so should wear khadi
and produce it. There is a dearth of khadi. I, who am one of its
producers, am going away. If I were around, I would supply it to all
by getting it from anywhere. Here I am, a producer of khadi, setting
forth with others who also produce it, and those of its producers who
are left behind do not have the capacity to meet the needs of all. It is
therefore your duty to produce as well as wear khadi.
*
*
*
Even in my dreams, I would not wish anyone ill—be he an
Englishman, a Parsi or a Muslim. I am a well-wisher of all. How then
can it do anything to me? It dare not do so. It would arrest me, if it
could muster up the requisite courage. And even if I should be arrested, while in prison I would pray to God to bring about a change of
heart in this Government and to eradicate the sentiment that has been
born within it which does not befit a human being. In other words,
even in prison I would wish it well. I do not wish to see the King or his
officers murdered; hence, it becomes difficult to arrest and imprison a
person like me. The authorities could certainly arrest me if they
wanted to, but I congratulate them on being ashamed to do so.
However, such a situation will not continue always. They have no alternative but to arrest me some day, and, if they do not do so, the whole
of India will flare up within a short period. I am aware that all you
men and women have not come here today to court arrest. For me, it
is all the same whether I am arrested or remain free. All of you will be
in that position one day.
22

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The Government’s plight is that of the serpent which has
swallowed a rat. It would find it hard to resort to either course of
action—allowing me to remain out or putting me behind the bars. I
am pointing out this ordinary duty to you. Everyone, whether a
Hindu, a Muslim or a Parsi, should follow it. When all of us do so, it is
beyond the power of any Government to arrest us.
*
*
*
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 6-4-1930

18. TO THE WOMEN 1
As I am fully aware of the fact that countless women in India are
illiterate, the principles of education which I have formulated are
concerned with how they can attain their due status in spite of their
lack of education; and it is from these that the means for securing
swaraj have been derived. I can make the claim that this struggle has
been so organized that the women of India, if they so desire, can make
a bigger contribution than the men. The entire khadi movement depends on the women. This movement would collapse today if the
women were to refuse to extend their co-operation to it. At least five
times as many women as men are lending support to the cause of
khadi. As a matter of fact, their number should be regarded ten times
as large since there will be ten women working on a loom which runs
for e-ight hours. Everyone knows that the contribution of men
towards providing yarn for looms is very small, but even in other aspects of khadi work a good number of women are contributing their
share. There are of course a large number of women working the
loom. Hence, with regard to khadi it has already been established that
this activity depends solely on women and it is because of this that
women in India have made such progress which is unprecedented in
Indian history and beyond what anyone had imagined to be possible.
I saw this in the course of my three tours around India and today,
walking through Gujarat, I see the same thing and that in a measure
which can be calculated by the rule of three. That is to say, the awakening among women in a particular area has been in proportion to
the number of spinning wheels working there.
1

The first three paragraphs of this article are not translated here. They are
covered by the first three paragraphs of “To the Women of India”, pp. 219-20.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

23

Considering this and keeping in mind the impatience
of women to take part in civil disobedience, I felt that if women truly
wished to take risks, if they wished to leave a stamp not only on
the history of India but on the history of the world, if they wished to
see a resurgence of the civilization of India, they should find an
exclusive field for themselves. Let us consider this. If women wish to
participate in civil disobedience, they can do so in a very few
days. But, after having found something, I am not interested ininviting
them to offer civil disobedience against the salt law. Even if women
participate in this, they will be lost amongst the men. For I expect that
at every place large numbers of men will come forward. I do not
believe that women will come forward in such numbers. And even if
they do, neither the women nor the men will have anything to do and
the salt tax will be repealed. The more I think the more I feel that we
shall not have much difficulty in getting the salt tax abolished.1
I feel that it is, or it can become, the special field of women to
bring about a change of heart in these people [the drink addicts].
History testifies that man cannot conquer hearts as speedily as woman
can. If women wished they could take up the work of prohibition
today. The following is my idea of it:
1. Trained women should start satyagraha units at various places,
go in deputations to the owners of liquor booths and request them to
give up this trade.
2. They should go to the homes of drink addicts and also start
picketing liquor booths, singing devotional songs and preventing
those entering them from being caught in the vice.2
If liquor booths and opium dens were closed down, it would
mean a saving of 25 crores of rupees of the people’s money. It is
possible to collect 25 crores of rupees of revenue in some other way.
Only one result would follow from this; there would be a heavy
reduction in the expense on the army and the administration—so
heavy a reduction indeed that the very nature of the administration
would be changed. The present policy is based on distrust of the
people. Tomorrow’s policy will be based on trust of the people. In a
policy so based there would be neither a large police department nor a
large army. But why should I involve women in this tangle? At this
1

One paragraph following this is not translated here. It is covered by
paragraph 4 of “To the Women of India”, p. 220.
2
One paragraph following this is not translated here. It is covered by
paragraph 5 of “To the Women of India”, p. 220.

24

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

juncture I merely offer to women the field of prohibition without
entering into discussion of any other field of activity. I believe that
Gujarat is the best place for carrying on this activity. The physically
delicate Parsi lady Mithubehn Petit is the person who has prepared the
ground for this work. And it was her remarkable effort that suggested
this field of work to me. Hence, all that remains to be done is that
Mithubehn’s work should be multiplied a hundredfold. Not that only
a hundred women should prepare themselves for the work, but, rather,
that countle-sswo-men should prepare themselves and the activity
should increase a hundredfold. The manner in which the work is at
present being carried on should be slightly modified. All men should
step aside. They should only do such work as is allotted to them by
women. But the principal work of picketing, of persuading people, of
pleading with them and of taking deputations to the liquor-booth
owners should be done by women alone.1
I have only given an outline of the scheme as I visualize it.
Details may be filled in. It is my desire that women should become
pioneers in this task and should give this activity such momentum that
it will shake up the people as well as the Government.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 6-4-1930

19. WELLS FOR ANTYAJAS
A few weeks ago, Navajivan published Thakkar Bapa’s appeal
for wells for our Antyaja brethren. Some men from Bombay recently
came to see me at Sandhiyer. Thakkar Bapa, too, was present at the
time. I suggested to those friends that they themselves should fill
Thakkar Bapa’s purse. Rs. 40,000 was not too big a sum for them to
give. These Antyaja friends require that amount. Immediately, one of
the rich visitors paid the sum needed for sinking one well. Shri Narandas consulted the others and undertook to raise without delay the
whole sum needed. This filled me with great joy and I comp-limented
the visitors. I now advise these friends to collect this sum and place it
at the disposal of Thakkar Bapa. Wells can be sunk only during the
next three months. No well can be sunk after the monsoon has set in.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 6-4-1930
1

Two paragraphs following this are not translated here. They are covered by
the last two paragraphs of “To the Women of India”, p. 221.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

25

20. MY NOTES
S OME QUESTIONS
QUESTION.

Should one insist upon khadi in jail?
ANSWER. I was not aware of this problem when I conceived the
khadi vow. I feel that such insistence is unnecessary. Ordinarily a satyagrahi should not oppose any of the prison rules which do not violate
his dharma. But everyone should decide his own duty in this regard.
If someone has taken a vow that under no circumstances will he wear
anything but khadi, he should certainly insist upon khadi. But I would
consider it improper for one to take such a vow and go to jail.
Q. Anyone who follows the rule of eating only after having spun
160 strands of yarn would prefer the spinning-wheel to the takli.
Should one therefore insist on being provided with a spinning-wheel
and facilities for carding? Spinning on a takli would take much time
and interfere with prison work, hence the spinning-wheel is an absolute necessity. Is one justified in insisting upon spinning 160 strands
or should one be satisfied with less?
A. Spinning is a yajna so one can insist upon being provided
with a spinning-wheel and facilities for carding. Anybody who has
taken the vow of spinning must insist on both. It is not enough that a
takli is provided. Whether one should be satisfied with less than 160
strands depends upon the vow. If the vow is to spin 160 strands one
cannot do with less.
Q. What should one generally do when, for instance, the food
provided is dirty, or when no urinals are provided, or when one is required to complete the calls of nature within two or three minutes and is
not allowed to visit the lavatory again if the need arises, or when one is
over-burdened with work, or when one cannot sleep owing to the
warders shouting out the roll-call all night long? What kind of
insistence concerning what matter would be regarded as dharma?
A. The common rule in such matters is that those inconveniences
with which one can put up and which do no harm to one’s
self-respect, should be tolerated while in the remaining matters one
should fight as befits a satyagrahi. I would not tolerate dirty food or
filthy utensils. I would not tolerate dirty urinals, but if facilities for this
were provided in my cell I would not object to these. I would certainly
take my own time with regard to evacuation of the bowels and would
not tolerate being hustled in this matter. I would tolerate the noise of
roll-call.
26

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

TO THE HEARTLESS MEN

The heartless Gujaratis do not appear to be concerned about
Gujarati women being killed every day by Primus stoves. I have just
been informed of the death of two women. During the present pilgrimage, I have had first-hand experience of the dangers involved in
using these stoves. Even one of my experienced and skilled colleagues
has had two narrow escapes. As a result of this, I have prohibited the
use of such stoves altogether. Women do not know how to use a
Primus stove, for it does require some skill. And our women cannot
put it on a table. Hence, it is the duty of men to boycott it. So long as
they do not do so, the deaths of the young girls and women from the
use of this stove will be on their heads. Even Primus stoves which have
been bought should be discarded. It is an illusion that the Primus
saves time. We must also consider all the attention it needs when it
goes out of order.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 6-4-1930

21. SWADESHI
The cloth merchants of Bombay are talking of boycotting
foreign cloth. The Gujarat Sabha of Ahmedabad is doing the same.
The intention of both is to help as much as possible the movement for
the boycott of foreign cloth. However, if either of them should make a
mistake, harm may be caused to the movement.
We now find the following varieties of swadeshi:
(1) Pure khadi, i.e., khadi made from hand-spun and handwoven yarn.
(2) Cloth made in India in mills owned and run by Indians and
from yarn that is also produced in such mills.
(3) Cloth made in such mills out of yarn that is wholly or partly
of foreign origin.
(4) Cloth made in any mill which, although located in India, is
owned and controlled by foreigners.
(5) Any object that is made in India.
(6) Any object for the making of which part of the work has
been done in India, for instance, a musical instrument assembled here,
though all its parts were made abroad.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

27

The following are the various forms of boycott.
(a)
Boycott of all foreign cloth.
(b)
Boycott of British cloth alone.
(c)
Boycott of all British goods.
(d)
Boycott of all foreign goods.
In my opinion (1), i.e., pure khadi alone is swadeshi and, true
boycott implies (a), i.e., boycott of all foreign cloth . If item No. (1) is
proved to be swadeshi, other necessary items will prove their swadeshi
character. We shall be unable to satisfy the need for even one article
of swadeshi which is essential, if we try to obtain all swadeshi goods
which may be found to be desirable.
Only one form of boycott, i.e., item (a), boycott of all foreign
cloth, is essential and this can be achieved through khadi alone.
The reader should remember that discussion on other swadeshi
goods has been going on ever since the Congress came into existence
forty-five years ago. Even so, no conclusion has been reached. The
question of pure swadeshi, that is khadi, was first taken up only nine
years ago. Nevertheless, we have achieved a fair amount of success
there. For the furtherance of this cause a national institution has come
into being the like of which I do not find anywhere else in the world.
It is only through khadi that the experiment of civil disobedience on
such a large scale became possible.
The reader should remember that although we have been talking
about boycott of British goods for the past forty-five years, we have
not met with any success in this sphere. Boycott of foreign cloth on
the other hand has now proved so effective that the people have
developed faith in the possibility of such a boycott.
In my opinion it would be harmful from a practical standpoint
to divert the attention of the people from the boycott of foreign cloth
and it will be short-sightedness to think of attempting such a boycott
without the help of khadi. If such a boycott were possible with the
help of Indian mills, this could have been achieved by now, i.e.,
during the last fifty years. Yes, the mills could certainly help khadi in
making the boycott effective. I have already shown how this could be
done in practice.
The swadeshi of Indian mills is not merely useless, it is
also harmful. This is because it puts khadi on a par with mill-made
cloth. This is like the friendship between a tall and a short man. If the
28

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

short man has the same rights as the tall man, he really has none. One
can see with the naked eye that someone who is short cannot stand
alongside someone who is tall. Hence, if the tall man wishes to be
just to the short man he should always put the latter in the front.
He should be ready to renounce anything in his favour. It may even
be necessary for him to lift the short man on his shoulder in order to
sustain him. The relationship between khadi and mill-made cloth is
exa-ctly of this nature. Whereas the latter is well set on its feet, the
former has as yet only learnt to crawl. Hence anyone who has not
taken the vow to wear pure khadi can at least act in the following
manner. He can refuse to wear any cloth which has a single thread of
foreign yarn in it. Instead, he should take the vow of using pure khadi
alone. And, in case he is unable to do so, he should use cloth made in
mills which are exclusively owned and controlled by Indians.
If khadi is not constantly kept in view, the result will be that the
price of cloth made in mills in India—not Indian mills—will keep
increasing and the boycott will never become effective.
1. In this age, no amount of effort would make it possible for
mills to make cloth sufficient to meet the country’s needs.
2. The concern of mills generally is, and will be, profits.
3. The Government can, at any time, suppress the mills.
4. The present trend indicates that mills in this country are
passing under foreign ownership and control.
5. As mills are dependent upon foreign machines and foreign
techniques, they could, all of a sudden, be faced with a difficult
situation.
While on the contrary:
(1) If the sentiment for khadi becomes widespread in the
country, we can produce today as much khadi as we require.
(2) Khadi does not require as much capital as mills do.
(3) It does not require as much technical skill.
(4) It may be said that potentially there are thirty crores of
labourers employed in the production of khadi.
(5) All the implements required for the production of khadi are
made in the country.
(6) Khadi cannot be suppressed either by the Government or
any other power.
(7) Khadi can be produced in every home.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

29

(8) It is not necessary to make khadi at one place and send it to
another. At present it does have to travel to some extent because the
sentiment for khadi has not gained much ground.
The reader will see from all this what precisely swadeshi dharma
means. While practising it, anyone who has imbibed the spirit of
swadeshi will also readily abide by it in all other things. Anyone who
wears khadi out of ignorance, by way of imitating others or out of
hypocrisy, will not be regarded as having taken the vow of khadi, despite the fact that he wears it. Such fashionable khadi-wearers could not
be regarded as advancing the sentiment for khadi. Anyone who uses
khadi with knowledge will start denying himself all foreign goods
which he can do without.
Let us now turn to boycott. It is madness to try and boycott
everything. The idea is indefensible.
It is impossible to boycott only British goods or British cloth.
This is because such goods or cloth can find their way into the
country under the guise of other foreign goods or cloth. During the
days of the Partition of Bengal, British cloth was being sold as swadeshi with the British markings on it removed. So when we think of
boycotting British cloth alone, no purpose is served except that of
giving an impetus to cloth made in Japan and other countries.
So far I have considered the matter only from the view-point of
the boycott of foreign cloth.
But if we consider the situation after swaraj, if we consider the
interests of the starving millions, we can only think of khadi.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 6-4-1930

30

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

22. MILL-OWNERS OF AHMEDABAD
In saying that I am greatly pleased at the kindness shown by the
mill-owners of Ahmedabad, I am not merely being polite: I am expressing the deepest feelings of my heart. Their presence on the eve of
my departure from Sabarmati, their visits to me from time to time and
finally their coming to Surat in a group out of their affection for me
are a happy indication that this struggle is not directed against
mill-owners or against capitalists.
However, I myself attribute a special significance to their
presence and their blessings. I have been associated with them now for
almost fifteen years. During this period, despite the fact that perhaps
some of them regarded my conduct as being detrimental to their
interests, they have accepted me as a friend and our relationship has
been cordial even when there has been a dispute between us. I believe
that their co-operation on this occasion is, to some extent, because of
that relationship. If this conclusion is correct, I have the right to
expect some more practical support from them in addition to their
presence and their blessings.
They have taken a step forward by their decision that
hence-forth they will boycott foreign cloth and use only swadeshi
cloth. This resolution, though commendable, has loopholes. Some
may regard khadi as swadeshi. Others may prefer mill-made cloth
with a border that is made of foreign yarn. The dharma of swadeshi
cannot be practised in this manner. In my opinion, the purest form of
swadeshi to the extent it is practicable is khadi. If this is not possible,
then swadeshi should mean cloth made in mills owned and controlled
by Indians out of yarn spun in those mills. If even this cannot be
done, not only is swadeshi meaningless but it is also harmful from the
point of view of boycott.
If mill-owners encourage khadi and run their mills with an eye
to attaining the object of swadeshi, I regard the boycott of foreign
cloth as something very simple. If I find the time, I hope to consider
this subject in detail in a separate article. Here I wish to show how and
in what ways mill-owners can specially assist this movement. It is
beyond argument that the relations between mill-owners and workers
should be friendly. If, instead of opposing each other, they were to
help each other they would encourage the cause of swaraj. In this
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

31

regard the following points should be borne in mind:
(1) Mill-owners should carefully remove the everyday inconveniences the workers have to face.
(2) Since mostly I am not there and Sheth Mangaldas is old—
even older than I am—there should be a permanent panch to solve
problems as they arise.
(3) Mill-owners should consider the Majoor Mahajan a friendly
body and have faith in it. They should make full use of its assistance
and co-operate fully with it.
(4) With a view to improving their moral and social condition
labourers should be given financial and other assistance whenever
there is need for it. In other words, schools, hospitals, reading-rooms
and such other institutions meant exclusively for them should be
supported without anything being expected by way of return.
(5) Those labourers, clerks and others who wish to participate in
civil disobedience or such other national work, should be given help
and wherever it becomes necessary to relieve them, this should be
done reserving their right to return. If it becomes necessary to support
the families this should be done.
(6) In order to free labourers from the vice of drink, millowners
should start canteens and provide recreation to suit their tastes. In
order to induce abstention those who give up liquor should be
recognized and encouraged in various ways.
(7) There should be no profit motive behind the production of
cloth by mills. The purpose of such production should be boycott of
foreign cloth.
(8) Mills should never produce cloth with the intention of
passing it off as khadi; they should not mark it as khadi or stamp it
with the spinning-wheel; instead, they should produce such qualities
of cloth as cannot be found in khadi at present. In other words, they
should decide upon the quality of cloth to be produced in
consultation with the Charkha Sangh.
(9) Mills should stock khadi, propagate it and give of their talent
and experience for its production.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 6-4-1930

32

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

23. LETTER TO REGINALD REYNOLDS
April 6, 1930
MY DEAR REGINALD,

I hope you had my previous letter1 .
The letter from Wilson2 is quite good. God will keep you out of
harm’s way.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 4534. Courtesy: Swarthmore College, Philadelphia

24. LETTER TO LALA DUNICHAND
DANDI,

April 6, 1930
DEAR LALA DUNICHAND

The news that Lala Shamlal of Rohtak has been arrested has
prompted Lala Surajbhan to rush to the Punjab. I have approved of
the suggestion. Please make what use you like of him. I do hope that
you and Mrs. Dunichand will not fail to sacrifice your all in this final
battle for freedom.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 5588

1

Vide “Letter to Reginald Reynolds”, 4-4-1930.
After the addressee had written an apology to Wilson, author of the critical
comment in the Indian Daily Mail, the latter sent a “very friendly reply” which was
forwarded to Gandhiji.
2

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

33

25. INTERVIEW TO FREE PRESS OF INDIA1
DANDI,

April 6, 1930
Now that a technical or ceremonial breach of the salt law has
been committed, it is now open to anyone who would take the risk of
prosecution under the salt law to manufacture salt wherever he wishes
and wherever it is convenient. My advice is that a worker should
everywhere manufacture salt and where he knows how to prepare
clean salt should make use of it and instruct villagers to do likewise,
telling the villagers at the same time that he runs the risk of being prosecuted. In other words the villagers should be fully instructed as to
the incidence of salt tax and the manner of breaking laws and
regulations in connection with it, so as to have the salt tax repealed
and it should be made absolutely clear to the villagers that this breach
is to be open and in no way stealthy. This condition being known they
may manufacture salt or help themselves to salt manufactured by nature in creeks and pits near the seashore, to use it for themselves and
for their cattle and to sell it to those who will buy it, it being well understood that all such people are committing a breach of the salt law
and therefore running the risk of prosecution or even without
prosecution to be subjected by the so-called salt officers to
harassment. Thus the war against salt tax should be continued during
the national week up to the 13th instant. Those who are now engaged
in this sacred work should devote themselves to vigorous propaganda
for boycott of foreign cloth and use of khaddar. They should also
endeavour to manufacture as much khaddar as possible. As to this and
prohibition of liquor I am preparing a message for the women of
India who, I am becoming more and more convinced, can make a
larger contribution than the men towards the attainment of independence. I feel they will be worthier interpreters of non-violence than
men, not because they are weak, as men in their arrogance believe
them to be, but because they have greater courage or the right type
and immeasurably greater spirit of self-sacrifice.
1

Gandhiji gave the interview after he had broken the salt law by picking up a
lump of salt mixed with mud.

34

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

QUESTION.

Now that you have infringed the salt law and Government have not
interfered with you what do you intend doing afterwards? —the Free Press
representative. Gandhiji replied:
ANSWER.

Oh, I shall continue to manufacture illicit salt.
You must subordinate bread-earning to national interest. You
must take interest in gaining independence for India and freeing her
from the heavy burden of this infernal tax. You must all take
concerted action and co-operate in India’s interest.
The Amrita Bazar Patrika, 7-4-1930

26. SPEECH AT DANDI
April 6, 1930
At four in the afternoon Gandhiji addressed a meeting. Reviewing the day’s
Programme he remarked that the beginning of the national week had been very
auspicious. Whether Government arrested them or not they had to do their duty. He
was sure that all over India people must have started satyagraha on this day.
Proceeding, he said there was not much of natural salt at Dandi since Government
servants had taken timely care to destroy it. That was a monstrosity which it was their
duty to get rid of. When they made a beginning in the morning he had himself picked
up more mud than salt, but after washing and cleaning he could get two tolas of pure
quality which was sufficient for his day’s requirements. That was only a beginning but
that signified great things. Today those who had broken the law had become either
thieves or owners.
He then referred to the raid at Aat. Mr. Antia, the police officer in charge, had
shown considerable prudence in his behaviour. That was the victory of ahimsa. What
an amount of public money Government had wasted in confiscating that salt!
Gandhiji then made a reference to the arrest of Lala Shamlal of Rohtak under
section 124A. He paid a glowing tribute to Lala Shamlal for his excellent national
work.
He could not understand the policy of Government in arresting other workers
and leaving him alone. Not that he was anxious to be arrested, but that was not a just
course. He did not expect any greater honours by his arrest. He was already a
Mahatma. He did not want the title of Mahatma.
He was not at all anxious to go to jail. Surely he enjoyed the good climate of
Dandi. Government must arrest him before others, because he was the greatest
offender. It was the duty of every person in Rohtak to commit breach of 124A under
which Lala Shamlal was arrested. In conclusion, Gandhiji asked the people not to eat
taxed salt any more.

The Bombay Chronicle, 8-4-1930
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

35

27. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
Sunday, After 10 p.m. [April 6, 1930] 1
CHI. MAHADEV,

I hear that Manilal Kothari has been arrested. Ramdas and
others have already been arrested. All this is very good. For you also
it is a matter of days or hours. As for me, it will make no difference
whether I am inside or outside jail.
I have sent the articles for Young India directly to Mohanlal.
You may or may not be there to receive them.
If you get time, organize the women. There will be no harm if
the Ashram women make a start. On the contrary, it may be necessary
that they do so. I am referring to the campaign against drinking.
Surajbhan is going to the Punjab, with my permission, after
hearing about the arrest of Lala Shamlal.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Here they have not laid hands on anyone so far. Sarojini Devi
has remained here and has decided to take Abbas’s place if the old
man is arrested.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11472

1

The arrests of Manilal Kothari, Ramdas and others were reported in
Navajivan, 13-4-1930. The letter was evidently written on the preceding Sunday.

36

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

28. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI,
KARADI ,

10.15 p.m. [April 6,] 1 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

You must have received the reply to your question. Perhaps it
will be better if Purushottam comes over here. The air here is very
good. About arrangements for water we must wait and see what can be
done. There are no signs yet of my being arrested.
That lady Kamaladevi is a vary good-natured woman. She will
stay for about fifteen days. If the place suits her child, she may even
stay on. If she wishes to, she is worth encouraging. See that she does
not feel lonely.
A Bengali gentleman from Santiniketan will be arriving there
for a fortnight’s stay. Cultivate his acquaintance. He, too, is a
frank-hearted man. After gaining some experience, he will return to
Bengal.
It will be very good indeed if Ratilal sticks to the work he has
taken up.
Tell everyone that it is because I do not get time that I do not
write letters to them.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Surajbhan is going to the Punjab with my permission.
From Gujarati: C.W. 8096. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

1

From the reference to Surajbhan’s going to the Punjab, it appears this was
written the same day as the preceding item.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

37

29. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
April 6, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

No time to send you a long love letter. It is now nearing 11 p.m.
How much yarn have you now left to be paid for the two Sanghs, to
what dates have payments been already made?
More when time permits. Manilal has gone to replace Ramdas.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5388. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9622

30. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Silence Day [On or before April 7, 1930] 1
CHI. MIRA,

If you feel like coming, you are at liberty to come. You won’t
see Dandi. If you are quite calm, you need not come. Even if you are
to join the prohibition work at a later stage, you will be none the wiser
for coming. All the talk will be in Gujarati. But if you want to come
because you must see me, then come some other day for that
sole purpose. But you must judge for yourself. I leave you entirely
free to decide.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
You will carefully follow Young India nowadays.
From the original: C.W. 5384. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9618

1

Gandhiji seems to refer to the women’s conference held at Dandi on April 13
which passed a resolution on prohibition. The preceding Monday was April 7.

38

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

31. BARBAROUS
[April 7, 1930]
The threatened has after all happened. I congratulate the
Government on having commenced arrests in right earnest of salt tax
resisters at least in Gujarat. They have arrested Sjt. Manilal Kothari
and all his com-panions, so also Sjt. Amritlal Sheth and his
companions, Dr. Chandulal Desai of Broach Sevashram and his
companions. They have arrested Darbar Gopaldas, Sjt. Fulchand, Sjt.
Ravishankar, the intr-epid reformer who has weaned the brave but
ignorant Rajputs of Kheda from many an error. They have arrested
Ramdas Gandhi, Keshavbhai Ganeshji, Chimanlal Pranshankar and
others. All this the Government had the right to do. But they had no
right to do what they did today 1 at the village Aat four miles from
Dandi. The police tried by force to snatch salt from the civil resisters.
This they had no right to do, if they were representing a civilized
Government. There was no provocation offered. The resisters were not
running away. Their names could have been taken. But they insulted
these brave men and through it the nation by touching their sacred
persons without warrant and without just cause. One of the resisters by
name Ukabhai Rama of Bardoli was slightly injured on the wrist. I
admit that the police went unarmed to the scene of action. They will
probably admit that there never was the slightest occasion for carrying
arms. For the people were obviously and absolutely peaceful,
nevertheless this laying hands on the people for the purpose of seizing
the salt they were carrying was morally wrong and even wrong I fancy
according to English common law. But I do not know what powers are
given by a statute that makes a crime of undefined cowardice.
This first drawing of blood, however little, brought down
practically the whole of the village to the scene. Women were just yet
to take no part in the act of civil disobedience, nor were the men of
the village expected as yet to do so. But they, men and women (some
with babes in arms), immediately they heard that salt was being
forcibly seized and that one of the volunteers was injured, rushed out,
and men on one side and women on the other descended to the cha1

Monday, April 7, 1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

39

nnel and began to dig out the salt. As soon as I heard of the attempt at
forcible seizure from the persons of the resisters, Monday being my
day of silence, I wrote on a piece of paper that Shrimati Sarojini Devi
and Sjt. Abbas Tyabji should go, and if the police did not desist they
should also dig out salt and challenge them to seize it from their
hands. But I charitably assume that the police had seen their mistake
before these friends reached the scene and had not the heart to touch
a whole villageful of people including women. The sat-yagrahis, however, would not be satisfied without my presence although I might not
speak. They wanted me evidently to see with my own eyes how they
had behaved and with what zest the whole village was participating in
the struggle. Ukabhai Rama was brought to me with the salt rescued. I
went. For me it was a soul-stirring sight. The forcible seizure served a
good purpose. It brought life to the whole village. Nevertheless, for
the sake of the Government and for the sake of keeping the salt war
on the gentlemanly plane, I wish this ugly incident had not happened.
Legal procedure may be a cumbersome business for the Government. But since they have begun well let them not end ill. Let
it be a pure trial of strength between them and the people. If
they will resort to terrorism and if I am not mistaken, they will find the
people, men as well as women. ready for any ordeal they may prepare
for them. Salt in the hands of satyagrahis represents the honour of the
nation. It cannot be yielded up except to force that will break the
hand to pieces. Ukabhai, as he was describing the action of the police,
said, “God gives strength to a satyagrahi to defend what is entrusted
to him.” Let the people defend the salt in their possession till they
break in the attempt, but they should do so without malice, without
anger, without an angry word. The police have the easiest way open to
them of taking possession of the salt. Let them arrest the civil resisters,
and they can take possession of the salt for they have possession of
their persons. But it can become forfeit only after conviction, not
before.
Young India, 10-4-1930

40

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

32. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
April 7, 1930
The reports received so far indicate that the magic wave of mass
civil disobedience in Gujarat has had its effect on the Government.
The Government has lost no time in arresting the leaders of this
movement but I understand that it must have paid similar attention to
the leaders in other provinces as well. This is something we can congratulate ourselves on. It would have been surprising if the Government
had allowed the satyagrahis to act as they pleased. It would have been
considered barbaric if it had attacked the life and property of the
satyagrahis without any previous inquiry. One cannot object to trial
and conviction according to established procedure. Prison and such
other punishments are the ordeal through which a satyagrahi must
pass. A satyagrahi can be said to have fulfilled his purpose only when
he does not flinch, when he does not betray those whom he represents
and when he is not scared by the arrest of his leader. The time has
come when everyone will have to be both soldier and commander.
I shall be deeply grieved if even after these arrests, students who
attend schools or colleges run or controlled by the Government
do not leave these institutions. People should make salt only
after realizing the risk involved in doing so, or, alternatively, they
should collect the salt that has naturally accumulated increeks and
holes on the seashore and use it for themselves and their cattle and sell
it to those who may wish to buy it. Everyone should realize that in
defying the salt law they run the risk of legal action being taken against them. It is also possible that the officers of the so-called salt
department may harass them without resorting to any legal steps. The
struggle against the salt law has to be carried on in this fashion during
the whole of the National Week ending on 13th April. All those who
do not take part in this sacred task should devote them-selves wholly
to the powerful movement for the boycott of foreign cloth and use
khadi. They should try and make as much khadi as possible and carry
on the struggle for prohibition.
I am preparing a message to the women of India. I am becoming increasingly certain that in the struggle for securing swaraj, the
women of this country could contribute a greater share than the men.
I feel that women will be able to explain the meaning of non-violence
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

41

to the country more effectively than men. Not because men, out of
vanity, regard them as weak but because they possess real courage in a
greater proportion and an immeasurable sense of dedication.
[From Gujarati]
Prajabandhu, 13-4-1930

33. LETTER TO GEOFFREY MAW
DANDI,

April 7, 1930
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter 1 of 26-3-30 and the book. I have
read the passage2 referred to by you. From my experience of such
incidents I doubt if the deceased ever uttered the sentiments imputed
to him or that the Indians referred to by the author or ever said what
has been reported of them. But I should be sorry to discover that the
deceased made the remarks ascribed to him, although he had never
met me and although he had never studied the movement. For I hold
with many Christian friends that Jesus himself was a confirmed
non-co-operator. His whole life as we know it was one of sustained
non-co-operation with priesthood because it was identified with evil.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Geoffrey Maw Papers. Central Library of the Selly Oak College,
Birmingham. Courtesy: Marjorie Sykes

1

In which the addressee had said: “Forgive me if I appear to criticise. Your
way of non-co-operation appears good for you. . . though you foresee bloodshed and
enmity and further cleavage of the two races ahead . . . Aggrey’s way seems to me to
be truly ‘the more excellent way’. I think he would have counselled ‘patience and still
more patience’. . .”
2
The passage from the book titled Aggrey of Africa by Edwin Smith had
quoted Aggrey to say: “I stand for co-operation with the white man. Your friend
Gandhi makes a mistake when he goes in for non-co-operation. So long as he persists
in that policy he will never help India . . .”

42

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

34. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
DANDI,

April 7, 1930
CHI. MAHADEV,

I have your letter. The first day at any rate Gujarat celebrated
very well and the Government on its part may also be said to have
celebrated it quite well. Except for what happened at Aat village, there
has been nothing that one might complain about. I have written about
Aat for Young India and you will find the article there among the
papers. The sentence awarded to Durbar and others may be regarded
as reasonable. As my article is based on the information I have received, you may make in it any alterations and additions you think fit.
If you have the courage and if you wish, you may distribute salt at a
public meeting; but from this distance I still think that it will be an
unnecessary risk to try to distribute salt at a public meeting. I have
explained to Gangabehn everything about women and about the drink
evil. If you have time, think on the subject and discuss it with others.
If you don’t, you may drop the idea.
I am busy at the moment with a long letter which I have just
received from the Kheda district.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11473

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

43

35. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
DANDI,

Silence Day [April 7, 1930] 1
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I do get your letters. But what can I do? I can get no time and,
therefore, have not been able to write to you. I very much wish to
write, of course. I have to write about the struggle under the
everpresent possibility of arrest and days pass. I should indeed be
happy if you are permitted and go to the Ashram. The Government
has still not arrested me. It has started arresting others. Ramdas has
been arrested. I have, therefore, sent Manilal to take his place. Our
work is going on very well here. Dandi is a small village; its water and
air seem to be excellent.
I stop here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 3363

1

From the reference to Ramdas Gandhi’s arrest the letter appears to have been
written on Monday, April 7, 1930. Vide also “Letter to Prabhavati”, 10-4-1930.

44

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

36. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 7, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

I send with this a cheque received from Bhai Shantikumar. Treat
it as an anonymous contribution.
Gangabehn will start from here tomorrow morning.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I have permitted Jayantiprasad to go to the U.P.
From Gujarati: C. W. 8097. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

37. LETTER TO SHANTIKUMAR MORARJI
DANDI,

April 7, 1930
CHI. SHANTIKUMAR,

I have your letter enclosing a cheque. I would not expect a
cheque from you just now. If, however, you send one, it will have for
me a hundred times its value. I know that your heart is here. We have,
however, to practise non-attachment. It is the quintessence of all religious teaching. I have given autographs and blessings in both the
copies of the Gita. May God give to both of you Shanti 1 and Sumati2
and may you be worthy of your names.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4718. Courtesy: Shantikumar Morarji

1
2

Peace of mind
Wisdom. Sumati is the name of the addressee’s wife.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

45

38. ADVICE TO VOLUNTEERS, AAT 1
April 7, 1930
Gandhiji asked them to cling to their resolve under any circumstances. He
warned them against putting any resistance that would encourage violence on the part
of the police. They had every right, he said, to hold, tight to their bosom the salt
which they might collect. That was no violence. To them their salt was as dear as
their blood. He hoped that by their patience and suffering they would change the
hearts of police even. Gandhiji advised volunteers to carry on their work without
minding such interference of police.

The Bombay Chronicle, 8-4-1930

39. MESSAGE TO KATHIAWAR
DANDI,

April 7, 1930
From what I hear it seems that the Government have conferred
upon Kathiawar greater honour. While information from other centres
states that leaders have been arrested, as regards Kathiawar, Mr. Manilal Kothari and Sheth Amritlal are arrested with their volunteers.
Nothing could be more creditable and welcome for Kathiawar. Moreover, the recent death of Mr. Kothari’s wife has added more to the
valour. The tragic sentiment is there in the death of a dear one and
when a warrior is deeply affected by such departure without succumbing to sorrow and plunges into the field without a moment’s
delay, his bravery shines even more. I hope Kathiawar will understand
this sentiment and will nurture it. There is only one way to do so. If
Kathiawar is pouring incessantly to join satyagraha and take up the
work left by these men, success will be theirs.
The Bombay Chronicle, 8-4-1930

1

After the arrest of two volunteers at Aat, Gandhiji accompanied by Abbas
Tyabji and Sarojini Naidu, visited the spot where satyagraha was offered. As Gandhiji
was observing silence, he wrote a brief message on a piece of paper which was read
out by the captain of the volunteers.

46

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

40. MESSAGE TO GUJARAT
DANDI,

April 7, 1930
Gujarat has worked wonders. The hopes which Pandit Motilal
Nehru had expressed at Jambusar seem to fructify. The first day of
self-purification week has begun with auspicious omens. Good news is
pouring in from all centres from Ranpur right up to Surat. Messrs
Manilal Kothari and Amritlal Sheth have been arrested with the
volunteers and the news just now reaches us that Durbar Gopaldas,
Talati and Ravishanker, all leaders of Kaira District, have been arrested. They have enhanced the prestige of Gujarat and India as well.
But what will the remaining workers in Gujarat do? I hope the volunteers will pour in large numbers from all quarters, without waiting for
any call and fill up the gap immediately caused by the arrests. The
time has now come when students, pleaders, Government servants and
others will be put to test. Will those who remain outside keep on
waiting and watching when seasoned soldiers are being arrested?
The Bombay Chronicle, 8-4-1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

47

41. LETTER TO KALAVATI TRIVEDI
DANDI,

Silence Day [On or after April 7, 1930] 1
22

,
I got your letter. I liked it. What are you doing? Are you at all
studying? Are you happy?
CHI. KALAVATI

Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5285

42. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
DANDI,

Silence Day [On or after April 7, 1930] 3
CHI. CHANDRAKANTA,

Write to Mother now that she should stay on there in peace.
When she feels truly inspired from within, she can register herself in
the Satyagraha Camp there itself.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

1

Gandhiji reached Dandi on April 5, 1930.
Wife of Kashinath Trivedi, then Assistant Editor of Hindi Navajivan. She
was at the time residing in the Sabarmati Ashram.
3
Gandhiji reached Dandi on April 5, 1930. April 7 was a silence day. Gandhiji
was at Dandi on the following silence day also.
2

48

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

43. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
DANDI,

Tuesday, April 8, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter and postscript. I hope Mother is not suffering
from cancer. But the life is so artificial that one wonders that we do
not suffer more than we do.
Yes, the things are hastening to an end. You were right in not
going when you did not feel like it.1 You will hear all about the
exclusive field I have suggested for women.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5390. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9624

44. LETTER TO AMINA TYABJI
DANDI,

April 8, 1930
MY DEAR SISTER,

Abbas Saheb is going tonight to Nadiad as even Fulchand has
been arrested. Now there is hope of his being arrested. He thinks that
here I am blocking his way. He may be right.
Khuda Hafiz.
Love.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 9687

1

Vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 7-4-1930.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

49

45. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS PODDAR
DANDI,

April 8, 1930
BHAI RAMESHWARDAS,

I got your letter. If you stop worrying and go on doing your
best, God is bound to be pleased with whatever you can do. And do
not give up Ramanama in any circumstances.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 219

46. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
Tuesday, April 8, 1930
CHI. MAHADEV,

Bhai Amritlal has been arrested. And on the Dholera side the
authorities seem to be acting in a novel fashion. I think you should
pay a visit to that part. From today I have started visiting the neighbouring villages. I don’t intend this week to go outside the limits of
this taluka or its neighbourhood. If, however, it becomes necessary I
will be ready to go to Dholera or any place near it. I suppose you
have heard about the arrests of Jamnalal, Ishvarlal, etc.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11474

50

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

47. SPEECH AT AAT
April 8, 1930
I am glad the Government has allowed me to remain free so that
I can fulfil the promise I made to you yesterday. Yesterday when Ukabhai was beaten and all of you suddenly jumped down in order to
collect salt, you all, including even the women, must have found it
difficult to stand the sight. That incident will remain indelible in the
history of India. Our first battle is going to be fought at Aat. Ours is a
war of love in which we have to suffer too. We shall not allow the salt
to be taken away even at the risk of losing our lives, just as a mother
would not allow herself to be robbed of her child even if she had to
die for it. 1 When this happens the whole of India will rise up. India
cannot tolerate such insult even when it is perpetrated against men.
God is the only ammunition that we possess. You have glorified the
second day of your struggle and I hope that all the villages of Gujarat
and the whole of the country will follow your example. Let the
Government arrest all the national leaders it wants to. It will find that
its belief that the struggle will be terminated for want of leaders is
false. When you have collected the salt, do not waste a single grain of
it. You should be determined to eat only that salt upon which no tax
has been levied. If the Government levies an excise duty on paddy
you would have no alternative but to eat paddy grown in your own
fields; you have to follow a similar course with regard to salt also.
Do not let go of salt when the police tries to snatch it from your
hands. So long as your wrists are intact, do not let your fists be
loosened. Your fists will acquire the strength of iron if you have faith
in satyagraha.
[From Gujarati]
Prajabandhu, 13-4-1930

1

This sentence is from The Bombay Chronicle, 9-4-1930.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

51

`48. MESSAGE TO THE NATION

1

DANDI,

April 9, 1930
At last the long expected hour seems to have come.
In the dead of night my colleagues and companions have
roused me from deep slumber and requested me to give them a
message. I am, therefore, dictating this message, although I have not
the slightest inclination to give any.
Messages I have given enough already. Of what avail would this
message be if none of the previous messages evoked a proper
response? But information received until this midnight leads me to the
belief that my message did not fall flat, but was taken up by the
people in right earnest. The people of Gujarat seem to have risen in a
body as it were. I have seen with my own eyes thousands of men and
women at Aat and Bhimrad fearlessly breaking the Salt Act. Not a
sign of mischief, not a sign of violence have I seen, despite the
presence of people in such large numbers. They have remained
perfectly peaceful and non-violent, although Govern-ment officers
have transgressed all bounds.
Here in Gujarat well-tried and popular public servants have been
arrested one after another, and yet the people have been perfectly
non-violent. They have refused to give way to panic, and have
celebrated the arrests by offering civil disobedience in ever increasing
numbers. This is just as it should be.
If the struggle so auspiciously begun is continued in the same
spirit of non-violence to the end, not only shall we see Purna Swaraj
established in our country before long, but we shall have given to the
world an object-lesson worthy of India and her glorious past.
Swaraj won without sacrifice cannot last long. I would, therefore, like our people to get ready to make the highest sacrifice that
they are capable of. In true sacrifice all the suffering is on one side —
one is required to master the art of getting killed without killing, of
gaining life by losing it. May India live up to this mantra.
1

This was published with a note which read: “The following is an English
translation of a message dictated by Gandhiji at Dandi on April 9, when there was a
strong rumour of his impending arrest. A month has gone by, but the message still
holds good. We publish it today as a challenge to the honour and loyalty of India to
meet the fiery ordeal that now lies before her.”

52

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

At present India’s self-respect, in fact her all, is symbolized
as it were in a handful of salt in the satyagrahi’s hand. Let the fist
holding it therefore be broken, but let there be no voluntary surrender
of the salt.
Let the Government, if it claims to be a civilized Government,
jail those who help themselves to contraband salt. After their arrest the
civil resisters will gladly surrender the salt, as they will their bodies
into the custody of their jailors.
But by main force to snatch the salt from the poor, harmless
satyagrahis’ hands is barbarism pure and simple and an insult to
India. Such insult can be answered only by allowing our hand to be
fractured without loosening the grasp. Even then the actual sufferer or
his comrades may not harbour in their hearts anger against the wrongdoer. Incivility should be answered not by incivility but by a dignified and calm endurance of all suffering in the name of God.
Let not my companions or the people at large be perturbed over
my arrest, for it is not I but God who is guiding this movement. He
ever dwells in the hearts of all and he will vouchsafe to us the right
guidance if only we have faith in Him. Our path has already been
chalked out for us. Let every village fetch or manufacture contraband
salt. Sisters should picket liquor shops, opium dens and foreign cloth
dealers’ shops. Young and old in every home should ply the takli and
spin, and get woven, heaps of yarn every day. Foreign cloth should be
burnt. Hindus should eschew untouchability. Hindus, Mussalmans,
Sikhs, Parsis, and Christians should all achieve heart unity. Let the
majority rest content with what remains after the minorities have been
satisfied. Let students leave Government schools and colleges, and
Govern-ment servants resign their service and devote themselves to
service of the people, and we shall find that Purna Swaraj will come
knoc-king at our door.
Young India, 8-5-1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

53

49. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
April 9, 1930
CHI. MAHADEV,

I am halting in Surat for a few hours on my way to Bhimrad.
The car took the wrong road, with the result that I missed the train and
came here by car. At present my very thoughts have grown wings and
they seem to have effect even when not expressed in speech or action.
That is a fact. Thoughts which are part of tapascharya are
single-pointed, and hence their power is greater than that of electricity
or of still subtler ether. Your suggestion, therefore, was acted upon
immediately yesterday. All the men in my batch will have to be dispersed and posted wherever they may be needed. Surajbhan has
already left, and so has Jayantiprasad, each for his own district.
Vamanrao Pataki also has gone to his district. I did not have to
suggest to any of the three that he should go. They themselves felt
that they should go. Surendra is waiting at Navsari to proceed to
Bhimrad. Puratan and Haridas Gandhi are at Navsari waiting to leave
for Olpad. I have sent Abbas Saheb to Nadiad, where I will send other
men whom he may ask for, provided I am not arrested by then.
However, if I am not free and you are, it will be for you to send them;
and if even you are not free, those who are left behind will make the
necessary arr-angements. Fortunately, Dayalji at least will stay behind,
and he will issue orders through the children. If none else, there will
always be Lord Krishna whose orders are bound to be felt by all in
their hearts and the work will go on somehow. I am certainly ready to
send Chhaganlal to Wadhwan, but Kevalram can go there as well. I
think you know that he has offered to do so. However that may be,
you may, if you are free, communicate to me any other suggestions
which may occur to you. I have sent word to the Broach Sevashram
people that they may ask me if they need any men. As for you, I
think you will not be a free man for long.
I also have written to Saraladevi, but that was only about
the drink evil. Yesterday I sent a letter addressed to Kaka on this
subject. I think you must have read it. You will have seen from it
that I, at any rate, wish to start the movement against the drink evil and
foreign cloth along with the salt agitation on the13th. Even if that should not be possible, I should like the fight against the drink evil to
start from Monday if you, Kaka and other men and the Ashram
women and other women visitors feel the necessary self-confidence. I
54

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

wrote to Saraladevi suggesting that she might throw herself into this
very work. If, however, my plan itself does not appeal to all of you,
you may leave it. I do not at all believe that the salt tax will go in
seven days. But I think it very necessary to utilize this golden
opportunity and combine these three aims of our movement.
Personally, I am convinced that if we should succeed in these three
things, swaraj would soon be an acco-mplished fact, the women would
realize their power in no time and, without any effort on our part, the
whole world would see for itself how ours was indeed a holy war.
Many women can contribute their share in this movement even while
attending to their domestic duties. We have the land revenue tax as a
last resort. That is why, though I have discussed the subject in my
article “The Immoral Foundation” 1 , I do not wish to touch the tax
just now. Nor is it necessary to do so. At pres-ent, my eyes are fixed
on the 91 crore rupees and considering the prevailing atmosphere in
the country I think we shall easily succeed in our aim.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I have talked at length on these matters with Mithubehn. She has
made up her mind. The Anavil Ashram will be handed over to her for
the use of women workers. Those women who are willing to give all
their time to the work will be admitted to it. Of course there will be
other conditions for admission. The present idea is to make an intensive effort in the Surat district where some work of this kind has been
done, and to extend the area of activity as the women’s
self-confidence increases. Such of the Ashram women as are ready for
this, like Mithubehn, should start coming here. Mithubehn herself has
already had experience of this work and, therefore, the women who
come here will have the benefit of that experience. As the women coming from the Ashram are trained in discipline, Mithubehn will find it
easier to take work from them. I have already discussed the matter
with Shardabehn. She and Dr. Sumant liked the idea very much.
Shardabehn said that she would certainly go there.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 16785

1

Vide “The Immoral Foundaion”, 10-4-1930.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

55

50. SPEECH AT BHIMRAD
April 9, 1930
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

This is the camp of civil resisters. Some of you have been
arrested but instead of being sorry for it I find you all more cheerful.
We prepared for a thing and asked for it. After receiving it we must
not be afraid of it, otherwise we would be considered ungrateful to the
Almighty God. We pray to God for imprisonment, hanging or independence. We do not want slavery and dependence. God has said that
without sacrifice you will get nothing. We must qualify ourselves to go
to jail. It will be useless to go to jail for thefts or for being drunk. We
only congratulate those who go to jail for pure actions. From our
point of view those who go to jail for good deeds do not deserve
imprisonment but freedom. In a Satanic Government innocent
persons must suffer. Under this rule, if we are good, we will get
handcuffs, kicks, daggers and gallows. Women will have to make greater sacrifices. I have brought material for sacrifice. We consider it a
picnic and I hope it will continue as such till the end. This is just a
beginning. Sardar Vallabhbhai ought to have been sent to jail for 30
years. The Government is trying us. At Bhimrad you will not be
killed. Salt will be snatched away from you but if you have courage
you should not part with salt in your possession until you are unable
to withstand the force used for snatching it away from you. I understand that by keeping salt in our possession we [shall] have kept with
us 6 crores of rupees and in it lies the independence of India. We want
boys who are 16 years old for the present struggle. If a fist containing
salt be clenched, none dare to open it. They may open fire upon you.
Men may come with bayonets and sticks and use them on you, but salt
should not be taken out of your hands. If none of you then cry over
it, I would consider it a picnic. Bodies may be lying dead, hands may
have been cut off but still you keep to your promise. I will then
understand that swaraj is approaching. The Government is testing us
because this Government is of bold persons. Do not consider that we
are fighting against impotent persons. They would not suffer defeat
quietly and we cannot defeat them soon. If 30 crores unite in the struggle, the Government would yield to it. If you remain true, I am sure I
shall see the light of success. I have come here to request you to stick
56

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to the present struggle until we have won. You are all doing good
work. Do not doubt about the salt tax. When Ukabhai received an
injury I consid ered it a sign that the salt tax would go. Do not consider that you will be happy after the repeal of the salt tax. Rs. 6 crores
are nothing for a nation of 30 crores. I asked Tyabji and he left
willingly (for Kaira district). Picketing of liquor shops should be done
by women and not by men. If men go there, it will be presumed that
they were there to assault others. Government would not like it
because they would lose Rs. 25 crores income from the sale of liquor.
I therefore advise all of you sisters to act according to the instructions
of Mithubehn. Foreign cloth is as bad as liquor. Those who have put
on foreign clothes should burn them. If you use khaddar 60 crores of
rup-ees will remain in India. You should spin cotton. You sisters
should do three things, viz., assist the temperance movement, use khaddar and do spinning. I have sent my son Manilal for the work, and
he will do it. Do not fight in the jail for food but for your self-respect.
Patels who have resigned have not yet been relieved by the Government. There is some trick in it. They should hand over the records
to the Government or lock the office and hand over the key to the
Mamlatdar
Bombay Secret Abstracts, 1930

51. TO THE WOMEN OF INDIA
The impatience of some sisters to join the good fight is to me a
healthy sign. It has led to the discovery that however attractive the
campaign against the salt tax may be, for them to confine themselves
to it would be to change a pound for a penny. They will be lost in the
crowd, there will be in it no suffering for which they are thirsting.
In this non-violent warfare, their contribution should be much
greater than men’s. To call woman the weaker sex is a libel; it is
man’s injustice to woman. If by strength is meant brute strength, then
indeed is woman less brute than man. If by strength is meant moral
power, then woman is immeasurably man’s superior. Has she not
greater intuition, is she not more self-sacrificing has she not greater
powers of endurance, has she not greater courage? Without her man
could not be. If non-violence is the law of our being, the future is with
woman.
I have nursed this thought now for years. When the women of
the Ashram insisted on being taken along with men something within
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

57

me told me that they were destined to do greater work in this struggle
than merely breaking salt laws.
I feel that I have now found that work. The picketing of liquor
shops and foreign cloth shops by men, though it succeeded beyond
expectations up to a point for a time in 1921, failed because violence
crept in. If a real impression is to be created, picketing must be resumed. If it remains peaceful to the end, it will be the quickest way of
educating the people concerned. It must never be a matter of coercion but conversion, moral suasion. Who can make a more effective
appeal to the heart than woman?
Prohibition of intoxicating liquors and drugs and boycott of
foreign cloth have ultimately to be by law. But the law will not come
till pressure from below is felt in no uncertain manner.
That both are vitally necessary for the nation, nobody will
dispute. Drink and drugs sap the moral well-being of those who are
given to the habit. Foreign cloth undermines the economic foundations of the nation and throws millions out of employment. The
distress in each case is felt in the home and therefore by the women.
Only those women who have drunkards as their husbands know what
havoc the drink devil works in homes that once were orderly and
peace-giving. Millions of women in our hamlets know what unemployment means. Today the Charkha Sangh covers over one hundred
thousand women against less than 10,000 men.
Let the women of India take up these two activities, specialize in
them; they would contribute more than man to national freedom.
They would have an access of power and self-confidence to which
they have hitherto been strangers.
Their appeal to the merchants and buyers of foreign cloth and
to the liquor dealers and addicts to the habit cannot but melt their
hearts. At any rate the women can never be suspected of doing or
intending violence to these four classes. Nor can Government long
remain supine to an agitation so peaceful and so resistless.
The charm will lie in the agitation being initiated and controlled
exclusively by women. They may take and should get as much
assistance as they need from men, but the men should be in strict
subordination to them.
In this agitation thousands of women, literate and illiterate, can
take part.
Highly educated women have in this appeal of mine an opportunity of actively identifying themselves with the masses and helping them both morally and materially.
58

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

They will find when they study the subject of foreign-cloth
boycott that it is impossible save through khadi. Mill-owners will
themselves admit that mills cannot manufacture in the near future
enough cloth for Indian requirements. Given a proper atmosphere,
khadi can be manufactured in our villages, in our countless homes.
Let it be the privilege of the women of India to produce this atmosphere by devoting every available minute to the spinning of yarn.
The question of production of khadi is surely a question of spinning
enough yarn. During the past ten days of the march under pressure of
circumstances I have discovered the potency of the takli which I had
not realized before. It is truly a wonder worker. In mere playfulness
my companions have without interrupting any other activity spun
enough yarn to weave 4 square yards per day of khadi of 12 counts.
Khadi as a war measure is not to be beaten. The moral results of the
two reforms are obviously great. The political result will be no less
great. Prohibition of intoxicating drinks and drugs means the loss of
twenty-five crores of revenue. Boycott of foreign cloth means the
saving by India’s millions of at least sixty crores. Both these
achievements would monetarily be superior to the repeal of the salt
tax. It is impossible to evaluate the moral results of the two reforms.
‘But there is no excitement and no adventure in the liquor and
foreign-cloth picketing’, some sisters may retort. Well, if they will put
their whole heart into this agitation they will find more than enough
excitement and adventure. Before they have done with the agitation,
they might even find themselves in prison. It is not improbable that
they may be insulted and even injured bodily. To suffer such insult
and injury would be their pride. Such suffering if it comes to them
will hasten the end.
If the women of India will listen and respond to my appeal, they
must act quickly. If the all-India work cannot be undertaken at once,
let those provinces which can organize themselves do so. Their
example will be quickly followed by the other provinces.
Young India, 10-4-1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

59

52. NOTES
C ONGRATULATIONS

Pandit Malaviyaji and the other members of the Assembly who
have resigned deserve the heartiest congratulations of the nation for
their patriotic resignations. How any self-respecting person can cling
to an institution where he cannot preserve his self-respect it would be
difficult to understand if we did not know our capacity for
self-deception. The Government, instead of telling us, show by their
many unmistakable acts that they will do anything but sacrifice the
material interest of their principals the British manufacturers and the
like who live on India’s exploitation. The legislatures, central and provincial, are like their other institutions, powerful and tempting devices
for draining India of whatever she has still left. They would, if they
could, leave her only when she has no more left to be plundered.
Pandit Malaviyaji and the others have left the Assembly none
too soon. With a faith worthy of a better cause he stuck to the
so-called legislatures for a quarter of a century in the teeth often of
popular opposition. He rendered at critical moments valuable services
to the Government. No Indian living has the unbroken record Pandit
Malaviyaji has of service rendered with a single-mindedness not often
to be found in men. The Government have therefore lost an ally
whom they will never be able to replace. I hope that Panditji and his
companions will now devote their energy to the popular work that
awaits them. They will soon discover as many have done that the real
work can only be done outside the legislatures. They will be good
only when they are so fashioned as to register real public opinion, not
that of certain groups or classes. They are positively harmful when
they are so manipulated as merely to give effect to the official will.
For the time being, therefore, servants of the nation have to forge sanctions and create a public opinion that will not be flouted.
A VICIOUS INSINUATION

An M. B. writes as follows :1
. . . The Lancet, a leading medical journal of London, in its edition
dated 8th March 1930 (page 531) has made the following observations:
“Whatever political agitators may say and in spite of the growth of medical
education in India, that country will need British doctors for a long time to
1

60

Only extracts are reproduced here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

come. Even Mr. Gandhi (who was himself operated by a British surgeon in the
I. M. S.) would probably admit the truth of this statement.”
So far as I know you were operated by the Civil Surgeon of Poona
while you were a prisoner in jail. But the insinuation seems to be that you
preferred to be operated by a British I. M. S. officer, because he was more
capable.

The insinuation made by the writer in the Lancet is baseless and
vicious. At the time the operation was performed I was certainly a
prisoner, but I was given the choice of having my own surgeon to perform the operation. I did not distrust Col. Maddock, the British
surgeon referred to, and the late Dr. Dalal and Dr. Jivraj Mehta (my
surgeon and physician respectively) not having arrived in time, the
operation was performed by Col. Maddock, whose care and attention
I have acknowledged more than once. I have never felt the dearth
of Indian surgeons or physicians of the highest calibre. Indeed, I
have sent several of my European friends to Indian surgeons and physicians and they have derived full benefit from the skill of these Indian medical men. It is in military science alone, thanks to the British
policy, that India perhaps stands in need of assistance from European
instructors. But, so far as I am aware, in every other dep-artment, if the
British withdrew India could be self-contained without the slightest
difficulty and that in spite of open or veiled obstruction from the
ruling caste.
Young India, 10-4-1930

53. THE IMMORAL FOUNDATION
This Indian Empire was conceived in immorality, for it was to
perpetuate the exploitation of India’s resources that it was founded.
The pages of history written by Englishmen amply prove the assertion
that no fraud was considered too much, no force too frightful by Englishmen, to gain the end. There is perhaps not an inch of ground
lawfully acquired by or for the British crown in India.
The rule is nurtured by immoral means. English statesmen
assure us that it is the British bayonet that keeps the Empire free from
attack both from without and within.
It is supported by revenues derived from immoral sources. I
have sufficiently demonstrated the hideous immorality, because inhumanity, of the salt tax. The immorality of the drink and drug revenue
is self-demonstrated.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

61

The immorality of the land revenue is not self-demonstrated.
But those who have followed the Bardoli agitation, who have studied
the so-called revenue laws and their administration, cannot fail to
perc-eive the immorality of the system. I call the revenue laws
so-called bec-ause they give arbitrary powers to revenue officers
whose decisions are not subject to judicial control. This land revenue,
like the salt tax, presses most heavily upon the poor ryot whether
under the ryotwari system or the permanent system. How it oppresses
the peasant under the ryotwari system we saw in Bardoli and recently
in Matar and Mehemedabad. The permanent settlement crushes the
ryot more than those affected by the ryotwari system. That the ryot
himself is partly to blame for his woes I have no hesitation in admitting. But that fact is irrelevant to the present consideration. There is
no inherent or independent right belonging to the State to tax the
land, whether it be considered to be the State property or the individual’s. The State has no more right to exact its toll from land under
any circumstance than the owner of an ox has a right to exact work
from it irrespective of its capacity. That there is a kind of classfication of land and some regulations about remissions, etc., is no
answer to the charge here made. The claim here made is that in the
vast majority of cases the ryot is wholly unable to pay any tax. In shaping its taxation policy a wise State will always take note of the
citizen’s habits, customs and even his weaknesses. This Government
had no time for such consideration. It had its fixed minimum to exact
anyhow; and so in the words of the late Lord Salisbury the lancet had
to be applied where there was yet any blood to be drawn.
So much about some of the visible sources of revenue. The invisible sources are equally tainted if not much more so. The unco-nscionable forced inflation of the rupee has by a stroke of the pen
drained India of millions. The favoured treatment of British cloth in a
variety of unseen ways drains India of sixty crores of rupees annually,
leaving behind partial unemployment of the starving millions.
Thus the Government trades upon our vices and exacts payment
by questionable methods principally from those who are least able to
make it.
There is therefore no way open to the people save to end a
system whose very foundations are immoral. Let us therefore pray
and work for the destruction of this demonstrably immoral system
and for ending it take the boldest risks consistently with the national
creed or policy (as the case may be) of non-violence.
Young India, 10-4-1930

62

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

54. AN ENGLISH FRIEND’S DIFFICULTY
An English friend writes:1
To us India is a composite country sharply divided by the caste
system, by religious differences, and by semi-independent and loyal
kingdoms, which could by no means be left to act together without the most
careful safeguards against civil strife or religious persecution, and which, if
left alone, would soon be a chaos of conflicting forces. But we are anxious to
do the right thing as the Government responsible for the welfare of the land.
A mere political reform is quite useless unless it improves the lot of
the people and removes any injustice from which they suffer and it appears to
us that the British could do these things far better than a mixed Indian
Government.
The question is: What is the injustice from which they suffer?
Are they too heavily taxed? Are the courts of justice unfair?
Do the British rulers act with tyranny?
Are there any monopolies which are unjust?
Are the wages of the workers less than they would be under a native
government? Or hours longer? Could such a Government prevent the famines
which afflict the country? Or, when they came, relieve them so effectually? . . .

This letter is typical of the average good but ill-informed
Englishman.
Take the 4th2 paragraph. It betrays the false teaching with which
Eng-lishmen are fed from their school-going age. It does not occur to
the writer that India left to herself will deal with the difficulties pointed
out. He does not see that if a century of British rule has not dealt with
the difficulties but has, if anything, rather accentuated them, with the
pro-gress of time they are not going to be solved or diminished
during British occupation. The writer does not know that according to
the testimony of English historiansthe innumerable villages have remained unaffected by the difficulties mentioned by him and many
more I can name. It should be remembered that India’s is a
predominantly rural civilization. Before the devastating British
occupation the seven hundred thousand villages of India were so
many self-contained rep-ublics. It was left for the marvellous
1

Only extracts are reproduced here.
The first three paragraphs having been omitted, this refers to the first
paragraph of the letter as given here.
2

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

63

organizing British ability, used not for “the welfare of the land” as
the writer imagines, but misused for its systematic exploitation, to
disturb the placid and comparatively happy life of the villager. Rulers
have before now come and gone leaving these villages untouched and
without leaving chaos behind. Why should the disappearance of
British rule result in chaos? If the British people play the game, they
will be expected to undo the great wrong they have done to India by
rendering to free and independent India such assistance as her free
Government may need. If they will not play the game what need is
there for any Englishman to worry whether there is chaos or concord
after the end of British rule? Ruthless exploitation of India is too great
a price to pay for securing the so-called orderly Government.
I have no difficulty in agreeing with the writer that “a mere
political reform is quite useless unless it improves the lot of the people
and removes any injustice from which they suffer.” But it is a fatal
mistake to suppose that “the British could do these things better than
a mixed Indian Government.”
English friends like the writer will better understand the
nationalist position by the following answers to the very relevant
questions he puts:
1. The people are too heavily taxed as has been maintained
elsewhere in this very issue and as can be amply proved from authoritative sources.
2. The courts have been proved to be unfair in political cases
and in cases as between Indians and Europeans.
3. British rulers have been known repeatedly to rule with
tyranny and almost invariably to act arrogantly and in total disregard
of Indian opinion.
4. There are numerous unjust monopolies of which the salt
monopoly is a glaring example.
5. If by workers only city labour is meant, it is but a drop
in the ocean of Indian humanity. They do not number more than
two million in all India, i.e., 150th of the whole population. Moreover
these are a British institution. How they will fare under an indigenous
Government it is difficult to foresee except that they will be better
able to wrest justice from it than from an all-powerful alien Government that can afford to be indifferent. In so far as the vast mass of
the workers in the Indian villages are concerned, I maintain, and it has
been proved in these pages, that they are worse off now than they ever
were.
64

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

6. Whenever there is famine in the land it is a famine of money,
i.e., incapacity of the people to buy the grain and the cloth they need.
Under indigenous Government, therefore, when the spinning-wheel is
restored, no one need starve for want of money as they do today
because they are unemployed for at least four months in the year.
7. The chief wrongs have been enumerated in my letter1 to the
Viceroy published in these pages.
8. What India wants is independence pure and simple.
This need not exclude British help if Great Britain will lend it on
India’s terms.
I do not ask the friend to accept the categorical statements made
by me. I should be satisfied if my reply stimulates an impartial study
of the charges made by me. There is ample literature on the subject.
The volumes of Young India will provide instructive reading. Let the
Eng-lish friends who will know the truth not summarily reject all
Indian evidence. Surely we must know better what we feel and want.
Young India, 10-4-1930

55. SOME CONDITIONS
Securing complete independence is difficult as well as easy. It is
difficult if we wish to do nothing. It is easy if the masses understand
their duty. We cannot say this about everything. Take for instance the
mastery of the Vedas. It is not easy work for everyone. It requires
years and years of study. But for swaraj all that is needed is change of
heart. For swaraj is our birth-right.
What are the conditions, one may ask for gaining swaraj that
everyone can fulfil? Here they are:
1. Everyone can offer civil disobedience of the salt law. For this
no training is needed. Men, women, boys and girls of no less than
eight villages were able to do this. They had not received any previous
training.
2. Everyone can spin on the takli. Everyone of course cannot
get a spinning-wheel, for it is a little costly. But taklis can be made
in every home even from bamboo. The general public can also buy
taklis for a few pice each. If millions of people take to carding and
plying the takli we can produce as much khadi as we may need. This
1

Vide “Letter to Lord Irwin”, 2-3-1930.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

65

work also does not require any elaborate training. Besides, it is work
for leisure hours. If people can grasp this, if they undergo a change of
heart, millions of men and women, young and old, can take up this
work and save sixty crores of rupees every year. Let us boycott all
foreign cloth and wear khadi alone. It is the only fit attire for us. If we
cannot afford more, we may do with the very minimum of clothing—
even a bare langoti.
Since this is a struggle for self-purification we must, this very
day, give up liquor, opium, tobacco, etc., if we have these vices. There
are various other things also which we can do if we want to. I have
merely cited an example or two.
For the attainment of swaraj it is also essential that Hindus, Muslims and followers of other religions treat one another as brothers. We
should banish the sin of untouchability and love our depressed
brothers and sisters. All these, to be sure, are not conditions for securing swaraj. They are part of the definition of swaraj. Today when
there is such wonderful awakening in the country every reader must
make his contribution to this yajna.
[From Hindi]
Hindi Navajivan, 10-4-1930

56. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
DANDI,

April 10, 1930
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

Your letters of resignation1 have filled me with joy. I am writing
this at 2 a.m. as some friends have brought the news that I shall be
arrested today.
Jamnalalji is ensconced in jail.2 I am confident that you will do
all you can in connection with salt satyagraha, prohibition and the
boycott of foreign cloth.
We shall have good support if Malaviyaji remains firm about
this.
The awakening in Gujarat, at least for the present, is beyond
words. God alone knows the future.
1

From the Legislative Council
Jamnalal Bajaj was arrested at Juhu, Bombay, and sentenced to two years’
rigorous imprisonment.
2

66

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I see only good coming out of these arrests. The present is
shaping as we had anticipated.
What more shall I write?
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From Hindi: C.W. 6183. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

57. MESSAGE TO BOMBAY CITIZENS1
DANDI

April 10, 1930
I don’t know whether to trust the citizens of Bombay when Jamnalal Bajaj and Nariman have been jailed and still the citizens of
Bombay have not shown sufficient spirit. Bombay should break the
salt laws and more particularly they should boycott foreign cloth and
thereby break the chain of foreign domination and the leaders of
Bombay should work to free the labouring classes from the drink evil.
The Bombay Chronicle, 11-4-1930

58. MESSAGE TO B.P.C.C., BOMBAY
April 10, 1930
I congratulate the Bombay Congress Committee and the people
of Bombay on the recent arrest of Abidali and Meherali. It is the duty
of every citizen of Bombay to fill the places of those who have been
arrested. The arrest of the leaders should not make us falter. The
unprecedented enthusiasm which was witnessed during the national
week shows that, following the arrest of the leaders, people’s enthusiasm in the whole of India has increased. I hope the recent arrests in
Bombay will create similar enthusiasm. We should make salt and use
only that salt. We should boycott foreign cloth and eradicate the evil
of drinking. I have entrusted the two latter activities to the women of
India. If we wish to succeed in the boycott of foreign cloth and exercise control over mills which are purely Indian it is women who can
do it. We should carry on propaganda for khadi and this will not be
possible until every one of us takes up the takli.
[From Gujarati]
Gujarati, 13-4-1930
1

Given to a deputation of brokers from Bombay

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

67

59. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
April 10, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

Your letter. Glad mother out of danger. It may be possible for
you to do something in the drink campaign if it ever comes into
being. If it comes, it will come naturally. No time for more.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5391. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9625

60. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
DANDI,

April 10, 1930
MY DEAR BHRRR,

Your sweet letter. So being on your mettle, you have evolved a
splendid programme. May you never grow old.
Dadubhai’s conduct is a painful surprise. However, Kheda has
worked wonders. Fancy Darbar and others being handcuffed, shaved!
It is good news one way, it is bad another way. Good because it must
nerve the people for greater effort, bad because it hurts one to see
human nature so debased. But that’s the system. Let us end it or end
ourselves in the attempt.
I have a good letter from Mrs. Abbas.
Yours ever,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 9570

68

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

61. LETTER TO TOTARAM HINGORANI
DANDI,

April 10, 1930
DEAR FRIEND,

Anand is proving worthy of you. He is also keeping well. Please
do not worry about him.
If Vidya wishes to do public work I am sure you will encourage
and bless her. And when she does such work, she cannot observe the
purdah. In any case the purdah is now gone.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand
T. Hingorani

62. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
DANDI,

April 10, 1930
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

Shankerlal and you should carefully study the suggestions I
have made to the women and if they appeal to you, take up the work.
Do not do it because I have suggested it, but consult your own desire.
No work once started must be abandoned afterwards.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: G. N. 11548

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

69

63. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 10, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

We cannot smuggle salt even for committing disobedience of
the salt law. How can we employ as a means of satyagraha what is in
itself wrong?
The contributions from the Surat district were quite big, but
they seem to have been passed on to the Provincial Committee.
Talk to Mahadev about this. I am writing to him.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11476

64. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
DANDI,

April 10, 1930
CHI. MAHADEV,

I have your letter. Kalyanji brought news that I was certain to be
arrested today, so I have kept awake the whole night. I go to sleep for
a while, then get up, write and again go to sleep. That is how it goes.
It appears Devdas has been arrested. That you have still not been
arrested is surprising. I see many risks in picketing colleges and
courts. I have explained the whole matter to Kaka. Those students who
wish to boycott the Matriculation examination may do so on their
own, but my advice is that we should not post pickets around the examination pandal. Liquor booths and foreign-cloth shops are a
different matter.
I have been thinking how to arrange the dispersal of the batch.
Before the 13th, I intend to send away only those who may be needed
elsewhere.
I don’t think I have anything more to write today.
Blessings from

BAPU [PS.]

The money coming from other places which was received in the
70

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Surat District has also gone to the Provincial Committee. Even now, as
I see things, the best thing would be for all the money to remain with
Narandas for the present. However, you may do as you think proper. I
have explained to Kaka this matter also.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11475

65. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
April 10, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

What do you think about my idea concerning the anti-drink
campaign and boycott of foreign cloth?
I did get your letters. You should continue to write to me.
Dhurandhar 1 seems to be a fine man. I liked Kamaladevi, too, very
much. She says that she will stay in the Ashram if the climate agrees
with her daughter. You should try and see that she stays on.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 6668. Courtesy: Premabehn
Kantak

1

Assistant Editor, Navakal, a Marathi daily from Bombay. He had joined the
Dandi March as a satyagrahi.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

71

66. LETTER TO LILAVATI
April 10, 1930
CHI. LILAVATI,

I got your letter. Your name cannot be chosen for drill, but you
will certainly be in the struggle when the time comes. They will accept
you. Those who have faith always get opportunities for service. Do
not feel anxious. Ask Gangabehn what to take for your constipation
and your menstrual trouble.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9316

67. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
DANDI,

April 10, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I have already replied to your letter. You two must have
discussed the matter by now. It is being rumoured that I shall be
arrested today, and so I don’t write more. May God bless you both
and give you sufficient firmness of mind.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3364

72

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

68. LETTER TO RUKMINI BAZAJ
DANDI,

April 10, 1930
CHI. RUKMINI,

I got your two letters. I have no time to write a long letter. I am
happy to know that you are happy. I suppose you do get Navajivan,
etc., there. Ramdas has been jailed. Devdas has been arrested. Jamnalalji and Kishorelal have also been sentenced to imprisonment.
Indeed hundreds have been jailed. There is no limit to people’s
enthusiasm.
I am sure that you will mix with the people there as naturally as
sugar mixes with milk.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9048

69. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL GANDHI
DANDI,

April 10, 1930
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,

I was awaiting a letter from you. I don’t think that the diet
which has benefited you will benefit others. You should remain where
you are and go on organizing the production of khadi. That also is an
important task. When I think it necessary to throw you as an offering
in the salt yajna, I will not hesitate a moment before doing so. Every
day we hear rumours of my arrest being imminent, but the day passes
and I am not arrested. It will make no difference whether or not they
arrest me. Shivabhai does bring out here a news-sheet named Satyagraha Samachar. So far as I know, only one copy is prepared and
circulated. A summary of its contents always appears in Navajivan. I
have had no letter from Umiya after she went to Ajmer. Now that she
has got used to the place, probably she does not think it necessary to
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

73

write to me. Rukhi seems to be happy, too.
Blessings from

BAPU
BHAISHRI JAISUKHLAL GANDHI
KHADI KARYALAYA
C HALALA
KATHIAWAR
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U. III/73

70. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
April 10, 1930
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

I have your letter. I send herewith a draft of your acceptance
letter. I understand about khadi. Krishna would have gained some
strength by now. About me, there is a scare daily about the proverbial
tiger coming. It kept me awake the whole of last night but the tiger
did not come. Let me see when it does.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original S.N. 32853

74

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

71. LETTER TO BENARSILAL BAZAJ,
April 10, 1930
CHI. BENARSI,

I have your two letters. I am immensely glad that you two are
happy. May God grant you both long life and the spirit of service.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 9302. Courtesy: Benarsilal Bazaj

72. LETTER TO VIDYA HINGORANI
April 10, 1930
CHI. VIDYA,

I have your letter. If you have self-confidence, come out for
some voluntary service. They need not hinder you. I have written to
Father 1 . He will never oppose this. It will be good if you can gain
some experience in the Ashram.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

1

Totaram Hingorani. her father-in-law; vide “Speech at Dandi”, 5-4-1930.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

75

73. SPEECH TO VOLUNTEERS
JALALPUR,

April 10, 1930
Addressing his volunteers this morning, Mahatma Gandhi said that their
mettle would soon be put to the test. There should, however, be no impatient hurry to
court arrest. They should refuse to be stampeded into hasty action by provocation
from police. Should authorities at any place “go mad and terrorize people” they
should proceed there and set an example of calm courage and undaunted suffering.
Mahatma Gandhi exhorted them to prefer death to national humiliation of the
type perpetrated by General Dyer.

The Bombay Chronicle, 11-4-1930

74. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA
April 10, 1930
My attention has been drawn to the report in The Times of India
of my Aat speech. It is a mischievous distortion of what I said. On
seeing a man’s wrist bleeding from a slight injury done to it, whilst the
police, four or five against one, were snatching the salt in his possession, I said that the salt picked up by civil resisters was a token of
India’s honour, and the civil resisters were expected to defend India’s
honour with their lives. People, I said, should hold on to the salt in
their possession as long as it was possible for them to bear the force
that might be used against them, and that they should not mind even if
blood was drawn while the police were delivering their assault upon
their defenceless victims. I added that, in resisting this dispossession,
people should not bear any malice nor should they be angry nor utter
a word of abuse. In order to avoid needless injury, I advised the people to take only a handful of salt which could be contained in their
closed fists and invited even women and children, if they had the courage to take part in the battle, and challenged the police to lay their
hands upon women and children. If the police laid their hands upon
women and children, I said that the whole of India would bec-ome
inflamed, and resent the insult by inviting suffering ofthe same kind
as they. The manner in which I expected Indians to respond to such
an insult was by taking up other methods of civil resistance, and by
students boycotting schools and Government servants giving up
76

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

service by way of protest. There is no departure from my creed of
non-violence, and I regard this snatching of salt from the civil resisters
as a piece of barbarity. The greater the barbarity of the Government,
the greater will be my call for self-suffering.
The Hindu, 11-4-1930

75. INTERVIEW TO “THE HINDU”
JALALPUR,

April 10, 1930
I asked Mahatmaji to define the scope of “defensive non-violent resistance”. A
volunteer, Mahatmaji had advised, should not yield his salt to the police until it was
wrested from him by superior force. “Is it permissible for the volunteer,” I asked, “to
struggle with the police in clinging to it desperately, moving this way and that in his
attempts not to yield, and possibly causing hurt to his opponent?” Mahatmaji said:

It is his duty to cling to the salt as though it was his life,
provided he was not offering violence to his opponent. Just as a
mother would save her child against the attempts of others to deprive
her of it, so should a satyagrahi cling to his salt.
Gandhiji, continuing stated that in no civilized country was it considered
proper for the police to take the law into their own hands. When a volunteer refused to
hand over his salt he would have committed an offence, but on that account, the
police should not inflict corporal punishment on him. The police officers had got the
right
of arresting a volunteer and marching him to the police station and of putting him up
for trial.
Asked how a police officer could discharge the duty imposed on him of seizing
the salt, Gandhiji said that his quarrel was exactly with that sort of law.
The conversation then turned on Mahatmaji’s statement that if women were
touched by the police, the whole country would be inflamed unless people were
napunsakas. That passage, I pointed out, had been criticized as a threat against the
legitimate arrest of women.
Mahatmaji laughed and said he had deliberately made the statement that the
country would, in such a contingency, become inflamed, but not necessarily into
committing acts of violence. He continued:

When Sri S. Subramania Aiyer threw away his titles because Dr.
Besant had been arrested he had been inflamed, but his feelings
involved no violence. It is that kind of inflammation that I had
referred to.
Referring to a report circulated by a news agency that his volunteers were
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

77

revolting against the diet prescribed for them, Mahatmaji pooh-poohed the
idea, adding:

There was some difficulty in the choice of diet, but once I
decided on it, all accepted it without a murmur.
The Hindu, 11-4-1930

76. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, ABRAMA1
April 10, 1930
I was told that last night I was going to be arrested and hence at
about 11 o’clock I finished some of my correspondence and did
some writing. The night went by but the expected did not happen I
have read in the papers today that the price of salt has fallen by half
but my contention is why should there be any price for it?
Gandhiji then stressed the necessity of complete prohibition and promotion
of khaddar.
Proceeding, he referred to the reports of his speeches appearing in a distorted
form in various papers and especially in the Times and remarked that these Press
reporters were doing a definite disservice to the country. He had to contradict a report
appearing in The Times of India. That report was a sheer distortion of his views. It
would be wrong to say that all reporters were so but he had to admit that many were or
else they did not understand his village dialect. I did not ask for the reporters but if the
papers wanted to send them they should select such as knew his language. Ignorant
reporters did harm both to him and the cause. Non-violence was not a new creed with
him, he had laid stress on it for at least fifteen years. Nobody should imagine that
with the advance of years he had lost his sense to such an extent that he should wish
to go to jail by paying the price in blood. Even for going to jail he would not wish
harm to anybody. What he had said was that they should not give up salt in their fists
even if that might involve serious injury. That was not at all contrary to
non-violence. He had received a wire from Delhi that four volunteers were so much
battered there that at last they fainted. Government had started the game in which
only a beginning was made. That should not come in the way of their duty. It was
ashame that Government were arresting even ladies. He wanted to show to the world
that theirs was a fight in which everyone could take part.

The Bombay Chronicle, 11-4-1930

1

78

About 5,000 villagers attended the meeting.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

77. TELEGRAM TO N. C. KELKAR1
April 11, 1930
YOUR

WIRE.

DECISION

DELIGHTED

ORGANIZE

GROSS

EXAGGERATION.

MILES

AWAY

BEYOND

SATYAGRAHA.
TOOK

MEASURE
REPORT

MORNING

MASS

YOUR

RESIGNATION

ABOUT
MEETING

HEALTH
SEVEN

TODAY.

GANDHI

The Hindu, 16-4-1930

78. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
DANDI,

April 11, 1930
MY DEAR RAIHANA,

I have your letter.
I would like you, Mother and others to attend here on Sunday. I
am holding a conference of Gujarat women for the purpose of
discussing the propriety and possibility of their tackling the problem
of drink and foreign cloth.
Here are the messages you want.
Kamladevi has written a good letter in reply to mine2 . Here it is.
You may destroy it.
There is every hope of Mother capitulating since she is capable
of blushing. It is a good sign.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: S.N. 9616

1

This was sent in reply to the following telegram from the addressee: “After
returning from the Assembly work at Delhi I immediately held conference of
Maharashtra National Party and have decided to start and organize Salt Civil
Disobedience in Maharashtra. Papers report your ill-health. Kindly relieve anxiety by
wire.”
2
This is not traceable.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

79

79. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
DANDI,

April 11, 1930
CHI. MAHADEV,

There was no harm in your having replied to the question about
the prize of Rs. 250. But why should we reply, even if we have
received the sum? If we are prosecuted for not replying, that would
make our path clear.
I should be happy if Saralabehn, Nandubehn and others attend
the conference. Ask Ranchhodbhai to send Motibehn and tell him
that, if he wishes, he also may accompany her.
Today they have been stopping the cars coming from Navsari.
They stop all cars coming from the Gaikawad limits.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11477

80

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

80. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
DANDI,

April 11, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

I intend to hold a small conference of women in Dandi on the
13th. Send those from among the women there who wish to come and
who can be spared to attend it. Meet the expenditure from the Satyagraha Fund. Those who have money with them should come at their
own expense. If Khurshidbehn volunteers to come, offer her the fare.
Probably she will refuse to accept it. Try if you can press her courteously to accept it. In the conference we are going to think only about
propaganda against the drink evil and boycott of foreign cloth. These
activities do not seem to have appealed to Khurshidbehn, that is, she
does not wish to take them up as specially women’s work. Hence she
may not wish to come.
How is Purushottam? How is Kanu? How does he spend his
time?
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8098. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

81

81. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
DURING DANDI MARCH,

[April 11, 1930] 1
CHI. NARANDAS,

I cannot choose the names. Only those women who wish to take
up these two activities and whom you can spare need come. You alone
can think and decide in this matter. Prompted by love, everyone may
wish to come. That is a different matter. We have no choice but to
exercise self-control in this matter.
Brijkrishna and Krishnadas have come here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8099. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

82. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
Friday, April 11, 1930
CHI. MAHADEV,

I got your letter. It does not matter that you did not show my
letter to Narandas. You may, however, do so now as my reply is in any
case the proper one. If people do not hide a thing there is no smuggling. There is “smuggling” only when there is an intention to hide.
What you are doing, therefore, is all right. The person carrying salt
also should declare (at the end) from where he brought it. Is it not
permissible for a person to get salt by post?
I understand what you say about lawyers. No purpose will be
served by Broker alone giving up practice. I am afraid that lawyers
will not give up practice just now. If schoolboys, however, leave their
schools, that will be enough. Congratulations to Mridu.
I am no longer enamoured of Dadubhai. Abbas Saheb writes to
inform me that Dadubhai asked him to go to Baroda but refused to
1

From the abrupt introduction of the subject-matter it appears this was written
as an afterthought to the preceding item. Besides, this was to reach those wishing to
attend the conference on April 13; it could not therefore have been written later than
April 11.

82

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

return. Dadubhai refused even to accompany him. What can a man do
after all? Who can successfully fight against his nature? Let us therefore be content with what we get.
Delhi has done very well indeed. Every place presents a
different spectacle. It appears that Atul Sen in Bengal has suffered a
fracture.
In Delhi at any rate the picketing of foreign-cloth shops by
women has started.
The women’s conference at Dandi has now been fixed for
Sunday. Read my letter to Narandas on the subject.
See that no mistake occurs in passing on the accompanying
letters to the persons concerned.
Take rest from time to time as you work. Entrust to others what
they can do.
I have just returned from Matwad.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11478

83. LETTER TO SHIVANAND
DANDI,

April 11, 1930
BHAISHRI SHIVANAND,

I had heard the news about Fulchand and others even before I
got your letter. I hope Shardabehn is all right. We should never feel
unhappy when we get what we had asked for. If you require any
volunteer on that side, tell Mahadev about it and he will then write to
me. If he is arrested before that, write directly to me.
Will Shardabehn be ready to join the new activity?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 2841. Courtesy: Fulchand Shah; also
G.N. 9203

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

83

84. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL
DANDI,

April 11, 1930
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

I had your letter. I was glad to know that your health was all
right. What was the cause of the improvement—the air and water of
Vijapur or reduced burden of worries or were both these the causes?
If the air and water of the place were the cause, you should occa-sionally go to Vijapur and stay there for some time and improve your
health. If you do that, by and by the body will get stronger. You
ought not to feel unhappy that you are not among the volunteers with
me. We shall have done our duty if we do with single-minded
devotion the tasks which may fall to our lot.
For megrim light food and a mud-pack every night as also when
the attack comes has proved a successful cure in all cases in which it
has been tried. I hope Babu does not get attacks of asthma now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. G. 6

84

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

85. LETTER TO SARALADEVI SARABHAI
April 11, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

I have your frank letter, It has been arranged to hold a small
conference1 of Gujarati women at Dandi on Sunday. You, Mridula
and other women should attend it if possible. We shall talk more about
swadeshi. There is no more time left to meet.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 11132. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

86. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
DANDI,

April 11, 1930
CHI, BRIJKRISHNA,

I have your letter. You must not thus break away from your
family. At present you should simply appeal to them. It will be of no
use at all if you go there 2 just now. The time for the total boycott of
foreign cloth is coming by itself and the people will then of their own
accord renounce foreign cloth. You have given no news of your health this time. Come over if there is no work in Vijapur. The climate
here is very bracing. As the house faces the sea we have cool breeze
day and night. Dandi is situated 10 miles from the Navsari station.
You will have no difficulty in staying on even if I am arrested and the
camp is shifted.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2379

1
Women’s conference to further anti-drink campaign and boycott of foreign
cloth. For Gandhiji’s article on the Conference which took place on April 13, 1930;
Vide “Special task before women”, 17-4-1930.
2
To Delhi

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

85

87. LETTER TO SITLA SAHAI
DANDI,

April 11, 1930
BHAI SITLA SAHAI,

I am late in replying to your letter. Kalakankar’s brother should
be instructed to prepare salt even at the risk of imprisonment. 1 The
work is proceeding very well at all places. There is no time to write
more.
Blessings from

BAPU
S JT. S ITLA S AHAI
C/ O S ATYAGRAHA C OMMITTEE
R AE BARELI , U.P.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 8684

88. STATEMENT TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA
JALALPUR,

April 11, 1930
Embarrassing invitations are being received by me to go to
several parts of India on the strength of the unauthorized report in the
Press that I would be free to go wherever I wanted. But such is not my
intention. So far as possible, I propose to concentrate all my attention
upon Gujarat and, health permitting, will next week make myself free
to go to those parts of Gujarat where my presence may be required. I
may possibly go as far as Bombay but not farther.
The Hindu, 12-4-1930

1

Kunwar Suresh Singh, brother of Raja Saheb Kalakankar, was arrested in June

1930.

86

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

89. MESSAGE TO HANSA MEHTA
[Before April 12, 1930]
Tell Mrs. Hansa Mehta that Bombay women should take up
energetically the cause of preventing liquor consumption in the city
of Bombay, as their contribution towards the fight for Purna Swaraj.
Not only will that save crores of rupees to the poorest workmen in the
world, but it will make a constructive step for the successful
accomplishment of India’s complete independence. India expects
every woman to do her duty at this moment in the fight for freedom.
1

The Bombay Chronicle, 12-4-1930

90. FRAGMENT OF LETTER TO PRESIDENT, B.P.C.C.
[Before April 12, 1930]
I know Bombay is doing extremely well. Indeed the whole
country is suffering, surpassing all expectations. But the real heat is
still to come. If it can stand that heat without retaliation and without
weakening, the way to swaraj is clear. Let us hope we shall end as we
have begun.
The Bombay Chronicle, 12-4-1930

1

Wife of Dr. Jivraj Mehta, physician and Congress leader of Bombay

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

87

91. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
DANDI,

April 12, 1930
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

Your wire. I was out visiting the villages in the morning and had
instructed Pyarelal to send you a reply telegram but he forgot. I will
not send one now at double rates. See my letter of yesterday and
decide on the right course. Come here if you wish to or proceed to
Delhi if that seems proper.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2380

92. LETTER TO NANUBHAI DAVE
DANDI,

April 12, 1930
BHAISHRI NANUBHAI,

I got your letter. The description which you give is heartrending
but I remain unperturbed knowing that our victory lies in enduring all
this. If, however, the repression continues, we shall have to think of
some form of agitation much more intense than the present one and
invite upon ourselves still greater suffering. Write to me from time to
time and give me all details. The information which you give should
be verifiable. I shall be able to find a solution only with the help of
such facts. If you can get the names of the officers who commit such
repression, give those names too. Give also the names of those who
may have been assaulted and send the results of medical examination
as well.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 16795

88

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

93. ARRESTS AND BRUTAL JUSTICE
Gujarat, it may be said, has saved our honour. Whole villages
here have set out to offer civil disobedience. Men, women and children are taking part in it. At many places, we can see fields of salt.
Illegal salt has found its way into people’s houses. Gujarat no longer
needs Government salt for its use. With a little bit of effort anyone
who requires salt can carry away as much readymade salt as he wishes.
But how could the Government tolerate this? It started arresting
people. From Dholar at one end to Jalalpur taluka at the other there
has been an awakening and leaders have been arrested. Amritlal Sheth,
Manilal Kothari, Fulchand Kasturchand Shah, Dr. Hariprasadji, Rohit
Mehta, Durbar Gopaldas, Gokuldas Talati, Ravishankar Vyas,
Raojibhai Man-ibhai Patel, Ashabhai, Dr. Chandulal, Keshubhai
Ganeshji, Ramdas Gan-dhi, Chimanlal Pranshankar, Bhikshuk or
Darbari Sadhu, Kikubhai, Manubhai and others are gracing prisons
with their presence. There are many names which I have omitted.
What does it matter whether all the names are mentioned or not?
Durbar and his companions are in fetters and their heads have been
shaved in prison. All this is good provided Gujarat values it.
The fact that those who at Aat, Ahmedabad and Dholka tried to
protect their honour through the medium of salt were beaten is significant and unexpected. I had expected that the Government would not
indulge in brutality and that it would send people to prison after duly
trying them under laws. My expectations have been belied. How can
one change one’s nature all of a sudden? The Government has yet
only given us a taste of its bloody claws; we can be sure there is more
to come.
Going beyond Gujarat, we find Jamnalalji, Nariman and others
have been arrested in Bombay. The cases are proceeding at great
speed. But the sentences, it is apparent, will depend upon the whim of
the magistrate.
In Delhi, Devdas Gandhi’s companions have been beaten.
Devdas and his companions have been arrested.
What reply will the nation give to this now? By the time this
article is published, much else will have happened.
I expect still more from the people. A bonfire should be made
of foreign cloth, there should be a takli in every hand. Schools and
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

89

colleges should become empty. Lawyers and doctors can help in various ways. I have written separately regarding women. All aspects of a
nation aspiring for freedom should be developed. It is a sign of weakness that Government jobs have not yet lost their fascination.
Weakness and freedom, however, do not go together. We can
win swaraj today if we completely do away with weakness and
selfishness wherever we find them. We can then open up the prison
gates and have the satyagrahi prisoners also released.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 13-4-1930

94. MILL-OWNERS AND KHADI
Shri Ranchhodlal Amritlal, who is himself a mill-owner, writes to
say:1
It is a distressing tale. I am convinced, however, that as people’s
sacrifices increase, the hearts of the mill-owners will melt. I know that
the khadi activity has benefited Indian mills. If, however, the latter
instead of enjoying the sweet fruit of the tree attempt to eat up its
roots, they will find they cannot do so and will even lose the fruit. Let
me cite a brief example. Let us suppose that boycott of foreign cloth
is successful; let us suppose that spurious khadi is passed off as genuine; and let us suppose that genuine khadi is unable to lift its head.
In that case, one of two results could follow. Spurious khadi and other
cloth made in mills would not be adequate. As people are not used to
khadi they would clamour for foreign cloth and we would be worse
off than we previously were, Indian mills would be swept away in the
storm, the chain of non-violence would be broken and the enraged
public would take to boycotting Indian mills. Or, supposing the goods
from Lancashire were totally rejected, since the shield of khadi would
not be there, the capitalists from Lancashire might start their mills in
this country and Indian mills would suffer as a result of foreign capital and foreign talent establishing themselves here and thereafter
swadeshi mills would regard it their duty to join the foreign mills in
exploiting the people. Though one cannot yet claim that the sentiment
for khadi has taken root in villages, nevertheless it has established
itself to the extent that many well-educated persons are prepared to
dedicate themselves to the cause of khadi. They will not allow khadi to
1
The letter is not translated here. The correspondent, enclosing samples, had
complained that many mills were manufacturing spurious khadi and selling it under
the stamp of “pure swadeshi khadi”.

90

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

die so long as they are themselves alive. If, therefore, mill-owners do
not stop producing and selling mill-made cloth as khadi, there is every
possibility of a fierce movement being launched against them. It will
become our duty to start such a movement.
They ought to save themselves from such a movement. It is in
their hands to do so. Here are the terms:
(1) Indian mills must not produce cloth which resembles khadi.
(2) That which has been already produced should he exported.
(3) They should altogether stop using the khadi stamp.
(4) They should give up making cloth which could compete
with khadi.
(5) They should consult with the Charkha Sangh and produce
only such cloth as is beyond the scope of khadi.
(6) In consultation with the khadi committee, they should fix
reasonable prices for mill-made cloth.
(7) No foreign yarn should be used in mills even for making
borders.
(8) Mill-owners and others should totally give up using foreign
cloth and wear only khadi as far as possible.
(9) They should stock khadi in the shop attached to mills.
During this period of self-purification it is highly essential for
the mills to observe the above rules. If they do so the boycott of
foreign cloth can be accomplished soon.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 13-4-1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

91

95. TO THE WOMEN
Last week, writing about prohibition, I had mentioned that there
was another activity also which women could and ought to take up.
This activity is the boycott of foreign cloth through khadi. This is, or
should be, the special field of women. For foreign cloth has ruined
millions of homes and taken away from millions of women an employment which sustained them. Foreign cloth has ruined seven lakh
villages in India. While on the one hand women have lost
employment, on the other they have to pay for cloth which they could
have produced in their own villages. People have developed a great
liking for foreign cloth and they will not give it up without great
effort and great penance. It is the women who embody that penance.
Man can never make an impression upon people such as women can.
Besides, amongst those who wear foreign cloth the number of
women exceeds that of men. And, in the final analysis, women will
create a greater impact upon other women.
Hence it is for women to start picketing in front of shops selling
foreign cloth. Men have failed in this task. But there is no reason why
women should fail. Moreover, in 1920-21 we did not have the same
climate that there is now. It is women alone who can take advantage of
this climate.
But there is also another aspect of this work. Supposing everyone was to burn their foreign clothes today, what then would they
wear? Indian mills would not be able to produce all the cloth within a
short period and perhaps even if they did we would not achieve the
purpose that we wish to.
That purpose would be served through khadi alone. Khadi
implies the takli or the spinning-wheel. In the latter lies the prosperity
of India. It is Annapurna 1 . If people in every home work on the spinning-wheel, we can produce today as much khadi as we want.
Producing khadi means spinning yarn. Men may well spin, but for
generations the profession of spinning has been practised by women
and men’s hands do not possess the same skill in this that women’s
do. Women alone can bring about this solidarity among their own sex.
I would, therefore, advise women to make this their special field
of work.2
1

Giver of plenty
Two paragraphs following this are not translated here. They are covered by
paragraphs 11 and 12 of “To the Women of India”, p. 221.
2

92

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

In this non-violent campaign, although our weapons are small
they are very powerful since they have in them the power of God.
Therefore, all those sisters who have faith in the spinning-wheel and
the takli and who wish to devote themselves to saving sixty crores of
rupees every year, should take up this work of boycott and the task of
propagating spinning.
It should be remembered that those sisters who wish to take up
this work have to be prepared to go to the villages.
Sisters who have faith not in both but in only one of these activities should take up only that. I have suggested the two activities
through which millions of women can develop themselves and contribute their full share in the yajna of swaraj.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 13-4-1930

96. MESSAGE TO “ THE HINDU ”
April 13, 1930
I have full faith in Southern India making adequate response to
the country’s call for the uttermost sacrifice. I expect that the response is not only in connection with salt tax, but also in regard to
intoxicating drinks and boycott of foreign cloth.
No part of India is perhaps better equipped for the boycott of
foreign cloth and the promotion of khadi than South India. Civil
disobedience with reference to the salt tax should be easy for the
Southern people owing to the extensive seaboard near by from almost
every part of that country.
The Hindu, 15-4-1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

93

97. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
DANDI,

April 13, 1930
CHI. MAHADEV,

I have your letter. I have been having a talk with some women
who have arrived. The conference itself will not start before 3.30. The
reason for calling them here was that Janakibehn and some other
women have arrived from Vile Parle and Mrs. Tyabji also has come
from Baroda. Consult your own convenience and come on the 16th.
There is no need to reach here on the 15th. At the moment, at any
rate, I cannot think of any additions to your list. I will write if I have
any suggestion to make. Tell Ba that she has been posted to do picketing of liquor booths at Jalalpur and that she should, therefore, come
after making all necessary preparations. She will not be in a position
to return as Mithubehn is quietly starting the picketing work right
from tomorrow. The idea is to begin with three booths, of which only
one will be taken up tomorrow. The next will be the one at Olpad and
the third at Jalalpur. Kanjibhai and Dr. Sumant will help and advise
Mithubehn. As Olpad has Muslim residents, Hamida will work there.
Kanjibhai’s daughter is also there. Motibehn will have to be posted
there. Probably Surajbehn will also be there. But I shall have to
consult Swami. Karsandas, who will be arriving this afternoon, will
bring some more news.
Considering all aspects of the matter, and in order that we may
have a quiet atmosphere, I think it best to have the meeting of the 16th
at Dandi. The women will arrive after breakfast, etc., [by the first
Mail]. 1 They will spend the whole day here and be back at their respective places in time for their evening meal. If they wish to have their
meal here, arrangements for that can also be made; but the arrangement here is bound to be a little unsatisfactory. Let me know if you
have any change to suggest in this. You and Narandas or the women
themselves should decide who should come from the Ashram. Khurshedbehn at any rate will not come and do not press her. Only those
who have faith in this programme can carry it out.
Mohanlal Pandya, Nanubhai and Ishwarlal Desai, these three
from Untadi have been arrested. Now it will be the turn of Kalyanji
and others. It seems possible that in the end I shall remain at Dandi
enjoying its air and you will remain there with no work to do.
Blessings From

B APU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11479

1

94

The source here is illegible.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

98. SPEECH AT GUJARATI WOMEN’S CONFERENCE,
DANDI
April 13, 1930
There are certain activities which are meant only for women.
Prohibition and boycott of foreign cloth are such activities; which if
you do not take up, will never be accomplished. In 1921 I compelled
men to take up these tasks and they did so out of fear, but how long
could it last? In the end I had to accept defeat and suspend the
activities. I would not have had to do so had I entrusted the work to
women. But when I was utterly confused and had been defeated on all
sides, God, like in that bhajan of the tortoise couple, made me entrust
the work to women. It is no doubt very difficult to picket shops but
women had been taking great risks in the past. It is for tha reason that
the world is still going on. Moreover both these activities required
persuasion and change of heart. Women alone can enter the hearts of
men and trans-form them. Moreover those women who have come
here must be aware of the plight of the families where husbands drink.
It is your duty to help your sisters’ families from breaking up.
Foreign cloth has taken away from fifteen crores of your sisters the
noble profession of plying the spinning-wheel and have rendered
crores of villagers unemployed. Khadi activity of ten insignificant
years have brought ten lakhs of rupees to the women’s homes. I want
you to expand the activity so that crores of rupees are brought in.
Once you take up this work, you have to discard foreign clothes—you
should burn them. You may say you will wear out whatever you have
or that you will pre-serve them. Even a drunkard might say that he
would consume whatever liquour he had or keep it. How can we keep
a thing which we consider to be a poison even for a day? We should
throw it away lest our children by mistake take the poison. You may
think that you have thrown that much money into water.
A woman picketer of Vejalpore had asked what the women should do if they
were attacked while they were picketing. Gandhiji replied:

There is no danger of such attack. However if that happens or if
the police try to disperse you with the help of horses then put up with
it quietly. A woman has a remarkable capacity for suffering. Take it
from me that the liquour shops will be closed down the day there is
such an attack on women. You may be certain he will give up
drinking for ever from that day,
[From Gujarati]
Prajabandhu, 20-4-1930
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

95

99. SPEECH AT DANDI 1
April 13, 1930
I am happy that you have on your own come here in such large
numbers on this the last day of the self-purification week, but you will
not be happy if I do not say something to you on this occasion.
I have just concluded the women’s conference. You will like
to know your place in what I have told the women to do. The
womenhave resolved to picket shops selling foreign cloth as also those
who use it, and those who sell liquor as also those who drink it. We
men may not interfere in this work. Let us treat this as the special field
of women.
The success of this work depends entirely on the self-control of
men. The assumption behind this is that men cannot easily control
their anger, cannot easily practise non-violence, while women can do
so. Renu-nciation and non-violence come naturally to women. Having
been insp-ired by this idea I have tried to explain it to women. If my
assum-ption is false, my conclusion will also be false to the same
degree.
It is the duty of men to make the atmosphere congenial for
women to do their work. We men should go to the dealers in liquor
and foreign cloth and try to convince them that now that the women
of India have come out they should give up trade in these two things.
Confronted by the large groups of women even liquor-booth
owners and owners of shops selling foreign cloth will be startled and
give up their trade. I know it is not easy to give up one’s trade. But, at
a time when the atmosphere is filled with national pride and patriotism, the people’s capacity for renunciation automatically increases.
During this week alone this capacity has increased a hundredfold, but
it should increase a thousandfold.
Dealers in foreign cloth still seem to be calculating whether to
give up their trade. They take a vow for three months or a year. Behind this act there is a lurking belief that they will be able to buy
foreign cloth after a year. They do not make the effort that is needed
to secure swaraj. This is because they lack the faith. But as this movement makes progress—trading in liquor and foreign cloth cannot but
come to an end.
1

Extracts from the speech were also published in Young India, 17-4-1930,
under the heading “Men’s Part”.

96

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

When hundreds of thousands of our countrymen have sacrificed
their all, even these sceptical traders are bound to develop the strength
to make sacrifices.
If women lack funds to continue the work after once starting it, I
shall stretch out my hand to you, though at present, by the blessing of
God, I am able to get more funds than I need. Only today, about a
thousand rupees were collected at the women’s meeting and a lady
belonging to the Galiara family of Kathor gave four gold bangles
without even being asked.
If we men are not indifferent and begin the work on our own, if,
for instance, for want of enough khadi it becomes necessary to wear
only a loin-cloth and we start doing so, to that extent we shall have
lightened the burden of our womenfolk.
Miss Mayo has accused us saying that many of our men have no
consideration for women, that we make them work as drudges, as if
they were born to be slaves. The world will be convinced that what
Miss Mayo said was not true when women wake up and accomplish
the tasks of boycotting foreign cloth and of prohibition.
The stocks of khadi in the country are dwindling and I am
therefore asking everyone to spin and wear khadi and I am demonstrating this before you every day by spinning on the takli. Just as
we grind and cook cereals which are available in every home we ought
to spin the large quantities of cotton which grows in India into some
kind of yarn, make cloth from it and then wear that cloth. When
spinning becomes a universal activity in the country, you can rest
assured that the trade in foreign cloth will come to an end.
Mills can never entirely meet the cloth needs of India and as
most mills in India are either wholly or partly foreign, cloth made by
only a few of them can be used if the need arises.
Women from good families have come out to take up these
activities. Divan Shri Manubhai’s daughter Shrimati Hansa Mehta and
some other ladies have only recently issued a circular and begun the
work of prohibition in Bombay. If Gujarati women continue to work
in this spirit and if the men lend them support this activity will become
widespread in India. All these three things are easy. When we have
accomplished these three things we shall have saved six crores from
the salt-tax, twenty-five crores from prohibition and sixty crores from
the boycott of foreign cloth—ninety-one crores in all. We shall have
become purer and added to our strength, and then it will not take long
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

97

for us to secure swaraj.
Finally, we should take care that we do not lose what we have
gained during these seven days.
I have just received news that some youths in Calcutta, who were
reading out passages from proscribed books at meetings, were
dispersed. On seeing the police committing such atrocities, Shri Sen
Gupta, the Mayor of Calcutta, also started reading out paragraphs
from those banned books and was immediately arrested.
Dr. Suresh Chandra Bannerjee, the able khadi worker of Abhoy
Ashram, who at one time received a salary of Rs. 600 a month from
the Government, has been sentenced to a term of two and a half years’
rigorous imprisonment for violating the salt law.
Notwithstanding such atrocities, just as we in Gujarat have not
become frightened and given in, there too, they are not onlynot frightened but have become more resolute. Whatever the atrocities perpetrated on us, we do not want to use force on anyone or to insult
anyone. A certain gentleman has informed me that in Bombay when
they were making bonfires of foreign cloth caps from other people’s
heads were forcibly removed and burnt I do not know how far this is
true. But if it is true, rest assured that this struggle cannot go on. If
force is used, people will not tolerate it; they will start fighting
amongst themselves and the Government will take advantage of this
situation.
If people do not want swaraj through the boycott of foreign
cloth, we cannot make them do good under compulsion. In order to
melt their hearts, we must make greater sacrifices and even practise
satyagraha against them if it becomes necessary to do so.
What should I do if I was convinced that people were deceiving
me, that having decided to boycott foreign cloth through khadi alone
they pledged themselves to do so and then broke their pledge ?
If I was convinced that I had become purified and wholly compassionate, I should, when the occasion arose, offer satyagraha and go
on a fast. What should I do if you should raise your hands every day,
say that if there is not enough khadi you will wear lungotis and then
it should turn out that not a single sister spins? I might perhaps even at
this advanced age have to say the same thing I said when I saw that the
labourers of Ahmedabad had broken their pledge, and do what I did
at the time of the riots in Bombay. I would do so unwillingly if I felt
that we were deceiving God daily. I have faith that the people of Guja98

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

rat will never deceive me.
We want to live in peace and win swaraj peacefully. I do not wish
to live to see disturbances in the country.
You just came on this day of my fast and I have said simply
what I wanted to. You must prevent any use of force whether in Bombay or elsewhere. Whenever I hear of one of our men having abused
someone, having been discourteous to someone or having used force
against someone I feel deeply hurt and truly my heart begins to
thump violently. If a doctor were to examine me at the time he would
hear the sound. Despite this, I am able to survive, for at such times I
close my eyes for a couple of seconds and repeat Ramanama. If I did
not do so, my heart would stop beating there and then. You all may
well call me Mahatma, but my task is that of a weak person. Do not,
therefore, deceive me, at any time in this struggle. It will be all right if
you sit at home, but once you join the campaign work sincerely.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 20-4-1930

100. LETTER TO GULAM RASOOL QURESHI
April 13, 1930
CHI. QURESHI,

I got your letter. Our duty is to do all we can. It is for God to
reward our efforts. Every rule should be observed. Meet Muslim
friends. Spin on the takli daily and persuade others to do the same.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
The women’s meeting today was good.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4295. Courtesy: Hamid Qureshi; also
G.N. 6650

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

99

101. LETTER TO LAKSHMIDAS SHRIKANT
DANDI,

April 13, 1930
BHAISHRI LAKSHMIDAS,

I got your letter today. I only read it just now at 9.30 p.m.,
Sunday. So there was hardly any time for a message. I always wish
you success in your tasks. Keep me informed.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4204

102. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
[Before April 14, 1930] 1
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. Take great care of your health. For that purpose, observe regularity in everything. Go out for walks every
morning without fail. Take the morning sun directly on your skin. Let
milk and fresh fruit be your principal diet. Do not worry about the
expense. If you run short of money, ask from the Ashram. If I have to
go away, use this letter.
I like your advice that I should not go to Bombay. Swami insists
that I should go. You can stop me from going. Swami can drag me
there. Talk it over between the two of you and send me a wire. I have
fixed Thursday for going. Until I hear from you, I shall keep Friday
and Saturday free. Inform Revashankarbhai if you want to call me. I
may forget to write.
Who will now attend to the affairs of the Provincial Committee?
Do what you can to see that the money is not squandered away.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1

The letter reached the addressee on April 15, 1930. Besides, Gandhiji in his
letter to Mahadev Desai dated April 14, 1930 (ibid.), mentions a change in his plan
of going to Bombay on Thursday.

100

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

103. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
[On or before April 14, 1930] 1
MY DEAR MIRA,

Just one line to acknowledge your long love-letter. It is now
nearing 10 p.m. So good night for the time being.
Love.
BAPU

Silence day or night? Silence breaks at midnight.
From the original: C W. 5386. Courtesy: Mirabehn

104. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL G. BANKER
Monday, [On or before April 14, 1930] 2
DEAR SHANKERLAL,

I can understand your requirement. But I would value even a
single minute I may get in Gujarat. I have sent you a telegram only
yesterday morning. You would surely have received it. I have sent a
telegram to Bhai Khatri also saying that I should be spared.
I am sending herewith a booklet 3 which you should print and
ell. I had intended to publish it on Wednesday as a supplement of the
Navajivan but now I am sending it to you. Carry on with it. Even then,
if you think it necessary, let me know at once so that I could come
there on the 16th and return the same night. I think if necessary I
should come earlier by a day, instead of on the 17th. You would, of
course, come to Surat on the 22nd. Look after your health well.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a copy of the Gujarati : S. N. 32708

1

From its placing in Bapu’s Letters to Mira this seems to have been written in
April 1930. There was no letter on April 28 (vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 29-1-1930)
and the one of April 21 is available. So this could belong to April 14 or some other
Monday before that.
2
From the reference to the “booklet” about which Gandhiji wrote in Hindi
Navajivan dated April 17, 1930; vide “Satyagraha Yuddha”, 17-4-1930. The Monday
prior to April 17 was April 14. Gandhiji was in Surat for a day on April 22.
3
Satyagraha Yuddha
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

101

105. TELEGRAM TO MOTILAL NEHRU
NAVSARI,

April 14, 1930
HAVE

JUST

YOU

AND

EARNED

THE

HEARD
SARUPRANI
CROWN

JAWAHARLAL
AS
OF

HAPPY

ARRESTED.

PARENTS.

THORNS.

WHO

I

GREET

JAWAHARLAL
WILL

HAS

OFFICIATE

HIM ?

The Bombay Chronicle, 15-4-1930

106. APPEAL TO THE YOUTH OF INDIA
[April 14, 1930]
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru’s arrest was what I was hourly
expecting. It was impossible for the Government to ignore the young
President and an ideal patriot. If I know the country, the response, if it
was tenfold after the arrest of the other leaders, will be a hundredfold
after this crowning act of the Government. This arrest should cost the
Government its existence.
Will the youth of the country realize this hope and now leave
their schools and colleges and work solely for the attainment of
independence ?
No doubt there will be an all-India hartal, though it has little
meaning in these times of big action.
The Bombay Chronicle, 16-4-1930

102

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

107. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU
DANDI,

April 14, 1930
DEAR MOTILALJI,

So Jawahar is to have six months’ rest. He has worked like a
Trojan. He needed this rest. If things continue to move with the
present velocity, he won’t have even six months’ rest. The Jambusar1
you saw the other day is different today. Whole villages have turned
out. I never expected this phenomenal response. In many villages
Government servants can get no service. The removal of some of our
picked men has only stiffened the resistance of the people. But
enough of this optimism. He will be a wise man who can say what will
happen tomorrow. Accounts arriving from Bombay too are most
encouraging. I take it you are following the pages of Young India.
How are you keeping?
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From the original: C.W. 9285. Courtesy: Allahabad Municipal Museum

108. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
[April 14, 1930] 2
CHI. MAHADEV,

I have your letter.
I have arranged to meet all of you on Wednesday at Vejalpur. I
shall go there from wherever I happen to be. I shall try to reach the
place early in the morning. The headquarters will be mostly at Karadi
now. If Swami’s request stands, I shall leave for Bombay on Thursday
evening and return from there on Sunday morning. I don’t feel
inclined to go to Bombay just now.
Your description of the happenings in Ahmedabad. . . .3
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11481
1

The addressee along with Jawaharlal Nehru had visited Jambusar towards the
end of March 1930 to see Gandhiji on his way to Dandi.
2
Gandhiji reached Vejalpur on April 16, 1930. Besides, in the “Letter to
Mahadev Desai”, 14-4-1930 (p. 260), Gandhiji mentions having written to him in
the morning. It is likely this was the letter referred to.
3
The rest of the letter is not available.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

103

109. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
April 14, 1930
CHI. KUSUM,

I have written about the anti-drink campaign and boycott of
foreign cloth. Do you think you can do anything in the matter? Do
you have the courage to take a leading part in that work?
I got your letters.
What are you doing there?
They told me yesterday that there was definite information that
my arrest was imminent and kept me awake the whole night. I am still
waiting.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1797

110. LETTER TO MANILAL V. DESAI
DANDI,

April 14, 1930
BHAI MANILAL DESAI,

I got the book about salt which you sent with Keshavram. I am
grateful.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXII/8

104

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

111. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
Monday [April 14,1930] 1
CHI. MAHADEV,

I wrote to you one letter in the morning. This is the second. It is
10.30 p.m. Jawahar has also been arrested. Pandya, Ghia and others
have been arrested here. It is rumoured that they also intend to arrest
Jugatram. All these persons certainly needed rest. They had been
working ceaselessly. People seem to have learnt now to work on their
own.
I shall not have to go to Bombay this week. Swami writes and
tells me that he will invite me to go there next week after more
preparation.
Bring Ba fully prepared. She should bring with her whatever
things she may want. I have found some work for her.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11480 and 11481

1

Jawaharlal Nehru was arrested on April 13, 1930.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

105

112. TELEGRAM TO MOTILAL NEHRU
NAVSARI,

April 15, 1930
NEHRU
ALLAHABAD
FEEL

SURE

EVEN

BE

MY
HARMFUL.

WEARING
IF

CROWN
YOU

CAN

UNNECESSARY
SHOULDER

MAY
BURDEN

YOU SHOULD.1

GANDHI
Motilal Nehru Papers, File No. G-l. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

113. LETTER TO PRESIDENT, B.P.C.C.
April 15, 1930
Your wire fills me with joy. I wonder what response the youth of
Bombay will make to the imprisonment of the President of the
Congress. I am hourly needed in Gujarat for consolidating the work
but I will come when absolutely needed.
The Bombay Chronicle, 16-4-1930

1

Motilal Nehru, in his reply dated April 17, said: “Your telegram. Fully
appreciate your point. Would have liked personal talk but consider longer
interregnum harmful and gladly place my whole-time services such as they are at
nation’s disposal under your guidance. Assuming charge today. Issuing statement.”

106

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

114. LETTER TO LAKSHMIDAS SHRIKANT

1

April 15, 1930
. . . There must be a Divine plan even in the fact that the Panchmahals district is waking up late. It would not be surprising if, in this
holy war, those who started first fall behind and those who started last
take the first rank. There is no limit to the strength of the Panchmahals district. The pity is we often do not realize our own strength.
This is the time to realize it. I certainly hope that Pan-chmahals will do
so.
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4206

115. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
DANDI,

April 15, 1930
CHI. MAHADEV,

I have just heard that you are going to be arrested soon! ! ! So
be it. You will get some rest. The wonder is that they left you free
even as long as they did. The more the people are tested the better.
“For this once, O Girdhari, save Thou my honour.”
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11482

1

The source does not give the name of the addressee. But in the G.N. collection
the letter is listed as addressed to Lakshmidas Shrikant.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

107

116. SPEECH AT UMBER
April 15, 1930
Mr. Gandhi asked the village women gathered there if they knew Pandit
,Jawaharlal Nehru.
They said, “How can we know?” Gandhiji remarked:

It is not your fault but of us men who have hitherto been
satisfied with your being and remaining as house-keepers, cooks,
scavengers and drawers of water but now you will no longer remain in
that position. If this movement is to succeed, yours will have to be as
big a share as men’s if not much bigger.
Referring to Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, Gandhiji said:

He was to all India what Sardar Vallabhbhai was to us in Gujarat.
He was wearing himself out in the nation’s service and has been
punished because he was the greatest among us all.
Hitherto I have asked you to resist snatching of salt by the
police from your closed fists and suffer mutely and meekly whatever
injuries the police might inflict upon you. If you have got strength of
suffering and faith in your mission I want to go many steps further.
I would like you henceforth to regard yourselves as trustees or
guardians not merely of the precious national wealth locked up in
your fists but of the whole treasure now being prepared in salt pans.
Defend that treasure with your life if that be the price you have to pay
for it. When the police come and raid these pans, surround them and
do not let the police touch them till they have overpowered you by
sheer brute force.
Even if you are beaten you must not lose your temper. I hope
that Gujarat has now become courageous to that extent. I am getting
my strength from the strength of Gujarat. You must be prepared to
endure suffering and keep the peace at any cost. Let them destroy
pans but only after they have either arrested you, or beaten you. This
is altogether a new experiment and I leave it to you to make more
pans wherever possible.1
From your sufferings will rise into being not only Purna
Swaraj but a non-violent army for its defence. Women ought not to
take part alongside of men in defence of salt pans. I still give credit to
1

108

This paragraph is taken from a report in The Bombay Chronicle, 16-4-1930.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the Government that it will not make war upon our women. It will be
wrong on our part to provoke them into so doing. This is men’s fight
so long as the Government will confine their attention to men. There
will be time enough for women to court assaults when the Government
has crossed the limit. Let it not be said of us that men sought shelter
behind women, well knowing they would be safe if they took women
with them in what may be called, for want of a better name, aggressive
non-violence. Women have in the programme I ventured to place
before them enough work and to spare and all adventure and risk they
may be capable of undertaking. The Labour Association of Ahmedabad has undertaken to picket liquor shops. Selling of contraband
salt which was going on in Ahmedabad is now stopped. It will be done
in villages by sending batches of volunteers.
He said that they must either make their own arrangements for food or must
take whatever is cooked for them. They could not maintain kitchens for different
tastes. This was a fight for self-purification and therefore they must leave off all bad
habits. They must have perfect discipline and strength to suffer hardships. He asked
all those who cannot submit themselves to discipline to resign in the beginning. But
let them not cheat the community and nation. Even if there were only a few true
volunteers the fight would go on. The fight has been well begun, and Gujarat has
earned credit for it. Let it not be said that Gujarat lost the fight because of mistakes
and lapses.1

The Hindu, 16-4-1930

117. LETTER TO SAROJINI NAIDU
April 16, 1930
MY DEAR MIRABAI,

I have your letter. What advance shall I make? Of course I
should greet the friends just as before. But not having any sense of
sin, how shall I give them satisfaction by talking? Their grievance is
evid-ently most against me. The only way I can give them satisfaction
is by correct conduct. Can you tell me where I have erred?
I often sing to myself, ‘We shall know each other better when
the mists have rolled away.’
I am likely to come to Bombay next week.
Yours

M. K. GANDHI
From the original: Padmaja Naidu Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library
1

This paragraph is taken from The Bombay Chronicle report.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

109

118. LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI MADHAVJI THAKKAR
April 16, 1930
CHI. MAHALAKSHMI,

I received your beautiful letter. I am replying rather late. I have
no time. I got up today at a quarter past two in the morning.
I will give you sufficient work to do. I have understood the
natures of you both. Your resolves are noble.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6795

119. UNTOUCHABILITY
As in the matter of Hindu-Muslim unity so has there been
misrepresentation in the matter of untouchability It has been stated
that I am sacrificing the interest of the untouchables for the sake of
swaraj. I know that the lacs of untouchables will not believe any such
thing of me. For me just as there is no swaraj without communal unity,
so is there no swaraj without the removal of untouchability. But what I
do feel is that without swaraj there will be neither communal unity nor
removal of untouchability. He who runs may see that it is to the
interest of the ruling caste to keep up the divisions among us. That
caste is no more interested in Hindus and Mussalmans coming
together than in the removal of untouchability.
In examining the sources of revenue I endeavoured the other
day to show how the Government was built on an immoral
foundation. Even so has it built itself upon our weaknesses and our
vices.
Take the disgraceful Nasik quarrel. The Government knows
that the Sanatanists are in the wrong. But what has it done? Because
they repr-esent a powerful interest, the untouchables have been
sacrificed. It was open to the authorities to get together the Sanatanists
and reason with them. It was open to them to reason with the
untouchables and ask them not to precipitate a fight. But this required
an impartial mind, disinterestedness. But the Government is not
disinterested. It rejoices to see the parties quarrel and then side with
110

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the strongest. I know that many good natured but ignorant
Englishmen will cavil at this opinion. I can only tell them that it is
based on everyday exp-erience. I do not suggest that every time the
action is deliberate. ‘Might is right’, ‘divide and rule’, have become
the daily routine of the official world.
Such being my deep conviction, I would be wronging the minorities and wronging the untouchables if I stopped the progress
towards swaraj by inaction. I hold that as soon as we have realized the
power that is lying dormant in every one of us, that very moment we
shall be free and we shall feel the glow of real unity and the unto-uchables will also feel an accession of power.
Let it be understood that everywhere the bands of civil resisters
contain Mussalmans, members of other faiths as also untouchables, be
these ever so few. The fact is that the foundations of swaraj are being
laid by those who regard communal unity, equality of rights and
opportunity and removal of untouchability as articles of faith.
Let the untouchable brethren not be lured from the common
goal because it was the presence of Englishmen that stimulated Hindu
thought and brought to the untouchables a sense of their rights. The
fact is there. But the English did not descend upon India with any
such benevolent motive. Their civilization or rather the Western civilization does not recognize distinctions in the manner decayed
Hinduism does. We could have profited by this excellence of theirs
without having the infliction of their rule. My indictment is not
against the English as men, it is against Englishmen as the ruling caste.
As men they are as good as we. In some respects they are better, in
some others they may be worse. But as rulers they are highly undesirable. As rulers they can do, have done, no good to any of us. They
have pandered to, and accentuated, our vices. And as we have developed the inferiority complex, their contact demoralizes us. I have
watched ourselves acting one way in their presence, another way
behind their backs. This is an unmanly and unmanning process; it is
unnatural. “The tallest of us,” said Gokhale, “has to bend before
them.” When they come to their senses, they too will realize that their
rule has no less debased them than us.
Now a word to the untouchables. I have advised them and I
repeat the advice that it is wholly unnecessary for them to seek to
force entry into the orthodox temples even through the method of
satyagraha. It is the duty of the ‘touchable’ Hindus to secure for the
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

111

untouchables the freedom of the temples. It is for the ‘touchables’ to
offer satyagraha when the time is ripe. The untouchables know that
the Congress has appointed, with Jamnalalji as the head, a committee
for that very purpose. They know that very great progress has been
made in the matter of removal of untouchability, they know that all
over India are to be found hundreds of well-known believing Hindus
who will lay down their lives to remove untouchability. The reformers
hold it to be their duty and penance to purge the Hindu society of the
evil. Let the untouchables know that the vast majority of them are
today engaged in this life-and-death struggle. If they realize the truth
of the statements I have made, they will at least suspend the satyagraha
pending the struggle even if the whole mass of them will not join it as
some of them have already done. The Hindu reformers have
undertaken the work not as patrons, not to do the favour to the
untouchables, certainly not to exploit them politically. They have
undertaken the task because their conception of Hinduism
peremptorily demands it. They have either to leave Hinduism or to
make good the claim that untouchability is no part of it but that it is
an excrescence to be rooted out.
Young India, 17-4-1930

120. THE INHUMAN TAX
Every new experience gained of the incidence of the salt tax
shows it to be more inhuman than it appeared at first. Living and
moving as I am in the midst of the salt area in Gujarat, I find that
villages have been ruined because of the prohibition of salt
manufacture by the villagers. The only use the people can make of
the land is to extract salt from it which nature deposits in abundance
from month to month. This was the poor man’s staple industry in
these parts. Now all this land lies fallow. Dandi itself has a tragic
history. It is a beautiful seaside place. It takes its name from the fact
that it was a place for a diva dandi, i.e., a lighthouse. Now it is a
deserted village. A European and then Indians tried against nature to
reclaim the soil for cultivation. As I walk about the otherwise beautiful
peace-giving shore and listen for the heavenly music of the gentle
waves, I see about me wasted human effort in the shape of dilapidated
embanked fields without a patch of vegetation. These very fields,
immediately the hateful salt monopoly is gone, will be valuable salt
pans from which villagers will extract fresh, white sparkling salt
112

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

without much labour, and it will give them a living as it did their
ancestors.
Mahadev Desai has already shown that the Government
communique that this salt is injurious to health is a wicked falsehood.1
In spite of the inhuman regulations, the people round about this area
have used none but the salt that nature provides here in abundance.
They do not seem to have felt any the worse for it. Thousands all over
this area have been during the past week eating this salt with impunity.
I hear that in Konkan people have all these years used what they
regard as swadeshi salt in contradistinction to the taxed salt which they
regard as sarkari or foreign, although in the first instance it was yielded by India’s earth and seas. The recipe which I publish in this issue
has been prepared by two careful men who have graduated in science.
According to it every household can prepare its own salt without any
expense whatsoever. One boy has merely to fetch a lota-ful2 of salt
water and it has merely to be strained or filtered and put near the fire
in a shallow pan and treated in accordance with the recipe and the
householders have every day’s supply of salt much cleaner and
healthier than the ‘sarkari’ 3 or ‘foreign’ dirty salt to be had in the
bazaars. Let the salt satyagrahis (and they are to be counted in their
tens of thousands now) not waste a single grain of swadeshi salt. Law
or no law, there is now no excuse for anyone to eat the bazaar salt.
Swadeshi salt must be introduced even where there are no salt beds. It
can be easily transported in small quantities from place to place. Let
the Government prosecute tens of thousands of men and women or, if
they dare, send their officials to search their persons and brutally
force it from them. Let them say: ‘The salt law allows it.’ I have
already shown that the salt regulations are as inhuman as the tax itself.
If the history of the administration in the early stages of these regulations were known, it would be found that these inhuman regulations
were as inhumanely administered in order to deprive the people of
their natural calling and compel them to take the bloodstained sarkari
salt. Let the reader know that even palanquins bearing purdahnashin4
women were searched in order to prevent the transport of illicit salt. If
1

Mahadev Desai’s article entitled “A Brazen Lie” was published in Young
India, 10-4-1930.
2
A lota is a metal jug.
3
Literally, of the Government
4
Wearing purdah
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

113

today we have to bear hardships in the attempt to have this iniquitous
tax removed, we are but doing a modicum of penance for our past
neglect and shameful submission to the impost. The reader will thus
see that it is not merely the tax, heavy as it is, that is offensive. It has
not one redeeming feature about it. The revenue it brings is not the
only cost to the nation. The cost to the nation is probably twenty
crores per year besides the loss of an equal amount of salt which is
wantonly destroyed or prevented from being gathered.
Young India, 17-4-1930

121. A SURVEY
The mass manifestation in Gujarat has exceeded all expectations. Bombay and its suburbs have done no less. And the reports
slowly coming to me at this out-of-the-way place from all over India
are fully encouraging. It is a matter of the keenest joy to me to see
Maharashtra united once more and Sjt. N. C. Kelkar and his friends
joining the struggle. Sjt. Kelkar’s and Sjt. Aney’s resignations are
events of great importance in the struggle. Bengal is the most tempestuous province in all India. It is pulsating with life. Its very factions
are symptomatic of its great awakening. If Bengal responds in the
right style it is likely to overshadow every other province. I do not
know that any province, even Maharashtra, can claim the credit that
Bengal can for voluntary sacrifice. If its emotional side is its weakness,
it is also its greatest strength. It has the capacity for reckless abandon
to non-violence, if such use of language is permissible. Sjt. Sen
Gupta’s action in response to the wanton assault on the students’
meeting has evoked the sentiment above expressed. The sentence of
Dr. Suresh Bannerji and others pales into insignificance before the
possibilities of the move on the part of the Bengal students and the
savage counter-move on the part of the police. I know what the
Calcutta Commissioner of Police will say if he sees these lines. I hear
him saying, ‘But you do not know my Bengal.’ Well, I know his
Bengal more than he ever will. His Bengal is the creation of the
Government. If the Government will cease to molest Bengal and not
keep India from her cherished goal, Bengal will be as gentle as the
greatest province of India. If Bengal is seething with the violent spirit,
it is because of her sufferings.
114

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

But I expect Bengal’s imagination to come to her assistance and
to realize that non-violence is the trump-card. All the suffering must
be dedicated to the goddess of ahimsa.
Soon after the Jallianwala massacre, I used to express and
reiterate the hope that next time in no part of India must people run
away on bullets being discharged against them, and that theymust
receive them in their chests with arms folded and with courageous
resignation. That testing time seems to be coming faster than I had
expected. And if we are to train ourselves to receive the bullet wounds
or bayonet charges in our bare chests, we must accustom ourselves to
standing unmoved in the face of cavalry or baton charges. I know that
it is easier said than done. Nevertheless, I must say it if we are ever to
complete our training in mass non- violence. That mass non-violence
is a perfect possibility has been sufficiently demonstrated during the
past eight days. Mahadev Desai has given a realistic account of the
brutal treatment of volunteers in the Dholera saltbed and the volunteers suffering the brutality with meek heroism. What thousands in
Bombay did when the police acted with rashness and harshness if also
with comparative considerateness can be studied from a condensed
translation published elsewhere of a graphic description sent to me by
Pandit Malaviya. His report is in the main corroborated by Dahyabhai,
Sardar Vallabhbhai’s son, who was also an eye witness.
Perinbai and her companions as also Kamaladevi acted with rare
courage and calmness. But they would allow me to say that they
would have done better to remain outside the venue of the men’s
fight. For women to be in the midst of such danger as they put
themselves in was against the rule of chivalry. Anyway that time is not
yet. Let them by all means manufacture salt in their thousands. But
they may not remain deliberately in crowds which they know are
likely to be charged. I have in all humility suggested to them an
exclusive field in which they are at liberty and are expected to show
their best qualities. There is in that field enough scope for adventure
and heroism.
To revert, if then we are to stand the final heat of the battle, we
must learn to stand our ground in the face of cavalry or baton charges
and allow ourselves to be trampled under horses’ hoofs or bruised
with baton charges. An armed crowd would stand firm and retaliate if
there were such charges. We, if we would learn the lesson of
non-violence, should show greater courage by standing our ground
without anger, without retaliation. Then a reincarnation of Dyer will
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

115

find us ready for receiving bullets in the bare breast.
People have already begun to defend their salt pans. If we have
evolved that sufficient amount of courage, it must be done
methodically and regularly. As soon as the police come to charge us
and break through the living wall, women should, if the police give the
opportunity, stand aside and let their men be wounded. They do so all
the world over in armed conflict, let them do so in a conflict in which
one party deliberately chooses to remain unarmed.
When there are no men left to fight the battle of free salt, if
[they] have courage let them take up the work deserted by men. But I
have no doubt that men will give a good account of themselves in this
struggle.
I have already examined elsewhere the argument that the police
must use force if people will not surrender the contraband salt in their
possession. Here I would only remind these critics that even from
confirmed thieves they do not take stolen property by force except
after they are brought under arrest and then too never if they are not
to be brought to trial. The property still remains the thief’s until he is
convicted and the court adjudges the property not to be his. That the
salt regulations make the policeman the arresting officer, prosecutor
and judge all rolled into one is no answer to my charge of barbarity in
respect of the procedure adopted by the authorities.
Young India, 17-4-1930

122. PRESIDENT’S REWARD
The President of the Congress has had his laurels cheap. For a
telegram just received from Pandit Motilalji tells me that Pandit
Jawaharlal has been sentenced to six months’ simple imprisonment.
But even a day’s imprisonment of the nation’s first servant is an
affront offered to the whole nation. Through this imprisonment the
Government have told us to do our worst. And the worst we can do is
to invite more suffering upon ourselves. This can only be done by our
intensifying the campaign. Great as is the work being done by the
youth of the country, I must confess that I am not satisfied with the
response from the students. They have not yet got self-confidence.
They do not believe that swaraj is coming soon. They do not realize
that it is for them to anticipate its advent by simple faith and acting
upon it. But faith cannot be given by anybody. It has to come from
116

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

within. The country will watch the effect of Pandit Jawaharlal’s incarceration upon the thousands of students who are still hankering after
degrees and diplomas.
Young India, 17-4-1930

123. SPECIAL TASK BEFORE WOMEN
The conference of women on Sunday last at Dandi became a
Congress as I had wanted it to be. Thanks to the Government prohibition against the Baroda territory cars plying between Navsari and
Dandi, many had walked the full 12 miles to Dandi. The following
resolutions were unanimously adopted:
I
This conference of the women of Gujarat assembled at
Dandi on 13th April, 1930 having heard Gandhiji, resolves
that the women assembled will picket liquor and toddy shops
of Gujarat and appeal to the shop-keepers and the shop-goers
[to desist] from plying their trade or drinking intoxicating
liquors as the case may be, and will similarly picket
foreign-cloth shops and appeal to the dealers and the buyers
to desist from the practice of dealing in or buying foreign
cloth as the case may be.
II
This conference is of opinion that boycott of foreign
cloth is possible only through khadi and therefore the women
assembled resolve henceforth to use khadi only and will so far
as possible spin regularly and will learn all the previous
processes and preach the message of khadi among their
neighbours, teach them the processes up to spinning and
encourage them to spin regularly.
III
This conference appoints the following Executive
Committee with power to draw up a constitution and to amend
it from time to time and add to their number:1
1.
Mrs. Tyabji (President)
2.
Shrimati Mithubehn Petit (Secretary)
1

These four paragraphs have been taken from “Women in Conference”, Young
India, 17-4-1930.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

117

MEMBERS

3.
Shrimati Manibehn Patel
4.
,,
Rohini Desai
5.
,,
Chandubehn
This conference hopes that Gujarati women will welcome this
activity and participate in it.
This conference hopes that women all over Gujarat and the
other provinces will take up the movement initiated at this conference.1
The same resolutions were passed also in Vejalpur; only the first
resolution was divided into sections. Two distinct sections dealt with
prohibition and the boycott of foreign cloth through khadi, so that
wo-men who believed in only one of these causes could vote for that
one alone. At the second conference three more names were added:
Shrimati Shardabehn Sumant Mehta
Shrimati Savitabehn Trivedi
Shrimati Surajbehn Manilal
This vote need not be considered as having much value. It is
valuable to the extent that not a single resolution was opposed at the
meeting, for it shows that even if the women present may not be prepared to put the resolution into practice, nevertheless they approved
of its substance. At both these conferences women from villages were
present in greater numbers. The struggle this time is of the villages
especially. The awakening in the villages is astonishing which is a
good sign. Salt, the boycott of foreign cloth and prohibition—all
these three are specially meant for villages and the women would benefit especially.
Even if a few women are ready to lay down their lives for the
sake of this resolution, they will come forward. If this does not happen
the conference will not be deemed to have completed its work. If the
number of women present at the conference is any indication, the
women would seem to be prepared for work.
The soul of any organization is its executive committee. Hence
the success of the work depends upon the enthusiasm, the tapascharya
and the skill of the ladies who have given their names for the
committee.
1

118

This paragraph has been taken from Young India.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Mithubehn Petit has started the work with great alacrity. According to her accounts habitual drunkards are enthusiastically breaking
earthen jars containing toddy. Thousands of persons in Surat who are
given to drinking, have started having resolutions passed by their
castes prohibiting drinking.
Once women become self-confident and gain faith, they will
find from experience that the fear which they entertain has no
basis. Rama and Ravana dwell in every human being. If women would
act through the Rama who is in them, the Ravana who dwells in man
would be powerless. Rama awakens less readily in men than in
women. Who can harm one who is protected by Rama? Who can
protect one with whom Rama is displeased ?
In the work of prohibition, once the initial fear is shed, things
become easy. For all it involves is picketing. Those who drink are not
wicked. They are simple folk. Their self-interest is not involved in
drinking. Once they are convinced, they will give up liquor. The
liquor-booth owners do have their self-interest involved but they
realize that this is an immoral trade.
I regard this extension of the swaraj movement as of the highest
importance. I need not reiterate the argument already advanced in
these pages. Mithubehn has already commenced operations. She is
not the woman to let the grass grow under her feet. The idea is for
twenty to twenty-five women to go in one batch and plant thems-elvesnear each liquor shop and come in personal contact with every
visitor to the liquor or toddy shops and wean him from the habit.
They will also appeal to the shopkeepers to give up the immoral
traffic and earn their livelihood through better means.1
Foreign-cloth shops are to be treated in the same way as liquor
shops as soon as there are enough trained women volunteers. Though
the same committee will carry on the two boycotts it will necessarily
have two branches. It will be open to any woman to offer her services
for only one branch of work, nor is it necessary that every worker
should belong to the Congress. Only this must be clearly understood,
that the work is part of the Congress programme and has tremendous
political results if it has also equally great moral and economic
consequences.
1

This and the following two paragraphs have been taken from Young India,
17-4-1930.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

119

Those who will belong to the foreign-cloth boycott branch
should realize that without the constructive work of khadi production
the mere boycott will be a mischievous activity. Its very success
without the production of khadi will prove the ruin of the national
movement of independence. For the millions will take it up in simple
faith. But they will curse us if they discover that they have no cloth to
wear or the cloth they can get is too dear for their purse. The formula
therefore is: discard foreign cloth and make your own khadi and wear
it. Already there is a dearth of khadi.
The boycott of foreign cloth is, however, a difficult matter. It
has two aspects; boycott and khadi production. The boycott does not
require much effort Only a few women would suffice for the work.
For the production of khadi thousands and even hundreds of thousands would have to be regularly active. Hence it would require organization and planning. However, it is a work needing patience, as it
requires intelligence and faith. In the course of it you have to come in
contact—directly or indirectly—with crores of women. It requires a
pure co-ordination between towns and villages. And, through it all the
khadi India needs can be produced in a short time. We have before us
all the means to produce it. We have the necessary skill too. All that
we lack is workers. It is the sisters who must create these workers.
They can do so only when they themselves learn to card and spin and
disseminate the art among others. Most of the khadi workers are in the
salt campaign. Therefore the production has suffered a temporary
check.1
But there need never be any dearth of cloth the moment the
country gets disabused of the superstition that it must buy cloth to
cover its nakedness. It would be on a par with someone saying that we
must starve if we cannot get Manchester or Delhi biscuits. Even as we
cook our food and eat it so can we, if we but will it, make our own
cloth and wear it. We did it only a hundred years ago and we can
relearn the trick now. All the vital processes are almost too simple to
learn. At this supreme crisis, this turning point in the nation’s history,
we must not hesitate and nurse idleness. I do not need to restate the
argument about our mills. Even if every mill were genuinely swadeshi
and even if all became patriotic, they could not supply all our wants.
Whichever way we look at it, whether we like it or not, we cannot
1

The last two sentences and the following two paragraphs have been taken
from Young India, 17-4-1930.

120

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

escape khadi if we are to achieve independence through non-violent
means and if we are to achieve the boycott of foreign cloth on which
we began concentration in 1920.
Of men’s part in the boycott I have said enough in my speech
which I unexpectedly delivered to the men who had come to Dandi.
Relevant parts of this speech are reproduced elsewhere.1 Suffice it here
to say that men will damage the movement if they will meddle with
women’s picketing wherever it is undertaken by them.
By passing the above two resolutions Gujarati women have taken
up the responsibility and Begum Amina Tyabji and their committee
have shouldered the responsibility on their behalf.
May God grant them strength!
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 20-4-1930 and Young India, 17-4-1930

124. “SATYAGRAHA YUDDHA”
The Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, has issued a
booklet under the above title. Let everyone read it. Those who are not
regular readers of Hindi Navajivan, or those who have to train
themselves for the satyagraha campaign will find the booklet
especially useful.
[From Hindi]
Hindi Navajivan, 17-4-1930

125. PRESIDENT IN PRISON-HOUSE
Pandit Jawaharlal is in jail. This means that the Government has
thrown the whole of India into prison. If we understand this, then our
duty becomes clear at once. If we wish to force the jail doors open we
must do these things.
1. We should make salt everywhere and distribute it.
2. Women should picket liquor shops, that is, they should
humbly plead with the sellers and consumers of liquor to desist
from selling and drinking it.
3. Women should similarly dissuade those that sell and those
that wear foreign cloth.
1

Vide “Speech at Dandi”, 20-4-1930.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

121

4. Spinning should be started in every home.
5. Students should leave schools and dedicate themselves to
national work.
6. Lawyers should give up their practice and devote all their
time to this national yajna.
7. Those in other occupations should also give for these
activities as much time as they can.
8. People should leave Government jobs.
9. Under no circumstances should people become disorderly or
commit violence.
10. They should not look down upon anyone. They should live
at peace with all.
If we did this much our strength would certainly increase and no
one would dare deflect us from our path.
[From Hindi]
Hindi Navajivan, 17-4-1930

126. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 17, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

Yesterday I sent the replies to your questions orally through
Gangabehn . They must have been conveyed to you.
What you write about accounts is correct. I intend to write in
Navajivan about the matter.
I had sent to you by return of post my reply to your question
concerning. . .1 Mahadev must have explained to you why you did not
get it. If Ramji Sahay wants to go to his own province to work, he may
do so. He should pay his own fare if he can.
I have already written to you asking you to send some women.
Have you found some work for Keshu?
Think of all possible plans to increase the production of khadi.
Blessings from

BAPU
1

122

The name has been omitted.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[PS.]
You will have to send the thing to Malkani, since I had not
written to him to say no. Now I do not wish to write.
From Gujarati: C.W. 8100. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

127. INTERVIEW TO FREE PRESS OF INDIA
JALALPUR,

April 17, 1930
It is too early for me to speak with certainty anything about the
so-called riots in Calcutta and Karachi. Having become used to
grossly exaggerated accounts and distorted versions of things happening before my eyes, I am inclined largely to discount the stories of
violence alleged to have been done by people. But be it ever so little, I
have no manner of doubt that it harms the struggle, and at the same
time the struggle has to go on unchecked. If non-violence has to fight
people’s violence in addition to that of Government, it must still perform its arduous task at any cost. I see no escape from it. At the very
outset of the campaign I had declared that there was every possibility
of some violence breaking out on the part of the people. It seems now
to have broken out; and it hurts me, only because it hurts the cause I
hold as dear as life itself. But I must say that Government have provoked it in dispersing the meeting where no violence had been done; to
prohibit public meetings and processions altogether is a thing calculated to precipitate violence. Government have with utmost deliberation picked up the leaders of the people who were known to be
partial to non-violence and to possess controlling influence on the
people. It would have been miraculous if this gross interference with
popular liberty had not evoked reprisals from easily inflammable people, who were to be found in every community and in all parts of the
world. Take Gujarat itself; and in the out-of-the way Dholera and near
Viramgam unnameable and indecent atrocities are said to have been
committed upon defenceless national workers. Their only crime was
that they would not easily yield up the salt in their possession.
In the first place, I do not know that outside India under
any civilized government, authority has been given to the police forcibly to take away from people anything unless it is of a dangerous
character. I know that Salt Acts do give such powers. That merely illustrates my view. A barbarous act does not become less so
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

123

by having the authority of law, and the practice of indecent torture
is uterly intolerable and calculated to exhaust the patience of anypeople. The obvious fact is that Government [do not] want peace. I
observe that Mr. Jairamdas Doulatram has come in for a bullet wound
in the thigh. I am delighted it is Mr. Jairamdas Doulatram rather than
some unknown person to have been thus injured. Mr. Jairamdas is one
of the greatest persons to be found in all India. If he was in the crowd,
he was there not to incite people to violence but to prevent it.
Spilling of such innocent blood will hasten the end, but such
casualties will only result in the manifestation of greater response
from people. Let me, however, warn those whom my message may
reach that if they cannot restrain themselves, they must not interfere
with the struggle. If they do, they will only retard the country’s progress towards its goal.
I know, however, that soon my word will cease to reach the
people. All instruments I possess will have been snatched away from
me, but they cannot snatch away one thing from me and that is my
unshakable faith in my cause. A mass movement like the one we see
in front of us is regulated not by men but by God. Manifestation has
been spontaneous. It has required but little guidance.
If what I have seen happening in Gujarat is an index to what has
happened in other provinces of India, the movement has been largely
self-directed. I have, therefore, still every hope that at the end of the
struggle it would be possible to say of it that even though regrettable
violence now and then broke out, it remained predominantly and
overwhelmingly non-violent. Not what happens in cities but what
happens in villages will decide the fate of India.
The Bombay Chronicle, 18-4-1930

124

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

128. SPEECH TO VOLUNTEERS, VEJALPUR
April 17, 1930
Gandhiji at the outset said that they had gathered to decide about their future
programme. The Government was doing quite the opposite of what he thought would
be done. They had belied the expectations of the satyagrahis. He expected that he
would be arrested, but he was still free. The Government has miscalculated. The word
‘defeat’ is not to be found in the dictionary of a satyagrahi. There was no defeat for
them who were ready to die and suffer. Out of these sufferings mighty strength would
be created with which all Government laws could be broken.
They had broken the salt laws successfully. What should they do next? He had
heard of riots in Calcutta and Karachi. From what he had read in the newspapers he
could find that somewhere there was some mistake on the part of the people and it was
regrettable. Though he expected that the people would remain non-violent, he did not
think that such occurrences would never happen.

I cannot teach peace and non-violence by stopping the fight.
How can one man keep in check crores of people? We must do our
duty and the people will understand by themselves. I hope Gujarat has
well understood the lesson of non-violence, which is our religion at
the present moment. We must suffer till the goal is reached.
Continuing, Gandhiji said that he wanted that all should be prepared to serve
as national volunteers till swaraj is attained and asked those who wanted to retain
their services under the condition to raise their hands fearlessly. All the volunteers
except 48 raised their hands.
Gandhiji congratulated those 48 satyagrahis who did not raise their hands for
their courage and assured them that they would be given other work in their
own villages.
The question of ration for the national army was then discussed. It was
unanimously resolved by the volunteers, at the suggestion of Mahatmaji, that their
food should be simple and should not cost more than annas 5 per head per day. But
option was given with the permission of the Captain to take meals privately at the
volunteers’ own expense. But Gandhiji wanted them to use the option as rarely as
possible, as they as national soldiers were expected to behave with self-restraint. He
said that in England even Kings had to work as sailors where they got the same food
as ordinary sailors.
The resolution regarding smoking by soldiers of the national army evoked
keen debate. Gandhiji said that he did not want to dismiss all those who were
habituated to smoke, but suggested that they must try to do without smoking.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

125

Concluding the conference, Mahatmaji laid great stress on the fact that they
must always be at their post and asked them to observe all the rules they had
themselves passed after full deliberation and of their own free will. He asked them to
be of good moral character. If they did national work with impure conscience swaraj
would go farther away from them. He said he would be glad if he saw his own national
soldiers suffering and receiving bullets on their own chests and out of the ashes of
these non-violent soldiers of freedom, swaraj would be born.

The Bombay Chronicle, 18-4-1930

129. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
VEJALPUR,

April 17, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

I have your two letters.
I can understand how the mishap occurred as to the yarn.
I understand too your natural desire to come. But I am [sure]
restraint was better. It is a fine saying “there is no remission of sin
except by being born again.”
You know however that you are at liberty to come if you cannot
help it. But then you must come plainly to satisfy the natural desire. If
you can suppress the desire, so much the better.
Calcutta and Karachi have broken the spell. Somehow I
am unmoved. But there is no suspending even if moving violence
takes place.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5392. Courtesy: Mirabehn

126

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

130. LETTER TO SHAUKAT ALI
VEJALPUR,

April 17, 1930
DEAR BROTHER,

I have your astonishing letter today. The original has not been
received. It is now 10.30 p.m. But I may not let your letter go
unanswered even for a night.
I had no knowledge of the extent to which I had fallen in your
estimation.
If I had lost confidence in you, I should certainly have told you.
What I have lost I have told you—confidence in your judgment. Even
now I shall defend the Nehru Report.1 But I own it is useless
if it cannot satisfy the Mussalmans or the other minorities. That was
why I moved the saving resolution in Calcutta in Motilalji’s absence,
but with his full consent and approval. Surely it should be enough for
you that the Nehru Report and, with it, the communal scheme are
buried. What the scheme shall be in an independent India will be for
Mussalmans, Sikhs, other minorities and Hindus to decide. If I erred
in endorsing the Nehru Report, I did so with Dr. Ansari. This was
enough for me.
Your charge that I did not consult you on embarking on civil
disobedience is true. But how could I when I knew there was no
meeting ground between us?
Can you not see that, although I may act independently of you,
it might not amount to desertion? My conscience is clear. I have
deserted neither you nor the Mussalmans. Where is the desertion in
fighting against the salt tax and the other inequities and fighting for
independence? Lastly, time will prove what no assurance from me can
prove.
You are at liberty to publish the whole of the correspondence
between us.
I hope that your fears about Mahomed Ali’s eyes will never be
1

A draft constitution for India prepared by a committee headed by Motilal

Nehru.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

127

realized. His eyes are wanted even if it be to fight me. May God bless
him and you.
Yours ever,
From a photostat: S.N. 16810

131. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
April 17, 1930
CHI. CHANDRAKANTA,

I have your letter. You are a girl with immense patience. May
God always prosper you.
Let Uncle continue giving money to Narandasbhai.
It is now getting on for 11 o’clock in the night.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

132. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
April 17, 1930
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

I have your letter. Now it is about 11 at night. So, 1 will not be
able to write much.
Give up worrying about the struggle. There are persons to guide
you, aren’t there? Do what they say.
You cannot go to Delhi but it is sufficient that Krishna has
reached there. Write to him. He is at the Jamia. I hope you know that.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32945

128

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

133. ADVICE TO VOLUNTEERS
NAVSARI,

April 17, 1930
A question arose in Mahatma Gandhi’s camp today about volunteers requiring
more khadi to replace their torn clothing. Mahatma Gandhi said that the volunteers
should dispense with the torn or lost pieces and should be satisfied with mere
loin-cloth as the millions in India had to.

The Bombay Chronicle, 19-4-1930

134. TELEGRAM TO MOTILAL NEHRU 1
April 18, 1930
THANKS.
MAY

YOU

HAVE
GOD

CONSIDERABLY
GIVE

YOU

RELIEVED

ME.

STRENGTH.

Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1930. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

1

This was sent on receipt of intimation from the addressee that he had assumed
charge of the presidentship of the Congress; vide also “Telegram to Motilal Nehru”,
15-4-1930.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

129

135. TELEGRAM TO N. R. MALKANI
NAVSARI,

April 18, 1930
MALKANI, C ONGRESS
KARACHI
CONSIDER
THIGH

JAIRAMDAS
BETTER

MOST
THAN

FORTUNATE.
PRISON.

WOUND

BULLET
HEART

WOUND
BETTER

STILL.

BAPU
From a photostat: C.W. 9261. Courtesy: Jairamdas Doulatram

136. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI N. PATEL
April 18, 1930
CHI. RAOJIBHAI,

I have sent all of you there with great hopes. Mahadev writes
and tells me that they are spending money extravagantly in the Kheda
district. Put a check on this. One of you should remain with Abbas
Saheb, so that no one harasses him for money. There is no one there
to act as leader. You should take up the leadership and assume control
of things.
The boycott also seems to be turning violent in spirit. Be
vigilant about this, too. Meet the Headmen who have resigned and, if
any of them are resorting to coercion against others, check them. If
any of those who have not resigned are being harassed, that should be
stopped. Allay the fears of all who have not resigned. The supply of
provisions to such persons ought not to be stopped.
Think carefully about every step you take.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8987

130

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

137. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 19, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

I have written in Navajivan about money falling into the hands
of too many people. I have also told Mahadev to take all possible
steps.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8101. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

138. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
P OST JALALPUR,

April 19, 1930
BHAISHRI MUNSHI,

I have your letter. How can I advise you? After giving up legal
practice, one can only go on with the cases which are pending. This is
what Motilalji, Das and others had done. You should decide for
yourself what you should do.
Have you positively decided to invite me to Bombay? In
reply to my letter to him, Swami had wired to say that I should not go
till I had heard from him. He must have seen you. I have really no
time to go to Bombay just now. I shall be satisfied if things here are
properly organized.
It is very good indeed that you have decided to go to Broach.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From Gujarati: C.W. 7512. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

131

139. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
April 19, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN,

Tell all the women that no one should suppose that I will not call
them here. I will call them here soon, but write to me immediately and
tell me who must remain there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original C.W. 8745. Courtesy: Gangabehn Vaidya

140. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
Saturday [April 19, 1930] 1
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. Sarojini could not carry on without me, so she
has come. No harm will come to her as long as she is by my side.
When she is away, she cannot help being affected by the surrounding
atmosphere. We shall take from her as much service as she can give.
I shall write about mills in Young India 2 . I have not put forward
any particular conditions to Ambalalbhai or anyone else. Whatever
there are have been mentioned in the Navajivan3 . You will see them.
No mill has accepted those conditions as yet.
I am not at all in favour of the strike. But I do not know how it
can be avoided under the prevailing conditions. Still, I am making all
efforts. This time the struggle will be against twofold violence. God’s
will be done.
Only you and Swami can deal with the money-grubbing going
on in Bombay. The proper thing in my view would be to appoint a
trust to which the money should be paid. Otherwise it will be eaten up.
In my view some things cannot be stopped.
I shall of course write about that, too.4 Why should Hiralal,
1

The letter reached the addressee on April 21, 1930. The Saturday preceding
fell on this date.
2
Vide “Our mills and foreign-cloth boycott”, 24-4-1930.
3
Ibid.
4
Ibid.

132

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Paramanand, and others not involve themselves in the Provincial
Committee? What about Vithaldas Jerajani? I have written to him to
come over for a discussion on khadi matters. But he has not yet come
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Munshi1 has been pressing me to go there. I have agreed to go
on Friday if something else does not prevent me. I am glad that
Swami has not come. Meet Munshi and decide.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

141. SPEECH AT MEETING OF HEADMEN, VEJALPUR
April 19, 1930
The way of ahimsa by itself is such that it can produce riches
out of dust. The Government’s is the way of violence. It mixes earth
with salt, while we produce salt out of earth. The Government destroys,
we create. It has guns and cannon, we have no such arms. It has huge
factories, we have nothing of the kind. Our factory is in our cottage,
and our machinery is the takli. For you it is a matter of faith that
swaraj hangs by a thread of yarn. It was you who took the pledge to
carry out in six months the constructive programme for swaraj. Keep
that pledge and justify my faith in you. If you do so, Bardoli can win
swaraj for India.
Now that you have given up being Headmen of the Government
you should become Headmen of the people. In the villages where you
served as Headmen you should now work as true Headmen; in other
words you should serve the people of these villages.
There are many ways of serving. But first take up these.
Every man in your village should break the salt law by making
salt not only for use in his home, but also some to be stored for
people living away from the sea-coast.
But this work is not likely to take the whole of your day. Hence,
1

K. M. Munshi; vide also “Interview to The Bombay Chronicle”, 20-4-1930.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

133

the next item of work for you is to see that foreign cloth is banished
from your villages. The right way to do so is to sit in your homes and
twirl the takli, which you can make without spending a pie. If you
Hea-dmen start spinning on it the other people in the village
willfollow suit. In numbers is strength, as the saying goes. And by
making all people in the village wear khadi you will be able to save
the village wealth from being drained away.
Moreover, if all of you take up the work seriously, you can soon
get the liquor shops closed, since you have your finger on the pulse of
the village.
Then you should provide arbitration in village disputes, which is
important work. You are well versed in these matters. Some of you
probably are addicted to this kind of work. If they have to remain idle
after resigning as Headmen they may regret having resigned. I was
myself a practising lawyer. Having left practice I have never had to
repent since I found for myself work that kept me occupied even
more than legal practice had. The Headmen may very well give up
their jobs, but they should have village council meetings in their
homes. They should set up boards of arbitration. Being well acquainted with the affairs of the village, these boards will be able to settle
disputes in a just and satisfactory manner.
In order that you can do all this work in an organized way I
suggest that you establish an association of ex-Headmen. If such an
association comes into being, I should like to have regular reports of
its work so that I am kept informed about all your activities.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 25-5-1930

134

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

142. EXTRACTS FROM SPEECH AT BARDOLI
April 19, 1930
Headmen and Talatis are looking frightened. They have a
lingering belief that through the present Government they can enjoy
prestige and status and plunder the people in the name of the Government. That is why you find it necessary to persuade them to resign
and to employ the weapon of social boycott against them. Truly
speaking, there should be no need to persuade anyone or to put pressure on anyone in the form of boycott. A person should himself be
able to see that his dirty job and soiled power are things to be
abjured. And why talk only of the Headmen and Talatis? I do not
believe that even others have full faith in this struggle. But we
have to build on the courage that has been roused among the people.
I want that the Headmen and Talatis who have not yet resigned
should do so at once. And those who resign should do so totally.
To keep charge of the village books and to continue waiting on
the officers after resigning the post would be deceiving the people.
Rather than do so, they should boldly say: “Boycott us if you like.
But we do not yet see the need to resign.”
Defying the salt law is only a part of our work. Our aim is to win
swaraj. To that end, it is necessary to undertake other items of work
also. We should see to it that all the liquor shops are closed down. For
the present, a few of our sisters have boldly come forward and taken
up the task. It is not necessary for all the women to come out of their
homes. They should banish liquor from their own villages. We should
not abuse anyone, we should not lift our hand against anyone. Go to
the owner of the liquor shop, and entreat him to close his shop. Plead
humbly with the drink addicts also. This is easy for women to do.
Men should help them in their work of persuasion and cut down the
toddy palms for their owners. Both men and women can do all this
without leaving their villages.
The third item is the boycott of foreign cloth. That task, too, we
have entrusted to our sisters. It may appear to you a difficult job, but
to me it seems easy. Or, to the extent that it is difficult, when accomplished it will make the winning of swaraj easy. There is no exaggeration in saying that this Government remains in our country
chiefly for its cloth trade. You cannot think of all the other trade that
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

135

is allied to this direct trade of 66 crores. You will, like the people of
Karadi, collect and burn foreign cloth. Brothers and sisters of Bardoli,
burn with faith all the foreign cloth you have, but at the same time
take a pledge that you will wear khadi. If you do so, you will save so
much expenditure on clothes. If you wear fine garments of foreign or
mill-made cloth, you will each need a score or more of them. But if
you wear khadi a loin-cloth for men and just a sari for women will do.
Also, the khadi vow should be a vow to wear khadi woven from yarn
spun by oneself. That is not difficult to do. For though you cannot
learn weaving in a short time, I can teach you spinning on the takli
right away. If you spin the yarn, the ashrams will undertake to weave it
into cloth. All the ashrams in the neighbourhood here are devoted to
khadi activity. They have done some work though not so much as
they might have done.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 25-5-1930

143. FOREWORD TO “PUBLIC FINANCE AND OUR
POVERTY”
KARADI ,

April 20, 1930
The booklet is a reprint, revised where necessary by the author,
of the chapters written by Professor Kumarappa and published in
Young India. They examine the economic policy of the British
Gover-nment and its effect upon the masses. They are therefore very
seasonable. The value of the chapters is enhanced by the addition of a
very careful and copious index prepared by the author himself. I
commend the booklet both to the Indian as also the Western readers.
M. K. GANDHI
Public Finance and Our Poverty; also G.N. 10085

136

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

144. MY NOTES
BEWARE

When a great struggle is on, generous people empty out their
pockets and look upon everyone as a public worker. At such times,
traitors see their opportunity and rob everyone wherever they can.
Any-one who wants to sells swadeshi salt; anyone who wants to
collects funds. People, being gullible, pay up. At such a time, it is
necessary for people to be on their guard. No one should make any
con-tributions unless they know those making collections and never
without getting a receipt. The receipt should bear the signature of an
office-holder of the Congress and the stamp of that office. The committees should maintain accounts of every pie and publish the names
of the donors. The receipt books should be numbered and the rule
should be that only these should be used for acknowledging contributions. And then accounts should be maintained accordingly. Despite such care, however, some misappropriation is bound to be there.
A thief has a hundred prying eyes; a banker can glance only now and
then. Nevertheless, it is the duty of all public institutions to be as much
on their guard as possible.
MILL -HANDS OF AHMEDABAD

The mill-hands of Ahmedabad are contributing their share in
the yajna of swaraj in an excellent manner. Many of them wear khadi.
Their children, if not they themselves, spin and they are picketing the
liquor booths. Some have also offered civil disobedience against the
salt law. As a result of the movement for prohibition, the income from
liquor has greatly diminished. In 1928-29 the average sale of six
liquor booths in Ahmedabad was 231_ gallons. The sale this year has
been 45_ gallons. In other words, there has been a decrease of over 81
per cent, that is, only 19 per cent is left. If this movement continues,
we may hope that the liquor booths in Ahmedabad, at least, will have
to close down. Labourers as well as the organizers deserve to be
congratulated on such good results. Labourers alone act as pickets
before liquor booths and it may be said that this is done in an ideal
manner. Perfect peace has been maintained. If other labourers follow
the example of these, their incomes will at once be doubled as money
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

137

saved is money earned. Besides there is the added gain that homes will
become more peaceful.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 20-4-1930

145. MESSAGE TO PEOPLE OF DHOLERA AND
VIRAMGAM
The reports from places around Dholera and Viramgam are
becoming intolerable. The barbarous atrocities which are said to have
been perp-etrated there make one shudder. Those who have sent in
the reports should be careful and be prepared to substantiate them.
The inhuman atrocities which have been described are not supposed
to have been perpetrated secretly but openly in public. I hope the
accounts are untrue. However, if they are true, there are satyagrahi
measures more severe than the ones that are being adopted at present.
Through them these inhuman acts could certainly be prevented.
Those on whom these indignities have been inflicted should not be
afraid. I am eager to go to that area. And, if these atrocities do not
cease, God willing, I shall go and suggest ways of preventing them. I
assure them that although I am trying to cope with the work in Surat
district, my mind is occupied with the Dholera and Viramgam events.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan 20-4-1930

138

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

146. CALCUTTA AND KARACHI
The news from Calcutta and Karachi is shocking. Only time will
show how much of it is true. Newspapers contain so much falsehood
that it becomes difficult to get at the truth. A regime given to violence
always needs to be sustained through villainy. Who does not know that
at time of the Bardoli Satyagraha false rumours were spread concerning the activities of satyagrahis? Do I not have experience of the
lies that have been spread about me? Nevertheless, there would seem
to be some truth in the attack on us. Some Indians, whoever they may
be, have caused harm to life and property. They have caused harm to
the movement and put me in awkward position. Such incidents stand
in the way of the Service which the people expect from me. It is a
painful thing. Such incidents agitate me. That is my temperament, so
how can I prevent it?
But my path is straight. Whatever happens, I cannot stop the
struggle. I cannot gauge my non-violence. I go on working in faith.
All will be well if untainted non-violence is at work. Nothing but good
will result from the steps which are being taken.
There is only one path and one duty for the readers of
Navajivan. They should work for peace wherever they go; they
should not say one harsh word to anyone; they should not encourage
among the people hatred for the British and for Indian officials. It is
our dharma to love even the wrongdoer. We do not wish to injure even
a hair on his body. We have to face greater atrocities by undergoing
greater suffering.
There is a bit of good news in the reports from Calcutta and
Karachi. Jairamdas has received a bullet wound in his thigh. I have not
known anyone more pure-hearted than he. The intelligence he possesses and the prestige he enjoys are as great as his purity. He is a
member of the Congress Working Committee; he is the secretary of
the committee for the boycott of foreign cloth. He is a staunch votary
of non-violence. In this struggle, the sacrifice of such persons is
expected. So I regard Jairamdas lucky that he was the first to receive a
bullet-wound. If there was a riot he surely did not go there to instigate
it but rather to try and quell it. It is good that he has been injured.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

139

It is with the blood of such Indians that the temple of swaraj will
be built. If we too wish to make the final sacrifice in this yajna, we
should cultivate Jairamdas’s purity, simplicity and determination.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 20-4-1930

147. FOREIGN-CLOTH DEALERS
I have just received a telegram from Delhi which says:
“Dealers in foreign cloth want certain conditions to be
considered with regard to the round-the-clock picketing of
foreign-cloth shops. They want to be given time to cancel orders
against which goods have not been received and to sell goods
which they have in stock.”
The question is whether such conditions can be conceded. I
have sent my opinion as follows:
“Such time certainly cannot be granted. If the traders
have the faith they should rest assured that such poor merchants
who have suffered a loss will be suitably compensated in swaraj.
Those who are well-to-do will get no compensation. They
should regard the loss that they incur on account of the goods
lying in stock as a token prayashchitta for their past sins.”
I feel that it is essential for swarajists to make things fully clear.
The desperate souls who have entered the field will either
triumph or perish, but even while perishing they will clarify many
matters. There was not in the world a single war in which thousands
did not suffer losses.
If, however, this struggle does have a peaceful ending, there
would be the minimum loss with the maximum gain. But the
satyagrahis must harden themselves to put up with this loss. Why
should the boycott which is possible today be postponed? Where
would we be if every dealer in foreign cloth asked for time? The
strength of the boycott move-ment would be frittered away and the
doors to betrayal would be opened in front, from behind and on the
sides. Who would keep watch on which traders? The traders who lack
faith but do not wish to practice deceit can act in the following way:
140

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

They can keep their goods for the time being. If the people lose and
enter into a fresh indenture of slavery, such traders will easily be able
to sell their goods. They should make out lists of their goods andhand
them to well known volunteers and get these stamped by the Congress,
so that, at the proper time, if it is felt that they should be given
compensation, the swaraj Government could do so. Another
alternative is for them to export their goods to countries where foreign
goods are sold. Anyone who wishes to do something, finds many
straightforward ways of doing it. But a poor dancer will always find
the courtyard uneven.
But why sympathize with the sufferings of traders? What about
educated lawyers? With great difficulty we find a person like Kanaiyalal Munshi, who saw his way clear and sacrificed his legal practice
and his, what in Government circles is called, “career”. Other lawyers
are afraid of offering civil disobedience. What if they are disbarred?
These good but timid lawyers would see if they reflected a little that if
all of them offered civil disobedience, no one would be disbarred. But,
what if all of them do not do so? Even then what is there to fear? Why
should not a sacrificing lawyer have the conviction that by making his
own contribution he will bring swaraj nearer? Why cannot he have the
faith that such a mighty struggle cannot but end in swaraj? Then those
who were disbarred will again be called back to their practice in honour. Dr. Krause was a famous lawyer in the Transvaal. He was very
nearly sent to the gallows. His legal practice was forcibly taken away
from him. He, however, reestablished himself with honour and not
only did he regain all he had lost but his prestige increased. Many
such instances could be cited. Want of faith is the most expensive
thing in this struggle. If we have the least bit of self-confidence swaraj
is within our grasp. Otherwise we victims of delusion shall be like the
woman who is looking all over the village for the child who is in her
lap.
What applies to the traders and the lawyers applies also to the
students. We do not even have an idea of the full extent of our fall.
And so we have not developed sufficient dislike for our miserable
plight. Ignorance of our plight stands in our way.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

141

Even so if we maintain our present progress, traders, lawyers,
students, doctors and even barbers will gain courage and we shall soon
secure the end we desire.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 20-4-1930

148. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 20, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

I have sent Chhotelal to Ahmedabad today, as I sent away
Pyarelal. Retaining both of them in my service encouraged them and
me in indulgence and resulted in their services being not fully
utilized. I have, therefore, sent Pyarelal to Wadhwan and other places
and Chhotelal to Ahmedabad to stay in the Vidyapith and elsewhere
and propagate the takli, the spinning-wheel, etc. Let me know which
women ought to remain there.
The sum of Rs. 250 which I have sent with Chhotelal was
received from a Marwari gentleman. Credit it to the Satyagraha Fund.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C. W. 8102. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

142

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

149. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
April 20, 1930
CHI. JAMNADAS,

I had been expecting your letter. You seem to be doing good
work. Is your throat all right? It would be very good indeed if
Khushalbhai joined the movement. According to me, it is pure
dharma to join it. Write to me from time to time and give all the
details.
Blessings from

BAPU
C HI . J AMNADAS GANDHI
OPP. M IDDLE S CHOOL
NAVA P ARA, R AJKOT
KATHIAWAR
From the original in Gujarati: C.W. 9307. Courtesy: Jamnadas Gandhi

150. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
April 20, 1930
BHAISHRI MUNSHI,

I have a letter today which says:
Shri Munshi has produced a good effect by his bold step, but he has
issued a circular letter to his lawyer friends telling them that he would be able
to attend to work in his chambers from 1 p.m. to 4 p.m.

There is another letter signed by seven persons, which is full of
allegations against you. The signatories desire the letter to be
published. I have categorically refused to do so. This is merely for
your information.
Shri Mukund Malaviya sends a long letter. He says that none of
them desires me to go there at present. I have seen the Congress
leaders too. They also say the same thing, adding that I might visit the
place after they do something which I would welcome.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

143

For the present, therefore, I would ask you to free me from the
engagement. The work here does not leave me a moment to spare.
There is little need to arouse enthusiasm in Bombay. I am making this
suggestion for the sake of the rest and peace that I need. You may
come here and bring with you a few Congress leaders. You will spare
me for the present, won’t you?
Tell Lilavati that I shall expect her to make her own contribution, and a big one. If it was with her approval that you
made a public reference to our old relations, I may say that those
bonds were as between a father and his daughter. Imagine what
expectations a father who had lost his daughter would have from her
when she was found.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS

[PS.]
After this was finished, I received a letter of praise also, which I
must send to you. Do not return it. Tear it up.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 7513. Courtesy: K.M. Munshi

151. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
9.30 p.m., April 20, 1930
CHI. MAHADEV,

I have had no letter from you for two days. I am eager to know
about what is happening in Viramgam and Dholera. Either write to me
yourself or ask someone else to write. There seems to have been an
actual revolt in Chittagong. May everything be as Rama wills.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11483

144

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

152. INTERVIEW TO “THE BOMBAY CHRONICLE”
JALALPUR,

April 20, 1930
I see that several friends expect me to be in Bombay next week.
In reply to Sjt. Munshi’s pressing invitation I said weather permitting
I might go to Bombay next week. But I see that my presence in these
parts is urgent and letters from several friends in Bombay tell me that
I should not move from Gujarat till Bombay is better prepared. Of
enthusiasm, so far as newspapers can tell me, there is no lack in Bombay. Of discipline I do not know. At the present moment what we want
is the rigidest discipline, more rigid than in an army made to wage
bloody warfare, side by side with the utmost defiance of the sele-cted
laws and consistently with the principles of non-violence and truth.
There must be continued and continuous constructive work as if
swaraj was to be established today. How far this is being done in Bombay I do not know. I, therefore, advise friends in Bombay not to be
hasty in asking me to come there. If Gujarat alone responds to the
work put before the men and women, it would be a great thing and a
large step towards swaraj.
I would, therefore, ask friends in Bombay not to build upon my
coming there in the near future but I would go there with the greatest
pleasure as soon as I can free myself from Gujarat and when Bombay
is really ready.
After all the struggle is becoming a mass movement. Nobody’s
presence is therefore indispensable. What is most necessary is consolidation of the present phenomenal manifestation into dynamic
energy of a purely non-violent type. That is possible. The world has
had ample demonstration since the 12th of March last.
The Bombay Chronicle, 21-4-1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

145

153. ADVICE TO FOREIGN-CLOTH DEALERS
April 20, 1930
Gandhiji said he feared that wherever foreign-cloth boycott can be organized
perfectly non-violently, it cannot be suspended upon any undertaking save that of
refraining from selling.

This is no time for bargaining. Those who have faith in this and
therefore in swaraj coming as the certain result of the present movement and who believe that it is good to stop buying foreign cloth
should stop altogether and not for a certain period. But for those who
have no faith and would stop selling foreign cloth in obedience to
rising public opinion against it, I would make the following suggestion. Instead of asking for suspension of picketing, let them suspend
selling of foreign cloth which they will resume if the movement fizzles
out. If it succeeds they will find a market for their wares elsewhere. If
they suffer loss and are too poor to bear it they should trust the national Government of the future to give them reasonable compensation. I would, however, warn those who would undertake to picket
against using the slightest violence either directly or indirectly. That
was one of the reasons why I conceived the idea of confining
picketing of foreign-cloth shops and liquor shops to women but
where women are not ready and men have confidence in their ability
to conduct non-violent picketing, they should certainly take it up.
The Bombay Chronicle, 21-4-1930

146

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

154. THE BLACK REGIME
KARADI ,

April 21, 1930
The past week has not been one of unmixed joy. It has seen
disturbances in Calcutta1 and Karachi. And now comes the sad news
from Chittagong. It shows that in spite of the striking demonstration
of non-violence all over the country, there is still violence in the air
and cities are the storehouses of it. Calcutta and Karachi can be distinguished from Chittagong. The first two appear to have been mad outbursts of the moment. Chittagong seems to be a deliberate planning.
Whatever they were, they are most regrettable and interfere with the
growth of the movement which is otherwise shaping itself
marvellously well and gaining fresh momentum from day to day. I
can only appeal to those who believe in violence not to disturb the
free flow of the non-violent demonstration. Whether they listen or not,
this movement will go on. Violence is bound to impede the progress
tow-ards independence. I am unable to demonstrate how it will
impede. Those who survive the struggle will know how.
Meanwhile satyagrahis must continue their activity with redoubled vigour. We must deal with the double-edged violence ranged
against us. For me popular violence is as much an obstruction in our
path as the Government violence. Indeed I can combat the Government violence more successfully than the popular. For one thing,
in combating the latter, I should not have the same support as in the
former. Then again the motive in the latter being as honourable as
that of the satyagrahis, the method to be employed has to be
somewhat different from that employed in regard to the Government
violence.
I hope that as in Karachi, so in Calcutta and Chittagong, there
were satyagrahis attempting to check mob violence. Brave young
Dattatreya Mane who is said to have known nothing of satyagraha and
being an athlete had merely gone to assist in keeping order, received a
fatal bullet wound. Meghraj Revachand, 18 years old, has also
succumbed to a bullet wound. Thus did seven men, including
1

There had been disturbances in Calcutta during the hartal observed on April
19 following the arrests of Jawaharlal Nehru and J. M. Sen Gupta.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

147

Jairamdas,receive bullet wounds. Jairamdas’s injury gave me
unmixed joy. It is the injury to leaders that would bring relief. The
law of sacrifice is uniform throughout the world. To be effective it
demands the sacrifice of the bravest and the most spotless. And
Jairamdas is of the bravest and the cleanest. I therefore could not help
wiring when I heard of Jairamdas’s wound that a wound in the thigh
was better than prison and wound in the heart better still.1
Whilst therefore I tender my sympathy to the parents of the two
brave lads who lost their lives, my inmost desire is to congratulate
them for the finished sacrifices of their sons, if they would accept my
congratulations. A warrior’s death is never a matter for sorrow, still
less that of a satyagrahi warrior. One of the lessons that a nation
yearning for freedom needs to learn is to shed several fears; fear of
losing title, wealth, position, fear of imprisonment, of bodily injury
and lastly death.
Accounts from all over India tell the same tale of growing fearlessness. The Bihar letter published elsewhere makes soul stirring
reading.
One thing we must get rid of quickly. Lawless physical violence
must be stopped even if it is to be through forcing the Government to
use its guns. And this can be done non-violently.
I give only one out of several samples of indecent assaults by
the police at Viramgam:
S TATEMENT OF ANIRUDDHA VYAS,
VIDYARTHI BHAVAN VOLUNTEER NO. 35/3:

A

S TUDENT

OF

DAKSHINAMURTI

I with a number of my companions got down from the 6.30 evening
Mail with bags of salt at the Viramgam railway station, when from 8 to 10
policemen surrounded us. To save the salt from being seized I sat down with
the bag of salt on the ground, clinging to it with all my might.
All efforts of the police to make me get up having failed, one of them
thrust apart my legs and squeezed my private parts with his hands so as to
compel me to get up. But the weight of my body and the push and the pull of
the surrounding police disengaged the parts and I fell down. I was then pulled
up again. But I bent double and held the salt bag tight under my crossed arms.
A policeman thereupon straightened my back by poking it with his foot which
caused me intense pain. Then two policemen gave a violent jerk, twisted my
fingers as they liked and loosened my arms and wrested the bag from me. I was
1

148

Vide “Telegram to N. R. Malkani”, 18-4-1930.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

then let go, one officer taking my name and number.

Mahadev Desai tells me that these assaults have stopped for the
time being. But there is no knowing that they have stopped for ever
and there certainly is not the slightest ground for supposing that they
will not occur in other parts of Gujarat or of other provinces. In
Broach the things are growing from bad to worse. A bullet wound is
any day better than these barbarous, unnecessary, unprovoked assaults. The person of a citizen must be held inviolate. It can only be
touched to arrest or to prevent violence, never in the manner being
done now. It is a prostitution even of the salt laws to use them against
civil resisters. The provisions were designed to deal (even then
unjustly as I hold) with surreptitious breaches of its new provisions,
never to deal with masses of men openly defying them. If the Government do not stop this brutal violation of the body, they will find the
satyagrahis presently compelling them to use the guns against them. I
do not want this to happen. But if the Government will have it, I
should have no hesitation whatsoever in giving them the opportunity.
They must not physically interfere with the bands of civil resisters
manufacturing or vending salt, they may arrest every man, woman and
child if they wish. If they will neither arrest, nor declare salt free, they
will find people marching to be shot rather than be tortured.
It is true that the barbarous interference with the body and the
indecent assaults are a heritage of the past. This Government has by its
tacit approval given it a currency which it never had before.
As I am writing these notes two volunteers have brought me salt
said to have been poisoned. Not only do the authorities wantonly
destroy salt and salt pans now, they are said to poison the sources of
salt manufacture. If the report is true, the blackness of the regime
becomes blacker still. And all this against a people who without
hurting anybody are seeking to gain freedom through self-suffering!
Young India, 24-4-1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

149

155. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
April 21, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

I hate writing letters in pencil. But I am writing this whilst I am
waiting at the prayer ground for the others to come. It is just nearing
4.20.
You must speak to Premabai with all the love you can command
and she will listen. She is a capable girl and a good girl. She wants to
do the best she can. She is aware of her shortcomings. All she needs is
gentle helping. I am writing to her too.
How is Reginald getting on now?
I am 1 moving from place to place and concentrating on
spinning. Boycott of foreign cloth will be a trap without spinning.
And takli is the only thing to make spinning universal. You will
therefore do there whatever is possible to manufacture more khadi
there.
I am sending you a cutting regarding yourself.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
The ink portion was written after prayer.
From the original: C.W. 5393. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9627

1

150

Up to here the letter is in pencil.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

156. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
Monday Night [April 21, 1930] 1
CHI. GANGABEHN,

It is 11.15 p.m. now. I will not, therefore, write much. There is a
great rush of work these days.
The women who have remained there are also helping the
movement. I have often explained that the Ashram activities and this
movement are not unconnected with each other. For anyone who has
given up fear of jail, it is the same whether they are in jail or at home.
We should avail ourselves of whatever opportunities of service we get
unsught. If women’s help is sought for picketing, all the women may
of course come forward. When nobody else remains to carry on the
work and fear rules all, let the Ashram women come out and lay down
their lives to the last of them. Just now, many many women are
coming forward for picketing, you should do whatever work falls to
your lot.
I have told Kusum that the inmates of the Ashram cannot be
divided into two classes. If she joins as from the Ashram, she must
sign the pledge. If she does not sign the pledge and yet wishes
to remain in the Ashram, she can observe the other rules and
remain there. Hearing this, on the very day on which the women came
here she went to consult her mother. I do no know what happened
after that.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 8746. Courtesy: Gangabehn Vaidya

1

The date is from Bhapuna Patro — 6: G.S. Gangabehnne.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

151

157. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
KARADI ,

Midnight, Monday, April 21, 1930
CHI. MAHADEV,

Pyarelal has arrived. Your statement was not found useful, you
will see why when you read my article. What is happening in Broach
and what has happened in Bihar have overshadowed the incidents in
Dholera and Viramgam. Now that the repression at these places has
stopped, why rake up the matter? What little you may have mentioned
in your weekly account may remain. A part of your statement was, I
felt, fit to be dropped, but I have no time just now to explain why. I
wrote the whole day, after which I went to the Navsari hospital to see
someone who had been seriously injured while cutting toddy-palms
and has now only a few breaths left. After my return from there, I
have been at the spinning yajna and dictating this. I am sending Pyarelal to Broach. You also seem to have sent someone there. To err on
the safe side, I am sending Pyarelal. The services of Chhotelal, who
was sent there yesterday, will mainly be utilized for khadi propaganda
work. I have explained this to Kaka. However, Chhotelal is known for
his ability to attend to a number of jobs at the same time and you may
take from him any work you wish to. I have been thinking how to
give the last instructions. I am not sure, but I may be able to finalize
them in a day or two. Tomorrow afternoon I shall reach Surat and be
there till the evening, when I will return.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I am sending all the affidavits. The bundle of papers for Young
India has been sent direct. I have included in my article the translation
of one affidavit. Pyarelal’s translations are incomplete and faulty I
have dropped the idea of sending Pyarelal.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 16824

152

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

158. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA
NAVSARI,

April 21, 1930
Chittagong news makes sad reading. It shows that there is a large
or small body of men in Bengal who do not believe in non-violence
whether as a policy or as a creed. That there were such people all over
India I knew but I had hoped that they would give non-violence a
chance. If Chittagong is an indication and not an isolated act, as I
believe Calcutta and Karachi acts to be, it is a serious affair. But,
however serious the situation becomes, there can be no suspension of
the fight. There can be no retracing. I observe that the Viceroy has
answered the Chittagong disturbance with the exercise of his extraordinary powers. That was only to be expected. So long as the British
people are determined to impose their rule upon unwilling people, so
long must they rule in reality without law. We in India easily delude
ourselves into the belief that we have duly constituted legislatures.
Presently there will be no one remaining under any such delusion.
Civil resisters must, therefore, fight an unequal struggle—the violence
of the Government and the violence of those among us who have no
faith in non-violence. Satyagrahis, if they are true to their creed, will
either come out victorious or will be ground to atoms between the two
mills.
The Bombay Chronicle, 22-4-1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

153

159. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
April 22, 1930
BHAI SATIS BABU,

I am not getting from anywhere a true account of what is
happening in Bengal. I do not even know how your organization 1 is
working. Instruct someone to keep me posted with correct
information.
How is your health?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
After writing this I saw the telegram regarding the fast. I have
wired and am awaiting the reply.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1617

1

154

Presumably, the Ashram at Sodepur
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

160. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
April 22, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

There has been no letter from you for several days. I have no
idea how long I shall be allowed to remain free. But you must keep
writing to me. After I am arrested we shall see.
How is your health now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1666

161. SPEECH TO HEADMEN, SURAT
April 22, 1930
Remember that you have pledged your services in the cause of
the country. Your duty now is to work whole-heartedly for the swaraj
“Government”.
If you have resigned your jobs unwillingly I consider that you
are doing the greatest disservice to your country. If you have faith in
yourselves and, therefore, in swaraj, then alone I invite you to join this
fight.
Do not purchase Government salt. Do not wear foreign clothes
and shun liquor. You are taking a step towards swaraj.
The Bombay Chronicle, 23-4-1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

155

162. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 22, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

What you write about Sharja1 is correct.
The accompanying letter2 is for Gangabehn. Read it and give it
to her. I have no time to write more. It will be 11.30 p.m. in a few
seconds.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8103. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

163. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAMDAS TRIKAMDAS
10 p. m., April 23, 1930
BHAISHRI PURUSHOTTAM,

I was glad to have your letter, for which thanks. We need as
many lawyers as we can get. Bhai Munshi has shown the way to all.3
May God give you strength.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
S JT. P URUSHOTTAM TRIKAMDAS
29 D D ONGONSI R OAD
MALABAR HILL
BOMBAY
From the Gujarati original: Purushottamdas Trikamdas Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

1

Sharja Apte wanted to live independently of her husband and do some work.
No letter of this date to Gangabehn Vaidya is available. It is likely the reference is to the letter of April 21.
3
Ibid.
2

156

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

164. LETTER TO HARIBHAU UPADHYAYA
April 23, 1930
BHAI HARIBHAU,

I have your letter. After all of you are arrested, I will write for
Young India and Navajivan if I am not arrested by then. There is
some matter even today on which I must write in Navajivan. I will sit
down and write out something. Ramnarayan has expressed a desire to
go there and I have also given my consent. The movement is certainly
gathering momentum. If we can keep up the present tempo, I am
confident that we shall be able to gain our object in quite a short time.
I wrote this yesterday and was then called away. I got your wire
at Navsari. I got your letter, too. I have used that letter itself and
written something for Hindi Navajivan.1 If I can write something for
the next issue of Young India, I will do so. Take care of your health.
Perhaps by next week I shall have been arrested.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 6072. Courtesy: Haribhau Upadhyaya

1

Vide “Salaaming or Flogging?”, 24-4-1930.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

157

165. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
KARADI ,

April 23, 1930
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

Your letter. What purpose can be served by calling you here? I
know the conditions in Delhi well enough. Do as much as you can.
Increase the production of khadi in and around Delhi if possible.
Make bamboo taklis, teach others to make them and organize collection of yarn. Meet Nair and do whatever is possible. I see no harm
in making the Ashram permanent. But if you have faith in our pledge,
you may be sure that the Ashram will automatically become permanent because this struggle is going to be decisive and the Ashram is
bound to exist till the establishment of swaraj. And after attaining
swaraj all the ashrams will, as a matter of course, become a permanent
feature. It is very good that Mother and others have taken to khaddar.
How is your health?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2381

158

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

166. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 23, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

Herewith is a cheque, along with its particulars. Send the
acknowledgment to Allahabad.
It is 10 p.m. just now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8104. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

167. LETTER TO VITHALDAS JERAJANI
April 23, 1930
BHAISHRI VITHALDAS JERAJANI,

There have been, from time to time, several changes in the khadi
propaganda movement and consequently in your work. In my view,
those changes were necessary in the interest of the khadi movement
and of Daridranarayana though, at the time those changes were
made, they did not immediately appeal to reason. Our experience so
far has been that ultimately all those changes stood the test of reason
too, and were justified by the results. The change which I am now
suggesting may, I think, seem much more risky than the earlier
changes. However, I believe that the change is as essential in the
interest of khadi as it may seem dangerous to khadi lovers on a superficial view. Anyone who has properly understood the rationale of
boycott of foreign cloth will immediately see the necessity for this
change. We do not have in stock enough khadi to meet the present
demand. The demand is daily increasing and we are not in a position
to produce sufficient khadi to meet it. Hence, if we do not somehow
increase our capacity to produce khadi, the supply of khadi would be
inadequate. It can be proved with mathematical certainty that, if that
happens, the boycott of foreign cloth will fail. The new suggestion
which I, therefore, wish to make is as under:
As quickly as feasible, that is, immediately in a day or two, you
should inform the Bombay public that no one who wishes to buy
khadi will get it for money but that it will be sold only against
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

159

hand-spun yarn. This is the only way to make it clear to people that
khadi is not a mere commodity, like foreign cloth, which can be
bought for money, but that it is a symbol of the nation’s strength and
aspiration. According to the science of khadi, as long as cotton is
available there can be no scarcity of khadi. However, this requires that
the people should be imbued with a zeal for spinning. Khadi will have
no meaning if, at this critical time and when we are about to win
swaraj, we cannot make the zeal for spinning universal. Moreover, it is
not possible for us at short notice to produce ten million pounds of
khadi. Our duty, therefore, is straight and simple. If the people have
real love for khadi, they ought to spin. My suggestion is not in fact as
extreme as it may appear on a superficial view, since the prospective
buyer of khadi is required to produce yarn not spun by himself but
by any person. Hence a resident of Bombay may procure hand-spun
yarn in any way he chooses. He may spin it himself or get it spun by
members of his family or his poor neighbours or by the residents of
any village in India. The Bombay man will have to take some trouble,
of course. If he does not take even that much of trouble and has in
consequence to go without khadi, it would be best for himself, for
others and for the cause of khadi that he should go without it. You
may think and decide for yourself what the quality of the yarn should
be and what articles can still be sold for cash. I hope that the residents
of Bombay, who have been making a great contribution to the present
struggle, will understand this simple suggestion and take the little
trouble they are being asked to, for obtaining the khadi they require.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9772

160

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

168. HINDU-MUSLIM UNITY
As so much misrepresentation is being made about my attitude
on the communal question, without entering into any argument I
would state my position as clearly as my knowledge of the language
would enable me to do.
1.The views that I have held for the last 40 years remain
unchanged.
2.I hold that there is no swaraj without communal unity as
without several other things I have repeatedly mentioned.
3.The present campaign is not designed to establish independence but to arm the people with the power to do so.
4.When the power has been generated and the time has come for
the establishment of independence, Mussalmans and all other
minorities will have to be placated. If they are not, there must inevitably be civil war. But I live in the hope that if we succeed in
generating the power, our differences and distrust will vanish. These
are due to our weakness. When we have the power from within we
shall shed our weakness.
5.The Nehru Constitution having lapsed the communal solution
has naturally lapsed. The Lahore Congress resolution mentionsin so
many words that the communal solution not having given satisfaction
either to the Sikhs or the Mussalmans the question might have to be
reconsidered so as to give satisfaction to all the parties concerned.
6. The only non-violent solution I know is for the Hindus to let
the minority communities take what they like. I would not hesitate to
let the minorities govern the country. This is no academic belief. The
solution is attended with no risk. For under a free government the real
power will be held by the people. That demonstration is being given
now. The mightiest government will be rendered absolutely impotent
if the people realizing their power use it in a disciplined manner and
for the common good. In Gujarat the people are within reach of
success if the strength and cohesion they are showing today are
genuine and not derived from blind faith. It must be remembered that
only an infinitesimal proportion of the people can hold positions of
responsibility and power in a country’s government. Experience all
the world over shows that the real power and wealth are possessed by
people outside the group that hold the reins of Government. We in
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

161

India hanker after power, because our people are ignorant and will be
exploited. The power wielded today is corrupt to the core. Ind-ependence achieved through non-violent power must by its very nature
reduce corruption to a minimum. It is thus my practical wisdom which
has suggested the solutions. The fact is that we are today unable to
visualize anything contrary to our experience present or inherited. Yet
what can be clearer than that an independent India must be something
quite outside our present experience? It is of course open to the critic
to say that both non-violence and inde-pendent India achieved
through it exist only in my imagination. My retort then is that, God
willing, I shall not be found surviving in an India that remains slave in
spite of this struggle or under so-called independence achieved
through violent means. I admit that under an independence violently
achieved, minorities have to take care of the-mselves. But this, thanks
to the existing Government, they do not need much exertion to do.
For the Government exists by playing one community against the
other or others. The difficulty of my critics arises from their ignoring
or doubting my creed. I remain unmoved, because they won’t be able
long to ignore or doubt my creed.
7. My so-called inconsistencies are no inconsistencies to those
who understand, be it only intellectually, the implications of
non-violence.
8. There can be nothing to suspect in resisting the salt tax or the
drink and drug devil or the inroads of foreign cloth through khadi. I
therefore do not hesitate to invite all to take their due share in the
campaign. Those who will not, simply deny to themselves the opportunity of gaining the power of resistance to evil under every conceivable circumstance.
9. I have embarked upon civil disobedience without any
reservation save that of non-violence for the simple and peremptory
reason that non-violence itself was in danger of being worsted in the
fight. I could not possibly contemplate such a calamity with
equanimity. I saw at once that if non-violence was a potent force, it
must be able to make its way even through violence and finally
supersede it.
Young India, 24-4-1930

162

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

169. MASS ACTION
A friend having seen the wonderful manifestation of mass action
sends the following extracts from an aritcle by Sir Martin Conway in
Commerce and Finance:1
What any generation can accomplish in faith and growth is little compared
with what has been accomplished for them by the generations that have gone
before. This is evident enough; in the case of material possessions and the
great treasure of the world’s art, but it is still more true for the world’s ideals. It
is those that are the most precious of all its belongings, and for the
preservation of these it has, not individuals, however great, but crowds to
thank. For let me declare again that it is in crowds that ideals reside. It is they
that incorporate them and they that transmit them. An individual may invent an
ideal, but unless he can get it incorporated in a crowd it is barren of effect, and
dies with him. Rail against the crowd as we may for its intolerance, its pride,
its fickleness, its lack of measure and all the other shortcomings of which we
are only too easily aware, it yet remains true that upon crowds our spiritual
life depends, that from them we draw our enthusiasms, and to them we owe
those flames of love and passion and glory which make the life of each
individual the splendid opportunity that it is.
A crowd that has never come physically together gains greatly in
vigour if it can be in whole or even in part embodied. If it can be seen it will
bring to bear on outsiders that attractiveness which every embodied crowd
possesses. If it can see itself it will grow hot. . . .
An even more rudimentary application of the principle of crowdattractiveness is the organization of processions. The longer they can be made
the more useful they are, and the more they attract and impose upon the
outside. . . . An English movement dates its success from the day when it can
fill the Albert Hall with a shouting throng; and it is an obvious fact that one
successful, enthusiastic Albert Hall gathering is worth more for purposes of
propaganda than a score of smaller gatherings in unimportant halls and
chapels.
1

Only extracts are reproduced here.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

163

The use at the present moment of this article consists in the help
it gives one in measuring the progress of non-violence. An idea
whether good or bad can be said to have gained ground only when it
strikes the imagination of masses of men. Whatever crowds do is not
necessarily always good. Nor is it true to say, as some have said, that
non-violence is necessarily confined to individuals. On the contrary
the test of the sincerity of one’s belief in non-violence lies in the
measure of its acceptance by masses of men. If non-violence could
not affect masses of mankind, it is a waste of effort for individuals to
cultivate it. I hold it to be the greatest gift of God. And all God’s gifts
are the common heritage of His creation and not a monopoly of cloistered monks or nuns. They may specialize in non-violence, they may
teach us its wonderful effects, but if their discoveries and their claims
are sound they must be adaptable by masses. If truth be not a monopoly of the few why should non-violence, its counterpart, be otherwise? My reverent study of the scriptures of the world has led me to
the belief that all register emphatic and unequivocal testimony in
favour of non-violence being practised by all not merely singly but
collectively as well. In all humility I have often felt that having no
axes to grind and having by nature a detached mind, I give a truer
interpretation of the Hindu, Christian, Islamic or other scriptures. For
this humble claim I anticipate the forgiveness of Sanatanists, Christians
and Mussalmans.
Young India, 24-4-1930

164

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

170. NECESSITY OF PURITY IN ACCOUNT-KEEPING
Simple people are in pure faith pouring in their copper, silver
and paper coins into the bowls of volunteers who sell salt or otherwise
collect money. No unauthorized volunteers should make collections
or sell salt at fancy prices. Accounts should be accurately kept and
frequently published. Books should be weekly examined by auditors.
It will be well if monied men of proved honesty were to constitute
themselves treasurers to take charge of and collect funds and work in
full co-operation with Congress volunteers. Active workers are being
quickly picked up and it may be difficult before long for local organizations to hold funds and keep proper accounts. As it is, the public
have everywhere taken over the financing of the movement. Let it be
done responsibly and methodically.
Young India, 24-4-1930

171. LIQUOR PICKETING
A Parsi correspondent writes as follows:1
If there is negligible profit in liquor trade, the Parsis will leave it at
once and join you gladly in all your undertakings. Can you find out any means
and ways of making this profit of liquor shops negligible? It is a fact that
these shop-keepers make a good profit by (a) short sale (b) adulteration, and
keep the staff of the Excise Dept. well in hand by paying them their dues.
The only suggestion I can think of for stopping this middleman’s
profit is to insist on Government to first introduce the ‘bottle system’, as is
introduced in Indore and Gwalior States. . . .
The second point is that the liquor now distilled in Nasik is quite unfit for
human consumption. . . . They should distil liquor of one
uniform strength (say 350 to 450 ) and bottle it at Nasik and then distribute it
for sale.
The third point I have to suggest is that it is rather difficult to introduce
peaceful picketing of liquor shops. Why not open magic lantern shows or
cinema shows in every big town and a few big villages and show such pictures
to the public pointing out the harm and disadvantages of liquor? . . . Such
temperance movements will have better effect. Government cannot stop such
1

Only extracts are reproduced here.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

165

shows and this will lead to temperance. . . .

This is a sincere letter. It is a frank admission that if the Parsis
can be persuaded to give up the drink traffic, the solution of the drink
problem, at least up to Bombay if not throughout India, becomes
simple. But the remedy suggested by the correspondent will not
answer the purpose. No matter what is done the traffic all the world
over bears an immoral taint. The only true remedy is therefore prohibition. Even as thieving cannot be regulated save by prohibition so
may drink traffic not be regulated save by prohibition.
There is no doubt danger of violence in picketing. Hence my
appeal to the sisters of India to take charge of it. If only the educated
few will shed their fear and disbelief the other sisters are sure to
follow.
And as to the Parsi liquor dealers, surely it is not beyond the
capacity of Parsi philanthropists to take them in hand and find for
them a suitable employment. Parsi leaders can create an atmosphere
against the traffic and thus make picketing easy. Anyway I should be
surprised if during this wave of self-purification the traffic is not swept
away. It needs but a little sustained effort on the part of the sisters. In
six canteens of Ahmedabad frequented by the labouring population,
thanks to the quiet picketing done by the Labour Union, the traffic
has fallen to 19 per cent. Though I have not accurate figures as yet,
the traffic in the area covered by Mithubai’s activity has also fallen
considerably. And I know that in both these places picketing has been
absolutely non-violent. Thousands in Surat are said to have
voluntarily come forward to forswear drink.
The mention of Mithubai Petit reminds me of two other Parsis
who are working in the same field. Dhanjishah known as Darbari
Sadhu or Bhikshu or Sannyasi and who has now gone to jail under the
Salt Act has been for years working in the village where I am writing
these notes. It was partly in his honour that I decided to shift from
Dandi to Karadi. The other is Baheram Mehta, a non-co-operating
graduate. He was picked up by the police in Olpad, because he was
respected and loved by the people. I need not mention the four
grand-daughters of the G.O.M. who have been for years unas-sumingly serving the cause with a single-mindedness worthy of their
noble-hearted grandfather. I can name several other Parsis who are
also selflessly helping the cause. I have therefore every hope that the
Parsi liquor dealers will themselves not repel the appeal of their sisters.
The liquor traffic like the salt tax is doomed.
Young India, 24-4-1930
166

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

172. HOW TO DO THE PICKETING
1.At least ten women are required for picketing a liquor or
foreign-cloth shop. They must choose a leader from among
themselves.
2.They should all first go in a deputation to the dealer and
appeal to him to desist from carrying on the traffic and present him
with leaflets setting forth facts and figures regarding drink or foreign
cloth as the case may be. Needless to say the leaflets should be in the
language understood by the dealer.
3.If the dealer refuses to suspend traffic, the volunteers should
guard the shop leaving the passage free and make a personal appeal to
the would-be purchasers.
4.The volunteers should carry banners or light boards bearing
warnings in bold letters against buying foreign cloth or indulging in
intoxicating drinks, as the case may be.
5.Volunteers should be as far as possible in uniforms.
6.Volunteers should at frequent intervals sing suitable bhajans
bearing on the subject.
7.Volunteers should prevent compulsion or interference by
men.
8.On no account should vulgarity, abuse, threat or unbecoming
language be used.
9.The appeal must always be to the head and the heart, never to
fear of force.
10.Men should on no account congregate near the place
of picketing nor block the traffic. But they should carry on propaganda generally through the area against foreign cloth and drink.
They should help and organize processions of women to parade through the area carrying the message of temperance and khadi and the
necessity of boycott of drink and foreign cloth.
11.There should be at the back of these picketing units a network of organization for spreading the message of the takli and the
charkha and thinking out new leaflets and new lines of propaganda.
12.There should be an absolutely accurate and systematic account of all receipts and expenditure. This should be periodically
audited. This again should be done by men under the supervision of
women. The whole scheme presupposes on the part of men a genuine
respect for women and sincere desire for their rise.
Young India, 24-4-1930
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

167

173. OUR MILLS AND FOREIGN-CLOTH BOYCOTT
Foreign-cloth boycott is coming, if we will do our duty and tax
ourselves to understand its purpose and the conditions of success. I
must not at present adduce reasons for the propositions set forth
below. They have been often argued in these columns. I am having
the figures prepared for reproduction. But for the present I give my
conclusions for those who are interested in them. They are arrived at
dispassionately and after due consideration of every factor and every
argument for and against.
1.It is impossible for the indigenous mills to cope with the
deficiency to be created by a complete boycott within the time we
expect it to come to fruition.
2.All the mills situated in India are not swadeshi; some of them
are as foreign as the foreign Government inasmuch as they drain the
wealth of the country away from it. They are close preserves for
Europeans only employing Indian labour.
3.The majority of swadeshi mills will not work for the national
benefit only or even predominantly.
4.Even when they will, they can be crushed by the Government
in a variety of ways.
5.The majority will not resist the temptation to exploit the
present favourable times.
6.Many mills use foreign yarn for weaving, especially for
borders.
7.We can only use them by not counting upon them to replace
the cloth boycotted and by putting them upon their own resources
and honour.
8.This last we can do only if we can replace the cloth boycotted
through cloth not manufactured in our mills. This can only be khadi.
9.An unlimited quantity of khadi can be manufactured without
the slightest difficulty inside of one month if the spirit of khadi and
the will to manufacture it can be created.
10.Skilled weavers are to be found all over India. The only
problem therefore is that of spinning.
11.Spinning and the antecedent processes can be learnt inside of
one week by those who have the will and the industry.
168

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

12.India produces more than enough cotton for all her
requirements.
13. Therefore all those who work for boycott of foreign cloth
should concentrate on khadi production through spinning. This does
not mean boycott of swadeshi mill-cloth but it means an intelligent
reco-gnition of the fact that the mills do not need any effort for selling their cloth. The boycott movement sufficiently helps them by
removing foreign cloth which competes with them and stifles them as
it had suppressed the spinning-wheel. To do more for the mills than
procure boycott of foreign cloth will be to harm khadi.
Mill-owners can, if they will, help boycott through khadi by
publishing the list of those mills which are owned, controlled and
managed by Indians, which use no foreign yarn at all in weaving, and
which will not manufacture cloth corresponding to khadi, will not
use the name khadi or the wheel on their labels and will not inflate
prices.
I am convinced that those who merely carry on boycott propaganda without insisting on boycotters contributing towards khadi
production by themselves spinning or procuring spinners and who
talk loosely of swadeshi, retard the boycott movement if they do not
actually harm it. Boycotters must not stray away from their path even
though for the moment they are unable to satisfy the demand for
khadi. Let them know that that very moment is the one most propitious for khadi production. Necessity is the mother of invention. It
knows no law, for it invents new laws. They need not worry if people
refuse to give up foreign cloth if they are also called upon to spin.
This restraint will truly push forward the boycott movement. It is no
empty formula. Just as we want swaraj not to punish Englishmen but
because we cannot live without it, so also we need boycott of foreign
cloth not to punish Englishmen but to bring work and therefore food
through the wheel to the starving millions.
Young India, 24-4-1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

169

174. BOYCOTT THROUGH TAKLI
Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya, having been for years interested in
co-operative banking and being a khadi expert in Andhra, may be
presumed to know his figures. He makes the calculation that five
million charkhas working for five hours daily can spin enough yarn
to replace the whole of foreign cloth to be boycotted. He thinks that
there are already that number of wheels lying in India’s homes. But
we will take some time to unearth these wheels and make them work.
New wheels we cannot make fast enough to meet the demand that a
spinning atmosphere will create. The wheel will again require some
capital, be it ever so little. When we think of crores of people, even the
capital of one rupee per head mounts up to crores. We want to work
with as little capital as possible. We want to teach spinning to the largest number available as quickly as possible. This can be done only
through the takli. If the average output of a wheel be 300 yards per
hour, that of the takli will be 100. Therefore to manufacture the
amount of yarn that five million wheels will spin, we require taklis to
work. And if the workers would spin not five but only fifteen million
one hour, we need seventy-five million taklis to work. Seventy-five
million is one fourth the total population of India.
Our disbelief makes our heads turn giddy to think of eight
crores of people working for one hour per day for the nation. But if
there be true national consciousness there is nothing extraordinary
about one in every four inhabitants of India giving one hour per day
as the price of deliverance.
Be that as it may, let workers take up the takli in faith. Let them
not think of the steel takli which was invented by Maganlal Gandhi for
the city people. If there was an immediate demand for eight crores of
steel taklis, the cost would amount to a respectable sum, and the time
required to manufacture so many would also be fairly long. We must
therefore dismiss the steel takli from our minds. Taklis can be made
from split bamboos and broken tiles or bad coins the size or weight of
a half-anna piece. A pointed sharp knife is the only tool absolutely
necessary. The point is required to bore a hole. Here are full
instructions:
HOW TO MAKE A TAKLI

1.Take a broken Mangalore tile or slate or the like and make
170

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

out of it a disk the size of a pice. This can be done by gently breaking
the edges and rounding them on a rough surface.
2.Punch a straight hole in it, make it slightly larger on one side.
3.Take a well-dried bamboo splinter seven inches in length.
Smooth it round with a knife to the thickness of a pencil. Sharpen it
from one end so as to taper it to a point the thickness of a knitting
needle. Half an inch from the tapering end, make a little notch to hold
the thread.
4.Insert the length so made into the side of the disk
with larger circumference to the hole so as to leave half an inch at the
thick end.
5.Test the takli by revolving it on a flat surface. If it spins like a
top it is true. If it does not, you know that either the hole is not
straight or is not in the centre of the disk or the tapering of the
splinter is not even. It is easy to detect the error and to correct it.
The highest output of the takli after a week’s practice has been
found to be 110 yards per hour. And it takes about half an hour to
make such a takli.
This takli-making is a pleasant pastime. Spinning is a positive
recreation. It is the solace of the perturbed heart and a mute companion. The wheel sings to you and may therefore distract your attention. The takli is eloquent in its very muteness, and in that way is
perhaps a fitter representative of the dumb millions. Try it and you
will experience the same joy that many of us do. In any case he or she
who spins adds to the wealth of the country and hastens the boycott
movement and thus brings swaraj nearer.
Young India, 24-4-1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

171

175. FOREIGN-CLOTH DEALERS
I have given my opinion to the Press representatives on the
question of foreign-cloth boycott. The nervousness of the dealers is a
symptom of want of faith in the country. Why do they want terms and
time if they are sure that swaraj is coming in the near future? Why will
they not come in unconditionally and make it a greater certainty? All
this uncertainty instead of strengthening the swaraj atmosphere,
weakens it and fills peoples’ minds with doubts. This movement is
largely based on faith. There is nothing organically wrong with us to
make us unfit for swaraj. It is our hallucination that makes us—a
nation of three hundred millions—feel helpless and diffident. Let not
the foreign-cloth merchants strengthen the hallucination by indefinite
statements. Let them rid themselves of it and help others to do
likewise. If they cannot do so, let them not ask for terms but bravely
say that they will not stop their foreign-cloth trade.
To the weak and the unbelieving I make a tangible suggestion.
Let them cancel all unexecuted orders. If swaraj is not attained and if
they want to revert to their old occupation, no power can prevent
them. Let them lock up their existing stock unless they can sell it
outside India and let those who are poor rely upon the swaraj Government giving them such compensation as may be necessary. But
they should make an inventory of their stock and have it certified by
authorized volunteers. The wealthy merchants may not expect any
compensation. The loss they may suffer will be part penance for the
sin committed against the nation. Lastly, though the last is a bad
suggestion, if they have no faith in the country getting swaraj, let them
keep their stock and begin selling it when the popular movement has
died of inanition or been suppressed by force. God forbid however
that the present enthusiasm is a mere bubble or that it is capable of
suppression under the severest repression. I hope therefore that whatever the result of the movement, the foreign-cloth dealers will see
clearly that the terms suggested by them are harmful to the cause and
that there is ample protection for them without the terms. Let them be
patriotic enough to rise to the occasion and render picketing unnecessary by stopping the sale of foreign cloth of their own motion.
Young India, 24-4-1930

172

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

176. SALAAMING OR FLOGGING?
Shri Haribhau Upadhyaya writes from Ajmer:1
If what Shri Haribhau says is true there is plenty of scope for
satyagraha in the jail. Normally it is proper for a prisoner to salaam
the jailor, but if a satyagrahi does not salaam he should not be forced.
If therefore force is used against someone for not salaaming it may
become the duty of others also to refuse to salaam.
It is surprising that the concessions provided in several other
jails to satyagrahis have been denied to satyagrahis in this jail. In my
opinion of course satyagrahi prisoners should be treated the same as
other prisoners. But if a satyagrahi is treated in a particular way all
other satyagrahis should be similarly treated. So far as the Congress is
concerned there is no difference between Pathikji or Nrisinhdasji and
the President. But how can one expect justice and fair play from this
Government?
[From Hindi]
Hindi Navajivan, 24-4-1930

1
The letter is not translated. The correspondent had said that a satyagrahi,
Baba Nrisinhdas, had been placed in solitary confinement for refusing to salaam the
jail officials and might even be flogged.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

173

177. INTERVIEW TO “THE HINDU”
KARADI ,

April 24, 1930
I broke the news of Mr. Prakasam’s arrest and Dr. Pattabhi’s sentence.

Yes, all prominent men are being taken away and the number is
increasing.
All of you will remain free outside.
Gandhiji added after a while bursting into laughter once again, referring to
Press reporters in general. I pointed out that the Government did not appear intent on
touching him at present and therefore he would also be free.

Yes, I am also a journalist. We all journalists will be free.
The conversation turned to the contemplated “No Tax” campaign in Raas.
Gandhiji was of the opinion that he must not come in their way if the people were
ready and confident about success. He declared:

Of course, they have thought of starting after informing me and
I gave my permission but they must be able to conduct the campaign
themselves. If they are prepared let them do it.
The Hindu, 25-4-1930

178. LETTER TO REGINALD REYNOLDS
11 p.m., April 24, 1930
MY DEAR REYNOLDS,

Just one line.
How will you fare about Young India now that Mahadev is off ?
I hope you are well both in mind and body.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: C.W. 4535. Courtesy: Swarthmore College, Philadelphia

174

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

179. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
April 24, 1930
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have received your two letters. Kevalram Bhimji has gone
there. He is staying at the Ashram. He is an absolutely pure man. He is
honest and frank. He gave up his business and came here. His wife
came too. I have now sent him back. He can be used for the accounts.
If he has not already met you, please trace him. His address can
certainly be ascertained from the Zandu Pharmacy. I shall be at
Bardoli on Sunday. Let Nagarajan come there, I shall reach Bardoli in
the morning and leave in the evening.
Mahadev had become too active.1 How could they fail to arrest
him? Now he will get some rest.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
When you see Jamnalal,2 tell him I know that he and others will
come out better qualified.
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1
2

Mahadev Desai was arrested on April 24 at Ahmedabad.
Jamnalal Bajaj had been sentenced to two years’ rigorous imprisonment.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

175

180. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
[After April 24, 1930] 1
I have your letter only just now with the post that brings me the
news about Mahadev.
Yes, you may take up the khadi work with Chhotelal. Ask
Balkoba to write to me. He must take milk and fruit.
I am conceiving the last move2 that must compel decisive action.
But it is all in God’s hands.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5385. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 5385

181. LETTER TO DOROTHY D’SEUA
C AMP KARADI ,

April 25, 1930
DEAR LITTLE FRIEND,

Don’t you be afraid of the doings of the processionists. They
mean no harm to you whatsoever and if you believe in God why
should you fear anything or anybody. However I shall do whatever
may be necessary.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
MISS DOROTHY D’SEUA
NO. 47 GOUGH R OAD
AGRA (U. P.)
From a photostat: G.N. 1369

1
The “news about Mahadev” presumably refers to his arrest on April 24 at
Ahmedabad.
2
The reference presumably is to the proposed raid on Dharasana Salt Depot;
vide “Letter to Viceroy”, 4-5-1930.

176

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

182. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
April 25, 1930
MY DEAR WHITE BEARD,

Here is Manibehn also coming to you. This accession must
delight your heart and Raojibhai and Co.’s. Let her be used
unsparingly to wake up the women of Kheda.
Hamida1 is working wonders in Olpad. She is a chip of the old
block. God bless her.
Love.
M. K. G.
From a photostat: S.N. 9571

183. LETTER TO KAZI NIZAMUDDIN AHMED
C AMP KARADI ,

April 25, 1930
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter giving me full information about the progress
of the campaign in Meerut. I hope all the prisoners are doing well.
Please keep me informed from time to time.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
KAZI NIZAMUDDIN AHMED
P RESIDENT
DIST. C ONGRESS C OMMITTEE
MEERUT
From a photostat: G.N. 10855

1

Grand-daughter of Abbas Tyabji

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

177

184. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
April 25, 1930
CHI. MAHADEV,

Of course you have my blessings. Though I see that you had no
choice but to get on the lorry, in my view you did commit an error. I
am pointing it out in fact for the benefit of others, but let my criticism
be for your benefit too. There was no need to forfeit the vehicle. I had
thought that you would devise a method of carrying the salt by stages
as they used to do in carrying Ganga water, and had very much liked
the idea. Suppose that we have a camp of twenty-five men at every
five miles or so. A batch of twenty-five, each man starting with five
seers, would mean three maunds and five seers. The first batch would
hand over the stock at the second camp and stay there. The second
batch would deliver the stock at the third camp and return to its camp,
after which the first batch would proceed to Dholera. This would have
provided very good training and it would have been easy to protect
the salt. There was nothing to lose in this arrangement. The method
which you followed involved the possibility of losing the cart and the
certainty of losing the lorry. Moreover, it required your hiding something, and the success of your plan depended on your ability to do
so. We should, of course, have nothing to hide. Any method in which
we have to hide something requires the cunning needed in the
ordinary kind of war, which we ought not to practise. Moreover, for
taking possession of the salt carried in a lorry, the police would be
required to use much greater force. We should not needlessly compel
them to do so. Hence, though your plan certainly required much
courage and no less intelligence, it was not based on perfect
non-violence. But in the prevailing atmosphere, I do not think you
would have realized this by yourself. Who knows where I myself may
be going wrong? All I can say is that I never take a single step without
thinking carefully and that I get time to do that. My thinking
nowadays takes the form exclusively of prayer. I do not use my
reason, but look into my heart.
Swami’s idea of lifting salt from Bhayander would also have
involved a similar error. Dharasana is very near from where I am but
I do not let anyone approach even that. When it is ultimately
decided to attempt to seize the stocks there, a pilgrim party will start
178

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

for the purpose, after giving public notice of its intention.
Please do not blame yourself or feel sorry for what you have
done because of my criticism. I have written this only to help you in
jail to think and understand the fine and subtle aspects of
non-violence and as guidance for the future to Kaka, Narahari and
others. But in any case it is good that you have been arrested. You
would have had no opportunity of facing bullets and on account of
excessive work you would probably have fallen ill. By the time you
come out, some thousands will have lost their lives. What grace of God
to the few chosen ones that they will be automatically saved. Those
who die and those who survive, both classes of persons should be
regarded as equally blessed. We need not believe that he alone is
blessed, or more so, who gets killed.
Personally I do feel, after the incidents at Peshawar and Chittagong, that there are bound to be two or more big massacres of
innocent people. Or it may be that they would deliberately and firmly
put the innocent behind the bars. In Karachi at any rate, only the
innocent were killed or wounded. The truth is that even the Government does not know where it stands and what it wants to do. What is
happ-ening is something quite new for it and for the whole world.
Now take good rest. Make a takli of wood and spin on it as much as
you can. Khadi stocks have been exhausted. Ask other prisoners also
to spin.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9858

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

179

185. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 25, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

Obtain the salt for the Ashram from the Provincial Committee.
Write to me if it is not available there or from any other source in
Ahmedabad.
Consult Imam Saheb about selling the salt.
Where has Sharjabehn sent her daughter?
I will write to Khushalbhai. I have received no request from
Orissa for women workers. If you cannot send Sonamani and others,
let them remain and get more training.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Bhai Bhansali wants work. In any case he wants to be permitted
to take up the night watch. Give him any work you think proper. He
may do even sanitary work.
From Gujarati: C.W. 8105. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

180

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

186. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
April 25, 1930
CHI. JAMNADAS,

I got your letter. It was not necessary to send the wire. I believe
that at any rate Khushalbhai will not be arrested. It would be a fine
thing if he was accompanied by a batch of men. He should think
about one thing. Perhaps they will stop his pension for participating in
civil disobedience. Personally I think it would be good if they did so.
The more injustice they do, the sooner will it end. If, however, he has
not the courage to forgo the encumbrance that this pension is, he
should give up the idea of civil disobedience, though I have no doubt
at all that, in the present circumstances, civil disobedience has become
the supreme religious duty. He should not detrain at Viramgam, but
proceed further to Lakhtar or to any other place which has a camp.
He may stay there as long as he feels inclined and then return home.
He may afterwards offer civil disobedience when an opportunity occurs and, if circumstances arise anywhere, should even go and face
bullets. In brief, he should be ready for everything. He should do this
only if Devbhabhi agrees. If not, it is enough for me that all of us
have his blessings. You may come to see me whenever you wish to.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9308. Courtesy: Jamnadas Gandhi

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

181

187. LETTER TO KHUSHALCHAND GANDHI
April 25, 1930
MU. KHUSHALBHAI,

The very old people are also joining this fight. Kashi’s revered
mother is eager to join it. Just now, the fight has taken a purely
religious form. Even the most eminent persons having faith in ahimsa
have joined it and are in jail. Would not both of you, on an occasion
like this, make the fullest sacrifice and thereby uphold the principle of
ahimsa? If you do so, the place which Tulsidas has had in our family
would have been fully justified.
Respectful prostration by

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33923

188. SPEECH AT PANNAR1
April 25, 1930
Gandhiji asked villagers to prepare themselves to go to jail but they should
remember their fight was non-violent. They should not lift their little finger against
the police even if they were assaulted.
Men like Pandit Motilal and his wife, who had grown old in the service of
country had plunged into the fight. Why then should they stand back, asked the
Mahatma.
Gandhiji referred to the police zulum and cruelties practised in some quarters
under the law. The police had no right to use force even against prisoners. He
condemned police atrocities and said their action was indefensible. But this should
not deter the maintenance of the non-violent character of the struggle.
Gandhiji next exhorted the villagers to spin and weave their own cloth. They
should not depend on outside villagers for the supply of cloth.
His message to students was to spin at least a tola of yarn per day.
Prohibition, he said, was equally important. Liquor and foreign cloth drained India of
1
Gandhiji read out a letter from Mahadev Desai in which, describing his own
arrest, he had written that young Gujarati graduates had courted arrest with him while
accompanying lorries of contraband salt.

182

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

crores of rupees.
Gandhiji asked if the village Headman had resigned. A khaddar-clad villager
got up and said, long ago he had done so. He asked the parents to withdraw students
from the Government-aided schools and start a National school. They should have
nothing to do with the British Government. The village leader announced that 500
khajur trees had been cut down and the village had declared social boycott of
Government officials.

That is good, but you must also boycott foreign cloth
vigorously.
The Bombay Chronicle, 26-4-1930

189. LETTER TO A. SUBBA RAO
April 26, 1930
DEAR FRIEND,

You should not join C.D. 1 but confine yourself to carding and
the spinning-wheel.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
S JT. A. S UBBA R AO ,
R AZAVARAM ATREYAPURAM
Via KOTHAPETA , E. GODAVARI DIST.
From the original: C.W. 9286. Courtesy: A. Subba Rao

190. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 26, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

I think I shall be arrested in about eight or ten days.
After I know the names of the women who have been selected
by Khurshedbehn and who agree to go with her, I will think about the
1
Seeking Gandhiji’s advice the addressee had written that he wanted
to join the civil disobedience movement but his aged parents did not allow him to
do so.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

183

remaining. The more the women who go with Khurshedbehn the
better. She is an extremely pure woman. Is Sarojinidevi of any
service?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I have written to Anjanadevi and told her that she should go with
Ramnarayan.
From Gujarati: C.W. 8106. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

191. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 26, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

Moulvi Syed Rauf Pasha is a professor in Colombo. He is
coming to see the Ashram and may stay there for a few days. Look
after him and introduce him to Imam Saheb and Mirabehn.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8107. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

192. LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI M. THAKKAR
April 26, 1930
CHI. MAHALAKSHMI,

I got your letter. You certainly need not change your diet. You
should continue to live on milk and fruit. I only wrote to Tarabehn
and told her that if you did not get fruit at the place where it was
proposed that you should go, there would be a problem. I therefore
dropped the idea of sending you with her. I will certainly put you in
circumstances in which you will remain in contact with an experienced
woman who can teach you things. Most probably I shall go there
tonight, and I will further talk with you then. Do not worry at all.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6796

184

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

193. SPEECH AT AMBHETI
April 26, 1930
“Court death: serve your country” was the
message.

gist of the

Mahatma’s

He said he had visited the aged mother of Vithaldas, not to express sorrow but
to congratulate her for giving her son to the cause of the country. Every mother must
give her son to serve the country. Vithaldas had not really died, but lived in the
memory of his country for ever. Many would have to die to liberate India.
The moment they ceased to fear death swaraj was near. They should prepare for
death when fighting Government which had resorted to excesses.
He appealed to the people to continue the unfinished work of Vithaldas,
by uprooting every khajoor tree in the village and by completely giving up
drinking.

The Bombay Chronicle, 28-4-1930

194. SPEECH AT BULSAR
April 26, 1930
I was here at Bulsar only a few days ago. If you had done some
special work since and called me here to have a view of it, my visit
would have been worth while. But neither you nor the Government
has done any such thing. Ramniklal Modi was with me on the Dandi
March. The Government conferred upon him the distinction of sending him to jail. You called me here to celebrate the occasion. But
what is there to celebrate in that? Only a year for a co-worker of mine
! This time we are playing a more serious game. Jail is now a familiar
thing to us and its hardships are no hardships. Even women and
children ask to go to jail as if it was some tasty dish. In a word, we
have given up the fear of jail. People have realized that to go to jail is
to share in the struggle for swaraj. I welcome all this, but I attach no
value now to jail-going. I feel no exhilaration whenI hear that some
co-worker of mine was sentenced to one year or two years, or, for that
matter, even five years. It would exhilarate me to hear that a co-worker
like Jairamdas was shot dead or that another co-worker, of an equally
spotless character, had had his skull broken. The Government’s
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

185

actions so far proclaim to us, ‘We shall break your heads, but will not
repeal the salt tax.’ Our answer to the Government is, ‘We are willing
to offer you as many heads as you want, but do please remove the salt
tax.’ If Ramniklal had made an offering of his head and a patch of
Bulsar land had been besmeared with his blood, then you would have
been justified in asking me to come. But Ramniklal has displayed no
such heroism, nor has the Government. Such heroism is being displayed at Anand and at Dehwan. There volunteers were beaten up in
the night and, so that the police might enjoy beating them, lights were
put out. If they call me there, I would immediately go. That is an
occasion worth celebrating. By all means ask me to come here when
you have such an occasion. Whether such an occasion will come is in
the hands of you brothers and sisters of Bulsar.
The Headmen of your villages are still clinging to their posts.
But I am not interested in their announcing their resignations. Their
resigning and their clinging to their posts exposes us to ridicule. If
any Headmen are present here, I beseech them to withdraw the resignations rather than expose us to ridicule. If there are none here, the
local workers should convey my request to them. The Bulsar Municipality has still not dug a well for the Bhangis of the place. If you do
not get a contractor for the work, give me the contract. The people of
Bulsar should take a vow that as long as the Bhangis are not given
water, they too will draw no water. Entrust the administration of Bulsar
to me for a day, and I will show you if this cannot be done. If you
cannot do this much, take it from me that you will not win swaraj for
Bulsar. This is said to be a civilized town. Toddy worth Rs. 45,000 is
sold here. I must admit that this is a mark of civilization. At the same
time, let me respectfully submit this also that your civilized town
ought not to have invited at such a time a man like me, a man who is
impatient to secure swaraj, to get the salt tax abolished and to end the
Government’s barbarity.
What have you done to stop the consumption of liquor? At least
the women here are civilized, not in the sense I have just mentioned
though! They sing in such a sweet voice. If they sang their beautiful
bhajans to people given to drinking, it could have an excellent effect.
Our sisters in Olpad and Jalalpur talukas and in Surat have in this way
brought about very good results. The question which worries the
186

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

owners of liquor booths is how they would live if their business
stopped. People should go to them and offer to find for them other
trades if the drink trade is given up. At Karadi yesterday, four Parsi
brethren came to see me. They said, “Only two months are now left.
Permit us to continue our business for that period.” After joking with
them for a while I said, “Now when the whole country is swept by a
wave of awakening, shall I for the sake of your trade entreat the
people not to give up toddy?” They said, “No, but why should there
be picketing?” “If picketing makes the drink addicts feel ashamed of
themselves and they turn away from the shops, why should I not do
it?” I said. Then I asked them if any of the women pickets exercised
coercion on them or the addicts. They admitted that they would not
say that.
Picketing is done everywhere by women only, and that gives
good results. If all the women present here work in that spirit, they can
get all liquor shops closed in twenty-four hours. No man, however bad
a drunkard, can remain unmoved by the loving appeal of you sisters.
Go to the addicts and humbly tell them, ‘Brothers, why do you do
this?’ When you appeal to them in this way, the addicts will reform
themselves and so too will the owners of the booths. People do not
want to be coerced, but, when you bathe them in your love, their love
for liquor will dry up. The Bhagavad Gita says that a fasting man’s
craving for sense objects diminishes but his instinctive pleasure in
them does not disappear. It disappears only when God’s grace descends on him. And your love is that divine grace. I have no doubt that
it will dry up the drunkard’s pleasure in drinking. If you do really
mean to achieve something positive, see that the liquor and toddy
booths in your place are closed and the toddy palms uprooted from
everywhere.
I have been told that your city has 100 taklis and 7 spinning-wheels. That is not enough to accomplish the boycott of foreign
cloth. The takli should be plying in every home. I cannot of course
provide spinning-wheels for you all. Even if some benevolent
carpenter of Bulsar came forward, he too would find the task impossible. But taklis you can make for yourselves. If you cannot make a
hole in a pice you may use broken pieces of children’s slates, or even
potsherds. If you are hoping that I will get you khadi from Bombay

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

187

and make you wear it, it is not going to happen. Khadi stocks in
Bombay are already exhausted. If you want to wear khadi you must
ply the takli.
You may break the salt law, but that by itself will not get
you swaraj. It will no doubt bring about repeal of the law. But if you
want swaraj you will have to die for it—of course not in the way they
died at Chittagong. That way swaraj would take four months when it
could be won in four days. And I do not know when it will be actually
won. But what shall we call this beating of innocent workers at night?
Is it goonda raj? It looks as if it was. There is nothing but goondaism
in all the accounts that reach me. The mavalis are after all ignorant
men, and we may endure their methods, but how can we tolerate this
goonda rule? All of you men and women who have gathered here, if
you have met to do something and not merely to witness a show,
resolve here and now that you will not suffer this goonda reign, that
your answer to all laws that offend against morality will be civil
disobedience. We do not wish to follow the path that Chittagong took.
The more the suffering inflicted on us, the more of it shall we invite.
You are all civilized people and you should take it that though I
have said little I have said a good deal. And do kindly act upon it.
They have taken from your shores a good man like Ramniklal. He is a
good man and given to tapascharya. The imprisonment of such a
pure man has indeed brought swaraj a little nearer. Now it is up to you
to prove that you deserve workers like Ramniklal, Mohanlal Pandya,
Ishwarlal and Nichhabhai.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 4-5-1930

188

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

195. SPEECH AT CHHARWADA
April 26, 1930
People have conferred on me the title of salt-thief as a substitute
for Mahatma. I like it. But it is no easy thing to be a salt-thief, while it
is easy enough to be a Mahatma. If one makes a fuss of eating and
drinking and wears a langoti, one can easily acquire the title of Mahatma in this country. In a little while I shall go with you and get some
salt from the nearby creek. We shall not get pure salt, as the benign
Government has had it all mixed with earth. Anyway, we shall take
what we can find. But when can we be called thieves? Only when we
are punished for theft. What kind of theft is it which no one even so
much as takes notice of ? We shall pick up a little dust. It may well be
considered theft under the law, but the world will not take it as such
nor will the Government. It will be real theft when you have your
hands broken in committing it. Though we shall be collecting salt,
possibly neither you nor I will have our hands broken.
It will be real theft only when we raid those mounds of salt over
there. When I went to Untadi, I saw them from a distance and thought
them quite beautiful. Having a near view today, I find them dirty and
ugly. Let them be what they are, we shall be real salt-thieves only
when we lay hands on them and have our hands and wrists broken or
get thrown into jails.
I would even ask you not to confer the dearly bought title of
salt-thief on everyone who merely goes to jail. You do not have your
ribs smashed in going to jail. Just now I had a letter informing me that
in the Kheda district some people were beaten. They were all respected public workers. Those who had beaten them were Government
functionaries but they too were our own men. In order that they might
enjoy the beating better, they even put out the light. Six or seven men
are now in hospital undergoing treatment. None of them is likely to
die, but, if anyone should, we would call him a true leader of
salt-thieves. You will of course come with me to take salt from the
creek here, but you will not thereby earn the title of salt-thieves. Yes,
we may be said to be candidates for that title. When we have committed real theft of salt, there will no longer be any salt-thieves at all. For
the Government will then say to us: ‘You all refuse to obey the salt
law. Very well then. All those salt dunes are your property from now
on.’ That property is not worth even seven crores of rupees. That
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

189

amount we pay direct. If we add to it the expenditure involved in
collecting the sum, we save 20 crores. How can the Government persuade itself to forgo such a large amount? At present we have in the
country thousands and even hundreds of thousands of volunteers who
are ready to steal salt. But would that be enough to make the Government let go such a large income? Before it does so it will wound a
good many, even kill some of them. However, after it has done its
worst even this tyrannical Government will have no escape from
having to give up the income. When that stage is reached, then alone
will you have the right to call me a salt-thief and I the right to be so
called.
For the present, however, Mahadev has proved himself a greater
salt-thief than I. Since Sardar was taken away, he has not had a single
moment’s rest. The Police Superintendent on his part was not very
eager to arrest him. He saw that so long as he was free he would at
least provide the authorities correct information. But what was he to
do? Just as men were bringing from Dholera a motor lorry full of salt,
Mahadev jumped onto it. But I am unwilling to call even him a
salt-thief though he was arrested for the act. l have written to him to
say: “It is well that you have been imprisoned, but your duty was to
die for the cause.” It was good that at Anand some had their arms and
skulls broken. What trouble can there be in jail—and A class at that?
What is wanting for the saheb? There is more to eat and drink than at
the Ashram. One cooks for you, another fetches water and a third will
wash your dhoti for you. Are these the marks of a prisoner? When
men like Mahadev and Jairamdas have their heads bleeding and their
clothes beautifully splattered with fresh warm blood, then, from some
corner or other of the world human pity cannot but spring forth.
Surely, there must be God somewhere? When blood flows from heads
not only will the salt tax go but many more things will also be washed
away into the sea. And then our numerous sins will disappear under
the earth as this salt heap before us is covered with it.
You may call me a salt-thief but only when we take possession
of the salt-beds of Dharasana. What is there in picking a seer or two of
salt from here and there? Even the Government must be wondering
what a childish game we are playing. If you mean to play the real
game, come out and loot the salt-sheds of Dharasana, or Bhayander,
or Kharaghoda. The game we are now playing is, I admit, a children’s
game, but from that one day we will proceed to serious business. And
190

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

on the day the real game begins, I invite you all, brothers and sisters
of Chharwada and Dharasana to join me in the fun. But the day is not
yet. When an account of the Dharasana raid is being recorded what
will you, the immediate neighbours of these salt-beds, have to say
about your part? Will you have it recorded that you ran away at the
time or that you bared your bosoms and remained? We will not be
angry with those who put out the light and beat the volunteers, nor will
we abuse them. We want to follow a different rule of justice. Do you
remember the saying: “Offer a finger and the wrist is bitten”? If
these Government men seize our finger, We will offer the wrist and if
they seize the wrist, we will offer the shoulder; and if they seize the
shoulder we will offer our very neck. Now that they have started
beating our volunteers, let us plan a campaign so that we invite all the
beating on our heads.
But whatever we do should be above reproach. I did not like at
all what happened in Peshawar. If the reins of Government fall into
the hands of such persons, will they not rule in the same way? Will
they not break the heads of the poor? I want every head in the
country to be well-protected. Even a small girl should be able to move
about safely in any part of India. Our struggle is for self-purification
and I wish you all to become pure. It is impossible that you should be
able to carry out a raid on Dharasana salt-beds wearing those black
caps or foreign saris. In any case, for my part at least, I would not let
you accompany me. When you all come out for the raid, each should
be wearing khadi; if enough khadi is not available, you will wear only
a khadi langoti. Today you may all come with me as candidates to be
salt-thieves, but when I come again for a raid, I will have with me none
who does not wear khadi and who is not plying a takli at the time. I
should indeed like all of you to join me. But if you have not carried
out the programme of self-purification by then, I shall not hesitate to
go alone.
Do not tell me that khadi is not available. Get a takli and spin on
it. Send yarn as well as money to pay for the weaving. Then I
undertake to supply you khadi. If you do not pay weaving charges
you will get so much less khadi. If this is done there will be no
shortage of khadi. I have entrusted this work to our sisters. Men, by
making salt, will save Rs. 7 crores, but women, if they are proficient in
the work, will be able to save Rs. 60 crores.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

191

I have been telling you about the Dharasana raid. Do not think
it will be two or three years before the raid takes place. An old man
like me, past sixty years of age and nearing death. cannot speak in
terms of years. I can speak only in terms of a few months, and, if you
give me your co-operation, a few days. But why should I come here if
I find that the people of Dharasana are liars, drunkards and
debauchees? If I did come even then I would fight for salt with the
help of other men, not with your help.
I have made it clear to you that only if you wear khadi and give
up liquor will I let you join me in the raid on the Dharasana salt-beds.
If you do not fulfil the condition and still insist on coming, I will offer
satyagraha against you. I shall offer satyagraha against you as I would
offer it against the bayonets of policemen. I do not wish to take
possession of Dharasana salt with the help of drunkards or of people
who wear foreign cloth. I will do that with the help only of the pure
and spotless. The volunteers who are present here should go from
house to house and carry this message of mine to the people. I shall
be content if people stay at home but I will not tolerate their
interfering in my work without fulfilling the conditions I have
mentioned. If you do not like that, you are free to abandon me.
You may give me no food, not even a glass of water to drink.
I know how to carry out the raid on a hungry stomach. I will be here
again in a week or two; and if you have not done by that time what
I have asked you to do, you may stay away and sing bhajans. Rather,
I would shun the bhajans and shouts of ‘ Jai’ coming from such
people.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 4-5-1930

192

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

196. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
[Before April 27, 1930] 1
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. You are right that we should not have any
secret dealings. Let them get at the money any time they choose.
I shall write to Taramati about her brother. Let us see what
happens about the mills.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

197. MESSAGE TO AMERICA
[Before April 27, 1930] 2
The national demand is not for immediate establishment of Independence, but is a preliminary step to a conference, that must take
place if Independence is to be established peacefully, to remove
certain prime grievances, chiefly economic and moral. These are set
forth in the clearest possible terms in my letter, miscalled an
ultimatum to the Viceroy. Those grievances include the salt tax, which
in its incidence falls with equal pressure upon rich as well as poor and
is over 1,000 per cent of the cost price. Having been made a monopoly, it has deprived tens of thousands of people of their supplementary occupation and the artificially heavy cost of salt has made it
very difficult, if not impossible, for poor people to give enough salt to
their cattle and to their land.
This unnatural monopoly is sustained by laws, which are only
so-called, but which are a denial of law. They give arbitrary powers to
police, known to be corrupt, to lay their hands without warrant on
innocent people, to confiscate their property and otherwise molest
them in a hundred ways. Civil resistance against the laws has caught
the popular imagination as nothing else has within my experience.
Hundreds of thousands of people, including women or children from
1
2

From the reference to Gandhiji’s writing to Taramati
This appeared in The Sunday Times, 27-4-1930.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

193

many villages, have participated in the open manufacture and sale of
contraband salt.
This resistance has been answered by barbarous and unmanly
repressions. Instead of arresting people the authorities have violated
the persons of people who have refused to part with salt, held
generally in their fists. To open their fists, their knuckles have been
broken, their necks have been pressed, they have been even indecently
assaulted till they have been rendered senseless. Some of these assaults
have taken place in the presence of hundreds and thousands of people, who, although well able to protect the victims and retaliate, being
under a pledge of non-violence, have not done so. It is true thatviolence has broken out in Calcutta, Karachi, Chittagong, and now
Peshawar. The Calcutta and Karachi events should be isolated from
those at Chittagong and Peshawar. The Calcutta and Karachi incidents
were an impulsive outburst on the arrest of popular leaders. The
Chittagong and Peshawar incidents though also caused for the same
reason, seem to have been serious and well-planned affairs, though
wholly unconnected with each other, Chittagong being in the extreme
east and Peshawar being in the north-west border of India.
These disturbances have so far not affected other parts of India,
where civil disobedience has been going on in an organized fashion
and on a mass scale since the 6th instant. People in other parts have
remained non-violent in spite of great provocation. At the same time, I
admit that there is need for caution but I can say without the least
hesitation that, consistently with the plan of civil disobedience, every
precaution conceivable is being taken to prevent civil disobedience
from being used as an occasion for doing violence. It should be noted
that in Karachi, 7 wounded persons of whom 2 have died of their
wounds, were volunteers engaged in keeping the peace and restraining
mob fury. It is the opinion of eye-witnesses that the firing in Karachi
was wholly unjustified and that there was no firing in the air or at the
legs in the first instance.
In fact, the Government have lost no opportunity of incensing
people. Many of the best and purest and the most self-sacrificing leaders have been arrested and imprisoned, in many instances with mock
trials. Sentences, though, for the same offence, have varied with the
idiosyncrasies of the magistrates. In several instances they have been
for more than 12 months with hard labour on well-known citizens.
The enthusiasm of the people has up to now increased with every
194

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

conviction. Thousands of people regard the manufacture of contraband salt as part of their daily routine. In any other part of the
world with a Government at all responsible to public opinion, the salt
tax would have been repealed long since, but whether now or later,
repealed it will be, if the present existing atmosphere of resistance
abides as it promises to do.
That this is a movement of self-purification is abundantly
proved by the fact that women have come into it in large numbers and
are organizing the picketing of liquor shops. Thousands have
taken vows to abstain from intoxicating liquor. In Ahmedabad, a strong labour centre, receipts of canteens have dropped to 19 per cent and
are still dropping. A similar manifestation is taking placein the district
of Surat. Women have also taken up the question of boycott of
foreign cloth. It is spreading all over India. People are making
bonfires of foreign cloth in their possession. Khadi, i.e., hand-spun
cloth, is so much in demand that the existing stock is well-nigh exhausted. The spinning-wheel is much in demand and people are beginning to realize more and more the necessity of reviving hand-spinning
in the cottages of 700,000 villages of India. In my humble opinion, a
struggle so free from violence has a message far beyond the borders
of India. I have no manner of doubt that after all the sacrifice that has
already been made since April 6, the spirit of the people will be
sustained throughout till India has become independent and free to
make her contribution to the progress of humanity.
M. K. GANDHI

The Modern Review, June 1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

195

198. DRAFT LETTER TO VICEROY1
[On or before April 27, 1930] 2
YOUR EXCELLENCY,

We, the undersigned women of Gujarat, have come to the conclusion that we may not keep ourselves aloof from the great national
upheaval that is taking place. We are in full sympathy with the civil
disobedience campaign in respect of the salt tax. Our
sisters in the villages have already begun the manufacture of contraband salt.
But we feel that we must, as women, find an additional and
special field for our activity. We feel the force of Gandhiji’s argument
that women are better fitted for dealing with the question of the prohibition of intoxicating drinks and drugs and boycott of foreign cloth.
Drink has desolated many a home, and foreign cloth has deprived
millions of India’s women of their employment during leisure hours,
which amount in the aggregate to no less than four months in the
year.
These two are therefore questions that concern the women more
than men. And in so far as they can be dealt with through picketing,
i.e., an appeal to the hearts of those who traffic in these things and
those who are lured to the drink and the drug or the foreign-cloth
shops, we feel that we can make a more successful effort than men.
And women doing the work must automatically ensure its peaceful
nature.
As we embark upon the campaign we should respectfully point
out that it is essentially the duty of the State to prohibit traffic in
intoxicating drinks and drugs because they ruin both mind and body
and homes of those who indulge in them and to prohibit the entry of
foreign cloth inasmuch as it has brought about the economic ruin of
the villages of this unhappy land.
As to the importation of foreign cloth it might be urged that the
argument that applies to foreign cloth applies also partially to the
cloth manufactured in Indian mills. Only the output of Indian mills is
so far short of the requirements that khadi can have nothing to fear
from them.
1

This was drafted by Gandhiji.
The draft was ready for signatures on April 27, 1930; vide “Letter to Amina
Tyabji”, 27-4-1930.
2

196

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

We wish that we had time enough to canvass the opinion of our
sisters in the other provinces. But we know what their opinion is likely
to be. After all we are not dealing with new problems. These have
already been before the nation through its national organization, the
Congress. What we are seeking to do is to dedicate ourselves more to
these questions than to the others which along with these are being
dealt with in terms of the independence movement.
We are,
Yours faithfully,
SHARDA MEHTA

SULOCHNA CHINUBHAI

INDUMATI C. DIVAN

TANUMATI CHINUBHAI M.

MANORAMA CHINUBHAI

RANCHHODLAL

PARVATIBEHN GIRDHARLAL AMRITLAL SARLADEVI AMBALAL SARABHAI
VIJAYAGAURI DURGAPRASAD

VASANTGAURI NARSIDAS

LASHKARI

MRS . C HIMANLAL NAGINDAS

MAHALAKSHMI MANSUKHRAM

ANASUYA SARABHAI

CHATURLAKSHMI J IVANLAL DIVAN

MOTIBAI RANCHHODLAL

VIJAYAGAURI BALVANTRAO KANUGA

LILAVATI HARILAL DESAI

AMINA KURESHI

NIRMALA BAKUBHAI MANSUKHBHAI

LAKSHMIBAI KHARE

SANTOK M. GANDHI

MITHUBEHN PETIT

DURGA MAHADEV DESAI

AMINA TYABJI

GANGABEHN RANCHHODDAS BHATIA

RAIHANA TYABJI

SAVITA TRIVEDI

KANCHANGAURI MANGALDAS GIRDHARDAS

MRS . J AYANTILAL AMRITLAL

Young India, 1-5-1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

197

199. DRAFT OF APPEAL TO WOMEN OF GUJARAT
[About April 27, 1930] 1
SISTERS,

Here is a letter to the Viceroy. Please sign it if you feel you can
do so. The original letter is in English. This is a translation of it. You
will understand the contents carefully and sign it only if you wish to
join the movement. If you sign it, please give full particulars: such as
your name, address, age, etc. The names will be published in the
papers and your signing the letter will mean that you will be ready to
join in picketing liquor booths and foreign-cloth shops and to work
under the instructions of the self-appointed committee formed by the
signatories below.
However, there is also another way in which you may function.
Instead of working under this Committee, you may form your own
committee and determine your own area of activity. That is, you may
picket only those liquor booths or foreign-cloth shops which you may
choose. Even if you do so, we shall ultimately come together and
work in co-operation with one another. If you wish to join in
this sacred work, you should intimate while sending your
signatures whether you would form a separate committee or work
under this one.
We remain,
INDIA ’S WOMEN VOLUNTEERS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 16845

1

198

It is likely this was drafted about the same time as the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

200. HONOURING THE MEMORY OF
VITHALBHAI LALLUBHAI
This struggle will claim many lives. One must die to go to
heaven. Unless thousands die, swaraj, which is dearer than heaven, will
not be secured. The purer the men sacrificing themselves in this cause,
the earlier shall we get swaraj and the less will be the number of
people sacrificed. If everyone realizes and does his duty, there will be
no question of dying in the struggle. But this ideal state hardly ever
occurs in this world. Sacrifice, therefore, consists in oneself being pure
and innocent, but laying down one’s life [as atonement] for another’s
evil. If no one committed sin, where would be the need for sacrifice?
Sacrifice does not simply mean accepting the penalty of death at
the hands of the Government. It certainly is a sacrifice if one engaged
in the struggle undergoes unmerited suffering and dies. It is of course
a sacrifice to suffer an accident, while uprooting toddy trees as part of
our struggle, and to die on that account.
Such a sacrifice was made by Vithalbhai Lallubhai yesterday.
Vithalbhai was a teacher in a national school. Being enthusiastic he
had joined as a volunteer. While he was cutting a toddy tree, the axe
fell on his leg, he sustained a fracture and thorns pricked his hands.
The doctor spared no pains in treating him. But God’s will was
otherwise, and on the fourth day Vithalbhai breathed his last.
I saw Vithalbhai on the very day on which he was hurt. I was
impressed by his courage. Though it had been a serious operation, he
was cheerful. The doctor was all praise for his fortitude. All of us had
expected that he would recover. However, having fulfilled his life’s
aim, Vithalbhai departed doing his duty and discharging his debt to
the motherland fully.
The town of Navsari realized the grave loss in Vithalbhai’s
death. People flocked to where he lay, grieving. A great crowd formed
into a procession and followed his body to the cremation ground. The
procession seemed to be a celebration. Navsari observed a hartal on
that day.
Who would not ask for a death so glorious? I regard Vithalbhai’s mother, brother, wife and all others of the family worthy of
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

199

congratulations on their good fortune.
Why is such a death desirable, one may ask. It is so because it
purifies those left behind and awakens a greater spirit of service in
them. Has it so happened in this case? If it has, let us fittingly honour
his memory. Vithalbhai gave his life in the fight against the drink evil.
It behoves us to apply ourselves to the task and even risk our lives in
it. Vithalbhai lost his life in Jalalpur taluka. It, therefore, becomes the
special duty of this taluka to see that the toddy trees, stained with his
blood, are rooted out, that the liquor and toddy shops are closed down
and that the addicts give up drinking.
I had been to Bodali yesterday. The people there paid a
glowing tribute to the departed soul. On my request a number of
leading men of the place granted permission for felling the toddy
palm trees owned by them.
As we lost Vithalbhai, so did we lose Dattatreya and Meghraj.
These latter offered their lives to bullets at Karachi. For Vithalbhai,
who was engaged in ending the drink evil, I suggested a method of
honouring his memory befitting the cause he served. As for
Dattatreya and Meghraj, let us honour their memory by promoting
peacefulness among us. In the measure that disturbances increase, we
shall have to suffer more acutely and in larger numbers; and to that
extent the winning of swaraj will be delayed. The greater our
peacefulness, the less our need of sacrifice. It is not by throwing
stones, shouting slogans, attacking offices and other buildings and
setting fire to tram-cars that we can win swaraj for the poor.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 27-4-1930

200

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

201. THE SPIRIT OF RAAS
I have seen the pledge taken by Raas. The people of Raas
should understand that they have taken the pledge on their own responsibility. The Kheda district has been displaying wonderful strength.
Abbas Saheb, who has renounced all, has made it his home. He has
dedicated his tender daughter Hamida to the abolition of the drink
evil. His wife had already dedicated herself for that work. Raihana,
poor cripple, spends her days and nights thinking of India only. The
old gentleman is himself working in Kheda, and he is not to be
intimidated by anybody.
Kheda has the help of a man like him. Some tried workers from
the Ashram batch have also been working in this district. And now
Kheda has Sardar’s own daughter, who fears none and whom God has
endowed with inexhaustible energy for work. So Kheda has all the
help it needs.
If Kheda lacks the ability to preserve peace or the tenacity to
hold out till the last, it will put both itself and Gujarat to shame in the
eyes of the public.
The Government will not tolerate refusal to pay land revenue.
We have not yet reached that stage in the programme. However, those
who have the courage may certainly withhold payment. Did not
Panchia Patel do it all by himself ? But those who adopt this course
run great risks. They should not be surprised if their goods, chattels
and livestock are put up for sale. What happened in Bardoli is no
guide to what may happen in Kheda. The Bardoli struggle was in a
way limited in scope. It was a fight for securing a right. This is afight
to wrest power from the Government. The one is as far removed from
the other as the earth from the sky.
Hence, to be able to stand firm in the step taken by it, Raas
should cultivate the requisite purity of spirit and self-sacrifice. Other
villages wanting to follow in its footsteps should first take a measure
of their own strength quietly. I may say, however, that the district from
which they carried off Sardar and then Durbar and in which Mohanlal
Pandya and Ravishankar (Maharaj) have their homes, can never do
enough.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 27-4-1930
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

201

202. MY N0TES
S TRIKES

A trader has expressed sorrow at the frequent hartals. I feel that
a hartal should not be observed on any and every occasion and on the
arrest of every leader. In all matters the middle path is the only right
path. Excess is never good in any matter. When in some village a
leader is arrested, it may be necessary to observe a day’s hartal in that
village. But I personally do not regard it proper to have a hartal all
over when a leader with some reputation is arrested somewhere. I hear
that it is the intention of some traders to observe a hartal for seven
days when I am arrested. I hope that this is not true. If it is true, I wish
that those contemplating it will change their mind. Observing a
week-long hartal will not bring us swaraj. Only by working for the
constructive programme, not merely for seven days but on all days
until swaraj is won, shall we get swaraj and set free everyone who is in
jail. The present time calls for careful thinking, wisdom and quiet
work. Dangers of Picketing A woman correspondent says that
picketing may increase friction. So according to her we should be
content with pro-pagation of swadeshi. My humble opinion is that
both are necessary.
If the picketing is left entirely to women without any men
joining there will be no friction. What women need is endurance and
patience. Picketing does not mean coercion. It means appeal or
request—and a request may be made to all the communities. The
picketing programme includes organizing meetings everywhere,
takin-gout, processions, caste meetings passing resolutions, going
about singing bhajans, etc. In no case does picketing mean that
anyone is to be prevented by force. For the rest, if one wants boycott
to succeed one must produce khadi. Those sisters who consider
picketing risky may card and spin and create an atmosphere for such
work.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 27-4-1930

202

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

203. IMAM SAHEB
Mahadev has appointed Imam Saheb Abdul Kadir Bawazeer as
his successor. The whole of Gujarat is familiar with the name of Imam
Saheb. I had kept him buried in the Ashram; he is like my own
brother. From being a client of mine, he became a satyagrahi, after
becoming a satyagrahi he became an inmate of Phoenix and, not
resting at that, he came over to India with a few other inmates of the
Ashram. An acquaintanceship which began in 1902 has lasted until
1930. Hence this relationship of ours is not a recent one.
Imam Saheb is not a reformed Muslim but an orthodox one in
the sense that he never misses his prayers or his fasts. His father was
the Muezzin of the Juma Musjid of Bombay. He is himself styled
Imam because he officiated as priest in several mosques in South
Africa.
It was Sardar who brought Imam Saheb out into the public, but
Sardar is not a person to do so with a view to flattering Imam Saheb.
He realized Imam Saheb’s freedom of spirit and hence brought him
out into the open and took him with him wherever he went.
Although Imam Saheb may be called illiterate, he is shrewd and well
versed in the practical affairs of life. He understands many things
from mere hints. It is not for the first time that Imam Saheb is being
given an important position. He had often occupied such a position in
South Africa. If he is not arrested, those who come into contact with
him will soon realize that he is not one to sit in a chair like a dummy.
He can guide a meeting and give considered decisions.
I have had no hand whatsoever in the choice of Imam Saheb. I
do not recall suggesting his name to Mahadev. Of course I approved
his name after it had been suggested by the latter.
The age for having dummies as chairmen is now past. Only
those persons who are capable of guiding us, who put into practice the
commands of the public or resign if they are unable to do so can
become important public servants.
And today? Well, today only a person who will yield up his head
with a smile can become the leader. Imam Saheb is such a person. The
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

203

veteran Abbas Tyabji is another such person. Swami has found such a
person in our brother Abdulla. In this choice the Swami has put
himself to the test and has set the limits of this struggle. I could not
dream of Swami giving the chair to Abdullabhai. I myself could not
have made that choice, despite the fact that it was I who first made his
acquaintance and brought him over to the Ashram. Swami has chosen
a person who has cut off his own head and put it on a platter. Nevertheless, the reason for these three being chosen by Gujaratis is not
only because they are Muslims. These selections have not been made
in order to please anyone. They have been selected because besides
being Muslims they are worthy of the offices for which they have
been chosen, because they are prepared to lay down their lives, to
make sacrifices and are as sincere Indians as they are Muslims.
This struggle is not one only of Hindus or of Muslims or of any
one community. It is of all Indians. And, if we go a step further, this
struggle is for freeing the world from the monstrous tyranny of
material greed; it is a struggle to prove that money is not God, but that
God alone is everything and that nothing else except Him is real.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 27-4-1930

204. KHADI AND BOYCOTT OF FOREIGN CLOTH
Those who believe that boycott of foreign cloth is impossible
without progress in khadi know that the boycott can be deemed
successful only when and to the extent that khadi is available to
replace boycotted cloth, and that then alone shall we be saved from
repenting afterwards. Thus production of khadi is at present the most
important issue facing us in regard to boycott. If khadi is not available
foreign cloth is bound to enter India by the back door if not openly.
In this state of things the khadi bhandars should think what they can
do.
THE R ESIDENTS OF BOMBAY

What in particular should the Khadi Bhandar of Bombay
do? The Bombay Khadi Bhandar is the biggest in India. It receives
khadi stocks from all around. But everywhere the consumption of
204

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

khadi has gone up and it is with great difficulty that the Bombay
Khadi Bhandar can supply khadi to its customers. If in these conditions this Bhandar does not find a solution, it had better close down.
Discussing this question with Shri Vithaldas Jerajani, I told him: “Now
you should ask customers to pay for khadi not in cash but with
hand-spun yarn. When you do this, those alone will come to buy
khadi who wish really to effect the boycott through the use of khadi.
In this way, moreover, the use of khadi will become clean. The
number of those spinning cotton will go up, and you will get heaps of
yarn. When things are properly organized, you will again have a huge
stock of khadi. It would be best if the yarn had been spun by the customer himself. However, it may be open to him to offer the yarn spun
by members of his family. Some resourceful men may go to villages,
get yarn spun there and bring it to you. With a population of tens of
millions, it is quite easy to produce yarn. You will have to make immediate arrangements to get the yarn received woven into cloth. There
are many weavers in Bombay, and we should see to it that, when
boycott of foreign cloth becomes effective, no foreign yarn finds its
way into the Indian market. The yarn from Indian mills may be there,
but the mills may be persuaded not to compete with hand-spun yarn.
Weavers in whom the spirit of patriotism can be aroused will use only
hand-spun yarn to make cloth.”
“But what if by adopting this method we estrange people?”
—asked Jerajani.
“Those who understand our aim will not be angry. As for
others, let them be angry if they must. If they do not wear khadi, they
will be the losers. Khadi has nothing to lose.”
If the method I have suggested is adopted, we shall realize the
place of khadi in the boycott of foreign cloth. If we are convinced
that the boycott cannot be effected unless the use of khadi spreads,
why should we be afraid of telling the truth? Our duty is to do the
right and have others do it, leaving the fruit to God.
If I know Bombay, however, it will, I am sure, realize the
necessity of the method I have suggested. It will not be offended but
will help the cause to the best of its power.
Let us all take to the takli as an emergency duty and make
handsome taklis from bamboo and potsherds. Let us ourselves card
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

205

cotton and begin producing yarn. It will be enough if one gives just
two hours a day to the work. All employees of khadi bhandars should
become takli experts, and teach people coming to the bhandars to
make taklis, to card and to determine the count of yarn. Aftersix
months of this work, there will be no scarcity of khadi. We should also
realize that if the khadi spirit becomes universal, the villages will never
be short of khadi, for they will quickly produce what they require.
Everywhere in Bombay one question is likely to be asked: “On
the one hand you are advocating mass civil disobedience and, on the
other, you are advising people to use the takli. How can a person
offering civil disobedience think of plying the takli in the midst of all
the excitement?” My reply is: “Breaking a law merely for the sake of
breaking it may mean excitement. How can there be excitement in
civil disobedience? ‘Civil’ means ‘peaceful’. Peace and excitement
are incompatible with each other. If there is true peacefulness in our
disobedience, the takli will be plied with all the greater enthusiasm,
because it is the very embodiment of peace. Going round volunteer
camps, I find that in several places they idle away their time and say,
“Give us work or get us arrested.” To get them arrested is not quite
in my hands. I can give them work, and that is plying the takli and the
cardingbow. These thousands of soldiers can certainly produce yarn
in thousands of tolas a day. A thousand tolas of yarn means twentyfive seers of it, or not less than seventy-five square yards of khadi. Our
requirement of cloth is estimated at one inch and a quarter per head
per day. This means that we shall have met the requirement of
twenty-one hundred persons for a day. The result thus worked out is
enough to astound any man. But it will be no surprise to those who
understand the principle behind “strength from many threads woven
together”. A person spinning a tola of yarn supplies the raw material
to clothe in khadi himself and 1.25 other persons. It is child’s play
for everyone to spin one tola of yarn. And if we are carrying on a
peaceful struggle, it is possible to ply the takli even while picketing or
facing bullets. We do not wish to protect our persons. Let us suppose
that we go to take possession of a salt-water basin owned by the
Government, but the officers will not let us have it. Since we continue
to confront them they would arrest us, or shoot at us or charge at us
with lathis to prevent entry. Until this stage is reached, why could we
not peacefully ply our taklis? The takli is the satyagrahi’s weapon. If
the opponent has guns, we have our takli, made of bamboo and
potsherds. I can think of no sight more magnificent than this. Will not
206

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Bombay and other towns or villages welcome this suggestion?
Let us consider this further. Tens of millions won’t come
out to face bullets or spend the whole day making salt or join
processions. What, however, will women, children and the old do? If
they spin, they too will have offered their contribution to the swaraj
yajna.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 27-4-1930

205. TESTING ME
The Government has been putting me to a stiff test. It is entitled
to do so. The Government perhaps thinks that if it cuts off my hands,
I may lose the battle, or, even if I don’t, at least I shall be isolated. It
would seem to be the right thing in the eyes of the world. And that is
why Mahadev was removed and Swami, too, not to mention other old
co-workers and some new ones like Bhai Munshi.
Mahadev and Swami stand for Young India and Navajivan.
Though Swami had left Navajivan formally it did not mean that his
connection with it was cut off. It is like my connection with the
Ashram, which is not broken even though I am no longer among its
Trustees. The Navajivan means Swami. Even from Bombay he had
been looking after Navajivan. He took great pains to help Jamnalalji
in serving the untouchables. The activities at Ville Parle prospered
because of his tireless labour in their behalf. And as for Mahadev, the
Gujarati people living near Ahmedabad know his recent work better
than I from this distance can know it.
But what would it matter even if every one of my co-workers
was taken to where Mahadev and Swami have been taken? I do not
regard myself isolated at all. God is my only friend, philosopher and
guide, call Him what I may. I have not embarked upon the present
struggle counting upon the strength of Mahadev, Swami, Sardar or
any other person. I remain therefore unconcerned, no matter how
many of my co-workers are sent to jail. Why should a weak man
worry? The strength of the strong may be destroyed, but who can
destroy the strength of the weak?
Though a weak man, I feel I am strong too, but I rely in this
struggle on God’s strength. He guides me in what I eat and drink, in
what I speak and write. I, therefore, feel no burden at all. I do not feel
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

207

the arrest of Mahadev, Swami, or Ramniklal. For their part, they will
have some rest. They needed it. If I must worry, there are Chittagong
and Peshawar to worry about. They touch my heart of course, but
they do not cause me worry.
This is a struggle between violence and non-violence. To the
extent that I am non-violent in spirit, non-violent remedies will occur
to me; and these I shall put before the people so long as I remain free.
In my absence also, if the spirit of non-violence has then become
general, people will follow non-violent methods. Those who have not
come under the spell of non-violence are bound to do so in the end if
the true spirit of non-violence comes to prevail among the people.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 27-4-1930

206. LETTER TO AMINA TYABJI
April 27, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

Herewith the letter to the Viceroy. 1 Please sign and give it to
bearer to be posted to the Viceroy.
How is Raihana?
Hamida is doing great work in Olpad.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 9688

1

208

Vide “Draft letter to Viceroy”, 27-4-1930.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

207. FRAGMENT OF LETTER TO ASAF ALI
April 27, 1930
Personally I am of opinion that picketing may not be suspended
anywhere. But if the local Congress has committed itself to a
suspension directly or indirectly, it must be carried out in any case
and at any cost.
Strict performance of promises is the essence of satyagraha.
A.I.C.C. File No. 182-F, 1930. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

208. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
April 27, 1930
CHI. LILAVATI,

I got your letter. I was glad to read it. If you continue to
exercise such intelligent self-control, your restlessness will disappear. I
do not think there will be any harm in applying the plaster. If,
however, you take hip-baths, menses will certainly start. It would be
better if you did not join the drill. If you keep yourself calm and do
not work too hard, and if you sleep outside in the open, your fainting
fits will stop.
If you do not pass stools easily, you must take enemas. The
bowels should not remain uncleared for more than 24 hours.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9562

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

209

209. LETTER TO TARAMATI MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
April 27, 1930
CHI. TARAMATI,

Mathuradas has informed me of your brother’s death. The Gita
teaches us not to grieve over death. Birth and death are our two
friends and both are equal. Let us try each day to be pure and alert in
the knowledge that death is certain.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayya

210. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
[Before April 28, 1930] 1
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have written to you about Kevalram.2 He is very shy. Hence I
have sent him this note. He can look after the Congress office. It will
be good if both of them join the Congress and work there. I do not
know what the situation in the Congress at present is and so I am
sending you this note. Kevalram has lived in the Ashram. I have
known him for many years. His father is the Dewan of Vadhwan.
Nirmala is the daughter of the late renowned Kevalram Dave of Kathiawar. At one time there was a plan for me to undertake the
responsibility of bringing her up in S.A. But just then Bhai passed
away and I lost his son. Similarly Nirmala and others were also lost to
me, and Kevalrambhai’s aspiration remained unfulfilled. Bhai’s sons
could not be recovered but the lady, it would seem, can now be
reached. This is the reason I have been cultivating her and Kevalrambhai for some years now. I have written this so that you know with
whom you have to deal.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1
2

210

The addressee got the letter on April 28, 1930.
Vide “Extracts from speeches in Surat District”, 6-4-1930.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

211. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS BIRLA
JALALPUR,

April 28, 1930
BHAI RAMESHWARDASJI,

I have your letter. I know your love for khadi. That is why I
hesitate to offer comments on your scheme. However, I must tell you
that your scheme is not workable because the mill-owners will not give
up their interests.
For many matters Government aid is essential; it will never be
available for the boycott [of foreign cloth].
If the boycott can be successfully implemented by the efforts of
the mill-owners only, khadi need have no place in it. But I am
confident that boycott will be successful only with khadi.
This does not mean that mills have no place in the scheme at all.
The mills can take their proper place only by recognizing the worth
of khadi. According to the doctrine that various individual deities are
included in God, we destroy them by worshipping them separately
because they have no independent existence, and we do not reach God
either.
For all these reasons, the prosperity of the mills and the success
of foreign-cloth boycott lie in spreading the love of khadi and
increasing its production. Verb Sap.
Hope you will not find any difficulty in deciphering my handwriting.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From Hindi: C.W. 6184. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

211

212. LETTER TO NARAHARI PARIKH
April [28] 1 , 1930
BHAI NARAHARI,

I have just heard that Kaka has been arrested. In a way it is good
if he insists on being supplied the food which he requires, such as
milk, etc., and even fights for that purpose. Let me know what you
intend to do now.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I have explained to Khurshedbehn what to do in regard to that
Parsi liquor-booth owner. Women should undertake to picket his
booth. They should go to him in a procession. They should even pass
a resolution at a meeting. All this if Anasuyabehn approves.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9047

213. INTERVIEW TO “ THE BOMBAY CHRONICLE”
JALALPUR,

April 28, 1930
A raid on Government salt depots was inevitable, but the plan of
action was incomplete.
Asked if a raid on Dharasana salt depot was finally decided upon, Mahatmaji
said:

I have taken no final decision. I am praying for light.
In reply to a question if he would send intimation of the raid to the Viceroy,
Gandhiji observed:

I shall certainly not take the step without due intimation. If the
raid comes at all it will come very soon.
Asked how he proposed to carry out the raid if the police barred the entrance to
the salt pans. Gandhiji replied:

I do not know; but I shall know the way when the block stares
me in the face. When I talk about the raid I simply think audibly, as is
my wont. But so far as I can see the raid is inevitable.
The Bombay Chronicle, 29-4-1930
1

212

Kaka Kalelkar was arrested on this date.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

214. LETTER TO NARAHARI PARIKH
April 29, 1930
CHI. NARAHARI,

Why do you even entertain the suspicion that it is because you
are unfit to go there that I do not take you with me to Dharasana? Just
now, however, we will be exercising self-control if, instead of laying
down our lives in an attempt to seize the Dharasana [stocks of salt], we
refrain from such self-sacrifice and quietly do the task which has
fallen to our lot. At present your duty is to wait quietly by Imam
Saheb’s side. All the same, if I require you or think it necessary, I will
call you. If occasion demands, you may sacrifice yourself too as Kaka
has done.
Did you get my letter regarding Mahadev’s work? In it I have
analysed his action in great detail.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9048

215. SPEECH AT BILIMORA
April 29, 1930
Gandhiji addressing the meeting said he did not want to put the Indian States in
an awkward position either by making speeches or breaking the Salt Act. Let us first
of all settle everything with the British and everything that is to be done in the States
will be done later.

I would not ask you to break the salt law but I would certainly
appeal to you to adopt khaddar and carry on a vigorous campaign
against liquor. You could participate in the two items of boycott of
foreign cloth and liquor shops. Liquor trade has ruined our labour
class and it is the duty of every citizen, be he a State subject or a
British subject, to save them and ladies alone can successfully
bring about that change of heart among the drunkards, which is so
essential.
There is an impression in certain circles that I am starting
picketing against Parsi owners of liquor shops only but that is not a
fact. Picketing is to be against liquor-shop owners of all communities:
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

213

Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs and others. Parsis are like my brothers.
I would like to picket even Englishmen’s liquor shops, but at
present I am afraid to do so. They would not like to be our brothers
but would prefer to be our masters.
We will not get swaraj by non-violent means if we do not drive
away the evil of drinking from amongst us. We do not want a
drunkard as our President during swaraj nor do we want him as a
voter. We must destroy that cup of Satan wherever it is found.
In the end Gandhiji asked them to settle their disputes by arbitration.

The Bombay Chronicle, 30-4-1930

216. VEILED MARTIAL LAW 1
[BILIMORA ,

April 29, 1930]
The revival in the form of an ordinance of the Press Act that was
supposed to be dead was only to be expected, and I observe that in its
new form the Act contains additional provisions making the whole
piece more deadly than before. Whether we realize it or not, for some
days past we have been living under a veiled form of martial law.
After all, what is martial law if it is not the will of the commanding
officer for the time being? The Viceroy is that officer, and wherever
he considers it desirable he supersedes the whole of the law, both
common and statute, and imposes ordinances on a people too submissive to resent or resist him. I hope, however, that the time for tame
submission to the dictation from British rulers is gone for ever. I hope
that the people will not be frightened by this ordinance. The Press
men, if they are worthy representatives of public opinion, will not be
frightened by the ordinance. Let us realize the wise dictum of
Thoreau that it is difficult under tyrannical rule for honest men to be
wealthy. And if we have decided to hand over our bodies without a
murmur to the authorities let us also be equally ready to hand over
our property to them and not sell our souls. I would, therefore, urge
1

This formed the basis of an interview to The Bombay Chronicle and was
published with the following note: “Below is given the full text of Gandhiji’s
statement on the Press Act that has already appeared in a more or less mutilated form
in the various English Papers.”

214

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Press men and publishers to refuse to furnish securities, and if they are
called upon to do so, either to cease publication or to challenge the
authorities to confiscate whatever they like. When freedom is actually
knocking at our door and when for the sake of wooing it thousands
have suffered tortures, let it not be said of the Press representatives that
they were weighed and found wanting. They may confiscate type and
machinery, they will not confiscate pen and still less speech, but I
recognize that they can succeed in confiscating even these last two.
But what they will never succeed in suppressing and what is after all
the thing that matters is the thought of the nation and at the present
moment there is hardly a man or woman breathing in India who with
every breath does not breathe in disaffection, sedition, disloyalty and
whatever other term one may use to describe the mentality of the
nation which has set its mind on destroying the existing system of
Government.
Young India, 8-5-1930

217. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
April 29, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

I was unable yesterday to send you anything though I fully
intended. But I worked till midnight to finish Y. I. Now these lines
whilst I am in the train.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5394. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9628

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

215

218. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
April 29, 1930
BHAI SATIS BABU,

Your letter caused me much pain, Today I have had a letter
from Krishnadas too. I am enclosing it with this. He seems to be
somewhat lacking in sense. I had never thought Krishnadas could
harbour deliberate malice. Look him up and have a talk. I have
written to him too. Is it not a part of our struggle to try to overcome
our differences? Write in English if you find any difficulty in
expressing yourself in Hindi. At present it is essential that we
understand each other well. If Hindi is not adequate we must make do
with English. If you have sufficient time then write both in English
and Hindi.
Do you feel any after-effects of the fast? Please ask Hemprabha
Devi to write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1618

219. INTERVIEW TO “THE LEADER”
BILIMORA ,

April 29, 1930
I need hardly say I join the chorus of congratulations that has
been showered upon Mr. Vithalbhai Patel on his resignation which
was daily expected by many of us, especially after the deliberate
withdrawal by perhaps the oldest living servant of the nation, I mean
Pandit Malaviyaji, who, braving hostile criticism, had stood by
Government even during the sunniest days of non-co-operation in
1921 and refused to leave the Legislative Assembly.
The Leader, 2-5-1930

216

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

220. MESSAGE TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI1
[On or before April 30 ,1930] 2
It is good that our hands and feet are tied so that we sing with
joy, ‘God is the help of the helpless’.3
The Illustrated Weekly of India, September 24-30, 1978, p. 39

221. STATEMENT ON POISONING OF SALT-BED
JALALPUR,

April 30, 1930
Since the repudiation, after further and careful investigation my
informant sticks to the statement that he made to me. I had the
samples analysed, and the result of all my investigation is that there
certainly was some tampering with the salt-bed in question. Whether
the substance added rendered the salt poisonous or not I am unable to
say, but it certainly contaminated it. The sudden change in the complexion of the bed and the colour of the water are absolutely beyond
question. What then remains to be proved is, whether this change
happened through human agency or a superhuman one, and if
through a human agency, whether it happened through that of the
Government or some other. Seeing that Government officials have
been tampering with salt-beds, destroying them by mixing mud in
them and otherwise, the burden of proof rests on their shoulders that
there was no contamination produced so as to render the salt unfit for
human use.
The Hindu, 4-5-1930

1

In reply to the addressee’s letter regarding the order of the Madras
Government permitting the collector of Tanjore to prosecute the satyagrahis
breaking the salt law in the South
2
The addressee had been arrested on April 30, 1930, during the Vedaranyam
Salt Satyagraha.
3
A Tamil proverb, written in the Tamil script by Gandhiji
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

217

222. CONGRATULATIONS TO DELHI JOURNALISTS
NAVSARI,

April 30, 1930
I am delighted at the brave gesture of the Delhi newspapers, 1
which have been served with peremptory orders under the Press
Ordinance to furnish security. It would have been terrible if on the
very first application of the Ordinance important newspapers had
weakly submitted to the insult embodied in the Ordinance. I hope that
the refusal to conduct their newspapers under security is permanent
and that other newspapers will follow the courageous example set by
the Delhi editors and publishers.
The Bombay Chronicle, 1-5- 1930

223. LETTER TO NARAHARI PARIKH
April 30, 1930
CHI. NARAHARI,

Qureshi is required in Chikhli only in order to work among the
Muslims. You can send him after a few days.
It would not be wise just now to start disobedience of the
mahura law. The three things which we have taken up are enough.
And now the Government’s Press Act will provide further
opportunities. Chhotelal is going there. Use his services.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9049

1

218

They had decided to suspend publication as a mark of protest.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

224. LETTER TO NARAHARI PARIKH
April 30, 1930
CHI. NARAHARI,

As Imam Saheb is ill, you should not call him to the office. Let
him remain in the Ashram and give his decisions from there. When it
is absolutely necessary for him to go to the city, he should go in a car.
You should save his energy in other ways, too. We can make no
change now till he becomes altogether incapable of work. Have you
all considered what you should do in that contingency? It seems to me
that you yourself will have to assume charge of the affairs. But I
cannot judge. How can I know the present circumstances there? Do
what all of you think proper. What about Balubhai?
Maganbhai will meet you and give you the message about
Navajivan. Hence I do not write about it here. If I am arrested, Mohanlal should become both the Editor and the Publisher. How is
Kamalnayan?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9050

225. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
April 30, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN,

Kaka writes to say that with his arrest you may become more
fidgety. It is his considered view that for you sacrifice consists in
remaining behind in the Ashram. I agree with him. Bear everything in
patience. To preserve one’s peace of mind even in the midst of a
conflagration is also an art, it is a form of sadhana 1 .
Blesings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 8748. Courtesy: Gangabehn Vaidya

1

Spiritual effort

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

219

226. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
April 30, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I will not mind your living on gram and puffed rice, if you can
keep fit on that diet. But do not deceive yourself. Give the body the
food it requires and keep it fit for service.
If you wish to come and bring with you the girls and the women
who have not visited me, you may certainly come. Not that your
coming will do any good, for you will have to run back as soon as
you come.
Relationships depending on the body are noxious. They are as
transitory as a mirage. Why should we be blindly attached to them?
Through physical life, we should cultivate a relationship of the soul
and know that it never ends, that it alone can be pure and free from
ignorant attachment.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 8747. Courtesy: Gangabehn Vaidya

220

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

227. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
[April 30, 1930] 1
CHI. VASUMATI,

I was in fact expecting a letter from you. It is 10 p.m. now. I will
not, therefore, write more. Kamalabehn also should write. It will be at
least a week before we start on the march. Come before that.
Blessings from

BAPU
S MT. V ASUMATIBEHN
S ATYAGRAHA C AMP, B HIMRAD
Via S URAT
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 544. Courtesy: Vasumati Pandit; also S.N.
9280

228. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
[April 1930] 2
CHI. MANI,

I have your letter. Yesterday I could not after all write the note
you had asked for. Now you will surely go. I enclose the note
although it is unnecessary.
See that you act in a manner worthy of yourself, of Father and
of me. Try to read and understand the Gita as well as some Gujarati
books.
Write to me regularly. Inquire into the report about the
poisoning of salt-beds in Kheda and let me know.
Blessings from

BAPU
C HI . M ANIBEHN P ATEL
NADIAD

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro — 4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 70

1

From the postmark
From the reference to poisoning of salt-beds it appears the letter was written
in April 1930.
2

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930-22 AUGUST, 1930

221

229. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
April 30, 1930
CHI. JAMNADAS,

I have your letter. You need not have given your name. I think
they will not arrest Khushalbhai1 . It will be befitting if he is
accompanied by a batch of volunteers. He should consider this. They
may stop his pension for participating in civil disobedience. In my
view it would be good if they did. The greater their tyranny the
sooner they will go. If, however, he does not have the courage to
forgo the pension, he should give up the idea of joining civil disobedience. For the rest, at the present moment civil disobedience has
come to be the supreme duty for everyone. I have no doubt about it.
If he is not arrested when he gets down at Viramgam, he may as
convenient to him go to Lakhtar or any other place where there is a
satyagraha camp, and then return home. When another occasion arises
he mayagain offer civil disobedience and may even face bullets if
occasion arises. In other words, he should be ready for everything. He
may, however, do all this only if Dev Bhabhi2 is agreeable. In any case
we all have his blessings and that is sufficient. You may come any
time you wish.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati; Chhaganlal Gandhi Papers. Courtesy: Sabarmati
Sangrahalaya

1
2

222

Addressee’s father
Dev Kunvar, addressee’s mother
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

230 LETTER TO HARIBHAU UPADHYAYA
KARADI

April 30, 1930
BHAI HARIBHAUJI,

Bapu has received your letter. He has asked me to write that Kashinathji may
well join you if Ramnarayanji can conduct the Hindi Navajivan by himself. So please
write to him. It is very likely that Ramnarayanji may have to share some work of
Young India and Navajivan on account of Mahadevbhai’s arrest. Maybe he will be
unable to manage all the work by himself.
Respects from
KANTI
From the Hindi Original: Haribhau Upadhyaya Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

231. PLEDGE FOR SWARAJ WORKERS
[April 1930] 1
We, the undersigned, join in the fight for Purna Swaraj and, till it
is won, we will not take up any work other than what is assigned to us.
From Gujarati: C.W. 8108. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

1

In Bapuna Patro-9: Shri Narandas Gandhine this is placed between letters of
26-4-1930 and 3-5-1930.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

223

232. LETTER TO AMINA QURESHI
10.30 p.m., Thursday [On or before May 1, 1930] 1
CHI. AMINA,

You know very well the reason why I have not asked you to go
out and work. Do not worry. You may do whatever you can staying at
home. You may freely write to me anything you wish to. Imam Saheb
will soon be in jail. He will probably get there earlier than I do. May it
be so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4294. Courtesy: Hamid Qureshi; also
G.N. 6649

233. MAHADEV DESAI AND HIS SUCCESSOR
I have hardly time to notice arrests and imprisonments even of
eminent Indians. I do not even come to know of them immediately.
Being constantly on the move and living in a village, often
twenty-four hours elapse before I know some of the important events.
Happily it is unnecessary for me to know them. When many important
persons act as one man and undergo suffering and when many important events take place at the same time, both become common things
and it is a happy sign. We take no notice of the myriads of sunbeams
each as important as the sun itself. We pay homage to each when we
worship the sun which is the crowning act of the simultaneous action
of the beams. Even so do we worship daily the ever-waxing sun of
India’s freedom which is in the process of formation.
But I must take notice of Mahadev’s conviction. In themidst of
1

224

This was the last Thursday before Gandhiji was arrested on May 5.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

chaos going under the false name of Government, Mahadev’s arrest
was a courteous and reluctant business on the part of the authorities.
Though he set ablaze the whole of Gujarat from Viramgam and
Dholera to Ahmedabad, the authorities recognizedthat it was a
life-giving fire, that they were safer under Mahadev’s rule than their
own and that he was well able to control the forces he had brought
into being.
But Mahadev made it impossible for the authorities to keep him
free. He had managed to “smuggle in” a lorry load of salt from
Dholera. The authorities were wide awake. They intercepted the lorry.
They had hoped not to find Mahadev in it. But when he saw that the
lorry was to be arrested together with its precious load, he got out of
the car in which he was following and jumped into the lorry. And so if
they were to arrest the lorry they could not help arresting him. Nor
could Mahadev help jumping into the lorry in the circumstances. With
him was a youth who was to have appeared for his final L.L.B. the
following day; two were young men from the Gujarat College and two
were sons of wealthy men. The lorry was given by Sjt. Ranchhodlal, a
mill-owner who, when warned what might befall the lorry, said, “What
fear about the loss of the lorry when I am prepared to lose all for
swaraj?”
Mahadev has got his well-deserved rest. For hundreds of
strenuous workers the jail has become a resting house. Mahadev
yearned as he says after “ a better fate but evidently had not yet
deserved it”.
He has appointed as his successor Imam Saheb Abdul Kadir
Bawazeer, a comrade from South Africa and Vice-Chairman of the
Ashram Committee and one of its trustees. Imam Saheb is an elderly
man hardly capable of strenuous labours. He may be said to be
illiterate. But he is a seasoned soldier and son of a devoted Muslim
who was till the time of his death muezzin of the Juma Musjid of Bombay. He is himself styled Imam because he officiated as priest in
several mosques in South Africa. He is an orthodox Mussalman in the
sense that he never misses his prayers or his fasts. But he is also most
liberal-minded or he could not have lived with me in the closest
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

225

contact in the midst of all sorts of people for an unbroken period of
nearly twenty years.
But the swaraj of my—our—dream recognizes no race or
religious distinctions. Nor is it to be the monopoly of lettered persons
nor yet of moneyed men. Swaraj is to be for all, including the former,
but emphatically including the maimed, the blind, the starving toiling
millions. A stout-hearted, honest, sane, illiterate man may well be the
first servant of the nation as Imam Saheb has become in Gujarat and
another still less known friend, by name Abdullabhai, has become in
Ville Parle. He is the successor of Swami Anand who by his
inexhaustible energy and amazing self-denial made Navajivan
Karyalaya, though a purely philanthropic institution, also a sound
business proposition which has been bringing to the doors of the
Gujaratis the truest gems of Gujarati literature understandable by the
masses. But these are not rare instances. These are typical of what the
struggle has thrown up all over India. The Government is making its
last desperate effort to retain India as the milch cow of the White
Islanders in the far off West. But selfless servants of the nation will no
longer permit the rape of the cow at the expense of her three hundred
million children.
Young India, 1-5-1930

226

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

234. TO CORRESPONDENTS
My correspondence accumulates daily. I have purposely
deprived myself of much assistance. Seasoned workers have been
better occupied. It is therefore impossible for me to cope with the correspondence from day to day. I have invited co-workers whom I have
sent away to different parts of the country to keep me duly informed
of their doings. They naturally expect at least an acknowledgment. I
find however that I am unable even to do that. The fact is that I should
be regarded as a half prisoner permitted to receive letters but
prevented from writing in reply except occasionally. Presently I shall
be a full prisoner if not something higher. Therefore when
fellow-workers and others do not receive letters from me they should
know that I have had no time to write to them.
Young India, 1-5-1930

235.GOONDA RAJ
If what is going on in Gujarat is any indication of what is going
on in other parts of India, even Dyerism pales into insignificance. This
may appear to be an exaggerated statement. But it is meant to be
literally true. The massacre of Jallianwala was a clean sweep. It created
an impression both in the intended and the unintended sense.
The death by inches that is being dealt out in Gujarat is
unimpressive either way, and may, if care is not taken, prove utterly
demoralizing. It may weaken the victims and decidedly debases the
tyrants.
If I have the time I shall summarize the events of the past week
for these columns. In any case the reader will find the whole of the
evidence in the daily press.
Mahadev Desai had hugged the belief that after the efforts he
made by going there himself and sending lawyer friends, the
barbarous torture had ceased at Viramgam. But it was not to be. A
volunteer was for a few minutes isolated from his company, and this
gave the representatives of law and order an opportunity of falling
upon their victim and treating him as his predecessors had been
treated at Viramgam.
This is what Dr. Narsinhbhai Mehta, a retired Chief Medical
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

227

Officer of Junagadh, who at the age of 66 was enthused with the spirit
of satyagraha, saw with his own eyes:
I brought a party of about 120 satyagrahis, each with a bag of ten lb. of
contraband salt from Wadhvan Camp this evening.
As I led the party, I was the first to meet the inspecting party consisting of
one European officer, two Indian officers and about 4 or 5 police constables. Over and
above this there were about fifty spare constables watching the entrance of the
staircase.
I was asked what I had got in the bag under my armpit. I replied, “Ten lb. of
contraband salt.” “All right, old doctor, you can go,” they said. I said, “I am leading a
party of about 120 satyagrahis, each with a bag of such salt. So I want to see
personally how you deal with them, or whether you allow them to go freely just like
other passengers.” He said, “All right, you stand apart on one side, and watch.” One
by one the satyagrahis were made to pass through the said inspecting party and
immediately all the seven or eight of them, including the European officer, caught
hold of each resister and snatched the bag from the hands of the satyagrahi, handling
the resister most roughly. Almost every satyagrahi was treated likewise. It was a
disgraceful proceeding. I had a very high opinion of Englishmen all throughout my
life. This was the first experience of the kind during sixty-six years.
When I could bear the treatment no longer and expostulated, the officer said:
“Speak to the public outside about this and write to the papers!” And the whole
performance went on as before.

Mark the callousness with which Dr. Mehta’s entreaty was met.
It was a jolly performance for the British officer and his fellow-loyalists to indulge in the sport of dispossessing young men of
their precious possession. It was no use telling them that the victims
were not running away nor hiding anything. The law had to be respected without any waiting for the law’s delay on the part of its administrators.
But even this was nothing compared to the scenes enacted in the
Kheda district. I own that the brave sons and daughters of Kheda have
carried out fairly successfully the legitimate boycott of officials who
are no longer able to impose their will upon the people. They have
brutally struck a graduate and professor of the Gujarat Vidyapith who
had committed no offence, but who had gone simply to see what was
happening when he heard the beating. In the same district near Borsad
a few police supported by a local Thakore and his minions armed with
long armed sickles without notice put out the lights at a meeting and
mercilessly fell upon their victims. The audience consisted of Patidars
228

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and Rajputs who were fully able to defend themselves. But not a stone
was thrown, not a word was uttered. For the sake of discipline they
suffered. One man narrowly escaped death. Seven are still lying in a
hospital. Altogether thirty-five have been traced as having been
injured. This was a cowardly edition of Jallianwala.
Then take Ahmedabad. A liquor dealer finding his till empty
from day to day got so exasperated that he savagely attacked the
pickets one of whom lay senseless. The picketing was of the most
peaceful as acknowledged by everybody. There was not even any
demonstration. Only the names of those who visited this were taken
down by the pickets who knew them. The success of the picketing lies
in this case in moving the caste machinery which still works fairly
among the labouring classes.
Have the administrators of law and order done anything to
prevent this savagery? No. They have secretly enjoyed it. They are
welcome to the joy of it. Only let this be not called ‘law and order’.
Let it be called Goonda Raj.
The duty before the people is clear. They must answer this
organized hooliganism with great suffering. If they have the will and
the power, freedom is assured. Freedom is a fruit of suffering, licence
is born of violence. What we are all pining for is freedom that imposes
restraints upon itself for the sake of society. Licence imposes
suffering upon society so that it may enjoy exclusive privileges. This
is a Government of unbridled licence because it is a Government
whose chief, if not sole, aim is to exploit Indian society.
PS. Since writing the above I have almost identical pictures from
Balasore and Mathura. I reproduce them in full. Authorized
hooliganism is evidently India-wide or fast becoming so.
Young India, 1-5-1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

229

236. NOTES
THE S PEAKER’S R ESIGNATION

Vithalbhai Patel’s resignation does not come as a surprise upon
us. It would have been surprising if he had not resigned. By his
courage combined with impartiality, he won the affection of
Congressmen and commanded the admiration of opponents. I am
glad he recognizes that the way to serve the country is not through the
Asse-mbly. The legislatures are but a pawn in the game of
exploitation. Ostrich-like we hide our heads in the sand and refuse to
see what is plain as a pikestaff to the onlooker. Vithalbhai Patel’s
resignation is a severe blow to the prestige of the Government. His
firmness in the Chair was undoubtedly embarrassing to the
Government; his vacating it in the manner he has done is still more so.
F RONTIER P ROVINCES

When I marched to Dandi, friends in the Frontier Provinces had
offered to send some volunteers to help me. I sent them thanks in
appreciation of their offer but did not avail myself of it. How nice
perhaps it would have been if they had not actively participated in the
movement. Those who, not being sure of perfect non-violence being
observed, do not take an active part in the struggle are most assuredly
helping it. Those who wanting to serve take part in it and violence
results, as happened at Peshawar, are as assuredly harming the
movement. That the people in Peshawar meant well I have no doubt.
They are perhaps more impatient (if such a thing were possible) than I
am to win freedom. But nobody can get freedom today in this land
except through non-violence. We cannot get India’s freedom through
the way of violence; we are within reach of it if we would but keep up
non-violence to the end. The way lies not through the burning of
armoured cars and taking the lives of administrators of the
Government machinery; it lies through disciplined organized selfsuffering. I deeply regret the occurrences in Peshawar. Brave lives
have been thrown away without the cause itself being served.
NECESSITY OF F ULFILMENT

There is a great deal of bartering among us. The position taken
230

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

up by foreign cloth merchants is but a symptom of that spirit. They
want to give up foreign cloth trade only if they can do so without
suffering any loss. But patriotism does not admit of barter. People are
expected like Dattatreya to face death, like Kachalia in South Africa to
face compulsory insolvency, like the late Gopabandhu Das and others,
not known to fame, to face poverty and like the widow of Vithalbhai
of Ambheti to suffer the death of nearest and dearest ones. Therefore
the reluctance of foreign cloth merchants to suffer losses, in my
opinion, betrays want of real patriotism.
But the Delhi merchants contend that the local Congress
Committee has bound itself to stop picketing under certain conditions.
If that be so, the promise has to be fulfilled at any cost. If the word of
a Congressman or a Congress organization cannot be relied upon, we
shall ultimately lose the battle. Satyagraha means insistence on Truth.
Breach of promise is a base surrender of truth. I have therefore
advised the parties, if they cannot agree as to the text of the promise, if
any, to refer the matter to arbitration.
I understand too that in Delhi, they have resorted to mixed
picketing. I have suggested that it should be confined only to women.
It does not matter if picketing is suspended for want of sufficient
women pickets. Every occasion for violence must be avoided. Men
can produce by careful propaganda and production of khadi an
irresistible atmosphere for the boycott. But picketing wherever it is
done must be confined to women.
R ASHTRIYA S TREE S ABHA

This body has now formed a sub-association whose sole object
is to do the work of the two boycotts—liquor and foreign cloth. It has
made a public appeal for funds. I have no doubt that it will receive
greater public support than hitherto. The public should know that the
ceaseless workers in this association are the G.O.M.’s grand-daughters. His spirit is watching over their devotion and India’s work with
pride and satisfaction.
F ROM OVERSEAS

I have had cables from Mexico, the Phillippines, South Africa,
East Africa and elsewhere wishing the cause success. I have purposely
refrained from publishing them, not out of ungratefulness, but
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

231

because I know that valuable as the wishes of other people are, what
will decide the issue will be our own wishes and consequent action. If
our action is correct the good wishes of the whole world will be
with us if they are not already. Nevertheless I must reproduce the
two following messages as they are from English friends. It is the
conversion of England that civil resisters are aiming at. I have enough
criticism from England, some of which I have published in these
pages. It gives me pleasure therefore to publish good wishes of some
English friends.
DEAR MAHATMA GANDHI,

We the undersigned members of the Executive of the War Resisters’
International are watching with intense interest the progress of your campaign
in India. In accordance with the principles of the War Resisters’ International
we believe in the possibility of overthrowing imperialism by pacifist means
and we rejoice that you are relying upon the method of non-violence.
We send you our love and sympathy in the hardships and difficulties
which you will undoubtedly have to face and assure you that we will do our
best, by propaganda in whatever circles may be open to us, to assist you in
your fight for truth and justice.
Yours sincerely,
A. FENNER BROCKWAY
HAROLD F. B ING
MARTHA STEINITZ
STEPHEN J. T HORNE
H. RUNHAM BROWN
May non-violence achieve success.
WOMEN ’S INTERNATIONAL LEAGUE FOR PEACE AND FREEDOM

WOMEN ’S APPEAL TO THE VICEROY

The appeal of the women of Gujarat made to the Viceroy,
printed elsewhere,1 deserves world-wide attention. The appeal has been
promoted by the Gujarati women only. For an all-India appeal much
time would have been required. But it is to be hoped that the action of
1

232

Vide “Draft letter to Viceroy”, 27-4-1930.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the Gujarati sisters will be copied by all the other provinces with such
changes as may be necessary. The organization has to grow naturally.
Therefore a variety may be invited. It would not matter, so long as the
central facts are allowed to remain intact. They are (1) no mixed
picketing, (2) Boycott of foreign cloth, not merely British cloth, and
this through khaddar.
Young India, 1-5-1930

237. QUESTIONS ANSWERED
Professor Syed Rauf Pasha caught hold of me when last I was in
Bulsar1 and asked me some pertinent questions on Hindu-Muslim
unity. At my request he reduced the questions in writing so that I
could give precise answers. The reader will find the questions and the
answers below:
Q. 1. You say that the present campaign is intended only to create the

necessary strength among the people to gain independence rather than to establish
independence. If you feel that Dominion Status on the basis of the Nehru Report will
create that strength, will you accept it when the Muslims feel that it would be only
Hindu strength rather than National strength that would be gained thereby?
A.

I should never feel that any grant can give us strength. In no
case could the Nehru scheme be revived or accepted if only because
the communal solution suggested therein does not satisfy those concerned in it and also because it does not stipulate for Independence as
it obviously could not at the time.
Q. 2. Do you consider the Ali Brothers to be sincere in differing from you over

the time of starting the disobedience of the salt law and over the question of
participation in the Round Table Conference; and that they were in no way influenced
by the British Government in the adoption of such an attitude?

A. I certainly consider the Ali Brothers to be sincere in what
they say. If I believed them to be insincere or capable of being
influenced by the British Government, I should never hope of their
being weaned from what to me appears to be a grievous error as my
action appears to them to be.
1

On April 26, 1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

233

Q. 3. Do you realize or not that the Ali Brothers still have a great following

among the Muslim masses throughout India and who would swell your ranks
tomorrow if only the Ali Brothers assure them that such a step will not be detrimental
to their interests?
Further, don’t you think that even the Ali Brothers with all their
influence were and still are powerless to dispel their suspicion of the Mahasabha
Hindus just as you were and still are powerless to carry the Hindu community with you
in the settlement of the communal question although your leadership in other matters
is not questioned?
A.

How can it be otherwise? Their record of service will always
secure for the Ali Brothers a following among the Muslim masses.
There is no doubt therefore that their coming would mean additional
strength to the cause.
Deep-rooted suspicions cannot be dispelled by leaders however
influential they may be.
Q. 4. Do you think that Muslims specially of the N.W.F. Province and

Malabar are sufficiently trained for non-violent fight as the Hindus specially of
Gujarat are; and do not past recent occurrences in these provinces impress on you the
necessity of stopping such unprepared provinces from immediate participation until
such organization is complete and that otherwise there would be an unnecessary loss
of Muslim life?
A. I have repeatedly warned those provinces that are unprepared
for strict non-violence against participation in the struggle. It is quite
enough if they can give their sympathy.

Young India, 1-5-1930

234

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

238. LIQUOR AND PARSIS
Several Parsi friends seem to be under the apprehension that
liquor picketing is to be confined only to Parsi liquor dealers. This is
wholly a misconception. Picketing is now going on all over India in a
more or less organized fashion. And in the parts other than Gujarat
there are more Hindu dealers than Parsis. Even in Gujarat the thousands of toddy trees that are being uprooted belong overw-helmingly to Hindus. Toddy booths owned by Hindus are certainly to be
picketed on a most extensive scale. Organized picketing, it should be
remembered, has only just commenced. In my speeches I have made a
pointed appeal to Parsis because there is an indissoluble bond between
them and me and because they are the most advanced and organized
community in all India and therefore more readily ame-nable to
reason. They read newspapers. Parsi liquor dealers attend my meetings, whereas Hindu dealers are too ignorant to do so. The latter can
only be reached by personal visits made to them in their own booths
or homes. Indeed the response I am getting from Parsi friends is quite
encouraging, though not yet adequate. It is a Parsi sister—Mithubai
Petit—who, assisted among others by a Parsi pleader, is org-anizing
picketing in the Surat district. Behram Mehta and Dhanjisha Darbari
have gone to jail in the same cause. They were ostensibly arrested for
breach of salt laws, but I have a suspicion that they were arrested for
the possibility of their undoubted influence spreading among liquor
dealers. Anyway, they were engaged in the anti-drink work as much as
the Salt Satyagraha. It was a matter of joy to me too that some Parsi
liquor dealers who came to me the other day went away satisfied to
find that I had fully the intention of picketing toddy booths just as
much as liquor shops. One complaint was that we were leaving alone
the liquor shops in the adjacent Baroda territory. The charge is true.
But I am hoping that the Baroda State people will organize the
picketing of Baroda canteens. Prohibition is first and foremost a
moral reform. The Indian States are as much interested in it as the rest
of India. The States’ people may take up this reform, and ought to do
so.
The friends who saw me raised also the question of their living.
It is here that the Parsis as a community have to step in to find a
solution. Parsi associations can prepare statistics and organize bureaux
for the employment of those who would need relief when the only
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

235

source of their income is gone, as it ought to have long ago. It cannot
be a matter of pride that this great community has so many of its
members living on an immoral traffic.
Young India, 1-5-1930

239. ‘TRIUMPH OF NON-VIOLENCE’
Who does not know Shri Rajendra Prasad? He writes from
Patna: 1
The more I become aware of the present trend in the country
the more I am convinced that people have fully learnt the lesson of
peace. There is still something lacking to be sure. But if people are
peaceful and fearless to the end swaraj is not far away.
There are three prerequisites for swaraj: purity, fearlessness and
work. Giving up of liquor and other intoxicating things is a sign of
purity. Through civil disobedience of the salt law people are learning
the lesson of fearlessness. When the charkha or the takli has become
universal one can say that people have become industrious. The
economic gain from these things is of course there. Giving up of
liquor, etc., will save us Rs. 25 crores. Abolition of the salt tax will save
at least Rs. 6 crores and the takli through the manufacture of khadi,
Rs. 60 crores.
May God grant the people of this country strength to do all this.
[From Hindi]
Hindi Navajivan, 1-5-1930

1

The letter is not translated here. Rajendra Prasad had described how events in
Patna had ended in a procession of about 15,000 being taken out on April 23 and how
in the face of police violence the huge assembly had remained wholly peaceful and
disciplined. He had called it a triumph of non-violence.

236

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

240. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
May 1, 1930
MY DEAR WHITE BEARD,

I had your letter. Kheda has become the storm centre. It is there
that the danger exists. You will please keep the boycott clean and
absolutely free of any compulsion. The little underlings ought not to
be molested in any way. And I feel that you should transfer yourself
to where the Thakore of Dehvan is residing. If you are satisfied about
the atrocities, let me have a brief statement for publication. Try to see
the Thakore if it is at all possible. Who is this Foujdar Munshi?
I am writing this in a moving train. Going to Hamida’s seat of
action and looking forward to seeing her.
Love.
Yours,

M. K. G.
From a photostat: S.N. 9572

241. LETTER TO NARAHARI PARIKH
Unrevised

May 1, 1930

CHI. NARAHARI,

Getting used to ‘Chi.’ will take me some time.1
1 There should be no boycott of petty police officials.
Provisions, etc., should be freely supplied to them.
2. But they should be disobeyed when they come as policemen.
Any services demanded by them as policemen should be refused.
3. Big officers should not be asked to vacate the houses in
which they may be living.
4. In spite of the boycott, our relations with those boycotted
should be happy. If they become bitter, take it that there is hatred in
the boycott.
It is not the officials, but their authority that we boycott. We
boycott not Dyer, but Dyerism. We should examine our attitude by
putting ourselves this question: “How would I behave with the officer
1

Gandhiji first wrote “Bhaishri 5” and then struck it off.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

237

if he were my own brother?” For example, how do I behave with
Harilal? This will enable you to understand your attitude a little more
clearly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9051

242. EXTRACTS FROM SPEECH AT OLPAD
May 1, 1930
The Government has been testing us thoroughly by taking away
our leaders from us one by one. It believes that, deprived of our
leaders, we shall either hide ourselves in our homes or become violent.
What can be better for the Government than if we hide? If we do not
raise our heads, if we go on paying the land revenue year after year,
continue drinking liquor, buy salt at a rupee and a quarter a maund
and wear foreign cloth, the Government will want nothing more. On
the other hand, if we resort to violence it can stand it since the consumption of ammunition will then go up, the industry in England will
stand to gain, and its generals, captains and soldiers will have honours
and awards conferred on them. There is just one thing the
Government cannot put up with, and that is that we should refuse to
obey its laws and to submit to its authority.
We have not been true to our salt. That is why we disregard the
cloth made by the hands of our poor and virtuous brothers and sisters
and import cloth from abroad. Islam had a Caliph who was the
greatest among all the Caliphs. What did he tell the great governors
from Baghdad who had come dressed in silken robes? “Your Prophet
wore only coarse cloth. Where did you learn to wear such soft
garments?” Holy men in those days had such power that people
trembled before them. And this they did, not because they brandished
the sword, but because they wielded spiritual power. Now people,
whether Hindus or Muslims, tell me that they find khadi too coarse. I
laugh when I hear that, though, in truth, I ought to weep.
I have been told that in Surat when some of our sisters were on
their round, the owners of toddy booths behaved badly. Some even
threw clods of earth at them. I was ashamed to hear this. A man
should die before he insults such women or swears at them or lifts a
stone against them. What though the person behaving thus be a
238

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

drunkard? Haven’t drunkards their mothers and sisters? These women
do not go and abuse them. They only humbly entreat them. Is it a
crime to do so? Every man in this country should have the spirit in
him not to tolerate women being insulted. This does not mean that
one should lose one’s temper with the person who abuses them. But
how can any man have the audacity to abuse a woman or lift a stone
against her? He ought rather to pray: O God, may my hand come
unstuck before I commit such a crime.
Against whom can you raise your hand? Perhaps against a man
who attacks you, though even that is at present forbidden. To raise
one’s hand against a woman is cowardly. It is unthinkable. I hope no
Indian is behind these incidents. I hope the clod of earth fell
accidentally on some sister. I had believed that though there might be
wicked Indians, even they would observe some decorum. However,
even if a few women have their heads smashed as some men have had
theirs, we will not give up what we have undertaken in the name of
God. If it is the fate of our sisters to be beaten they will be beaten. But
let those who drink as well as those who sell liquor note that drinking
will soon be a matter of the past.
The way of the Raghus it has been ever,
Life may fail but a pledge never.

We all brothers and sisters have now learnt to recite this quatrain
and we are no actors in a play who only sing and do not act. Just as we
know that the salt law is as good as abolished, let us also have the faith
that the drink evil, too, will be gone.
Remember my humble prayer. I also want you to carry my
message—the message of an old man—to all concerned and to the
liquor-booth owners of Surat.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 11-5-1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

239

243. SPEECH AT RANDER
May 1, 1930
I appeal to Muslim friends to realize that at present we have
embarked upon a movement of self-purification. The time has not yet
come to divide the gains among ourselves. When that time comes, we
shall decide the share of each. If it is our misfortune to fight then, we
shall fight it out. But personally I believe that when that day comes,
there will be no need for us to fight. There will be no cause then for
mutual distrust or fear. At present our fight is directed mainly against
the salt tax. Such a tax is forbidden in Islam. Salt is a necessity for all.
The majority of Hindus and Muslims are poor people and the burden
of the tax falls on them. In Rander, however, we have millionaires and
multi-millionaires. They can see the facts if only they go with me into
villages.
Our second task is to banish foreign cloth. Everyone can see
from the accounts of the Spinners’ Association that because of this
movement we pay thousands of rupees to Muslim women and
weavers. The large number of women in Vijapur who earn a living
through this work and bless me are all Muslims. These poor women
have often wept when my workers could not supply them enough
slivers.
The third task is eradication of the drink evil. In which religion
is drinking not forbidden? In the course of my life I have mixed a
great deal with Muslims and attended many dinners given
by Muslim hosts. Muslims cannot but join the movement for ban-ishing liquor and other intoxicants from the country. Are those mill
workers not Muslims who picket liquor booths in Ahmedabad and
plead with proprietors and drink-addicts, patiently submitting to
assaults and abuses?
This is God’s work. He alone can do it who is ready to sacrifice
his life for it. Only he who is ready to dive into the sea can bring up
pearls from it. I only beg of my Muslim clients and other Muslims to
realize that this movement of self-purification is not a monopoly of
any community, and wish that all people shouldheartily join it. We will
see afterwards how to share the gains when the Government asks us
what we want. My prophecy about that day, however, is that we shall
then no longer think it necessary to fight, that one brother will invite
another to take anything he wants. We shall then have nobility among
us and the bargaining spirit will have disappeared. We have to do this
240

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

work in God’s name, in the name of the poor. Let all the communities
help in it and let the town of Rander, too, give all the help it can and
bring glory to its fair name.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 11-5-1930

244. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
[After May 1, 1930] 1
CHI. SUSHILA,

I have your letter. What is the name of the lady who is angry
with me? Send her here. Are all of you concerned with substance or
with unimportant details? I maintain good weight and sufficient
energy; what does it matter, then, whether or not I eat fruit? I have
kept a way open to permit me to start eating it again if it becomes
necessary to do so for my health. I have not taken a vow not to eat
fruit. But why should I if there is no need? I had read in a paper that
you go out to picket liquor booths.
To you all,
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1184. Courtesy: Sushila Gandhi; . also
G.N. 4772

1

According to Navajivan, 11-5-1930, picketing of liquor booths by
Ahmedabad women started from this date.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

241

245. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM GANDHI
May 2, 1930
CHI. PURUSHOTTAM,

I was in fact expecting a letter from you when I got one. If you
keep good health in the Ashram, you should stay either there or in
Vijapur. If you have overcome the fear of death, you should be
equally contented in all circumstances and go on doing the work
which may fall to your lot. I do not feel inclined at present to call up
here any of those who are left behind. If, however, you wish otherwise.
let me know.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 898. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

246. LETTER TO VITHALDAS JERAJANI
May 2, 1930
BHAISHRI VITHALDAS,

I got your letter. You have asked for someone to help you.
Maganbhai is going there. He is a very exact man in all matters. He
will prove very useful to you. I wish you all success.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9773

242

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

247. LETTER TO RADHA GANDHI
May 2, 1930
CHI. RADHA,

Mithubehn told me that you were eager to work with her. She
intends to entrust you with a responsible task. If you really wish to
work with her, I will not dissuade you. But Khurshedbehn also told me
that you wished to work with her. If you gave her your word first you
should work with her.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 8682. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri

248. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
May 2, 1930
CHI. KUSUM,

I have still not received the letter which you said in your
hurriedly-written last letter you would write.
I keep with this the two letters received from you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1798

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

243

249. LETTER TO JANAKIDEVI BAJAJ
May 2, 1930
CHI. JANAKIBEHN,

I got Madalasa’s letter today. I do not remember to have
received any from you. Why should I get angry? You seem to have
plunged into work there. I am glad that you are working with
Perinbehn.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2886

250. LETTER TO NARAHARI PARIKH
May 2, 1930
CHI. NARAHARI,

I do not know all the facts about the Headman. But why should
he try to defend himself ? If he has the necessary strength, he should
suffer whatever is done to him. But otherwise he may by all means
defend himself. I can conceive of only one situation in which a person
may defend himself, and that is when a false allegation is made against
him. Then he may, if he wishes, defend himself. In such cases,
however, only those who are on the spot can decide what is right.
Bhagavati tells me that there will be darkness there after you go.
There is no one, he tells me, who will give all his time to the work.
Think about this and let me know your view.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9052

244

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

251. LETTER TO SARALADEVI SARABHAI
May 2, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

I was very happy to see your signature on the letters about the
meetings. You know how much I value your signature.1
Shankerlal told me about your activities and I was glad to hear
it.
Ask Mridu to give me a report of her work.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11133. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

252. MESSAGE TO SAHU SABHA, BOMBAY
KARADI ,

May 2, 1930
I hope that the Sahu Sabha will receive support from all patriotic
non-Brahmins. The present struggle is intended to bring relief to
millions and not to any particular class or caste.
The Bombay Chronicle, 3-5-1930

1

Vide also “Draft letter to Viceroy”, 27-4-1930.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

245

253. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
May 3, 1930
MY DEAR K.,

Publish in the I.S.R.1 only. 2 You are doing bravely. If I.S.R.
refuses, let me know.
BAPU
S JT. J. C. K UMARAPPA
GUJARAT VIDYAPITH
AHMEDABAD
From a photostat: S.N. 10086 and 10087

254. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 3, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS

Bhai Sundaram was formerly an inmate of the Ashram. He has
the virtues suggested by his name. He had left the Benares University
and come to us. He will stay there for a few days. Cultivate his
acquaintance and introduce him to the others. I shall write about other
things after I get the mail.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8109. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

1

Indian Social Reformer
This sentence is not in Gandhiji’s hand but has been retained out of the four
alternatives typed on the postcard.
2

246

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

255. LETTER TO OCHCHHAVLAL PANDYA
May 3, 1930
BHAI OCHCHHAVLAL,

Bhai Kamalashankar is very keen to join the struggle. Earlier
you have encouraged your brother to take part in such activities. I
should like you to do the same now. Every family should take part in
this struggle.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: Kamalashankar Pandya Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

256. CERTIFICATE TO V. A. SUNDARAM 1
[About May 3, 1930] 2
V. A. Sundaram has been in touch with me since 1915 and was
in the Satyagraha Ashram for a long time from its foundation. He has
left the Benares Hindu University with Pandit Malaviyaji’s blessings to
join the Struggle. The best use that can be made of him and his wife3 ,
who is also with him in his decision heart and soul, is for both to go to
Tamil Nad and there to break the salt laws, to assist in organizing,
especially in his own district of Coimbatore, boycott of foreign cloth
through the takli and boycott of intoxicating drinks.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3207

1

The original bears no title. The G.N. register however, describes it as a
certificate.
2
It appears, this was written about the same time as the preceding item, in
which Gandhiji wrote to the same effect.
3
Savitri
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

247

257. TO THE PEOPLE OF KHEDA
In Gujarat at present the Kheda district seems to have become
the centre of our struggle. Nowhere else in Gujarat do we find the
same repression as in that district. There they arrest or release whom
they like, beat up or abuse all and sundry. People may be said to have
remained fairly quiet and peaceful in spite of provocation. But Kakasaheb observed some shortcomings also. People submit to the repression but in their severe boycott of the Government men there is
anger and ill will and hence violence. They harass the Government
officials in petty ways and call them names. This is not the way to
success. We may denounce bureaucracy to our heart’s content, but
not the men in office. The poor officer is like any of us. Time was
when, if not we, our own kinsmen wanted to be Headmen or
Mamlatdars and we flattered the Mamlatdars. Now that our love of
office is gone, how can we expect that theirs too should go? It is true
that it should go. We should humbly try to cure them of their
infatuation, and show them the evil that is there in the office of
Mamlatdar or Sub-Inspector of police, but in no way should we vent
our anger on a Mamlatdar or a Sub-Inspector of police. No matter
how severe our boycott, it should be full of sweetness and courtesy. If
it is not so, some day even a riot may break out. The Mamlatdar or the
Sub-Inspector may cross the limits of decency. One might say that the
Sub-Inspectors of Police have already crossed the limits, for I know
that one of them insulted a person like Maganbhai Desai and
manhandled him. Would it be surprising, then, if people should
similarly cross the limits? If some regard it decent not to go beyond
abusive speech, how can they blame others who draw the line at
slapping the former? And once violent hands are laid on another,
where will it all end? As things are still under control, it is time for the
Kheda people to take heed and change things wherever necessary.
Within the limits I have laid down, they are free to continue the
different boycotts they have put into effect. Let me mention those
limits. The reader should go through and understand Kakasaheb’s
article along with this. Let us take a Headman as an example.
If the Headman belongs to the village, he cannot be deprived of
his place of residence or denied provisions. The boycott should be
confined to his duties as Headman. That is, his orders should not be
carried out, not a drop of water demanded by virtue of his authority
248

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

should be given and no provisions demanded by him for the visiting
officials should be supplied. Should he, however, fall ill, we ought to
serve him lovingly. If we lack the power or the love to help him thus
we should give up the boycott altogether. Take it as gospel truth that
if any boycott proceeds from a feeling of malice or enmity it will
bring us no good, at any rate in our present struggle.
Some may say that this non-violence is a difficult thing. That is
true. And still non-violence is as easy as it is difficult. It is easy for
those who understand it. For others it is more difficult than even
flying in the air. It was because I was fully aware of this that I did not
include in our programme the boycott of officials. As the people
themselves took it up, I have let it go on and even encouraged it in my
speeches. But I have always mentioned the limits within which it
should be practised. Nothing will be lost and it is still not too late, if
the boycott is given up because the limits of non-violent boycott
cannot in practice be observed.
I ought to admit that I am unconcerned with defeat or success.
For I know that victory will come only with non-violence and that,
whatever the good results violent methods may seem to promise,
ultimately they will bring defeat. The ruddy cheeks of a tuberculous
patient are not a sign of health, but a portent of imminent death. This,
however, is not my whole story.
It does not surprise me that people cannot digest the nonviolence that requires them to suffer beatings without demur. And yet
that is what our original pledge contains. People have on occasion
done quite well. I know that when the Thakore of Dehvan in
complicity with the police made an attack on the people, the people
could have fought back but did not. There have been several other
occasions of the same kind, but people proved their fortitude by
remaining quite peaceful. They deserve to be congratulated on their
conduct. However, if they do not regard peaceful conduct as their
duty but remain peaceful reluctantly, such peace will not last long.
People will either begin to run away or fight back in self-defence, and
both these are forbidden in our present struggle. People can neither
run away nor fight back. The present struggle is one which requires us
to learn the secret of living by dying.
No one has ever said so far that there is no victory in store
for those prepared to face death. Some there are who doubt whether
the people have the capacity to die, but many no longer have that
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

249

doubt. It is possible to take the figures for the last World War and
show that our loss in men and money during the four weeks of this
struggle is only a fraction compared to that borne by each State
participating in the terrible war in Europe. And, moreover, we have
advanced. If our present struggle remains non-violent to the very last,
we shall win swaraj without having incurred, during our whole
struggle, the loss in men and money incurred in a single day of the
European War. After this there should be no room for doubt. And if
doubt goes, the necessary climate of public spirit is certain to
build up.
So much for social boycott.
Now about discipline.
If the volunteers lack the sense of discipline, we shall find
ourselves in a difficult position. In war discipline is everything. At the
time of the Crimean War, the officers of the British army committed
such blunders that vast numbers of soldiers were killed. The poor
soldiers went on obeying the orders given and met their death. The
stupidity of the officers has been forgotten, but the bravery of the
soldiers has been immortalized in the golden words of a famous poem
by Tennyson. This is how he enumerates the virtues of true soldiers:
Theirs not to make reply,
Theirs not to reason why,
Theirs but to do and die.

I feel that this is as it should be. It does not mean that the true
soldier suppresses his reason. Before a man enlists in the army he
should fully use his power of reason, know his commander and study
the rules of service. After this, if he discusses at every step the
sub-rules as and when they are framed, and if he weighs the pros and
cons of the orders issued, his time would be wasted in thinking and
arguing and the progress of work will be hindered. If every soldier
claims for himself the right to argue with the commander, the battle
might be lost. Therefore a soldier, having enlisted himself, should
suspend his reason. If after enlisting oneself as a soldier, one gives
free rein to one’s reason and indulges in arguments on the subject of
one’s duties, one’s reason will lose steadiness of purpose. That would
be misuse of reason.
Everyone in Kheda who understands this should carefully
observe our rules of discipline.
Carding and spinning are essential aspects of this discipline. The
250

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

volunteers who do not card and spin should leave this movement for
swaraj. Our motto is: ‘Swaraj through the thread of yarn.’ To those
who have accepted the motto, it is no longer a subject of discussion,
but a duty to be practised. No matter if spinning does not seem
necessary as part of the Salt Satyagraha; it is essential as part of the
swaraj movement. True the salt tax has not been removed; our
struggle, however, is not merely for its abolition but for winning our
freedom.
Just as carding and spinning are essential, so is being clad in
khadi from head to foot. This goes without saying.
The people of Kheda have been evincing boundless enthusiasm.
If that enthusiasm is pure and non-violent, the peaceful activity of
spinning is both its sign and its food. Quiet enthusiasm is always
constructive, and its opposite begins and ends only as a wave of
excitement.
I have one thing in particular to add. Not only Raas, but other
villages also have taken the pledge of non-payment of land revenue. I
like this pledge. Those who keep it will make a name in Indian history
as heroes. But the consequences of the pledge need to be considered.
The person taking the pledge should be ready to let go his land,
his homestead and his cattle, and do it without resorting to violence
himself or through others. He who has faith that we shall get swaraj
will not let anything disturb him. He is prepared to lose his land and
his homestead. Even if he loses them now, he will have them returned
to him. The Government can never appropriate them for all time. But
those who lack such faith should at present take no risk at all of
non-payment of the land revenue. In the Congress programme at
present there is no mention whatever of non-payment of revenue, and
hence one who pays up the tax has nothing to be ashamed of.
However, the man who has self-confidence, who has the power to
endure suffering, who can make sacrifices for his country or his commander, such a person will, on his own responsibility, refuse to pay
land revenue. He has the right not to pay it.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan,4-5-1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

251

258. LAWYERS’ DUTY
I have never minced words in criticizing lawyers. Mahadev,
during his short reign, castigated them to his heart’s content. But the
lawyers did not misunderstand him. They saw that the shafts he aimed
at them were shafts of love. Though the lawyers deserve criticism, their
contribution to the fight for freedom is no mean one. Pherozeshah
Mehta, the uncrowned king of Bombay, was an eminent lawyer. The
Lokamanya was a lawyer. Manmohan Ghosh, Lalmohan Ghosh and
Lalaji, the Lion of the Punjab, all of them were lawyers. Deshbandhu,
who sacrificed lakhs in the service of the country, was also a lawyer.
Motilalji, Malaviyaji, Vithalbhai Patel, Sardar, Jairamdas, Rajagopalachari, Prakasam, Venkatapayya, Santhanam, Munshi, Kamdar,
Purushottamdas Trikumdas and Broker, all these are lawyers, and the
President of the Congress himself is a lawyer. This list is not exhaustive. I have mentioned only the names which occur to me at the
moment, but many others can be mentioned.
The lawyers have, therefore, no reason to feel ashamed of their
contribution, but there is none to feel elated either. If despite the
sacrifices of all these lawyers people speak ill of lawyers—even I have
done so—there is reason for that.
People expect every lawyer to be a patriot, as they expect every
Brahmin to possess spiritual knowledge. A lawyer, by his very
profession, is an advocate of people’s rights, an expert in law and
politics and one who saves the victims of oppression by the State.
When, therefore, a class of people who should regard service of the
country as their profession give themselves up to the pursuit of
self-interest, lead a life of self-indulgence or have no other aim than
making money by encouraging litigation, people naturally speak ill of
them. Though, taken absolutely, the number of patriotic lawyers
named above will not appear insignificant, if we have regard to the
total number of lawyers and the magnitude of their task, it will appear
small indeed.
Lawyers have not remained untouched by the present awakening. The sacrifices of Shri Munshi and other lawyers stem from
the present struggle. I see that lawyers who dare not or cannot give up
practice, still wish to do some service. I hear that many lawyers in
Bombay have stopped wearing hats and foreign clothes. Some lawyers
in Gujarat have come forward to investigate the cases of those against
252

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

whom atrocities are being committed. All this is welcome indeed. But,
leaving aside the question of their giving up practice, the important
thing is that they should come forward in large numbers to offer civil
disobedience and remain undeterred if the courts cancel their sanads.
They cannot betray the country for the sake of their sanads. If in
consequence of their doing national work they lose their sanads, they
should welcome this as if they had been cleansed of dirt. If lawyers
thus become fearless they can help the people of their districts in
many ways. If they shed fear, lawyers can
1. keep accounts of public funds;
2. explain legal intricacies to the people;
3. enquire into civil disobedience cases which have been
arbitrarily dealt with and bring them to light;
4. be present at places where there is fear of violence;
5. explain to the people all cases of arbitrary use of
authority;
6. enquire into injustices being perpetrated at present
and point out to the public the Government’s misdeeds;
7. help in manufacturing khadi;
8. help the women in bringing about boycott of foreign
cloth;
9. since in every province almost all the prominent
leaders have been arrested, lawyers can lead the people and
encourage the present spirit of fearlessness.
I have suggested these items only by way of illustration.
Those who are keen on doing service will think up many fields
in which they may do it.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 4-5-1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

253

259. NOTES
P ICKETING

The proprietor of a liquor booth in Ahmedabad thrashed innocent labourers who had committed no crime. In Surat, foul
abuses were hurled at women and clods of earth thrown at them.
In Jalalpur, they have started using filthy language towards women.
The women who endured all this deserve to be complimented.
But what about men? When women are abused, it is not necessary for
any man to come forward to fight on their behalf. One should not fall
into a panic when abused by a drunkard or the proprietor of a
liquor booth. All the same, men cannot remain idle in such circumstances. They should go and meet the proprietor, plead with him
courteously, collect people’s signatures on statements condemning
such conduct and publish them. The proprietors of liquor booths
should also realize that they ought not to insult women. I am convinced that, if every case of such misconduct is brought to people’s
notice in courteous language and public feeling in this regard is
explained to the proprietors, the latter will certainly desist from such
misconduct. They should wisely give up on their own a business
which is becoming less and less paying.
GIFT FROM A P ARSI GIRL

I reproduce below, without any change, the letter which a Parsi
girl has written to me.1
In just the same manner, Parsi children in Vapi gave Rs. 300 and
one little girl among them asked whether she might join the struggle.
When such innocent children show a desire for service, who can help
believing that they are prompted by God? I see no insincerity in these
girls.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 4-5-1930

1

The letter is not translated here. The girl, aged 7, had said she was sending
Rs. 10 as her contribution to the cause.

254

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

260. ATTACK ON PRINTING-PRESSES
I hope that no one will be frightened by the sword which the
Viceroy has hung over the printing-presses.
It is the duty of the people to criticize the bureaucracy. It is our
duty to wish that it be destroyed, to commit civil disobedience, to
persuade Government servants to give up their jobs and the recruits to
leave the army, and to persuade the people to refuse to pay taxes when
they have the strength to do that. And yet, under the Government’s
law, every one of these acts is an offence. The new Ordinance notifies
that the Government can seize any press which is guilty of any one of
these offences. Every editor and printer of a newspaper should regard
it as a sin to obey such a law. If at the present time, when the people
have shed fear and are committing civil disobedience of immoral laws,
editors of newspapers show weakness, they are bound to harm the
cause of the country.
Any press, therefore, which is served with a notice to furnish security should refuse to do so and prefer to close down the
paper instead. If all the presses act in this manner, the Government’s
Ordinance will remain unenforced.
In this struggle full advantage is being taken of the help which
newspapers can give, but it does not at all depend on such help.
People have realized their strength and know what they should do. So
there is little at present which newspapers can give them. We may not
get some news of distant places, but we can do without it. I hope,
therefore, that no press will furnish security. If people observe this
measure of self-restraint, they will find that the new Ordinance does
not remain in force for long.
Newspapers can be brought out hand-written and, if people now
feel a burning desire to work for the welfare of the country, countless
such newspapers can be brought out every day. If people really wish,
they can make thousands of copies of hand-written papers. For
instance, I may dictate the contents of one issue to fifty men at a time
and distribute the copies to fifty persons. The latter should then
produce fifty copies each with the help of their friends. We shall thus
have 2,500 copies. If these 2,500 copies repeat the process once again,
how many copies would we get? The poor at any rate would not
object to doing this. All that is necessary is to create such zeal in them.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 4-5-1930
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

255

261. CAUTION ABOUT KHADI
At the present time, when khadi is not easily available in the
market, traders who love neither their country nor their own good
name and whose only aim is to make money anyhow wish to secure
khadi of some sort from any source, and do not hesitate to pass off
mill-cloth as khadi, charging eight rupees for stuff worth two rupees.
Shri Shankerlal Banker writes as under so that khadi-wearers may save
themselves from such traders.1
I wholly agree with these views and I hope that no one will buy
cloth sold as khadi from any store not certified by the Spinners’ Association. Those who have fully understood the process by which
boycott of foreign cloth is to be brought about and know that the
boycott cannot succeed unless we produce khadi, should wait if khadi
is not available and should not, in their haste, let themselves be deceived and wear as khadi cloth which is not really khadi.
An effort is being made to stock khadi in khadi bhandars approved by the Spinners’ Association. If people follow the new method
which I have suggested, we shall have a huge pile of khadi in a few
days. Those who wear khadi should spin and persuade others to spin.
Those who are required to spin should not buy yarn from known
sources in the market, but should increase the number of spinners.
That is, they
1. should spin themselves;
2. should persuade their relations to spin;
3. should persuade their neighbours to spin;
4. should introduce new spinning-wheels in the neighbouring villages or persuade the residents to spin on the takli;
5. should induce pupils and teachers in schools under their
influence to spin.
I have merely mentioned a few of the possible fields in which
they can work. In this country of thirty crores, one can think of coun1

256

The letter is not translated here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

tless methods of inducing people to card and spin, and I have no
doubt that if all men and women who have some experience of this
work exert themselves, they will change the face of the country.
I appeal to greedy traders to exclude khadi from the sphere of
their operations. They should not sell khadi at all; or, if they sell it,
they should sell only pure khadi and be upright in their dealings. Let
it not be said of khadi that when it becomes scarce its price goes up.
When khadi has won its rightful place, there will be no scarcity of it.
Cotton will be grown in one’s own fields and the skill will be supplied
by the family; how, then, will there be any scarcity of khadi? Today
we do a business which cannot but ruin us. We have cotton in our
homes but we sell it away to foreign countries and, though we can
manufacture khadi with our own hands, we let the hands remain idle
and wear cloth imported from foreign countries. Let us, at this time of
national awakening and self-purification, give up our lethargy, work
hard and, with the help of khadi, make a perfect success of the
programme of foreign-cloth boycott.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 4-5-1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

257

262. KAKASAHEB
Kakasaheb has now followed Mahadev and it can be said,
therefore, that Navajivan has made a good contribution to the
struggle. Kaka, however, was connected recently more with the
Vidyapith than with Navajivan. He was its Principal, and so his imprisonment brings credit to the Vidyapith. The Vidyapith’s Chancellor is
in jail, its Principal is in jail; its graduates, its students and teachers are
candidates for imprisonment or for something better even than that.
Can there be any better measure than this of the worth of the
Vidyapith?
But a time is now coming when imprisonment, instead of
earning praise, will earn ridicule. When a thing becomes common, it
no longer requires compliments. That it is necessary to praise something is not a good sign. We desire that what we praise should
become common and, when it becomes so, we cease praising it. There
was a time when imprisonment was looked upon as deserving praise.
Now praise is given to people who are beaten by the police or who
face bullets. It is, therefore, probable that in a very short time people
who are imprisoned will be regarded with suspicion. They will say:
‘So and so was afraid of bullets and, therefore, courted imprisonment.’ We can sense such an attitude in the cases of Mahadev and
Kaka, and it is natural.
In truth we can go much further than this. No one should wish
to go to jail or be beaten or hanged. We should be ready to face all
that and more, if there is any ‘more’. If a man to whom being hanged
and being garlanded are the same does national work in his home, his
doing so has the same value as—or even greater value than—his being
hanged. There is great honour in being hanged. But ordinarily no one
honours a person who is busy writing day after day, his head bent low,
keeping accounts or courteously listening to people’s complaints and
helping them with advice. But often such work can have greater value
than facing death.
Kaka’s statement teaches something else too. The description of
the atrocities being committed in the Kheda district is honest testimony. It gives us some idea of the goonda rule which prevails there.
Kakasaheb was pained, and rightly, that some people ran away when
assaulted. If no one runs away in the face of a police assault, such
assaults will stop automatically. When we get such strength, we shall
258

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

soon get the strength to face bullets.
In his statement, Kaka has drawn our attention to one more fact.
Though there is an atmosphere of non-violence in the Kheda district,
everybody has not been able to assimilate the spirit of non-violence.
Kaka has drawn up the rules laying down the limits of social boycott
after observing the conditions in Kheda. Everyone should read them,
understand them and abide by them. There can be no malice or anger
in satyagrahi boycott.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 4-5-1930

263. TELEGRAM TO MOTILAL NEHRU
JALALPUR,

May 4, 1930
I

SUGGEST

THE

10TH

MEETING

THE

12TH

NO

DOUBT

AND

I

BEING
THE

SUGGEST

13TH

OR
OF

THE

MONDAY,
EARLIER
JALALPUR

THE
DATE

AS

THE

AS

THE

DAY

WORKING
DAY
WOULD

FOR

COMMITTEE,

OF

MY
BE

SILENCE.
BETTER

VENUE.

The Hindu, 6-5-1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

259

264. LETTER TO VICEROY
[May 4, 1930] 1
DEAR FRIEND,

God willing, it is my intention on . . . to set out for Dharasana
and reach there with my companions on . . . and demand possession
of the Salt Works. The public have been told that Dharasana is private
property. This is mere camouflage. It is as effectively under
Government control as the Viceroy’s House. Not a pinch of salt can
be removed without the previous sanction of the authorities.
It is possible for you to prevent this raid, as it has been playfully
and mischievously called, in three ways:
1. by removing the salt tax;
2. by arresting me and my party unless the country can, as I
hope it will, replace everyone taken away;
3. by sheer goondaism unless every head broken is replaced,
as I hope it will.
It is not without hesitation that the step has been decided upon. I
had hoped that the Government would fight the civil resisters in a
civilized manner. I could have had nothing to say if in dealing with
the civil resisters the Government had satisfied itself with applying the
ordinary processes of law. Instead, whilst the known leaders have been
dealt with more or less according to the legal formality, the rank and
file has been often savagely and in some cases even indecently assaulted. Had these been isolated cases, they might have been overlooked. But accounts have come to me from Bengal, Bihar, Utkal,
U.P., Delhi and Bombay confirming the experiences of Gujarat of
which I have ample evidence at my disposal. In Karachi, Peshawar and
Madras the firing would appear to have been unprovoked and unnecessary. Bones have been broken, private parts have been squeezed for
the purpose of making volunteers give up, to the Government valueless, to the volunteers precious salt. At Mathura an Assistant Magistrate is said to have snatched the national flag from a ten-year old
boy. The crowd that demanded restoration of the flag thus illegally
seized is reported to have been mercilessly beaten back. That the flag
was subsequently restored betrayed a guilty conscience. In Bengal
there seem to have been only a few prosecutions and assaults about
salt, but unthinkable cruelties are said to have been practised in the act
1

The letter was drafted on the eve of Gandhiji’s arrest. He was arrested at 12.45
a.m. on May 5.

260

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of snatching flags from volunteers. Paddy fields are reported to have
been burnt, eatables forcibly taken. A vegetable market in Gujarat has
been raided because the dealers would not sell vegetables to officials.
These acts have taken place in front of crowds who, for the sake of
Congress mandate have submitted without retaliation. I ask you to
belie-ve the accounts given by men pledged to truth. Repudiation
even by high officials has, as in the Bardoli case, often proved false.
The officials, I regret to have to say, have not hesitated to publish
falsehoods to the people even during the last five weeks. I take the
following samples from Government notices issued from Collectors’
offices in Gujarat:
1. Adults use five pounds of salt per year, therefore pay three annas per
year as tax. . . . If Government removed the monopoly people will have to pay
higher prices and in addition make good to the Government the loss sustained
by the removal of the monopoly. . . . The salt you take from the seashore is
not eatable, therefore the Government destroys it.
2. Mr. Gandhi says that Government has destroyed hand-spinning in
this country, whereas everybody knows that this is not true, because
throughout the country, there is not a village where hand-spinning of cotton
is not going on. Moreover in every province cotton spinners are shown
superior methods and are provided with better instruments at less price and are
thus helped by Government.
3. Out of every five rupees of the debt that the Government has incurred
rupees four have been beneficially spent.

I have taken these three sets of statements from three differ- ent
leaflets. I venture to suggest that every one of these statements is
demonstrably false. The daily consumption of salt by an adult is three
times the amount stated and therefore the poll tax that the salt tax
undoubtedly is at least 9 annas per head per year. And this tax is
levied from man, woman, child and domestic cattle irrespective of age
and health.
It is a wicked falsehood to say that every village has a
spinning-wheel, and that the spinning movement is in any shape or
form encouraged or supported by the Government. Financiers can
better dispose of the falsehood that four out of every five rupees of
the public debt is used for the benefit of the public. But those
falsehoods are mere samples of what people know is going on in
everyday contact with the Government. Only the other day a Gujarati
poet, a brave man, was convicted on perjured official evidence in spite
of his emphatic statement that at the time mentioned he was sleeping
soundly in another place.
Now for instances of official inactivities. Liquor dealers have
assaulted pickets admitted by officials to have been peaceful and sold
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

261

liquor in contravention of regulations. The officials have taken no
notice either of the assaults or the illegal sales of liquor. As to the
assaults, though they are known to everybody, they may take shelter
under the plea that they have received no complaints.
And now you have sprung upon the country a Press Ordinance
surpassing any hitherto known in India. You have found a short cut
through the law’s delay in the matter of the trial of Bhagat Singh and
others by doing away with the ordinary procedure. Is it any wonder if
I call all these official activities and inactivities a veiled form of
Martial Law? Yet this is only the fifth week of the struggle!
Before, then, the reign of terrorism that has just begun overwhelms India, I feel that I must take a bolder step, and if possible
divert your wrath in a cleaner if more drastic channel. You may not
know the things that I have described. You may not even now believe
in them. I can but invite your serious attention to them.
Anyway I feel that it would be cowardly on my part not to
invite you to disclose to the full the leonine paws of authority so that
the people who are suffering tortures and destruction of their property
may not feel that I, who had perhaps been the chief party inspiring
them to action that has brought to light the Government in its true
colours, had left any stone unturned to work out the satyagraha
programme as fully as it was possible under given circumstances.
For, according to the science of satyagraha, the greater the
repression and lawlessness on the part of authority, the greater should
be the suffering courted by the victims. Success is the certain result of
suffering of the extremest character, voluntarily undergone.
I know the dangers attendant upon the methods adopted by me.
But the country is not likely to mistake my meaning. I say what I
mean and think. And I have been saying for the last fifteen years in
India and outside for twenty years more and repeat now that the only
way to conquer violence is through non-violence pure and undefiled.
I have said also that every violent act, word and even thought
interferes with the progress of non-violent action. If in spite of such
repeated warnings people will resort to violence, I must disown responsibility save such as inevitably attaches to every human being for
the acts of every other human being. But the question of responsibility apart, I dare not postpone action on any cause whatsoever, if
non-violence is the force the seers of the world have claimed it to be
and if I am not to belie my own extensive experience of its working.
But I would fain avoid the further step. I would therefore ask
you to remove the tax which many of your illustrious countrymen
have condemned in unmeasured terms and which, as you could not
262

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have failed to observe, has evoked universal protest and resentment
expressed in civil disobedience. You may condemn civil disobedience
as much as you like. Will you prefer violent revolt to civil
disobedience? If you say, as you have said, that the civil disobedience
must end in violence, history will pronounce the verdict that the
British Government, not bearing because not understanding
non-violence, goaded human nature to violence which it could understand and deal with. But in spite of the goading I shall hope that
God will give the people of India wisdom and strength to withstand
every temptation and provocation to violence.
If, therefore, you cannot see your way to remove the salt tax,
and remove the prohibition on private salt-making, I must reluctantly
commence the march adumbrated in the opening paragraph of
my letter.
I am,
Your sincere friend,

M. K. GANDHI

Young India, 8-5-1930

265. LETTER TO DR. SYED MAHMUD
P. O. J ALALPUR,

May 4, 1930
DEAR DR. MAHMUD,

I was delighted to receive your frank letter. I would have been
disappointed if you had concealed your opinion.
I do not plead guilty. I was not indifferent. I was most
considerate to every Mussalman who came to me. I spent hours with
several who had come to see me. This is no matter to parade about. I
simply acted according to my wont. There was nothing special about
it. But with you I stood on no ceremony. I felt that it was no business
of mine to pay attention to you. I expected you to tackle me on any
and every point that called for criticism or alteration. You may not
know that to those who know me and whom I know and work with I
am most inattentive. In no other way can I possibly go through the
work before me. I wonder if I have made my point clear and given
you satisfaction. If not, please tackle me again.
I have not yet got your appeal which you said you were senVOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

263

ding. But I have seen a reference to it. Nevertheless I am concocting
some formula and if I succeed I shall publish it in Y. I.
I expect to see you at W.C.1 meeting if I am still free.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

[PS.]
This was written at three places: at the camp, in the train and
finally at Surat.
From a photostat: G.N. 5082

266. LETTER TO PADMAVATI
May 4, 1930
CHI. PADMAVATI,

I was very glad to read your letter. I do remember our
conversation. Keep the pledge which you have taken. Give yourself
wholly to the work there. Go outside and work fearlessly. If you do so
other women will also come out. Forget the difference between
Gujaratis, Madrasis, etc. Like Draupadi, have trust in God and give up
all fear.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4587

1

The Working Committee of the Congress; vide “Telegram to Motilal Nehru”,
4-5-1930.

264

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

267. LETTER TO SURAJBHAN AGRAWAL
KARADI ,

May 4, 1930
BHAI SURAJBHAN,

I have your letter. You all have my blessings of course. Keep
writing to me. Where is Yashoda Devi? What work are the ladies
doing? No doubt there are difficulties. But endeavour and God’s
grace will overcome them.1
lt does not surprise me that Lala Dunichand’s wife is engaged
in work.
Blessings from

BAPU
S JT S URAJBHAN AGRAWAL
S ATYAGRAHA C AMP
R OHTAK (PUNJAB)
From a photostat of the Hindi: Sumangal Prakash Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

268. INTERVIEW TO J. B. KRIPALANI 2
May 4, 1930
Mahatmaji had anticipated the situation which had arisen today. He had fully
expected that his lieutenants would be taken from him and he was glad to observe that
the younger folks had kept up their spirits and were yearning for more work. He was,
however, most anxious that this energy should be harnessed to the utmost in
constructive work. If the Government did not arrest the volunteers, Mahatmaji felt
they should engage themselves in constructive work, such as producing more yarn
and carrying on intensive propaganda to popularize the charkha and the takli. He also
wanted them to learn to live the camp life, and to live like soldiers. The soldiers did
their own cleaning and polishing and engaged in mock fights and other healthy
sports and the volunteers also should do so. Volunteers should not lose sight of
drilling. Discipline, Mahatmaji felt, would be half the battle won.
1

On heating of the arrest of Lala ShamlaI of Rohtak, the addressee with
Gandhiji’s permission, had gone to Punjab in April; vide also. “Letter to Lala
Dunichand”, 6-4-1930.
2
Based on a report of the interview. J. B. Kripalani had met Gandhiji a few
hours before the latter’s arrest.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

265

Mahatmaji felt that it was the Government game not to arrest the rank
and file of law-breakers but to tire them out. He wanted the volunteers not to play
into the Government’s hands by losing their patience. He wanted them to carry on
the work in every branch of national regeneration, namely, production of khaddar
and more khaddar to replace foreign cloth. He also wanted the volunteers to engage
themselves in an intensive prohibition programme by propaganda, picketing and
felling of date trees. It was not necessary that women alone should do all this,
especially in the United Provinces and Bihar, where there are very few women. In
provinces like Bihar and U.P., Mahatmaji wanted that women should be helped by
men. He felt that the initiative in these provinces should be taken by men.
. . . Mahatmaji also felt that the people could select other laws also to break
wherever they could conveniently do so without prejudice to the salt laws. Mahatmaji
also felt that this should be the case particularly in the provinces in which salt could
not be produced on an economic basis, or where there were no facilities to
manufacture salt. Mahatmaji had in view in this connection, the Chaukidari Tax in
Bihar and the Forest Laws in the Central Provinces.
Mahatmaji also felt . . . that Dharasana would supply many volunteers with
work, as volunteers from other parts of the country might be required if the Government were to effect the arrest of the “raiders”. Mahatmaji saw the possibility of
another Gurukabag at Dharasana. He also felt that the stage had come when those who
could do constructive work need not court jail. If the present enthusiasm were to be
utilized for the lasting good of the country, it must be directed into constructive
channels even as the electric current generated by a dynamo.
Regarding picketing, Acharya Kripalani said that he had narrated to Mahatmaji
his experiences of picketing of shops, which contained both foreign and swadeshi
cloth. He explained how some merchants dumped on the market mill-cloth as khaddar.
In reply, Mahatmaji said that he had expected that picketing would not be quite
effective but it was necessary to create an atmosphere for swadeshi, which could succeed only by the production of khaddar on a mass scale. Will agents, he said, could
help if they co-operated with the political workers, and themselves helped in the
production of khaddar by refraining from producing cloth below a particular count,
which could be left to hand-spinning.
In this connection, Mahatmaji said he had many talks with Seth Ambalal
Sarabhai and Mr. Birla. Mr. Birla had understood his point of view, and had decided to
open a khadi organization near his village in Marwar under his own supervision. Seth
Ambalal Sarabhai also had very nearly understood his point; but it looked as if other
mill-owners only wanted to use him (Gandhiji) as their advertising agent. Mahatmaji
was apprehensive that unless there was extensive spinning taken on hand at once the
swadeshi movement would fail in the absence of production and it would be possible
for merchants to cheat the public. When once the public discerned that they were
paying higher prices for doubtful stuff, their confidence in the national workers would
be so shaken that they would cease to listen to them and even would fight them.

266

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Therefore, the only possible way for the mill-owners to fight Lancashire and Japan
was to co-operate with the nationalist workers by refusing to spin yarn below a
particular count and, what was also equally important, by controlling the prices.

The Hindu, 14-5-1930

269. SPEECH AT SURAT
May 4, 1930
It is not by means of the power of intellect that people are able
to observe vows they take.1 There must be a thorough change of heart
and faith in God, which alone could give them the necessary strength.
I have been defeated in prohibition campaign as a man and therefore
I have asked women to help the movement. If anybody could melt the
heart of drunkards it is woman. I have often asked Ministers in charge
of Excise Department to put a stop to drink traffic. They have replied
that I must find out for them new sources of revenue. I have told them
to stop giving education to boys but they would not adopt the
suggestion. If in swaraj we have liquor traffic, our President will have
to face a similar problem afterwards. We are also not as adventurous as
Americans, who are successfully making America dry. We have
become emasculated and therefore I appeal to you to tackle this
question first.
The present time is the most opportune and auspicious. I appeal
to you with all earnestness to observe the vows you have taken. Do not
deceive me; if you are unable to give up drinking, say so openly; I
will congratulate you even then. My own son confesses honestly that
he is not able to give up the drinking habit, and I congratulate him on
his truthfulness. Even so you must be truthful so that I may not miscalculate. God alone will help him, my son, and you, who are unable
to give up drink. If you deceive me, you deceive your community and
the whole country.
Referring to the insult offered to some women picketers at some places
Gandhiji said that if they had not considered women as low creatures working for men
and as objects of their lust then nobody could have dared to raise a finger against
them.

But even if they will stone them, they will continue picketing.
“Pussyfoot” lost his eye in anti-drink propaganda to make America
dry, but did not give up his campaign. India will have to answer for
every insult offered to women. This is my last throw; and I am out to
lose my all. But all this I do for the liberation of India. If one district
1

Panchayats of Surat city had passed resolutions asking members of their
respective communities not to drink liquor.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

267

is ready, we will surely have swaraj. You must purify yourself, you
must be industrious; there is no other way for achieving swaraj.
The Bombay Chronicle, 6-5-1930

270. THE PROBLEM OF MINORITIES
[Before May 5, 1930] 1
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru sent the following note 2 to Mahadev
Desai on March 16th. Mahadev Desai being too busy was unable to
attend to it. It has now been forwarded to me, and I have no hesitation
in presenting to the public the President’s views on the vexed question
of minorities. It derives added significance from the fact of his
incarceration.
Young India, 15-5-1930

271. NOTE ON J. B. PENNINGTON’S LETTER3
[Before May 5, 1930]
Mr. Pennington’s argument cannot appeal to one like me who
has experience. A mountain of argument is dissolved before one
touch of experience. Great as is my regard for the late Sir T. Madhav
Rao, I must be pardoned for not endorsing his encomium of British
rule. I shared the deceased statesman’s views myself at one time. But
bitter experience corrected them. Every one of the arguments advanced by Mr. Pennington has been answered in these pages.
Young India, 8-5-1930

1

This was evidently written before Gandhiji’s arrest on May 5.
Vide Appendix III.
3
The letter is not reproduced here.
2

268

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

272. LETTER TO SATYAGRAHA COMMITTEE, BOMBAY
[Before May 5, 1930]
Friends from Bombay have been to me asking me to lead a
raiding party from there instead of from Karadi, assuming of course
that a raid is to be decided upon. I should be proud and consider it a
privilege to lead it provided that certain preliminary conditions are
fulfilled. I observe that there is a great deal of misunderstanding about
this contemplated raid. It has arisen because of the use of the word
“raid”. Now all my speeches in Gujarat are invariably delivered in
Gujarati. The word “raid” therefore is not the one I had used. I
admit, however, that it is a legitimate translation of the original. But
my audience knew the original word “dhad” used to alliterate with
“ d h a r ” in “Dharasana”, was used playfully. Fortunately or
unfortunately even for a non-violent war military expressions have got
to be used. But even as nobody is deceived by the use of such military
expressions, no one need be perturbed over the use of the word
“raid” when it is to be civil, non-violent or satyagrahi. The use of that
potent adjective alters the whole colour of the transaction. But
however innocent the raid, if it ever comes into being, may be, it will
be fraught with consequences perhaps far more serious than those
flowing from a violent raid. Those, therefore, who would join the
contemplated raid have to satisfy some test, and since the battle is
meant not merely for the removal of the salt tax but for establishing
Purna Swaraj, the conditions have to be in keeping with the objective.
They are three: 1. Observance of complete discipline. 2. Complete
abstention from drink under a permanent pledge. 3. Wearing of
hand-spun khaddar also under a permanent pledge and actual
spinning on the takli for one hour per day except when spinning is
made impossible through want of time or capacity. If Bombay
produces a hundred thousand such men I should lead them without
the slightest hesitation. I know that the citizens of Bombay will not
laugh at my conditions nor will they consider them impossible of
fulfilment. The only difficulty they might feel will be about the takli.
Surely if a hundred thousand men in Bombay have the will takli
spinning is child’s play. Sustained work from day to day may be a
task for easy-going citizens of Bombay but Freedom’s battle has
never been won by easy going people. No one need be irritated
against me for maintaining these conditions because they are not in
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

269

any sense obligatory; they are meant to be a consideration in a
voluntary contract. It is open to the citizens of Bombay to reject my
terms and do as they please. Rejection then of terms will not make
them less Congressmen than they are today.
The Bombay Chronicle, 5-5-1930

273. ARREST AT MIDNIGHT
KARADI ,

May 5, 1930
The Magistrate proceeded to Gandhiji’s hut and woke him up. 1 “I
have a warrant for your arrest, Mr. Gandhi,” said the Magistrate. Gandhiji asked
politely:

I am not surprised, but will you read out the warrant to me?
The Magistrate complied with this request and read the following which was
signed by Sir Frederick Sykes, Governor of Bombay.
“Whereas the Government view with alarm the activities of Mr. M. K. Gandhi,
they direct that he should be placed under restraint under Regulation 25 of 1827 and
suffer imprisonment during the pleasure of the Government and be immediately
removed to the Yeravda Central Jail.”
Gandhiji was smiling when the warrant was being read. He said:

I am prepared to accompany you, but will you allow me to have
a wash and clean my teeth?
“With pleasure,” said the Magistrate.
In the meantime, the whole Ashram was up, and everyone was anxious to have
a parting ‘darshan’ of Gandhiji. Having finished his wash, Gandhiji came out of the
cottage to say his prayers. The whole Ashram knelt down to recite the prayers while
the police officers watched. Gandhiji himself led the chorus. He then collected his
papers and gave them in charge of a volunteer whom he had chosen as Captain during
his incarceration.

The Bombay Chronicle, 6-5-1930

1
The District Magistrate accompanied by the Superintendent of Police and a
party of 20 armed constables arrived at Gandhiji’s camp at 12.45 a.m., when Gandhiji
was asleep.

270

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

274. INTERVIEW TO “THE DAILY TELEGRAPH”
BORIVLI ,

May 5, 1930
Gandhi seemed surprised when he saw my companion and myself, for both of
us were known to him. He greeted us in the most friendly manner.
“Have you a farewell message you would like to give, Mr. Gandhi?” I asked. He
replied:

Shall I give it now or shall I wait?
“You had better give it now,” I replied.
He paused, seeming to be at a loss for words and somewhat dazed by events.
Then he answered:

Tell the people of America to study the issues closely and to
judge them on their merits.
“Have you any bitterness or ill will towards anyone?” I asked.

None whatsoever; I had long expected to be arrested.
Do you think your arrest will lead to great disturbances throughout
India?

No, I do not; in any case I can honestly say that I have taken
every possible precaution to avert disturbances.
Then you anticipate no troubles?
The Mahatma hesitated for a moment and then replied:

I hope not; I have done my best to prevent them.
At this point the law intervened. Inspector Gordon stepped forward, saying; “Now,
Mr. Gandhi, if you are ready, please.” Only one person accompanied Gandhi from the
train, a doctor of the Indian Medical Service, who remained silent in the background.
He now took his seat alongside the prophet, with Inspector Gordon sitting by the
chauffeur. . . .1

The Hindu, 27-5-1930

1

Gandhiji was escorted in a train to Borivli, a suburban station of Bombay,
and from there taken by car to Yeravda. Vide “Extracts from The Daily Telegraph
report”, 27-5-1930.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

271

275. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL ROHTAGI
May 6, 1930
DEAR DR. JAWAHARLAL,

Sjt. Ramratan Gupta has been to see me regarding foreign- cloth
picketing. I have given it as my opinion that picketing once begun
cannot be easily suspended. But I do feel that it should be done
methodically and by women even if they are few. It is suggested there
will be no picketing in Delhi and none in Calcutta. I do not know what
is happening at the two places.1 But I feel sure that Cawnpore alone
should not be singled out for picketing. But of course what I am
saying is to be taken for what it is worth. Not knowing all the facts, I
am unable to say anything about the parti-cular Cawnpore case. I can
therefore suggest a general formula which I have done.2
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a facsimile: Dr. Jawaharlal Rohtagi Abhinandan Granth, between pp.
176-7

1
2

272

Vide also “Notes”, 1-5-1930.
Ibid.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

276. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE 1
YERAVDA ,

May 10, 1930
DEAR MAJOR DOYLE,

Having thought over our conversation, I have come to the conclusion that I must avoid, as much as possible, the special privileges
offered to me by the Government!
Books and newspapers I do not want through the Government.
Of newspapers, I would send for these if permitted:
The Bombay Chronicle,
The Times of India,
Indian Social Reformer,
Modern Review,
Young India and Navajivan (Hindi and Gujarati).
If these are allowed, I take it that they will not be mutilated.
The Government have suggested Rs. 100 as monthly allowance.
I hope I shall need nothing near it. I know that my food is a costly
affair. It grieves me, but it has become a physical necessity with me.
Neither you nor the Government will, I hope, consider me
ungrateful for not accepting all the facilities offered to me. It is an
obsession (if it is to be so called) with me that we are all living at the
expense of the toiling semi-starved millions. I know too that the
saving caused by my economy can but be an infinitesimal drop in the
limitless ocean of waste I see going on round me, whether in prison or
outside of it—much more out of it. I admit nevertheless it is given to
man only to do very little. He dare not omit to do that little.
Again, I hold radical views about prison treatment.
I have never taken kindly to the classification recently made. I
hold that a murderer is just as much entitled to have his needs
supplied as any other prisoner. What is therefore needed is not a
mechanical makeshift, but a human adjustment.
1

The text of this was communicated by Doyle to the Home Department on May

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

273

One thing I must mention. I do feel the necessity of contact with
the satyagrahi prisoners who are in this jail. It is wholly unnecessary, it
is cruel, to isolate me from them.
Yours truly,

M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, 750(5)-A; also S.N. 19971

277. LETTER TO MIRABEHN1
YERAVDA ,

May 12, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

Yours is the first letter I take up to write from the jail and that on
the silence day.
I have been quite happy and have been making up for arrears of
rest. The nights here are cool and as I am permitted to sleep right
under the sky, I have refreshing sleep. About the change made in the
manner of taking the diet, you will learn from my general letter.
It was a great treat to receive the wheel so thoughtfully sent and
with things so carefully packed in it. The carding-bow, the Superintendent tells me, was lost on the way by the friends who brought it.
I am in no hurry for it as you have sent me a liberal quantity of
slivers.
I do not know who sent me the books. They are not what I
wanted. They were to be sent back to the library. The list of books
that were to be sent to me when I was arrested was given by me to
Kusum. But I suppose she left the Ashram without giving instructions
to anybody as to what was to be sent or, if she did, she gave wrong
instructions. However this mistake does not matter much as I do not
miss the books just now. I am giving as much time as I can to the
takli. I find that I have no speed on it at all. I hardly get thirty rounds
in one hour. For the first day I gave nearly seven hours to nearly
reach 160 rounds. I was washed out at the end of the performances. I
must learn the trick of getting more speed. I am therefore in no hurry
to go to the books.
1

274

This was actually posted on May 16; vide “Letter to Miraben”, 18-5-1930.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I hope you had good news from mother about her health and
otherwise.
The prison officials are all kind and attentive.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
I believe it will be possible for me to receive the Ashram post.
You may therefore send a weekly letter together with the Ashram post.
From the original: C.W. 5395. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9629

278. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[May 12, 1930] 1
CHI. NARANDAS,

Show this letter to all, so that I need not write about the same
things to everyone.
Most probably I shall be able to write to you and you will be
able to send a reply once a week.
I keep excellent health. I get up in the morning and go through
the routine according to the Ashram rules. There is a light in the room
so that, according to my rule, I can read chapters from the Gita. I have
been resting after many days of fatigue and, therefore, must be
sleeping for probably two or three hours during the day. Generally I
sleep at eight in the morning and twelve at noon. I have resumed
eating oranges, which I had given up during the march. On the first
day I took cold milk, and I have continued it for the time being. I take
about three seers. Probably I shall have to reduce the quantity a little.
Or I may have some of it made into curds. In the morning, too, I
drink cold water instead of hot water. This I do only as an experiment.
The authorities have of course supplied the facilities for heating water,
etc. If, however, I can preserve my health with cold water, why should
I go to the trouble of heating it? I have given up honey. Even for
bathing I have been using cold water, but I intend to change over to
hot water from tomorrow. The goat is brought before me and milked
in my presence, so that the milk is as clean as I would like it to be. If
cold milk does not suit me, I will certainly heat it. They have given me
1

From Bapuna Patro — 9: Shri Narandas Gandhine, Part I

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

275

one person to clean the utensils and do other work. The diet includes
dates and raisins too. No one need worry in the least about my food.
Write to Jamnabehn and tell her that no one need take the trouble to
send me any fruit. I shall get from here everything I may require. Tell
Anasuyabehn that she need not pay any money here, as she used to
do on the previous occasion. It is not at all necessary to do so. We
have no time, ought to have none, to take unnecessary care of anyone.
We have no money, ought to have none, to throw away.
The air here is considered to be good. I sleep in the open as I
used to do there.
If you have still not received the money from Gordhanbhai
Patel, remind him to send it.
I do spinning regularly. I make a skein of what I spin each day
and get someone to spray water over it. Send me Vanatshastra and
Takli-shikshak along with other books. I never ascertained my speed
with the takli when I was outside. I tried to ascertain it here and found
that I hardly spin 30 rounds in one hour. I ought to be ashamed of
this speed. It means that I went on spinning but did not learn the
secret of doing it well. I can now master it only by experimenting. I,
therefore, give plenty of time to the work. I practise on a bamboo
takli. It is necessary for everyone of us to acquire complete control
over the takli. It is easy to do so if there is someone to teach us. I saw
children in Karadi who could draw out thread with playful ease. All
that is necessary is that they should feel interest in the work. In Wardha there are persons who have reached the speed of 80 rounds in
half an hour. Kanti Parekh told me that he spun that many. The
people there who have learnt to spin on the takli should ascertain their
speed; let me know what it is in each case.
How is Purushottam? How is Kanu?
Give me news about Khushalbhai. I had written to him.
Is Mathew at peace?
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8110. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

276

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

279. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA ,

Silence Day, May 12, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

You had stopped writing to me. But I knew that you did not
write because you wished to save my time and also because you
yourself had no time. Nevertheless, I regularly enquired after you and
got news of you. I like your self-restraint very much. I had not
expected it from you. You should now write to me every week without
fail.
You will get news about me from my letter to Narandas.
To whom did Kusum hand over my things when she left the
Ashram? Did she entrust to you the books which were to be sent to me
in prison if I was arrested? Among them were the Ramayana, the
Koran, etc. Inquire about the matter and if you find the books easily,
send them to me. I am in no hurry to get them.
Write to me and tell me who remain in the Ashram and what
work they are doing. What is your own special work?
No one should worry about me.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Who is in charge of the library?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 6669. Courtesy: Premabehn Kantak

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

277

280. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
YERAVDA ,

Silence Day, May 12, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I hope you do not worry. I often think about you. Write to me.
Did Nath pay a visit there? For how many persons do you have to
cook now? I am not writing today to the other women.
You will get news about me from my letter to Narandas. Inquire
from Narahari and let me know how Kamalnayan, who lives in the
Vidyapith, is faring.
Who has been specially asked to look after Hari and Vimala?
How is Lakshmi? The manner in which we look after Hari and Vimala
will be a test of our love.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3083

278

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

281. LETTER TO ASHRAM CHILDREN
YERAVDA P ALACE ,

Silence Day [May 12, 1930] 1
BIRDS,

Birds are real birds when they can fly without wings. With wings
any creature can fly. If you, who have no wings, can fly, you will feel
no fear at all. I will teach you how to fly in this manner. See, I have no
wings and still I fly every day and come to you, for in my mind I am
in your midst. There is Vimla, and here are Hari, Manu and
Dharmakumar. You also can fly with your minds and feel that you are
with me. A child who can think does not require much help from a
teacher. A teacher may guide us, but cannot give us thoughts.
Thoughts arise in our own minds. A child that behaves well will always
have good thoughts. Who, amongst you, does not pray properly with
Prabhubhai?2 Write a letter to me, signed by all of you. Any child who
cannot sign may draw a swastika.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati Ashram Samachar, 18-5-1930: S.N. 16834-a

1

The Monday before May 18, 1930, the date of the source
The name is omitted in the source. This is taken from Young India,
22-5-1930, where Mirabehn has translated this letter.
2

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

279

282. LETTER TO BALBHADRA1
[On or after May 12, 1930] 2
CHI. BUDDHICHAKRA,

It seems the name Buddhichakra has clung to you. It is not a
bad name. One whose buddhi 3 is like a chakra4 may also be a person
of perfect character, for a circle is a perfect thing. It has no beginning
and no end as a straight line has. Moreover, he who lives with his mind
turned inward should be regarded as a person whose intellect is like a
circle. That is the true intellect which turns our mind inward.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati Ashram Samachar, 18-5-1930: S.N. 16834-a

283. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI

5

[On or after May 12, 1930]
Take this letter as meant for all. How good it was that I met you
all on Sunday evening and accompanied you back as far as your
camp? I was very happy that I did so. God is showering His grace on
me. Let all the women write to me. All the letters should be put in one
envelope. Most likely I shall get those letters. If I don’t get them, it
will not matter. Do not feel nervous, any of you. All the verses in the
section of women’s prayer were purposely selected. The very first
verse teaches us a great deal. The last three verses of the Gita which
have been included sum up the whole prayer. They are like the
kalasha on the top of a temple which adds lustre to the temple and
completes its beauty. I hope the verses in this prayer are recited every
morning with careful attention to their meaning.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati Ashram Samachar, 18-5-1930: S.N. 16834-a
1

Vide “Letter to Balbhadra”, 11-9-1930.
Gandhiji started writing letters from jail on May 12, 1930.
3
Intellect
4
Wheel
5
The source does not mention the addressee, but Mirabehn, writing Young
India, 22-5-1930, says that this was addressed to Kasturba Gandhi.
2

280

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

284. EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS TO ASHRAM INMATES1
[On or after May 12, 1930]
1

This letter is for all the girls. Do all of you live as you should?
Do you work? Do you think Gangabehn would give you a certificate?
Have you kept up the habit of rising early? If you have given it up,
resume it.
Blessings from

BAPU

2
CHI.

I was often told that you were impatient to go outside the
Ashram and work. You are now of an age when you can understand
things. We should do with the fullest sense of responsibility any work
which falls to our lot. What difference does it make whether you go
outside to work or remain in the Ashram?
Blessings from

BAPU
3
CHI.

I hope you had calmed down soon afterwards. I had not thought
that you were such a nervous type. But do not worry. Are Kasturbehn
and you still together or have you separated? You should not feel it
necessary to remain with her all the time. One should learn to be
independent and take up responsibility on oneself.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati Ashram Samachar, 18-5-1930: S.N. 16834-a

1

Addressees are not known.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

281

285. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

[On or after May 12, 1930]
CHI. KUSUM (SENIOR),

Does your being senior mean that you are counterfeit or
genuine? You have left the Ashram but do not forsake the path of
service. You can write to me. May God bless you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1799

286. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

Silence Day [On or after May 12, 1930] 1
CHI. RAMA,

I used to be happy to see you. I had not thought that you would
show such courage and fortitude. How is Mahalakshmi? How are the
two Dahibehns?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5321

1

282

The year is given in Bapuna Patro—7: Shri Chhaganlal Joshine.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

287. EXTRACT FROM LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI1
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

May 13, 1930
CHI.

Since I do not know where you are, I write to you at the Ashram
address. There is God to worry for us all and we need not, therefore,
worry on account of one another. You know about me, that ultimately
I never come to harm. God always clears my path. Where else in the
world would you find a sweeper like Him? If he did not always purify
us of our mental uncleanliness the world would have become unbearably filthy long ago. Outward filth is only a sign of the uncleanliness in our minds. If the inner uncleanliness remains, what does it
help however completely we wash away the outward filth? I at any rate
derive much strength from this thought. . . .2
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati Ashram Samachar, 18-5-1930: S.N. 16834-a

1

Mirabehn, in Young India, 22-5-1930, says that this was addressed to Devdas

Gandhi.
2

As in the source

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

283

288. LETTER TO VICEROY
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

May 18, 1930 1
H. E. THE VICEROY OF I NDIA
DEAR FRIEND,

The authorities having permitted the use of newspapers, I am
able somewhat to follow the course of events in the country. I should
fail in my duty if I did not express my opinion on your latest
statement.2
You seem to ignore the simple fact that disobedience ceases to
be such immediately masses of people resort to it. Do you not see that
hundreds of men who have been known for their peaceful nature, who
have an unbroken record of service to their credit3 and whose integrity
is beyond suspicion are imprisoned? They are no law-breakers; they
are no haters of the English. And what of the most peaceful demonstration of thousands of simple villagers who are by instinct the most
law-abiding? To describe the movement of such men and women as
lawlessness is, in my opinion, doing violence to the language. The
very motive which is the essence of crime is lacking. It is the noblest
of motives which4 takes away men like the hoary-headed Abbas
Tyabji from their soft ease to court the hardships of a jail life.5
You protest your affection for India. I believe in your
profession. But I deny the correctness of your diagnosis of India’s
disease. The best constitution that can be devised will fail to bring real
contentment and peace unless the grievances on which public
attention is conc-entrated are immediately removed. The salt tax
cannot remain. The liquor revenue must go. The foreign cloth
importation which has produced a partial paralysis of the village life
must be stopped. Have you not noted the strength of popular feeling
in these matters? Or are the hundreds of thousands of men and
1

The letter was drafted on May 12, finalized on May 18 and handed to the
Superintendent, Major Martin, the following day.
2
On May 12, announcing that steps were being taken to hold the Round Table
Conference in October, the Viceroy had declared: “Neither my Government nor His
Majesty’s Government will be deflected by these unhappy events from our firm
determination to abide by the policy I was privileged to announce in November last.”
3
The draft did not have the words: “to their credit”.
4
The draft has “that”.
5
Abbas Tyabji was arrested on May 12.

284

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

women who are taking part in the movement wicked-minded or
misled or fools and the English officials the best judges of what is
good for India?
If I am not mistaken, you will find the spirit of the people
to be proof against repression, no matter how severe1 it may be.
You will not coerce millions of people into subjection for all time.
India must not live for England. She must live for herself, so as to enable her to make her contribution to the world’s progress. As a
slave nation she is a mere burden on earth because it is a false life.
No Round Table Conference can therefore be of any avail, unless
you see things from our standpoint and, leaving coercion, rely
simply on carrying conviction. Even those who you think are with
you are with the Congressmen so far as wants are concerned.
I remain,
Your sincere friend,

M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, 750(34), pp. 41-2; also S.N. 19972

289. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised

May 18, 1930

CHI. MIRA,

You must be in possession of my last silence day letter. It was
posted only on Friday I fear. This should go earlier. It is now after 8
p.m. Sunday. I take silence at 3 p.m. on Sundays as a rule. Of my life
here you will learn from my general letter. I have more than doubled
the quantity of yarn spun. It is nearly 400 rounds on the wheel and 55
to 60 on the takli. It is all well moistened and properly packed. For
the wheel yarn it is 5 strands of 75 C.A.2 put together daily. The takli
yarn is one strand of nearly 160 rounds. It will be interesting to know
what strength I am spinning. The whole performance takes up 6 hours
daily. I do not grudge the time. I am not doing much reading this
time nor do I want to collect a lot of books as I did last time. I should
like to perfect my spinning if I can. Presently I shall have to card. I
observe I have still 10 days’ supply of slivers. All this news is not
given in the letter to N.
1
2

The draft here has “however severe”.
The letter as published in Bapu’s Letter’s to Mira here has “rounds”.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

285

And how is Reynolds getting on? How is he taking the heat? My
love to him. In your weekly letter you may give all the news that is not
political.
I think I told you last time that I had started translating the
verses and hymns in the hymn book. I am nearing the end of the
morning verses.
I hope you are keeping perfect health. You will not overstrain
yourself on any account.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5396. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9630

290. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
May 18, 1930
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

Hope you are keeping well. What have you ultimately decided
about Vijapur? Write to me in detail. Do the children now pay
attention to the prayers? Has the heat affected you adversely?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32947

286

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

291. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
Silence Day [May 19, 1930] 1
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I remember every day all the women and the children, but I do
not worry about anything. Here, too, I keep myself busy and do not
remain unoccupied even for a minute. That way alone can I have
peace of mind. I can see God only through work. The Lord says that
He is ever working without taking a moment’s rest. How else, then,
can we know Him except through work?
If you do not read the translation of the Gita and if you have
time, read it. If, however, you have no time, you need not read it.
Devotion to duty is the living Gita; the other one is merely a book.
I have written to as many persons as I could. But I do think of
even those men and women to whom I have not written. How can I
possibly write to all? I write to those who I feel specially need some
words of comfort from me.
How is your son-in-law?
Does Nath visit the Ashram? When you write to him, tell him
that I often remember him. He ought to visit the Ashram occasionally.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 8749. Courtesy: Gangabehn Vaidya

1

From Bapuna Patro — 6: G. S. Gangabehnne

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

287

292. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
May 19, 1930
CHI. MANI,

God will be your shepherd. I remember you daily. I hope you
are no longer depressed.
Blessings from

BAPU
C HI . M ANIBEHN P ATEL
NADIAD

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro — 4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 71

293. LETTER TO NARAHARI PARIKH
May 20, 1930
CHI. NARAHARI,

I do not know if your tongue dances, but I see that your pen has
been dancing. How many benefits flow from my living in the jail
palace?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9053

288

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

294. LETTER TO PREMLILA THACKERSEY
YERAVDA JAIL ,

May 20, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

I can do a little sewing on the machine. While I have time here, I
wish to learn it well. The authorities have permitted me to secure a
machine. Since you are helping some women to earn their livelihood,
I believe that you will certainly have some machines, and hence I trouble you with this request. If you have them and if you can spare one,
kindly send it. If you don’t have any, please let me know. I shall get
your letter.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
LADY P REMLILA VITHALDAS THACKERSEY
P OONA
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4813. Courtesy: Premlila
Thackersey; also G.N. 71

295. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
May 20, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

What shall I say to comfort you? God will assuredly protect you.
You can write to me. I should indeed like you to do so. Tell
Kamalabehn1 to take care of her health. Convey my respectful
greetings to Swarup Rani2 . My blessings to Sarup3 , Krishna4 . If
Jayaprakash is outside convey my blessings to him. Write to me at the
Ashram address. I keep fine health. I eat the same food here that I did
outside.
Do not worry about me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3388
1

Wife of Jawaharlal Nehru
Wife of Motilal Nehru
3
Vijayalakshmi Pandit
4
Krishna Hutheesingh
2

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

289

296. INTERVIEW TO “ DAILY HERALD” 1
May 20, 1930
Our conversation began with a general exchange of ideas on British and Indian
politics. I then asked him to explain frankly what he meant by Independence. Did he
demand Independence as ultimately implied in Dominion Status? Or did he insist on
separation from the British Commonwealth?

I have always heard that in England Dominion Status is
understood to mean Independence, but by the Indian authorities it is
not so understood. Therefore when Independence is resisted by them
in contradistinction to Dominion Status we naturally asked for
Independence.
When I asked him if he thought that Canada and South Africa were not in all
essential respects independent, he acknowledged they were. He added significantly:

But we are not offered a status like theirs.
I asked him if he had calculated all the perils involved in his campaign of civil
disobedience. He replied that he had:

I have taken what has been called a mad risk. But it is a
justifiable risk. No great end has been achieved without incurring
danger.
Nevertheless he was gravely alarmed at the violence said to have been
committed at Sholapur. He grieved at the death of two policemen killed there, but he
was convinced the violence had not come from the civil resisters. They had, he said,
been ordered to suffer everything, even violence, without offering resistance.
I asked if he thought that in a struggle between law-breakers and the
authorities Government could acknowledge defeat, and Gandhi smiled. He said:

I am an optimist. In forty years of struggle I have frequently
been told I was attempting the impossible, but invariably I proved the
contrary.
Nevertheless he did not refuse to negotiate.

My life has been nothing but a record of settlements. If the
Government is in earnest in its desire to satisfy India it should grant
the eleven points demanded in my last letter to the Viceroy.
1

290

The interviewer was George Slocombe.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I can only judge the tree by its fruits. Until we get satisfaction
we shall fight on until the end, and give our lives if need be in the
cause of Indian freedom. We shall fill all the jails in India with our
passive resisters and our breakers of the salt laws, and we shall make
all administration impossible by our opposition.
Mr. Gandhi admitted, however, that even in the remote event of victory
negotiation would still be necessary, and he was prepared to do anything to avoid
bloodshed and suffering if the essential cause of Indian nationalism did not lose
thereby.
From our subsequent conversation I gathered that even at this critical hour a
settlement is possible and that Mr. Gandhi is prepared to recommend to Congress the
suspension of the Civil Disobedience Movement and co-operation in the Round Table
Conference on the following terms:
(1) The terms of reference of the Round Table Conference to include the
framing of a Constitution giving India “the substance of independence”.
(2) Satisfaction to be granted to Mr. Gandhi’s demands for the repeal of the
salt tax, the prohibition of liquor, and a ban on foreign cloth.
(3) An amnesty for prisoners convicted of political offences to coincide with
the end of the Civil Disobedience campaign.
(4) The remaining seven points raised in Mr. Gandhi’s letter to the Viceroy to
be left for future discussion.

The Bombay Chronicle, 23-5-1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

291

297. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

May 18/21, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

The letter I wrote to you last Monday seems to have been posted
as late as Friday. That is what a jail is, after all.
See that my letters are not published.
Write to Thakkar Bapa and inquire whether the work on wells
for Antyajas is proceeding. If he is short of funds, give him some
money from what is lying with us, that is, from the money which we
have handed over to Jamnalalji.
My hours are divided as follows:
Brushing the teeth, lavatory, bath
2
hours
Prayers, twice
1
hour
Nap during day-time
1_ hours
Meals and preparation for them
3
hours
Repairing the spinning-wheel, blowing and
spraying the yarn, etc.
3_ hours
Spinning on the takli
2_ hours
Walking in the yard
1_ hours
Reading, meeting the Jailor
2
hours
From 4 a.m. to 9 p.m.
17 hours
I discovered from experience that oranges were not necessary. I
have, therefore, given them up for the present. This means that my
diet consists of dates, raisins, milk and curds, and sour lime and soda
bicarb. If I find it necessary to do so, I will include oranges. I found
today that by adding a fairly good quantity of curd to unboiled milk,
we get well-formed curd. Yesterday I had mixed curd in unboiled
milk. I still take unboiled milk. I keep good health. I was weighed
again and I found that I had lost no weight.
I am at present reading Edwin Arnold’s The Light of Asia. I do
get a newspaper. It is the Times1 . I shall now be supplied the Chronicle
1

292

The Times of India
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

too. I have been permitted to get Young India, Navajivan, The Modern
Review and Indian Social Reformer. If I want, I can get some others
too.
I think I wrote to you that I had started bathing in hot water.
You need not worry about me at all. This time going to jail is
enjoying oneself.
I was very glad to read Kumarappa’s name in Young India. He
is certainly a worthy man.
You can write a letter giving general information and send with
it as many others of the same type as you like.
I cannot give any political message. You can give information
about everyone.
Does Rukhi write to you? How is she? Do you hear from
Umiya? Tell Kusum junior that she has not replied to my special
letter. She is a cunning girl. Navin and Dhiru must be doing fine.
Boys, girls, all of them can write to me.
How is Dr. Kanuga, the person for whom vegetables are sent
from the Ashram?
You must have made arrangements for Amina’s confinement.
Where is Imam Saheb? How is he?
Who were the four boys who were let off as being too young?
Where are they? Which are the places the women have spread
themselves over?
How is the work going on in the dairy, the tannery and on the
farm? How many looms are working?
The well near the office was to be cleaned. If it has not been
cleaned and if it can be, get it cleaned. Is Keshu contented? How is his
health?
Tell Radha to write to me. I do not write separately to her. I feel
like writing to many others, but how can I do that ?1
Blessings from

BAPU

1

This was written on May 18 and 19. The postscripts were written on May 21.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

293

[PS.]
I do not regard the experiment of making curds from unboiled
milk to have succeeded completely. On the first day, I thought it was
all right. I do not know whether the quantity of curd mixed in the
milk was not correct, but the next sample was not well formed. The
experiment is continuing.
BAPU

[PPS.]
Prabhavati’s address: A.I.C.C. Office, Allahabad.
From Gujarati: C.W. 8111. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

298. LETTER TO REGINALD REYNOLDS
May 22, 1930
MY DEAR REYNOLDS,

I have your love-letter as also news about you from Mira. By all
means go. If you feel like coming and seeing me before you leave, do
come. There will be no difficulty about your seeing me.
God be with you wherever you may be.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
I wanted to write to your fiancee but it was not to be. But if you
send me her address, I would still write. Tell her I received her letter
the day of my arrest.
From a photostat: C.W. 4536. Courtesy: Swarthmore College, Philadelphia

294

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

299. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA P LEASURE HOUSE,

May 25, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

Again I commence this on Sunday after the silence and after the
evening prayer.
When you came time seemed to be running against us. I
therefore simply allowed you all to talk instead of myself talking and
asking a lot of questions. You were not at all looking well. You
seemed to have been pulled down. That won’t do. You must take
proper exercise and proper food. You must take all the fruit you may
need and keep yourself fit.
I realize now as never before how careless I was not to have
mastered the details about arranging the large bow. As I have some
mechanical ability, I have suspended it and have already begun
working at it since Thursday last and have a fair stock of punis1 but
there is something wrong about it. The long cord hangs from the
roof. There are two strings hanging from the bamboo. I have joined
the two and I pass the thin cord over the joined strings thus:
The bamboo work does not stand steady but is inclined to turn
round and round. Of course, the wall prevents it. But I fancy that it
should not turn at all even if there was no wall preventing it. If you
have understood what I have described and if there is any flaw, you
will tell me.
Your takli is well made but it [is] too heavy for fine spinning. I
have no doubt that the bamboo is the thing. My speed is better now. I
have done 65 rounds today in 1_ hours—not bad for me. I would do
better when I shed my nervousness and draw the thread without
fearing to break it.
My translation of one verse per day from the prayer-book
continues. I wish I could do more. But the spinning and carding
won’t leave me any more time. And now I must make time for the
sewing-machine. I was glad you came.
Love.
BAPU
1

Slivers

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

295

[PS.]
How do you make rigid the little wheel on the spindle when it
gets loose?
From the original: C.W. 5397. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9631

300. LETTER TO SARALADEVI1
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

May 25, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

I have received the fruit sent by you. I am asked to write to you
not to send them hereafter. Any fruit I require is given to me here.
Mangoes and oranges are given to the Jailor to eat. When there has
been conflagration on all sides how can I eat mangoes? I took oranges
for two or four days and [then] gave them up. I do not see any
necessity for them. [If] I require I shall indeed take them. I shall ever
cherish the love behind the idea of sending fruit. I hope the children
are all right.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 574

1

296

This is a translation. The original letter is not available.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

301. LETTER TO CHANDRASHANKAR SHUKLA1
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

May 25, 1930
DEAR CHANDRASHANKAR,

The Jail Superintendent has shown me your letter. For the
present I will not ask for any book. The books already here are lying
[unread]. The whole of the spare time is spent in spinning and
carding. Some time is devoted to reading.
I hope your health is all right. If it is not so, improve it. You
must have forgotten the pang [of separation]. You must be seeing
Kaka. Where is Kamalnayan? If he is there, ask him to write.
Blessings from

BAPU
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, part III, P. 573

302. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

May 26, 1930
CHI. SUSHILA,

What kind of a husband have I given you? But no, you cannot
say that I gave him to you. He was your own choice. You cannot,
therefore, blame me. I hope you do remember how much I had
cautioned you. In any case, you can go one better than he; so how can
you or I complain? I hope Sita alias Dhairyabala is quite happy.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1180. Courtesy: Sushila Gandhi; also
G.N. 4768

1

This is a translation. The original letter is not available.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

297

303. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

May 26, 1930
CHI, NARANDAS,

Gujarati letters were received here last week, but they have not
yet been given to me. I got Mirabehn’s and Mathew’s letters because
they were in English. That is how it is! But this will not go on for
many days—if God wills.
My weight is practically the same; perhaps it has gone up by
half a pound.
The diet, too, continues to be the same. Now I get perfect curds
from unboiled milk. The milk forms into curd in 24 hours. I had
mixed a fairly good quantity of curd with the milk.
I have finished reading two books: The Light of Asia and The
Saints of Islam. I am now reading a book on prisons written by an
Inspector-General of Prisons of the Punjab, which was sent to me by a
friend. I simply get no time for reading. Seven hours are taken up by
the spinning-wheel, the takli and carding. On some days, when the
wheel requires no repair, it is less than seven hours, and on some other
days it is more. I am not unhappy about this. I love work. My skill in
the work increases because I have to do everything myself, and I
discover very small faults. The yarn which I spin on the takli has
improved very much in quality. The speed, too, has gone up.
I think very little about things outside. I am so busy with work
that I get no time to think about them. I fix my eyes on the central
teaching of the Gita, and so enjoy peace of mind. If I did not do that,
though I am supplied newspapers, reading about all that happens
would have made it difficult for me to experience peace. The prayers
twice a day and the daily reading of the Gita have proved a great
support to me.
Is there any news about Krishna Nair, Surajbhan and Jayanti
Prakash? How is Satis Babu? Write to all to whom you send letters and
tell them that they are not to be published. Friends may certainly read
them.
How is Jamna’s health?
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8112. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

298

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

304. LETTER TO JANAKIDEVI BAJAJ 1
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

Silence Day [May 26, 1930] 2
DEAR JANAKIBEHN,

How are you? I hope you have not lost your courage. How is
Madalasa? Do not be anxious about Kamalnayan. Have you not learnt
this much by hearing Gita from Vinoba that we need not be anxious
about anything?
Blessings from

BAPU
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 575

305. LETTER TO JAMNABEHN GANDHI 3
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

Silence Day [May 26, 1930] 4
DEAR JAMNABEHN,

This is to tell you this much that no women should be anxious
about me. I remember you all daily. Get a letter written to me and
send it through the Ashram.
Blessings from

BAPU
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 576

1
2
3
4

This is a translation. The original letter is not available.
The date has been inferred from the placing of the item in the source.
This is a translation. The original letter is not available.
The date has been inferred from the placing of the item in the source.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

299

306. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI

1

Silence Day [May 26, 1930]

2

DEAR NIMU,

I hear from Ba that both you and your mother have returned to
the Ashram. It was good. But what about your complaint about
constipation? Are you not brave? How is Savitri3 ? Is she called by this
name or any other?
Blessings from

BAPU
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom
Movement in India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 576

307 LETTER TO RADHA GANDHI

4

Silence Day [May 26, 1930] 5
DEAR RADHA,

Your letter must be in the post which I have not received. If you
have not written to me any letter, write to me one giving all the news.
Where is Rukhi? How is she?
In great haste.
Blessings from

BAPU
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 578

1
2
3
4
5

300

This is a translation. The original letter is not available.
The date has been inferred from the placing of the item in the source.
This seems to be a slip for “Sumitra”, daughter of the addressee.
This is a translation. The original letter is not available.
The date has been inferred from the placing of the item in the source.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

308. LETTER TO MAITRI GIRI 1
Silence Day [May 26, 1930] 2
DEAR MAITRI,

Have you become wise? Be a credit to the name of your father.
How is Krishnamaiya Devi? Write to me a letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 578

309. LETTER TO GANGABEHN JHAVERI 3
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

Silence Day [May 26, 1930] 4
DEAR GANGABEHN JHAVERI,

[I hope] you and Nanibehn are all right. Now can you stay
alone? I do not write more as it is dark.
Blessings from

BAPU
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 576

1
2
3
4

This is a translation. The original letter is not available.
The date has been inferred from the placing of the item in the source.
This is a translation. The original letter is not available.
The date has been inferred from the placing of the item in the source.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

301

310. LETTER TO GOMATI MASHRUWALA1
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

Silence Day [May 26, 1930] 2
DEAR GOMATI,

I hear that Kishorelal is keeping good health. Write to me in
detail. How is your health? Where is Tari? If she is there ask her to
write. Where is Nathu? How is he? Does he go to the Ashram? Which
sisters are there?
Blessings from

BAPU
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 575

311. LETTER TO MOTIBEHN

3

Silence Day [May 26, 1930] 4
DEAR MOTIBEHN5 ,

Ba told me that you were melancholy. How is that? One who
studies Gita cannot have melancholia. How can one be melancholy
who is daily in meditation with God and believes that He resides in the
heart? Drive out melancholia.
Blessings from

BAPU
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 577

1
2
3
4
5

302

This is a translation. The original letter is not available.
The date has been inferred from the placing of the item in the source.
This is a translation. The original letter is not available.
The date has been inferred from the placing of the item in the source.
Wife of Mathuradas Purushottam
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

312. LETTER TO DR. PRANJIVANDAS MEHTA1
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

May 26, 1930
DEAR BROTHER PRANJIVAN,

I remember you many times in the jail. You must be in good
health. Do not worry about me.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 577

313. LETTER TO RATILAL MEHTA 2
May 26, 1930
DEAR RATILAL,

How do you and Champa fare? What work do you do? Do you
write letters to Bapu3 ?
Blessings from

BAPU
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 578

1
2
3

This is a translation. The original letter is not available.
ibid
Addressee’s father, Dr. Pranjivan Mehta

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

303

314. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PARIKH 1
May 26, 1930
DEAR MANIBEHN,

Narahari did after all go to jail. He received beating also. He is
doubly fortunate. Are you completely courageous? Take care of your
health.
Blessings from

BAPU
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 577

315. LETTER TO MITHUBEHN PETIT 2
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

May 26, 1930
DEAR MITHUBEHN,

May God protect you.
Blessings from

BAPU
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 576

1
2

304

This is a translation. The original letter is not available.
ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

316. LETTER TO AMINA QURESH 1
May 26, 1930
DEAR AMINA,

At last Imam Saheb has after all gone to the jail palace. Perhaps
Qureshi may have also gone. Is your health good? What arrangements
have been made about confinement? How do children fare?
Blessings from

BAPU
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 578

317. LETTER TO SHANTA 2
Silence Day [May 26, 1930] 3
DEAR SHANTA,

How do you fare? Is your mind absolutely calm? Perhaps there
might be a letter from you in the post which I have not received. If
you have not written to me any letter, write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 578

1
2
3

This is a translation. The original letter is not available.
ibid
The date has been inferred from the placing of the item in the source.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

305

318. LETTER TO SONAMANI 1
Silence Day [May 26, 1930] 2
DEAR SONAMANI,

How are both you sisters? Have you learnt Hindi well? Write me
all news.
Blessings from

BAPU
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 576

319. LETTER TO KALAVATI TRIVEDI 3
Silence Day [May 26, 1930] 4
DEAR KALAVATI,

I await a letter from you. How is the state of your mind at
present? What are you doing? Write to me your account.
Blessings from

BAPU
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 575

1

This is a translation. The original letter is not available.
The date has been inferred from the placing of the item in the source.
3
This is a translation. The original letter is not available.
4
The date has been inferred from the placing of the item in the source.
2

306

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

320. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA1
[May 26, 1930] 2
DEAR GANGABEHN (ELDER),

I remembered you when I was reading Ch. XII and XIII. I have
written at the top of the translation of Ch. XII,3 which is short, that it is
worthy of being committed to memory by all, if not in Sanskrit, at
least in Gujarati. It is easy to understand it in Gujarati. When we know
the line of devotion shown therein, we have finished all. You must
have undoubtedly written a letter, but it has not yet come to my hands.
Blessings from

BAPU
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 575

321. LETTER TO P. G. MATHEW
May 26, 1930
MY DEAR MATHEW,

I was glad to have your note. If you have patience God will give
you light and peace.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1552

1
2
3

This is a translation. The original letter is not available.
The date has been inferred from the placing of the item in the source.
In Anasaktiyoga; vide “Anasaktiyoga”.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

307

322. LETTER TO PATRICK QUINN
May 27, 1930
1

DEAR MR. QUINN ,

Will you please order raisins 2 lb., kishmish 1 lb. and send me
some common writing paper or a scribbling pad?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 240

323. LETTER TO MOHANLAL BHATT 2
Tuesday [May 27, 1930] 3
DEAR BROTHER MOHANLAL,

You are indeed doing well. Some two mistakes have been
observed in the [translation of] Gita. I shall rewrite. Please send
Indian Social Reformer and The Modern Review to me. We [used to]
receive both of them. If they are not received please write to Messrs
Natarajan and Ramananda Babu.
Blessings from

BAPU
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III. p. 577

1
2
3

308

Superintendent, Yeravda Central Prison
This is a translation. The original letter is not available.
The date has been inferred from the placing of the item in the source.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

324. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

May 30, 1930
DEAR MAJOR DOYLE,

Today four visitors came to see me. Among these were Mrs.
Captain and Mr. Reginald Reynolds. The other two were Miss Slade
(Mirabai) and Mr. Mathuradas Trikumjee. The last two were admitted.
As the Superintendent could not admit the other two, I had to decline
to see Miss Slade and Mr. Mathuradas. At our very first conversation,
you will recollect, I made it clear to you that I recognized no
distinction between blood relations and others and that if the Government wanted me to meet my blood relations they should appreciate
my viewpoint and let me also see those who like Mrs. Captain and Mr.
Reynolds are as good as blood relations. I thought you had agreed to
the position. But I may have misunderstood you. I want to blame
nobody. I want no special privileges. I simply wish [you] to
understand my position and would like the Government to know my
viewpoint though they may not endorse it. I may not see my relatives
if I may not see the others. This is no new attitude with me. I took it
up in 1922 also and at that time there was no difficulty about my
seeing those who were not blood relations. Of course, it is understood
all along that there can be no political messages received or sent by
me.
There are, too, my weekly letters hanging fire. These too I wrote
as per our understanding, as I thought it was, namely, that
non-political affairs1 written to my Ashram friends in one envelope
would count as one letter.
I would appreciate an early clearance of both these issues.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, 750(5) A, p. 65; also S.N. 19973

1

The draft (S.N. 19973) here has “letters”.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

309

325. LETTER TO EDITOR, “WORLD FEDERATION”
May, 1930
DEAR FRIEND,

Just a line to thank you for your letter. I am too preoccupied to
say more just now. I know that you are doing all you can for the
country.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

326. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
[May-June, 1930] 1
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I get your letters regularly now. I have already written to you
about my health. Mirabehn wrote saying that she would give you
some work where you are. If she has not done so, and if Jayaprakash
is willing and Kamalabehn permits you may certainly go and join Ba.
There is much to learn there these days. My weight is normal. You
can write to me about anything you wish to do.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
What is Mrityunjai2 doing? How is Grandmother3 ? How does
Vidyavati keep? Write to Father and tell him that I often think of him.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 3307

1

From the contents the letter appears to have been written some time in
May-June, 1930 when Prabhavati was staying with Kamala Nehru; vide“Letter to
Prabhavati”, 20-5-1930 and “Letter to Prabhavati”, 29-6-1930.
2
Son of Rajendraprasad and husband of Vidyavati, addressee’s sister
3
Rajendraprasad’s wife

310

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

327. LETTER TO PATRICK QUINN
June 4, 1930
DEAR MR. QUINN,

Could you please send a jailor inspector if only for half an hour
at the outside?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 241

328. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

June 11, 1930 1
DEAR MAJOR MARTIN,

You have told me that the Government will permit seven of my
blood relations to see me twice per week and the others only by their
special permission. This means that my wife, who is not a blood
relative, and naturally her brothers and other relatives, have to obtain
special permission. I am sure this is a mere slip. But what is obviously
contemplated is that those who are not related to me by blood or
through marriage can, except Shrimati Mirabai Slade,2 see me only by
special permission of the Government. If this decision is not revised, I
fear I must not see my relatives. I have in the Ashram and outside
many widows, girls, boys and men, who are perhaps more to me than
many a blood relative. If they may not see me on the same terms as
relatives, to be just to the former, I must not see the latter.3
1

The letter was delivered to R. V. Martin, the Jail Superintendent, the next day.
The words “except Shrimati Mirabai Slade” do not appear in the draft
available under S.N. 19974.
3
Regarding the privileges to be allowed to Gandhiji, the Secretary of the
Home Department on June 17 wrote to the Inspector General of Prisons: “ . . . I am
directed to state that the word ‘relations’ should be substituted for the words ‘blood
relations’ . . . . It was of course not intended to exclude Mr. Gandhi’s wife, or his
brother-in-law and the like. I am further to say that if Mr. Gandhi refuses to see his
relations, the only thing that can be done is to treat them like strangers and
interviews regulated accordingly. . . .”
2

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

311

Although it is now a fortnight, I do not know what has
happened to the Ashram letters that were received and those that I
wrote. You told me that you had sent them1 to the I.G.
There is one more matter. I see Sjt. Kalelkar is to be brought
here as companion for me. He is an esteemed co-worker, but if I
conveyed the impression that I would like him to be brought here to
keep me company, I am sorry. I would not like him to be torn from
so many companions with whom he is placed at the Sabarmati Jail and
come here to share my isolation. If he could mix freely with the other
satyagrahi prisoners and keep company with me, I would naturally
value his company, but I have no desire to have the joy of his company at his expense. What I would desire is naturally to be able to see
all my satyagrahi friends who are in this jail. I repeat what I have told
you so often: I do not desire special privileges. But if an ordinary
prisoner may have the company of his fellows who may chance to be
in the same prison, it may be lawful for me to entertain such a desire.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original: C.W. 9316; also S.N. 19974

329. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

Silence Day [On or before June 16, 1930] 2
CHI. PREMA,

It seems it is your letter the authorities have held back. I am sure
it was entirely innocent. But what can we do? If every letter were to be
received a jail would have no meaning. Write again.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 6676. Courtesy: Premabehn Kantak

1

The draft has “both”.
In Bapuna Patro—5: Ku. Premabehn Kantakne it is suggested that this might
have been written between May 12 and June 23.
2

312

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

330. LETTER TO RAMANANDA CHATTERJEE
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

June 18, 1930
DEAR RAMANANDA BABU,

Your letter of 25th May was given to me three days ago. I thank
you for all you say in it. I was glad to learn that my brief account of
Kavi Rajchandra was safely in your hands.1 I was wondering whether it
had reached you or not.
I have permission to receive The Modern Review among other
magazines. Will you please send me copies from the May number? I
asked the Young India office some time ago to send me the magazine
but somehow I have not received the copies. I did not write directly.
I hope to see your contribution in Young India before long.
Please remember me to Pandit Benarsidas Chaturvedi.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S JT. R AMANANDA C HATTERJEE
120-2 UPPER C IRCULAR R OAD
C ALCUTTA
From the original: C.W. 9314. Courtesy: Sita Devi

1

Vide “A great seer”, 18-3-1930.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

313

331. LETTER TO PATRICK QUINN
June 18, 1930
DEAR MR. QUINN,

Will you please order:
Raisins 2 lb.
Dates 2 lb.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 266

332. LETTER TO KASHI GANDHI
June 18, 1930
CHI. KASHI,

I hope you are keeping well. I take it that you are at Vijapur. I
will not write separately to Krishnadas. He should write to me a
detailed letter. Who are the other persons with you there?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33084

314

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

333. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 22, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

After many weeks I take up the pen to write Ashram letters
again. The batch I sent you last I knew was held up and so was the
batch from the Ashram. In the circumstances, I did not want to write.
The way now seems to be fairly clear though I have not yet got all the
weekly letters and I know that some have been withheld. They are
from children. I am trying to secure them. I must have some
reminders now and then at least of prison life.
No visits can be entertained so long as the difficulty remains, as
it does, unremoved. If visits cannot be had on honourable terms, we
must be content with writing letters if they can be honourably
continued. If, therefore, you do not hear from me regularly, know that
I am a prisoner. If I am really ill, walls will speak. The authorities will
themselves proclaim it as they did last time and you could always
inquire from them whenever you hear rumours, and I expect they will
promptly give you the information. But I am hoping that there will be
plain sailing so far as letter-writing is concerned. Just at present there
is nothing wrong with me save for a trifling constipation. There is no
cause for any anxiety whatsoever.
I have your latest letter, i.e., of the 9th instant. Nothing since.
The instructions you give about the bow are quite good and quite
enough. Yet I have hung it up the wrong way up but it has worked
with perfect smoothness. The bow itself has not required any attention. I have finished carding all the cotton I had. The gut has not
given in at all as yet. I used not neem leaves but leaves of some other
tree resembling the tamarind. They are quite serviceable. You may
send two pounds of cotton per anyone who may be going to Poona.
There is no hurry. I have slivers enough to last till 15th July at least. I
need not touch the bow till then. When I do, I shall rearrange the
apparatus in accordance with your instructions.
About adjusting the wheel on the spindle too I understand.
But here again nature has been kind to me. I adjusted the wheel inmy
own way and it has remained quite fixed. If there is trouble I shall try
your prescription.
I note all you say about your own work. You shall act just as
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

315

God leads you and your strength permits. May God bless you. More
from the general letter.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5398. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9632

334. LETTER TO PATRICK QUINN
June 22, 1930
DEAR MR. QUINN,

(1) Will you please order 2 lb. dates?
(2) My companion did not get vegetables and salt yesterday.
(3) He is still without the commode-pot, he has the box.
(4) He has not got his utensils, charts, etc., returned to him.
I am obliged to write for him because he has been brought here
for my sake. His discomfort therefore becomes my discomfort. I
therefore write about him quite selfishly.
And of course the eternal letters!!!
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 266

316

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

335. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

June 22/23, 1930
CHI NARANDAS,

I get your letters one by one. You will read about this from my
letter to Mirabehn. I got three letters of yours, of 19th and 26th May
and 10th June, one after another during the last six days. Other letters
sent by you must be passing from hand to hand. I think I have still to
receive two letters, of June 2 or 3 and of June 16. In future give me
inyour letters the names of those whose letters you may have
forwarded. This is because some of them have not been given to me.
Do everything you can to please Ratilal. I am writing to him.
Please give the Japanese friend who wants to translate My
Experiments with Truth the permission to do so. With this is a letter for
the Bengali women. Rasjibhai and Shivabhai must have completely
recovered now.
What work is Jagannath doing?
The experiment of making curds from unboiled milk has
proved completely successful. Mostly I take curds instead of milk.
Hence my present diet is curds, raisins or dates and juice of a lemon
once a day. I still do not take any hot drink. Once only, when I had to
take castor oil, I had taken hot water, lemon juice and salt twice. I
drank milk on that day, but it was unboiled. This diet has had no
harmful effects. I think, therefore, that I shall keep to this diet for the
present. The weight is practically steady. It fluctuates by a pound. It is
105 at present.
Kakasaheb was brought here four days ago. He is keeping very
fit. His diet is milk, bread, ghee and some fruit from what is allowed to
me. He has made a request for vegetables, which will probably be
granted.
I have added sewing to my daily work. I had asked for a
sewing-machine from Lady Vithaldas and it has now arrived. I sew jail
caps at present. I give to this work three-quarters to one hour daily.
My rate of spinning is 375 rounds minimum. The average
would be 400. Spinning on the takli is also going on. I also spend
considerable time in making my takli. I am trying to spin fine yarn.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

317

The hand has set well and I spin with greater ease every day. I disover
new virtues in the takli daily. Even more than the spinning-wheel it
may prove to be the support of people in want, though, of course,
both give peace of mind. I compared them today with the
sewing-machine and clearly realized the moral value of manual work.
Though I look upon the sewing-machine as an invaluable benefit, I do
not regard it as a source of peace. When you work on it, you naturally
wish to increase the speed and in the end the brain is bound to get
tired. But once a person has acquired control over the takli, time
passes more peacefully for him as he works on it than for the driver of
a bullock-cart. This is my experience, though I have not become an
expert spinner as yet I must wait and see what exp-erience I have when
I have acquired perfect control over the takli. Kak-asaheb, too, spins
on it, but he has not discovered its secret yet.
These things are difficult for him to master. He knows that they
are for our good and, therefore, is trying to love them. He does not
want to start the spinning-wheel at present. He wishes to master the
takli first.
I read only after I have performed the spinning yajna. I look
upon sewing as a part of this sacrifice. I had received, and welcomed,
the suggestion sent by Mathuradas. I implement it whenever I get an
opportunity. Since Kaka is here, I am quite eager now. I started
Marathi yesterday. I would be happy if I make at least some progress
in it. If I advise everyone to commit the verses of the Gita to memory,
should not I, too, do that? The attempt is like fixing the shape of a pot
after it is baked. If at all it is worth making, however, this is the right
place. I, therefore, started learning the verses eight days ago. I have
learnt by heart Chapter XII and have now started Chapter XIII.
Kaka’s coming has naturally interrupted the progress. I will do
nothing by stealing time from the hours apart for the spinning yajna.
I, therefore, do these things in spare moments in the course of other
work or in the “library” 1 , etc. Let no one be shocked to read that I
try to learn the verses of the Gita by heart in the “library”. We have
learnt from childhood that there is no spot where He is not present.
We should, therefore, feel no qualms in taking His name or doing His
work there. Yes, this certainly means that our “libraries” should be as
clean as the buildings in which books are stored. Mine at any rate is.
1

318

Lavatory
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

For here in the jail everyone has to do all the things in the cell itself.
They have given me three cells. That does not mean that the position
is different. In jail I, too, have done all the things in the same cell,
whether in South Africa or here. I have had to do that.
Both of us felt that your long letter of 26th May was none the less
short, or rather not too long. It did not contain one superfluous word.
If anything was left out, the letter was short to that extent, but we did
not feel at all that anything was left out. I got this letter of the 26th
after I had received that of June 10th. In fact I got it only yesterday.
I shall not write more now. I think I have replied to all your
questions.
In the letters which you write in future, mention the names of
those whose letters you may enclose.
I have written this letter in two sittings. The first part was written
yesterday evening. I suppose it is Purushottam who attends on
Khushalbhai at present.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
If Mirabehn is not there, or if she is too busy otherwise to find
time, you should, when you can, carry out the suggestion about
sending cotton. I will reply to Balkrishna next time.
From Gujarati: C.W. 8113. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

319

336. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

June 23, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

I got your beautiful letter. If I were not eager to get your letters,
I would not merely out of courtesy ask you to write.
I like Dhurandhar and Kamala very much. I do not know when
I shall meet the other lady.
You should not stop eating uncooked vegetables. You can
certainly eat bitter gourds uncooked. I have done so. You should take
some tender ones, mash them and mix lemon juice with the pulp. If,
however, you get no vegetables on some day, you should do without.
You may eat raisins instead. Your health has improved and you
should not spoil it again. If you feel more hungry than before, you
may increase the quantity of milk or curds. Do not worry about the
expense. Write to me and tell me what you finally decide.
If I have left out any point in my reply ask me again.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 6671. Courtesy: Premabehn Kantak

320

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

337. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
Y.M.,

June 24, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

You must know Gujarati by now. I am writing in Devanagari
today, but later on, when you are willing, I shall write in the Gujarati
script. I have not received your letter. Write again. Give me news of
your parents.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

338. LETTER TO SUMANGAL PRAKASH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

June 24, 1930
CHI. SUMANGAL PRAKASH,

I have your letter. It is good you have arrived. Please keep
writing to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: Sumangal Prakash Papers. Courtesy Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

321

339. LETTER TO KALAVATI TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

June 24, 1930
CHI. KALAVATI,

You must be following Gujarati well enough by now. Write to
me and tell me all your thoughts. Is your mind at peace? How do you
occupy yourself?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5245

340. LETTER TO PATRICK QUINN
June 26, 1930
DEAR MR. QUINN,

I hope you have ordered dates.
Please send salt and commode-pot.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Part III, p. 269

322

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

341. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
June 27, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

You must now be getting my letters regularly. You should
assume that as long as I am permitted to write from here I will regularly write to you. My weight is satisfactory. It is a little above 103,
and so there is no cause for worry. It is indeed welcome news that
Father’s health is improving. You have lost much weight. How is that?
Take special care and improve your health. You should take
milk or curds and fruit, and also have exercise. A letter for Jayaprakash is enclosed.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3360

342. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

June 29, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I got your letter. My letter-writing had stopped, and so how
could you get any letter from me? Probably I shall be able to write
regularly now. I keep fairly good health. My diet consists of milk or
curds, raisins or dates and lemons; this seems enough. Even milk, I
have been taking unboiled. That has done me no harm. They have
been keeping Kakasaheb with me since about a week ago.
How do you two manage about your food? Do you have a
servant or do you cook for yourself? Do you read anything? I had
sent you a copy of Anasaktiyoga1 ; did you get it? Have you read it?
Did you understand it?
Write to Father and tell him that I often remember them all.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3392
1

A Gujarati translation of the Bhagavad Gita by Gandhiji.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

323

343. LETTER TO RUKMINI BAZAJ
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

June 29, 1930
CHI. RUKMINI,

I got your letter. You must have gone to the Ashram by now.
Your first duty is to make your body strong. You have no excuse now
to neglect doing that. Now that you are married and live with your
husband’s family, you ought not to fall ill. If you do, will not the
elders in the family lose face in society?
Write to me and tell me about your experiences in your
husband’s family. Do not be restrained by a false sense of shame
when writing.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9049

344. LETTER TO KALAVATI TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

[June 29, 1930] 1
CHI. KALAVATI,

Your letter. The earlier one was not given to me. It is good that
Shantabehn has come. She must be quite well by now. Improve your
handwriting.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5244

1

324

The source has ‘‘29-3-1930”, which seems to be a slip.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

345. LETTER TO BENARSILAL BAZAJ
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

June 29, 1930
CHI. BENARSILAL,

I heard something about you. I hope you are happy with Chi.
Rukmini. Write to me frankly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 9050; also C.W. 9303

346. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

June 30, 1930
MY DEAR RAIHANA,

I do hope you left your bed long ago. Tell me how you are
faring. Have you seen Father? Please remember me to Mother.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: S.N. 9617

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

325

347. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

June 30, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter.
I think the Ashram letters will be now regularly received by me
and mine by you all. The condition is that no politics can be discussed
on either side. But if you find again an interruption, you will infer that
some hitch has occurred.
I am glad you are keeping fit. Only your weight must not go
below a minimum which for your build must be 116 lb.
Yes, I am doing some sewing regularly. Of course, it is all jail
work. When Mathuradas suggested it for cheapening khadi, I was
attracted to the suggestion. I thought I would practise on the machine
here. The machine has been sent by Lady Vithaldas who was for some
time in the Ashram, if you can recall her.
As I am not likely to have visitors now, it would [be] better to
send me 3 lb. of cotton. I said 2 in my last letter 1 but perhaps it is as
well to send me 3. Kakasaheb too will need slivers. You may pack the
cotton in paper and then sew it up in sacking. This suggestion is made
to save khadi.
I told you all about the bow in my last letter. Though the way I
have fixed it works all right, I shall try your way when I get the cotton.
My love to all the friends.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
If you cannot attend to cotton, let someone else do it.
From the original: C.W. 5399. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9633

1

326

Vide "Letter to Mirabehn”, 22-6-1930.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

348. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

Silence Day, June 30, 1930
CHI. PURUSHOTTAM,

I have had no letter from you. Send me your diary. What is
your weight? Do you still take medicine? My respectful greetings to
the elders.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 899. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

349. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

June 30, 1930
CHI. LILAVATI,

I have your letter. From here I cannot send you a letter in a
sealed envelope. But what is there to hide for one who has a pure
heart? You should throw away the letter you have received. After
having once given up the thought of marriage, why think about the
matter again? Moreover, for you now true marriage lies in clinging to
the duty to which you have wedded yourself. It is only in such
marriage that true happiness is found. It gives rise to no problems and
there is no possibility of widowhood in it. So you should dismiss the
thought altogether from your mind. Meditate on the last portion of
the second chapter of the Gita which we daily recite. If this does not
help you to feel at peace you may write to me again and you should
have no hesitation in writing freely. Forget the past. Take care of the
present, and the future will then take care of itself. This is the
meaning, plain and simple, of non-attachment. If we do our duty
today, we shall automatically know our duty tomorrow.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9563

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

327

350. LETTER TO MUNNALAL
YERAVDA MANDIR

June 30, 1930
BHAI MUNNALAL,

I am both surprised and pained to know that you have fled. As
long as we live in the body, how can we run away from work? Even if
it is right for some persons to refrain from physical activity altogether,
that cannot be so for you or me. One who has attained perfection can
perhaps become free from the duty of working. I have already drawn
your attention to your unsettled state of mind. Wake up and start
working.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 6648. Courtesy: Munnalal; also G.N.
8648

351. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

June 30, 1930
CHI. SUSHILA,

I got your letter. How can you deny that you are a Parsi lady? If
you were not one, you would not write anadharya 1 . Vanias pronounce
the word with a palatal na. You seem, however, to be better than even a
Parsi lady. It seems you have given up all fear. It is because you know
that Manilal is not a body but a soul that you expressed sentiments
which befit a brave woman. My choice has been fully justified. May
God grant you a long life.
Convey my blessings to Father and Mother.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1181. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi;
also G.N. 4769

1

Literally,‘unexpected’. She had spelt the word the way Parsis usually
pronounce it.

328

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

352. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

June 30, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

I have now received all your letters.
We have thought long about the trouble being given by the Bharwads.
To me our dharma is plain. It is the same towards the entire world. We
should win over the Bharwads by love, and at the same time try to
protect what it is our duty to protect. That can be done only by giving
our lives to the Bharwads. In other words, we should lay down our
lives in protecting our things but should never attack the Bharwads in
doing so. However, I do not wish to blame anyone for what has happened. We can follow dharma only within the limits of our capacity,
otherwise we would be guilty of artificiality. We should, therefore, do
what the impulse of the moment dictates. That impulse is the measure
of our strength. As for the future, I have no doubt that our dharma is
what I have stated it to be. But before and after adopting that course
for protecting our things, we should discharge two other duties. I have
been observing and saying for the last fifteen years that we have not
mixed with our neighbours. What pains me is that I myself did not
follow that path. I tried to persuade Maganlal to follow it. Some kind
of a start was made. There were, however, difficulties in the way and
the attempt was abandoned. We are now paying for our indifference.
But recalling the past is of no value except for drawing lessons from
it. Let us look to the present. Just now, therefore, we should discuss the
problem with the Bharwads. We should ourselves try to plead with
them in the presence of persons who know them. We should also tell
them what we wish. If they want to graze their cattle [on our land],
they should pay us something. If, however, we have no land we should
explain that to them. We should also appeal to our neighbours to
plead with the Bharwads. We should render them whatever other
service we can, and should continue to do so irrespective of their
behaviour. We should explain to them why the Ashram has been
established and what it aims at doing. Even if we do all this, it is
possible that they will occasionally raid the Ashram. If they do, those
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

329

of us who can, may lay down their lives and let the Bharwads take
away what they will after killing them. If we do not have the will and
the strength for this, you may do what seems best to all of you. I have
only explained the duty, as I understand it, that is proper to an
Ashram. You should, however, put out of consideration what I may
write, for beyond expressing my views I can do nothing. Moreover, an
opinion expressed from a distance is likely to be erroneous. What I
might think if I were present there may very well be different from
what I think from here. Moreover, no matter with what detachment a
prisoner tries to think, his conclusions are likely to be based on
incomplete data. You need not, therefore, attach much weight to my
view. I shall be satisfied if it helps you to come to your own decision.
In any case it was good that afterwards you treated the Bharwads for
injuries.
I am writing to Bhansali; read that letter. Your decisions about
Chandrakanta and Giriraj seem all right.
I am getting on well. These days I am also trying to learn by
heart verses from the Gita. I have completed Chapter XII and done
half of Chapter XIII. Does man know what he wants? I liked Kaka’s
coming, but I also see that it has turned out to be an obstacle. Since
his coming my daily study has fallen behind. Without him I would
have proceeded faster with the Gita. Actually, I tried to prevent his
coming, but failed. My reason for doing that was quite different. I did
not like that he, too, should be confined within four walls as I was. But
the Government had made up its mind to provide me company and
did so. I, therefore, tolerate Kaka. And he has to bear separation from
the large company at Sabarmati. Thus we find the situation a mixture
of all sentiments—there are at least the pathetic, the humorous and the
heroic. However, if I have relaxed in one field of my daily study, I
have started Marathi. I would have become proud if I had become
altogether self-reliant. Now that I have been receiving invisible
services from Kakasaheb, they will help me in reminding me of my
right place. Besides, the exercise which my reason gets in sweet discussions about the Gita and other works is an additional benefit. Thus I
get an opportunity of another kind for self-examination. I can,
therefore, say that I would have been content if Kaka had not come,
and am also content now that he has come. Who can weigh and decide
whether his coming is a gain or a loss to me? To him who believes that
330

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

anything he gets unasked comes from God, every such thing is a
benefit—is a gift of His grace. Kaka’s coming, therefore, is such a
gift. It does not matter if the study of the Gita has slowed down.
Convey my greetings to Vallabhbhai. The question of Kaka’s
diet has been settled. He gets two pounds of cow’s milk, ten tolas of
butter, twenty tolas of fresh, uncooked vegetables and twenty tolas of
chapati. He turns the milk into curds. He is getting on quite well. His
weight has increased by one pound. By way of vegetables, he gets
brinjals and radishes by turn during the week. He cooks the brinjals
and eats the radishes raw.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8114. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

353. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

Silence Day [June 30, 1930] 1
CHI. GANGABEHN,

All of us are far away from our ideal and will remain so. Our
duty lies in striving to reach it. Man’s ideal grows from day to day
and that is why it ever recedes from him. You are ever striving and
that is all that you can do. Our effort should be pure and unremitting.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I do not write separately about Kaka, because the long letter
contains all the news.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 8751. Courtesy: Gangabehn Vaidya

1

From the reference to news about Kaka Kalelkar; vide the preceding item.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

331

354. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
Y.M.,

June 30, 1930
CHI. KANTA

I have your letter of May 26th. They did not give me the
previous one. Do you follow my Gujarati? Did you get my Gujarati
letter of last week?
It seems quite proper that you went and stayed with Mother. She
must have left by now. Your good lies in the attitude you have now
adopted. It is to one’s good to abide by the advice of a person whom
one has willingly accepted as one’s guardian. It makes for peace of
mind at least. Keep perfectly cheerful and remain engrossed in your
duty. I have high expectations of you. Write to me frankly about
everything.
I am very happy to learn that Krishna Kumari feels at home.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy. Gandhi
National Museum and Library

332

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

355. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

June 30, 1930
CHI. NIMU,

I got your letter. Nobody will object to your experimenting with
juwar in order to improve your health. Try it once and if it does not
agree with you, give it up. Moreover, when our dear ones are in jail,
we may certainly eat what they do, provided it is possible for us to do
so. You may stay wherever you like. Blessings to Ba. You seem to be
quite engrossed in your work. ‘Sumitra’ is a good enough name for
the baby.
1

Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
What is Navanit doing?
From the Gujarati original : Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

1

A variety of millet

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

333

356. LETTER TO KAMALA NEHRU
June 30, 1930
CHI. KAMALA,

I was very happy to have your letter. You must not let your
body become weak. It has to render much service. How is Indu
keeping now? Has she grown up a little?
My pranam to Mother and blessings to Sarup and Krishna.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1930. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

357. LETTER TO AMINA QURESHI
YERAVDA MANDIR , 1

Tuesday [July 1, 1930] 2
CHI. AMINA,

I think of you every day. Your confinement must be over by
now.
Blessings from

B APU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6670

1

Gandhiji was arrested on May 5, 1930, and placed in Yeravda Central Prison,

Poona.
2
In his letter to the addressee dated July 6, 1930, Gandhiji mentions the
addressee having had a baby. Presumably this letter was written on the preceding
Tuesday.

334

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

358. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 1, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

How is your state of mind now? And your health? When did
you see Satis Babu last?1 How is he? Who are all at Sodepur? What do
you study and what is your daily routine? Keep this in mind:
Who rejoices not, neither frets nor grieves, who covets not, who abandons
both good and evil—that devotee of Mine is dear to Me.2
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Write to me care of the Ashram.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1667

359. LETTER TO GANGABEHN JHAVERI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 3, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN JHAVERI,

The letters received in May were handed over to me only a short
while ago. I have faith in your strength and devotion to God. He will
certainly give you wisdom. Take care of your health.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Give my Vandemataram to Chhotubhai.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3101

1
Satis Chandra Das Gupta had been arrested and sentenced to one year’s
rigorous imprisonment on a charge of sedition in connection with the publication of
Satyagraha Bulletins.
2
Bhagavad Gita, XII. 17

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

335

360. LETTER TO NANIBEHN JHAVERI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 3, 1930
CHI. NANIBEHN (JHAVERI),

I got your letter of May 27, 1930 only a little while ago, more
than a month after it was received here. This is what being a prisoner
means. It was their kindness that I got it at all.
If you can digest cereals and pulses, by all means eat them. But
don’t eat them for the pleasure of the palate. Your body will become
strong only if you live on milk and curds. Give up all worries.
Meditate on the verses which we used to recite daily. Read the
Anasaktiyoga1 over and over again, reflect over its teaching and follow
it in practice.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3100

361. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI2
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 3, 1930
CHI. MANUDI,

So Balibehn3 has turned you away. Never mind. Only learn now
to behave like a grown-up girl. Do household work. Spin and card as
much as you can, and write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1502. Courtesy: Manubehn
Mashruwala

1

A Gujarati translation of the Bhagavad Gita by
“Anasaktiyoga”.
2
Daughter of Harilal Gandhi
3
Balibehn Vora, addressee’s maternal aunt

336

Gandhiji; vide

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

362. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 3, 1930
CHI. VASUMATI,

After I started addressing Ramdas, Devdas and others in the
second person singular, I don’t feel at ease addressing you in the
plural. And now I simply cannot bring myself to do that. From today,
therefore, I have started using the singular form of the pronoun, which
is the right one. Ever since I came to know you, you have held a
daughter’s place in my heart. And you have shown yourself fully
worthy of that place. Need I say more? Show yourself worthier still. I
don’t know when I shall be a worthy father to the many daughters
whom I have adopted. Don’t regard this merely as the language of
modesty. Let this be enough for today. I am all right. Kakasaheb1 has
been placed with me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9276

363. LETTER TO LAKSHMIBEHN KHARE
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 5, 1930
CHI. LAKSHMIBAI,

It was in July that I was given your letter of May. There is little
we can do about this. It would be enough if I could write Marathi as
well as you write Gujarati. I am of course learning it from Kakasaheb.
Always look upon all children of Vasant’s age as if they were
Vasant himself.
Write to me regularly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 285. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn Khare

1

D. B. Kalelkar

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

337

364. LETTER TO MOTIBEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 5, 1930
CHI. MOTIBEHN,

The letter which you wrote to me long ago was handed to me
just now. You must have received the letters which I wrote to you.
Read Chapter XII1 over and over again and reflect on it. I am sure you
get news about the children regularly from Cochin. Don’t grieve
about Meghji at all. He rests in peace. He who dies uttering
Ramanama with devotion, what evil can he meet with ?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3737

365. LETTER TO AMINA QURESHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 6, 1930
CHI. AMINA,

I was very happy to read your letter. I was glad to know that you
had a baby. May God grant him long life and may he be as brave as
Qureshi and you. Do the girls remember me? I trust you keep good
health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6656

1

338

Of Bhagavad Gita
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

366. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 6, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

They gave me your letter of July l. It is good that you get fruit
with your meals.
I took in Dhurandhar because I saw that he was scrupulous in
observing rules. I also liked his frankness. This should not be
published at present.
Give my love to the flower plants and trees. Here, too, I see their
brothers and sisters. Shouldn’t I be satisfied with that?
In all, I got only two letters from you. I didn’t get the one in
English.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10224; also C.W. 6672. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

367. LETTER TO DAHIBEHN PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 6,1930
CHI. DAHIBEHN (RAOJIBHAI),

You should write to me. I often remember you two Dahibehns.
I hope you never get fainting fits now. My blessings to all
thewomen who may be with you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9204

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

339

368. LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI THAKKAR
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 6, 1930
CHI. MAHALAKSHMI,

I got your letter. I was happy to learn that all the women were
doing their work well. Please tell Ramabehn that I got her letter. I am
not writing to her this time. The women to whom I don’t write must
not think that I have forgotten them. I write to as many as I can. But
when I write to one, the letter should be regarded as meant for all. I
note what you say about the children. I was pained by their going
away. I get news about Madhavji from time to time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6826

369. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 7, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter given to me intact and in good time. There is
not likely to be any difficulty now in the early delivery of letters on
either side.
I am glad you have good news from London. It was evidently a
thoroughly successful operation. 1 The West has always commanded
my admiration [for] its surgical inventions and all-round progress in
that direction.
In your menu you do not tell me how much ghee you are
taking and whether you are taking oranges or not. Ghee you need and
so also oranges. I would like you not to cut off or reduce these two
things.
If you have not sent cotton as yet it should now be sent at once.
I have told you 15th July is the last day.
I am keeping well. I find the doing of 375 rounds somewhat of
1

340

The addressee’s mother had undergone an operation.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

a strain nowadays. I am trying to probe the cause. That being so the
takli practice has slowed down considerably.
I have complaints about the non-appearance of extracts from
my letters. You may, therefore, resume publishing extracts of a
general character. I have discussed this with the Superintendent. The
people will be intensely dissatisfied if they see nothing from my
letters.
Nothing yet settled about interviews.1
My love to all those to whom I do not write but of whom I
constantly think.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5400. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9634

370. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 7, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

What does Bhansali write about Lilabehn2? Has she left the
Ashram?
This time I got your letter of July 2 soon after it was received
here. I had received the wire about Revashankerbhai and replied to
him direct.
I suppose Ratilal is quiet now.
Some portions of my letters can certainly be published. I have
suggested the limits in my letter to Mirabehn.
Amina, I hope, is all right now. If necessary, you can write to me
at any time. Most probably I shall get the letter immediately.
Where was Shambhu beaten up?
You are being put to a good test. You had no choice but to
endure the wild behaviour of the sadhu; not because he was a sadhu,
1

Gandhiji had refused to see anyone in Yeravda prison till permission as of
right was given to him to see close friends as well as blood relations; vide “Letter to
R.V.Martin”, 8-7-1930; also “Letter to R.V.Martin”, 11-6-1930.
2
Bhansali’s widowed sister-in-law who lived in the Ashram with her three
children.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

341

for to us a sadhu and an emperor are the same. Would we not treat an
emperor in the same manner if he created similar nuisance? If we
could and had the time to do so, we would try to come into closer
contact with the mischief-makers and to teach them to be civil. We
would go and see them at their places and plead with them. We would
try to discover their disease and observe their way of living. I know
that all this is difficult. But that is the only way. What would we do if
such a sadhu were our own brother? Would we not spend on him as
much time as we could spare and plead with him? The next thing is
that we should learn from such experiences to reduce our possessions.
This of course cannot be done in regard to milk,1 for we have
regarded running the dairy as our duty and done that duty. We
cannot, therefore, stop it. The only thing for us to do is to think out
methods of protecting it which would be worthy of the Ashram. I have
written this only by way of discussion. You may take from it what is
practicable.
The problem of the thieves, whom you are not able to catch, is
more difficult than that of the mendicant. Its only solution is that we
should mix with the people of the villages in our neighbourhood.
These are external remedies, and necessary ones. In the last resort, and
even as the first, we have prayer. “So long as the elephant depended
on his own strength, nothing availed him; if a weak person cries out
for help to Rama, He will come the moment His name is uttered.”
This is a great truth. It is realized in experience in the measure we
have faith in it.
Do write and inform me about every harassment. Such things
give me spiritual exercise. I get an opportunity to think what my mind
would prompt me to do in such circumstances.
Keep me informed about the results of Prabhudas’s experiments
with the spinning-wheel.
If they want to translate the Anasaktiyoga into Urdu, permit
them to do so.
The article on brahmacharya is kept in a safe place—only
Pyarelal or Kusum can say where. You will find it nowhere but among
the papers which are kept duly arranged.
Blessings from

BAPU
1

342

The sadhu had been wasting the milk in the dairy.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[PS.]
There are 47 letters today. I don’t see Kanu’s and Sharja’s
letters which you have mentioned in your list.
If you have not sent cotton, send it by return of post. Today I
am short of time and, therefore, a few things are left out.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

371. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI PANDYA
July 7, 1930
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

I have your letter. Please do not feel miserable. Since you have
not given up effort I have no doubt all will end well. The body is
under our control and therefore we ought to check it and restrain our
feelings. One who makes a show of physical self-control but indulges
in all manner of pleasures mentally is a hypocrite, a double-dealer.
One who controls one’s body and also endeavours to always restrain
one’s mind is an active aspirant; one whose mind as well as body are
fully under control is God [Himself]. It is enough if we are or [try to]
become active aspirants of the middling category. We should never let
our minds remain unclean. An evil thought should be thrown out no
sooner than it occurs. We should know that our mind is like our body,
which gets soiled every day and which we clean every day. The fact
that we are obliged to accommodate Shankarbhai’s father or others
like him is a help to us in preserving our dharma. Non-violence means
being strict towards one’s self and liberal towards others; this is the
sign of tolerance. Those who do not observe the rules, etc., deserve to
be pitied, never to be hated. That we have given up tea, etc., that we
abide by the rules is because we like it; if some do not, how can it be
an excuse for us to swerve from our own stand? On the contrary let us
hope that having observed our humble yet firm conduct people like
Shankarbhai’s father would be touched and give up their undesirable
habits.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 320. Courtesy: Bhagwanji Purushottam
Pandya

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

343

372. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

July 8, 1930
DEAR MAJOR MARTIN,

With further reference to my letter about interviews, I enclose
herewith a trial list to show what I mean when I say that I can see Mrs.
Gandhi and others of my family only if on the same terms I can see
those who are like blood relations to me, as those in the list are.
The alternative proposed by the Government is unacceptable to
me for the simple reason that I do not wish to expose my wife and
children to the indignity of having to apply to the Government for
permission each time they may desire to see me.1 I recognize that the
Government need not let anybody see me. But if they do let me see
anybody, I must refuse to avail myself of such permission if it is
bereft of grace as, in my opinion, the present position about interviews
is.
I know the Government’s preoccupations and it pains me to
have to take up their time over what is for them comparatively a trivial
matter. I have reverted to it only because I had a talk with you about it
and because I would like it finally decided one way or other.
If the list is approved, I reserve the right to submit a further list.
It is impossible for me to recall at once the names of all who are
intimately connected with me and are not known to political fame. I
may observe that such names I have purposely omitted. A large
number are boys and girls under 16. I have also omitted the names of
relatives as they are already allowed and I have omitted those who to
my knowledge are already imprisoned.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M . K. GANDHI

1

344

Vide “Letter to R.V.Martin”, 11-6-1930.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[Enclosure]
Trial list referred to in the letter to which this is the enclosure.
Damodardas and his wife
Harihar Sharma
Manibai Galiara and her
Begum Tyabji
children
Raihana Tyabji
Lakhmidas Asar
Hamida Tyabji
Vellabai Asar
Pyar Ali
Laxmibehn Bar
Noorbanu
Motibehn Choksi
Abdullabhai
Mani Asar
Gomatibai Mashruwala
Lilavati Asar
Naoroji Sisters
Amina Qureshi
Khambhatta
Mathuradas Purushottam
Tehmina Khambhatta
Motibai Mathuradas
Mithubai Petit
Jankibai
Gangabehn Senior
Laxmibai Khare
Gangabehn Jhaveri
Rambhau
Manilal Jhaveri
Chhaganlal Joshi
Gulabbehn Manilal
Ramabai Joshi
Ratilal Mehta
Motibai Ranchhodlal
Champabehn Mehta
Ramabehn Ranchhodlal
Nanibehn Jhaveri
Sarla Devi Ambalal
Nanibehn Budhabhai
Nirmalabai
Bhansali
Ambalal Sarabhai girls and boys Mathew
Ansuyabai Sarabhai
Kumarappa
Shankerlal Banker
Chandrashanker Shukla
Vinoba
Manibehn Parikh
Gopalrao
Manibehn Patel
Balkrishna
Nandabehn Kanuga
Shardabehn Mehta
Lalita
Dahibehn Patel
Lilabehn
Dahibehn Somabhai
Shantabai
Kamalabehn Patel
Shantabehn

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

345

Kamala Haridas
Vasumatibehn
Kusum Desai
Jethalal Gandhi
Maganbhai Patel
Kapilrai
Mahavir
Maitri
Durga
Krishnamaiya Devi
Sarojini Devi
Satyavati
Kantabehn
Krishna Kumari
Kasturbehn
Prithuraj
Laxmi Dadabhai
Lalji
Vithal
Jethalal Bhatia
Babalbhai
Kevalram
Nirmala Kevalram
Godse
Somabhai
Hasmukhrai
Giriraj
Mannalal
Jagannath
Shambhu
Ishvarlal
Tapu
Shivabhai Patel
Rowjibhai Patel

346

Jankibai Bajaj and children
Kamalnayan
Nathji
Kunverji Patel
Pundit Sukhlal
Bechardas
V. Sundaram
Emma Harker
Padmaja Naidu
Krishnabai Santanam
Laxmi Rajgopalachari
Dahyabhai Patel
Narmada Dahyabhai
Shanti Kumar Narottamdas
Narsimha Prasad
Mama Phadke
Haribhai Phatak
Dilkhush Divanji
Nandlal Shah
Punjabhai
Budhabhai
Karasandas Chitalia
Surajbehn Manilal
Gangabehn Ramji
Motibehn Ramji
Chelibehn Shah
Keshavrao Deshpande
Ramibai Kamdar
Lady Vithaldas
Kamalabai
Vithaldas Jerajani
Chhotelal
Kikibehn Lalvani
Girdhar

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Sharjabehn
Premabai
Sarda Kotak
Harijivan Kotak
Parvati
Nirmala Desai
Balbhad[r]a
Dudabhai Motji
Anandi
Indu Parekh
Kantilal Parekh
Amritlal Nanavati
Samalbhai

Mangala
Pushpa
Mahalaxmi
Nirmala Pandya
Durgabehn Desai
Ramchandran
Juthabhai
Punjabhai Junior
Chimanlal
Gulab Bajaj
Kaku
Bapubhai Shelat

M.K.G.
From a photostat: G.N. 3850; also S.N. 19975

373. LETTER TO KAPILRAI MEHTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 8, 1930
CHI. KAPILRAI,

Whence this illness again? It is the duty of every student to
shake off illness forthwith. It is a crime to fall ill.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3973; also C.W. 19595. Courtesy:
Kapilrai Mehta

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

347

374. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 8, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

How is it that there is no letter from you? How are you?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3389

375. LETTER TO ISHVARLAL JOSHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 8, 1930
CHI. ISHVARLAL,

How are things with you? What progress have you made? Have
you kept up your study of English ? Is Lakshmidasbhai satisfied with
your progress?
Is Indu there? How is she? Ask her to write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the original in Gujarati: C.W. 9311. Courtesy: Ishvarlal Joshi

348

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

376. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
July 8, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I got your letter. How is Kaka? What news of Ramibai?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-6: G. S. Gangabehnne, p. 39; also C.W. 8752. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

377. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

Silence Day, July 9, 1930
CHI. SHARDA (BABU),

1

Is it any wonder that we who are housed in the Mandir are in
fine spirit? But why should you be suffering from asthma? Is it not
due to their own fault that children or grown-ups fall ill? If this is true,
you must find out where your fault lay and should not repeat it. Once
you have recovered, your asthma would not visit you again if you
follow a regular course of deepbreathing exercises, sun-bathing,
massage, etc., and if you observe restraint in food, etc.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9885. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

1

Daughter of Chimanlal and Shakaribehn

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

349

378. LETTER TO WILFRED WELLOCK1
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

July 11, 1930
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. From a prison cell it would not be
proper for me to enter into any argument. But you may depend upon
my not missing a single real opportunity for co-operation. But I
confess that I see no sign as yet in the midst of fraud, falsehood and
force that appear to me to surround so many of the acts of the powers
that be.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, 750(34), p. 117

379. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 11, 1930
CHI. KASHINATH,

I got your letter. It is good that you poured out your heart in it.
I have known very few persons who have been free from the evil
which you have described. The environment in which we live is so
demoralizing that most young men are unable to save themselves
from that evil. But, now, instead of repenting for the past, take proper
care of the present, and leave nothing wanting in the attempt.
By all means, take Kalavati to a doctor. Let that lady doctor examine
her. A note from me is not necessary, and it would be improper to
send one from here. If you require any, a note from Narandas will
serve the purpose. She is a kind-hearted lady.
I understand what you say about the Gita. I will try to read the
Calcutta translation. I am sending a letter to Mahavir Prasad along
with this. Read it. You did the right thing in showing it to Vinoba.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5247
1

350

Member of Parliament, Birmingham
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

380. LETTER TO KALAVATI TRIVEDI
July 11, 1930
CHI. KALAVATI,

Your letter.
The only desire you may keep should be that for service. In or
out of the Ashram, all service should be the same to you. It is no
service if we find joy in doing those things only that suit us. It will
mean self-satisfaction not service. We must never indulge in that.
Kashinath has written about your pain. You need hipbaths and
certainly purity of heart. Try to keep your mind calm.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5246

381. LETTER TO KAMALNAYAN BAJAJ
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 12, 1930
CHI. KAMALNAYAN,

I have your letter. Just now your duty is to make your body
strong. Your diet is all right. Take proper exercise. Do as much khadi
work as you can. Write to me regularly. How is Kamala? And
Madalasa? Ask Janakibehn to write to me. What does Father eat? How
much do you spin daily? Do you get time to do any reading?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Kakasaheb sends you his blessings.1
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3043

1

This is in Hindi.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

351

382. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
Y.M.,

July 12, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

I have your letter. Only the woman who controls her desires and
finds joy only in doing her duty can truly serve. There is always a
conflict going on in our minds between the good and the desirable.
To be truly human one must choose the good and find it desirable.
We are not always certain what should be regarded as good. Hence, in
the course of one’s striving it is necessary to have faith in one’s
superiors and in the received word and to act accordingly. Of course,
it will always be well with you.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
What is Brother doing? Give him my blessings.
From a photostat of the Hindi: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

383. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 13, 1930
CHI. VASUMATI,

I got your letter. What does work mean? Is not spinning and carding
work? All work done sincerely has equal value. True soldiership or
devotion to God or spiritual living consists in being content with the
duty which falls to our lot. Absorption in the work of service which
has come to us unasked is the only true samadhi. It is quite true that
attaining this state of mind is a slow process. All that one can do,
therefore, is to go on striving. The result lies in God’s hands. We are
both in good health. I will give more information on this subject in
the common letter for the Ashram.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 3283

352

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

384. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 13, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

I have your letter. Nirmala’s letters reveal the beautiful influence
of her Hindi and yours that of Marathi. For instance, bet rahit karyo1.
I like a language being enriched in this manner. I hope in a short time
to be able to follow Marathi very well. I am at it every day.
I have finally given up hope of getting the English letter.
I know about Krishnan Nair.
Your handwriting in Gujarati seems to be improving.
Idealism sometimes causes pain but a human being without
idealism is like a brute. Our highest duty is to see that our idealism
takes the right direction.
You should try once to eat bitter gourds uncooked.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N.

10225; also C.W. 6673. Courtesy:

Premabehn Kantak

1

“Dropped the intention for the time being”.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

353

385. LETTER TO MATHURADAS PURUSHOTTAM
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 13, 1930
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I got your letters. I was glad that you wrote out and sent me the
instructions for improving the method of carding. How can I expect
to get copies of the Navajivan here ? I have no copy of the saptapadi1
pledge with me. If you send one, I will try to revise and improve it
with Kakasaheb’s help.
As for the book on non-violence, I am at present trying to live
it. The book will have real value only if I can practise the idea in my
own life. What I write will become a dead letter one day. What I live
will ever grow. And haven’t I written enough on the subject in short
articles from time to time? What can I say now which I have not said
already? Even if I try, I cannot think of anything new to say. However,
the request which you have made has been made by some others too.
If, therefore, I feel an urge within me in future, I may write one. Cease
grieving over Meghji’s death. We have countless Meghjis with us.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3739.

1

354

Vide “With bare religious rites”, 7-3-1926.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

386. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
Y.M.,

July 13, 1930
CHI. SHANKERLAL,

I have your letter. One who understands the meaning of ahimsa
must realize the importance of the takli and the charkha. It becomes
clearer each day that they are visible manifestations of ahimsa.
Take care of your health. Did Gulzarilal receive my letter? Ask
him to write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: G.N. 11549

387. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
Y. M.,

July 13, 1930
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

I was pleased to read your letter. The weaving school students
are doing credit to the name and the work of their Ashram. I am
getting along well. Take care of your health.
What more need I write?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: G.N. 11550

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

355

388. LETTER TO DURGA GIRI1
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 13, 1930
CHI. DURGA,

Your letter is good. The handwriting too is good. Will you test
me in sewing or shall I test you? Over there you are learning cutting
too. Who can teach me all this here ? But I shall see who surpasses, my
walking sticks 2 or I? I have praised your handwriting in the hope that
you would further improve it. You girls have an example in
Radhabehn’s handwriting. Mistakes due to oversight can be corrected
by revising the letter.3
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Bapuki Virat Vatsalata, p. 30

389. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
UNREVISED ,

July 14, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter. I am likely now to get the Ashram post
regularly.
Your taking cold baths I do not mind so long as the body reacts
immediately. There should be no chill felt. The full benefit of a cold
bath according to the Indian style is dependent upon vigorous
rubbing as the water is being poured. This is followed by equally
vigorous rubbing with a dry towel till all the parts are thoroughly dry.
But please do not try unboiled water. My case here is different. I get
the same water, which is strained and stored in a separate earthen pot.
The whole water supply for the jail is filtered.
1

Daughter of Dalbahadur Giri who, along with her brothers, sisters and
widowed mother, was residing in the Ashram
2
Girls on whose shoulders Gandhiji leaned while walking
3
The original letter was in Gujarati.

356

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

My constipation has almost altogether abated. This was due to
my having reverted to milk in the morning instead of curds. If I find
the heating of milk or hot water necessary, I shall not hesitate to take
either or both. But I am hoping that it will not be necessary. Fresh
fruit does not appear to be necessary for me. I am not losing weight.
Last week it was between 103 and 104 lb. I do not consider this a bad
weight. You will thus see that there is no cause for anxiety on my
account.
You ask for the Gita translation. I should love to do it. But just
now what little time I do get is given to the translation of the
Bhajanavali1 also undertaken for you. I am going at a snail’s pace. I
therefore do not know when that will be finished. The Gita translation
is a big task. You will agree I may not suspend the spinning for it. For
the spinning is applied translation of the Gita if one may coin that
expression. But if I have long enough of this quiet, I shall certainly
undertake the translation.
We cannot have at the Ashram the worship of the kind you refer
to. Of course, we have the little samadhi near Magan Kutir. But
nobody save a few look at it. The inmates of the Ashram have no
living faith in that kind of worship. For the worship of the invisible,
the intellect is ready but the heart does not respond. We have, however,
to plod in that direction. As pointed out in the 12th chapter, that way
is undoubtedly hard to tread but it is not impossible. It will come.
Everyone is subconsciously recognizing the worth of the Ashram
prayer. It has been the sole solace of many. Those that attend it are
not scoffers. They are not wittingly irreverent either. The spirit is
willing, the flesh is weak. They are all striving. And no one who has
honestly striven has ever been known to have failed. Ours is, you
should remember, a somewhat original attempt. We have no solemn-looking building for prayer. We have simply the open space. But
it is a sound thing especially as we represent the famishing millions.
For us the sky must be an all-sufficing roof and the four directions
our limitless walls. But we shall take time before we outgrow habits
handed down from generations, if not ages. And yet, if we are to
break through all bonds of race, class and creed, we can have but the
openest of house of prayer and in the way we are having it. Am I
clear?
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5401. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9635
1

Vide “Ashram Bhajanavali”, the last item in this volume.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

357

390. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 14, 1930
CHI. KUSUM (SENIOR),

I have a letter from you after many days. You have joined a
good place. Ultimately, you will have to return to the Ashram. Do not
ruin your health. Write to me from time to time. Don’t take up sewing
before you have acquired mastery over carding and spinning on the
wheel and the takli. It is easy to learn sewing. Nor is it absolutely
necessary. I would be satisfied if your spinning could become perfect.
Is Purani still out?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1800

391. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 14, 1930
CHI. MANI (PATEL),

Well done. No sooner did you meet the real father 1 than you
forgot the adopted father. And now you are a speaker at public
meetings and thus all the more likely to forget me. How are you in
body, and in mind? Did you get my letters?
How is Dahyabhai ? And how is Yashoda ? Has she recovered
completely?
Blessings from

BAPU
C HI . M ANIBEHN P ATEL
DR. K ANUGA’S BUNGALOW
ELLIS BRIDGE
AHMEDABAD

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 71
1

358

Vallabhbhai Patel, who was released from jail on June 26, 1930.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

392. LETTER TO HARIPRASAD
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 14, 1930
CHI. HARIPRASAD,

It is good that you have returned. Now tell me your routine and
also your thoughts.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2549

393. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 13/15, 19301
CHI. NARANDAS,

This time all the letters were delivered to me as soon as they
were received, and probably that is what they will do in future too .
Last time I wrote 47 letters and then added two at the last
moment, but could not change the figure which I had mentioned in
your letter. For the Jail Superintendent arrived then and I handed over
the packet to him after inserting into it those two slips of paper.
My speed has not increased to 400 rounds, or even yards, and it
is not likely to do so. I believe that my body simply does not have the
capacity for that. Formerly I used to spin 160 rounds during the day;
instead, I now spin 375 rounds. But to spin that takes on an average
four hours. Even on days on which everything goes well, I take not
less than three hours. The average probably comes to 400 rounds a
day. The speed used to be 160, which has now risen to 200 rounds,
but that only on the day on which I have sufficient energy and the
materials are well arranged. Make this correction. I have become
slackabout the takli these days. I get pretty tired working on the
spinning-wheel. Ever since my illness I have lost the strength to sit up
1

This letter written on different days is placed under the date on which it was
completed. Similar letters to Narandas Gandhi and Mirabehn are placed accordingly.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

359

for four hours at a stretch. I, therefore, find it difficult to accustom the
body to that. But this is my only spiritual discipline at present and
hence I cling to it. Of course I take care of the body. The weight is
steady, so I don’t believe any harm is being done. I have good sleep. I
of course give some time to the takli. I cannot yet make a very good
takli with my own hands and, for want of time, I do not try to learn to
do so by constant practice. I give primary importance to spinning, as I
should like to spin as much yarn as I can. Sewing is going on all right.
The hand has set well on the machine. I still do not know its
intricacies, for there is no one here to teach them to me. You will read
more about these matters in my letters to Mirabehn.
Kakasaheb is in excellent health. After his coming here his
weight has increased by two pounds. He walks for about two and a
half hours daily, in addition to the walking he has to do in connection
with work. He takes all the milk in the form of curds, so that the milk
he consumes is easily digested. He toasts bread. Ordinarily he gets the
vegetables by turns. He gets radishes and brinjals, and sometimes
turiya or guvar. He does not cook the radishes. He digests ten tolas of
butter. He still spins on the takli only. A Gandiva spinning-wheel
arrived from Surat only recently and Kakasaheb has started to learn
spinning on it from today. He continues to teach me Marathi. It is he,
again, who puts the fruit into water for me or washes it and also washes
the utensils in the evening. Besides these, I accept many other small
services from him.
You need not worry about either of us.
I am happy that the problem of the Bharwads has been solved.
I have not received any cotton from there till today. I am writing
this on Saturday night. If no cotton has been sent up to the time that
you get this letter, post some immediately. I think there will be no
difficulty if I get it by return of post in reply to this letter. I do hope,
indeed, that since I have given the time-limit up to the 15th, I shall get
the cotton on or before Tuesday. As days pass, I have certainly
become a little impatient.
I did not see Sharja’s letter. Kanu’s I got this time.
Give me news about Punjabhai. How is he ? Where does he live?
How does he spend his time?
360

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

July 14, 1930
One of the boys asks me in his letter why I use slips of paper.
The reply is that a prisoner should consume the minimum of
everything. Secondly, he who observes the vow of non-possession is a
trustee of all property and, therefore, I must use the property of this
prison, too, like a miser. Thirdly, isn’t this property really ours ? With
whose money have these things been bought ? Fourthly, in this poor
country the less the consumption of such things the better. Fifthly, it
hurts me to use anything extravagantly at a time like this.
I hear today that there is a railway receipt in the office, which
means that the cotton is likely to have arrived. If I cannot mention the
total number of letters, I am sure you will see the serial number on the
last letter.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
It is now 5.30 a.m. on Tuesday.1 I stop writing the letters. In all
there are 52. If there are people to whom I have omitted to write and
if they expect letters from me, send me their names. How is a man
with a large family to decide whom he would write to and whom he
may omit? Where is Subbiah?
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

1

July 15

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

361

394. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 15, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

The last two packets from the Ashram contained no letter from
you. Since as a rule you write regularly, the absence of a letter from
you worries me. How is Father? What is Jayaprakash engaged in at
present? I am all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3390.

395. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 15, 1930
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

Because I do not write to you every week, it does not follow that
you need not do so either. I can know about the state of your health
and your group’s only if you write and tell me every week. You may
write whatever else you wish to.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Send me the names of all the children in the Bal Mandir.
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33012

362

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

396. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 15, 1930
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

Give me an account of your health and your mental state. You
can write care of the Ashram. Do you see Devdas?1 Where is Krishnan
Nair?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2382

397. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

July 16, 1930
MY DEAR HENRY,

Your cable was given to me only yesterday.
As a prisoner, I may not write to you as fully as I would like. All
therefore I can say is that if you knew the circumstances as much as I
do, you would not press me to go to the R.T.C. I should be perfectly
useless there. I see nothing in the Viceregal statement to give me any
cause for hope. The fact is swaraj is for us to take. It cannot come by
way of donation.
My love to Millie, Celic, Leon and all those we knew. Where is
Maud nowadays? With my love to Andrews tell him I had his cable
just after my imprisonment.
Yours,

BHAI
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom
Movement in India, Vol. III, Pt. III, p. 182

1

Devdas Gandhi had been arrested and sentenced in Delhi early in April for
offering civil disobedience.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

363

398. LETTER TO GOVIND PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 17, 1930
CHI. GOVIND,

I was glad to see your letter written in a beautiful hand. Now
write to me regularly in future. I had altogether forgotten you.
Probably all persons with a large family find themselves in such a
plight. Out of sight, out of mind.
I am very happy to learn that your health has improved. I have
no doubt at all that you will always do your work carefully. May God
give you a long life and make you a true servant.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3944

399. NOTE TO MIRABEHN
[July 18, 1930 ] 1
CHI. MIRA,

It hurts me but I must deny myself this pleasure, if I am to be
consistent with myself.2 Please leave the wheel, etc., and I shall manage
the best way I can. It is on such occasions that we test ourselves. God
be with you.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5402. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9636

1

According to a note by Mirabehn in Young India, 24-7-1930, she took the
wheel to Gandhiji on Friday, which was July 18. Vide also “The final test”, 9-3-1930.
2
The following note by Mirabehn appears along with this letter in Bapu’s
Letters to Mira, p. 101: “I had prepared a wheel on the Bihar pattern and taken it to
Yeravda Jail, as I knew it would be difficult for Bapu to understand the method of
fitting it if I did not explain it personally. But this proved not to be possible, and
Bapu sent me the following note in the Superintendent’s office.”

364

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

400. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 18, 1930
CHI. RAOJIBHAI,

I have your letter. To be ready for jail is a duty. To wish to go to
jail is ignorant attachment. We should have only one wish, and that is
to serve. Any condition in which we can serve should be welcomed.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8988

401. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 18, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got the bag of this week’s love letters yesterday evening. I will
reply to most of them on the Silence Day. I write this just to tell you
that you should either put the letters in an envelope lined with cloth or
secure the packet with a string on all sides. The letters were about to
fall out of the packet. I got the cotton on the 16th.
Blessings from

BAPU
C HI . N ARANDAS GANDHI
S ABARMATI ASHRAM
B.B. [&] C.I. RLY .
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U. /I

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

365

402. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 18, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I had a letter from you after many weeks. I was relieved.
I keep good health. The weight remains at about 103-104.
The diet consists of milk, curds, raisins, dates and lemons. Do not
worry on my account. I spin 375 rounds daily. I have learnt sewing
on the machine. Kakasaheb is with me.
You may write anything you wish to.
Does Father tour in villages?
My blessings to Jayaprakash.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3365

403. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 18, 1930
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

I got your letter. Stop worrying about your health. It will be
as God has ordained. Worrying about health will not improve it. We
may try our best. This is my emphatic advice. You should go away
purely for the sake of your health to some hill station where you
can stay comfortably. You may do there whatever khadi work in
cotton or wool you can. Live as if the fight1 was not going on at all.
If this advice does not appeal to you or is rejected by
Chhaganlal or Kashi, do as they advise you. You should not decide
on your own because just now, it is beyond your capacity to do so.
You may, if you wish, consult the Vaidyaraj at Morbi. I insist on one
thing only. I cannot order you from here. Do as Chhaganlal and
Kashi advise you after reading this letter. Regard their advice as an
1

366

That is, the civil disobedience movement which was then in porgress
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

order. If Narandas has any suggestion to make in this matter, listen
to him. I have not shown this to Kakasaheb. If his view is different
from mine, I will include it in this letter.
Kakasaheb has not yet gone through what you have written
about the Ramayana. I will let you know his opinion after he has
done so. Go on doing what you have been doing by yourself.
What you say about prayer is quite right. All our undertakings
are in the experimental stage. None among us is omniscient. All of us
are blind, but some of us who have more knowledge than the others,
are trying to find remedies for the blindness and to employ them.
That being so, how can it be otherwise than that our prayer should be
imperfect? If Narandas has the time to do so, I have suggested to him
to introduce whatever reforms are possible. The prayer ultimately is a
matter of faith. We have to bring ourselves to take sufficient interest in
prayer to keep up that faith. After all, if you go in the mornings and
join the prayer group in that spirit, it will be sufficient prayer for you,
no matter in what language the prayer is offered. The practice of
collective silent prayer also is prevalent in the world. Devout men and
women among the Roman Catholics can sit for hours together,
absorbed in silent prayer. Our aim is somehow to find peace of mind.
You need to cultivate the habit of reading with proper attention
whatever you read. It can be cultivated by practice. Even in this,
however, if thinking too much confuses your mind, then give up the
effort to think. Do not be overeager in this matter either. We have
clung to the practice of prayer all these years with a pure motive. We
are therefore sure to discover the right key some day. Till then, be
content with the fact that the people have begun coming. For some
things, time is the only remedy. The more we think about it, the worse
the thing gets but if we wait in patience, we will discover the remedy.
This is not likely to give much satisfaction to one like you. But just
now I cannot think of anything more satisfying than this. It is
therefore best to endure what cannot be cured.
I understand what you say about the spinning-wheel. Insist that
all the girls who are carrying on the experiment, clean their
spinning-wheels properly. Banish from your mind the thought that
the girls will never do or cannot do this work.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32998
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

367

404. LETTER TO SHIVABHAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 19, 1930
CHI. SHIVABHAI,

I got your letter. The Lord has stated it as a law, to which there is
no exception, that everyone gets what he seeks with devotion. We seek
the spirit of disinterested service which would require us to sacrifice
our all. If, therefore, we fail to cultivate such a spirit, the Lord’s words
would be proved untrue or maybe our aspiration is not sincere. We
should, therefore, have faith and pursue with single-minded devotion
the task to which we have dedicated ourselves.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9499

405. LETTER TO DUDHIBEHN DESAI
July 19, 1930
CHI. DUDHIBEHN,

I have your letter. You must have returned to the Ashram now.
Do you go and see Valji? How is he? When you meet him next, tell
him that I often think of him. Take care of your health.
How are Hari-ichchha and the others?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7404. Courtesy: V. G. Desai

368

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

406. LETTER TO AMINA QURESHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 19, 1930
CHI. AMINA,

I have your letter. Father and Qureshi are in jail. You wish to be
there and, moreover, you live in the Ashram. You should, therefore,
believe that you are in the struggle too. It is more than enough if we
are content to live where and in the condition that God wills. Do not
give up your study of Urdu. Giriraj will be able to teach you. Tell
Father or Qureshi, whoever it is you see, that I cannot forget either of
them.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6657

407. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 19, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN (SENIOR),

I have your letter. It seems Kaka is getting useful experience.
Write to Ramibai and ask her to write to me. I often remember her and
Kamdar1.
What you said to Shankerlal was quite correct. We should
certainly take in any Antyajas who may wish to join.
Don’t be anxious to economize on fruit at the cost of your
health.
You must have read about Kakasaheb’s diet. If you wish to
suggest any change in it, do so. He does indeed keep good health.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-6: G. S. Gangabehnne, p. 39; also C.W. 8753. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya
1

Ramibai’s husband

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

369

408. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 19, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

I got your humorous letter crammed with news. Continue to
write in this manner. I do hope that I shall not fall ill here. How can I
have here Prema and Vasumati who would remain by my side
whenever I seemed to be passing through a difficult time, fearing that
something must have happened to me? Don’t believe the rumour
about my having lost weight. My health is indeed good.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10226; also C.W. 6674. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

409. LETTER TO LALJI PARMAR
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 19, 1930
CHI. LALJI,

Kakasaheb and I were pleased to read your long letter. In future,
write in ink. Work very hard. Never swerve from truth or forsake
self-restraint and modesty. As far as you are concerned, you should
form the habit of getting up regularly at four. You will realize in
future the great benefit of such a habit.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Ask Mamasaheb to write to me
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3294

370

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

410. LETTER TO MATHURADAS PURUSHOTTAM
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 19, 1930
CHI. MATHURADAS,

Both of us have gone through your glossary of technical terms.
I should like to suggest one change. For baithak, it is not enough
merely to sit on the floor with the right leg drawn in. It is necessary to
sit with the toes of the right foot pressed, under the left thigh. If this is
not done, the leg may at times brush against the string or the rod.
Think over this. If I can do so, I will think about the other definitions
too. I like your zeal for perfection very much.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3740

411. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 19, 1930
CHI. RAMA,

I have your letter. It is beautiful. You have taken upon yourself
a big responsibility, but I know that it is not beyond your strength.
Haven’t we, moreover, learnt that verse which tells us that the Lord
takes upon Himself the burden of the prosperity and welfare of those
who think of Him with single-minded devotion?1 Why then should we
worry? You have done quite right in changing the time of the prayer.
My blessings to all the women.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5322

1

Bhagavad Gita, IX. 22.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

371

412. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
Y. M.,

July 19, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

I have your letter. I have received Brother’s also. Has not the
Lord said in Ch. XII [of the Gita] that if we cannot absorb ourselves
in this service, that is, in the service of His creation, we shall be able to
do so by practice and yoga? By “practice” we should here understand effort. Very few persons are inclined by nature towards service,
but everyone can make an effort. Sincere effort makes it natural in the
end and then it becomes a thing of joy. Do you follow this? Should I
continue to write in the Devanagari script or may I change that also to
Gujarati?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

372

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

413. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
U NREVISED

July 20, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

It pained me to have to refuse to see you.1 But the proof of my
having done the right thing came the next morning. The Government
have rejected my offer and therefore there can be no interviews now.
It would be unbecoming for me to press my view-point. They are
entitled to refuse every facility to prisoners as was done all the world
over only a century ago or even much later. It is enough that the
exchange of letters is permitted. But you will recognize that even this
is a precarious thing. Any moment they may stop the correspondence
or impose unacceptable conditions.We can only gain by self-denial.
Therefore, there need be no heartburning over this stoppage of
interviews. It is better that spirit meets spirit. No power on earth can
stop that blessed contact.
Now for the gifts you left. I note the extraordinary care over the
smallest detail. I began the use of the new wheel immediately. This,
therefore, was the second day of use. Today is Sunday after the
commencement of silence. But whilst this love is deep, it is not as wise
as it might be. Your wheel has not lessened the strain. As I explained
to Mathuradas, the strain was in the having to sit out for five hours in
practically one posture. If I could reduce the hours and get the same
amount of production, it would be another matter. That the new wheel
is not likely to do. As it is, the strain on the left arm is felt in using the
new wheel. For in this you have to move the arm away from you and
raise it too, where [-as] in the box wheel, the arm is in a horizontal
position and moves towards oneself. Moreover, you could ill afford to
give time to a matter like this and take up that of skilled workmen
unless it is required by me. I must be allowed to be capable of looking
1

Vide “Note to Mirabehn”, 18-7-1930.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

373

after myself and expressing my wants. Thirdly, I have not yet been
able to draw as fine a thread as on the box wheel. The result is the use
of 50 per cent more slivers—a national waste! Enough however of
criticism. I am not going, lightly, to leave aside a thing that has come
charged with so much love. I am, therefore, going to continue the use
of the wheel and report to you from time to time. What oil do you use
for the holders and the axle ? How often do you apply the resin to the
mal? The taklis I have tried. They are not as good as the one I have
made here. The discs are too large, the bamboo not well polished.
There seems to be a proportion between the thickness of the rod and
the circumference of the disc. If weight is wanting, it must be made up
by making the disc thicker. Next time you make a takli, you will
consider these points and let me know your opinion.
There is nothing new to report about my health. The weight
keeps steady.
You will please take no liberties with your body during the tour.
I am putting in more time for the translation of the bhajans. I
have now finished the Sanskrit verses and am now on the bhajans.
Give my love to Hariprasad.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5403. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9637

374

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

414. LETTER TO PATRICK QUINN 1
July 20, 1930
DEAR MR. QUINN ,

Will you please post the enclosed p.c. which you will see is a
mere acknowledgment? Did you order the irrigator?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom
Movement in India, Vol. III, Pt. III, P. 284

415. LETTER TO PATRICK QUINN
[July 20, 1930] 2
DEAR MR. QUINN,

Will you please send for dates 2 lb., raisins 2 lb.?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom
Movement in India, Vol. III, Pt. III, P. 285

1
2

Superintendent, Yeravda Central Prison
The date has been inferred from the placing of the item in the source.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

375

416. LETTER TO RATILAL SHAH
July 20, 1930
BHAISHRI RATILAL,

I have your letter. The event is sad but it is the kind of thing that
is going on all the time. I have come to the conclusion that we
needlessly regard death as a matter for sorrow. Like all other natural
processes, death is also a necessary and beneficial phenomenon.
Hence even to a person denying the existence of the soul or its
attributes, it is no cause for fear, and it is much less so for one who
believes in the soul and its immortality. We should not regard it as a
cause for grief that Behn Zabak left the body that had outlived its
utility.
As for books, I have not come across many which deserve to be
read carefully and pondered. For me, the Gita and Tulsidas suffice,
and, among modern writings those of Raychandbhai. However, if you
wish to read anything recent you may read Kishorelal’s
Jivanshodhan.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7164; also C.W. 4658. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

376

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

417. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM D. SARAIYA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 20, 1930
CHI. KAKU,

I hope you have not taken a vow not to write to me. Or probably
you are waiting for a letter from me before writing yourself. You had
escaped very cleverly indeed. But it must have been God’s will to
reserve you for a greater task. We shall have done our duty if we do
our work with single-minded devotion. Do write to me. Both
Kakasaheb and I shall be pleased.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 2805. Courtesy: P.D. Saraiya

418. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS PODDAR
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 20, 1930
BHAI RAMESHWARDAS,

We got the letter addressed to us both. You are serving to the
best of your ability and that is enough. This will give you strength to
do more. If you let Ramanama sink from the lips into the heart, your
discontent will disappear.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 217

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

377

419. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 21, 1930
MY DEAR KUMARAPPA,

Your note. When your brother returns he must first come to the
Vidyapith and see things for himself. Then, but not till then, he is free
to make his choice. You had my previous letter sent from Karadi
about him, had you not? Give my love to him when he comes. And
remember me to your sister when you write to her.
‘Thodsow’ is a Tamil corruption of ’Dodhso’ nks<lksLove from us both.
Yours,

BAPU

[PS.]
Yes, your book was duly received, thanks.
From a photostat: G.N. 10087

420. LETTER TO MANSHANKAR J. TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 21, 1930
CHI. MANU (TRIVEDI),

Maganbhai has given detailed news about you. We were both
happy to read it. May God grant you good health and increase your
zeal for service from day to day. I have certainly not forgotten that
you used to bring fresh grapes for me. When you write to Father, tell
him that I have many sweet memories of him.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7758

378

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

421. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 21, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

I got your two letters together.
Some of the devotees are tried very severely. God is testing you
thus. But that He grants strength to endure is also His blessing. How is
Arun 1 now? Is any improvement noticed in Tarini and Charu’s health
? How many people are working at Sodepur? By the grace of God
Kshitish Bapu 2 is with you and has been blessed with a sound
constitution and a stout heart. You have also the support of Dr. Ray.
Convey my best wishes to both.
Does Satis Babu get milk, etc.? Has he proper facilities for
sleeping and resting?
Give me all the news.
May God grant you health, peace and patience.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1668

1
2

Addressee’s youngest and the only surviving child
Younger brother of Satis Chandra Das Gupta

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

379

422. CABLE TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI1
[YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

July 22, 1930] 2
THANKS

CABLE.

DEPEND

AM PRAYING

FOR LIGHT.

LOVE.

UPON

DOING MY BEST.

Bombay Secret Abstracts, 750(56), p. 21

423. LETTER TO G. A. NATESAN
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

July 22, 1930
DEAR FRIEND,

I have been given your letter with enclosures. Many thanks. You
may depend upon my doing my best. I had a cable from Shastriar. I
am praying for light, but as yet I do not see a ray in this impenetrable
darkness.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

SJT. G. A. NATESAN
“ I NDIAN REVIEW”
GEORGE TOWN, MADRAS
From a photostat: G.N. 2236

1

Srinivasa Sastri had cabled to Gandhiji “to receive the proposals of Sapru and
Jayakar with sympathy”.
2
According to a note just below the cable, the covering letter from Major
Doyle with which this was forwarded was dated July 22, 1930; vide also the following
item.

380

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

424. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
July 18/22, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your packet yesterday. So many letters cannot be carried
safely in an envelope of ordinary paper. It was quite torn when it
arrived. You should either use envelopes lined with cloth or even
though the cover is treated as a letter for purposes of postage, you
should secure it strongly with a string on all sides so that the letters
cannot slip out unless the string is broken.
I got the cotton as late as on the 16th. But I was put to no
difficulty. Prabhudas and Munnalal speak in their letters about the
prayers being dull. Does not Balkrishna lead bhajans? Would not you
or somebody else speak something about the Gita or on some other
subject? Balkrishna can do so if he decides. If we cannot do anything
besides reciting Sanskrit verses, we may be content with that, but if we
can we must introduce something more. Or start reading something in
Gujarati. Discuss the matter with Prabhudas and Munnalal, then have a
talk with Balkrishna and do what you think proper. I know that you
cannot spare time even to think about a matter like this. Even then I
make the suggestion. Do what is possible.
We should make an attempt to mix with the Bharwads and make
them feel one with us.
July 19, 1930
Much of what I write in these letters is meant for the whole of
our group there and so I don’t mention those things in the letters to
others. One such thing is Kakasaheb’s blessings. Let everyone know
that the letter to him or her carries them. Kakasaheb receives greetings
from all the persons there, for he reads all the letters which they write
and his name is mentioned in every one of them. Both of us are glad
to know this and to realize that the members of our group have
humility.
Thinking about the diary, I feel that it is of priceless value to
me. For a person who has dedicated himself to the pursuit of truth, it
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

381

serves as a means of keeping watch over himself, for such a person is
determined to write in it nothing but the truth. If he has idled away his
time or has done less work than usual, he must mention that. Thus a
diary helps in many ways. It is, therefore, necessary that everyone
there should realize its value. Once we start keeping a diary regularly,
we know automatically what to write and how to write it. Yes, there is
one condition, namely, that we should aim at being truthful. If that is
not so, a diary will be like a false coin. If it contains nothing but the
truth, it is of greater value than a gold mohur.
Letter No. 60 is for Mrs. Zaulinger; read that. Try to find out
from her what her difficulty is.
I see that it is a hardship for you to have to make a list of the
letters. If that takes too much of your time, you may stop doing it. It
will suffice if you merely give the total number. You may make a list
if you can do so without inconvenience.
I must now write off visits. You will know the reason from my
letter to Mirabehn. I don’t write about it again in this letter. What
would I do if I could not even write ? I should give up doing that, too,
if I cannot preserve my self-respect while writing. The path of bhakti
is a difficult one. But we have no other before us.
Do not worry if the number of letters goes on increasing. Let
anyone who wants to write do so freely. It will be enough if they
observe the restrictions imposed by jail rules. Political questions
should not be discussed, nor can I write anything about them. There
is, and should be, no objection to giving news about everyone.
Tell Dr. Haribhai that I often remember him. Has Dr Kanuga
completely recovered now?
After morning prayers, July 22, 1930
There is a suggestion in Vishvanath’s letter that every week I
should write and send a discourse to be read out at prayer time. I
thought about the request and felt that it deserved to be complied
with. Treat these discourses as my contribution to the attempt to make
the prayers more alive. I am considering with Kakasaheb if we can
send anything for the other six days as well. Here is something for this
week.1
1

382

This and the other discourses on the Ashram vows contained in the letters to
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I deal first with truth, as the Satyagraha Ashram owes its very
existence to the pursuit and the attempted practice of truth.
The word ‘satya’ is derived from sat, which means that which is.
Satya means a state of being. Nothing is or exists in reality except
Truth. That is why sat or satya is the right name for God. In fact it is
more correct to say that Truth is God than to say that God is Truth.
But as we cannot do without a ruler or general, the name God is and
will remain more current. On deeper thinking, however, it will be
realized that sat or satya is the only correct and fully significant name
for God.
And where there is Truth, there also is knowledge which is true.
Where there is no Truth, there can be no true knowledge. That is why
the word chit or knowledge is associated with the name of God. And
where there is true knowledge, there is always ananda, bliss. There
sorrow has no place. And even as Truth is eternal, so is the bliss
derived from it. Hence we know God as Sat-chit-ananda, one who
combines in Himself Truth, knowledge and bliss.
Devotion to this Truth is the sole justification for our existence.
All our activities should be centred in truth. Truth should be the very
breath of our life. When once this stage in the pilgrim’s progress is
reached, all other rules of correct living will come without effort and
obedience to them will be instinctive. But without Truth it is
impossible to observe any principles or rules in life.
Generally speaking, [observance of the law of] Truth is understood merely to mean that we must speak the truth. But we in the
Ashram should understand the word satya or Truth in a much wider
sense. There should be Truth in thought, Truth in speech and Truth in
action. To the man who has realized this Truth in its fullness, nothing
else remains to be known, because, as we have seen above, all
knowledge is necessarily included in it. What is not included in it is
not Truth, and so not true knowledge; and there can be no real bliss
without true knowledge. If we once learn how to apply this neverfailing test of Truth, we will at once be able to find out what is worth
doing, what is worth seeing, what is worth reading.
But how is one to realize this Truth, which may be likened to the
Narandas Gandhi first appeared in book form under the title Mangal Prabhat (Tuesday
Morning). The translation is reproduced from From Yeravda Mandir, with a few
changes to bring it into conformity with the Gujarati. Gandhiji states in the preface
to the booklet that he had gone through it carefully and revised the translation in
places.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

383

philosopher's stone or the cow of plenty? By abhyasa, single-minded
devotion, and vairagya, indifference to all other interests in life—
replies the Bhagavad Gita. Even so, what may appear as truth to one
person will often appear as untruth to another person. But that need
not worry the seeker. Where there is honest effort, it will be realized
that what appear to be different truths are like the countless and
apparently different leaves of the same tree. Does not God Himself
appear to different individuals in different aspects? Yet we know that
He is one. But Truth is the right designation of God. Hence there is
nothing wrong in every man following Truth according to his lights.
Indeed it is his duty to do so. Then if there is a mistake on the part of
anyone so following Truth, it will be automatically set right. For the
quest of Truth involves tapascharya, self-suffering, sometimes even
unto death. There can be no place in it for even a trace of self-interest.
In such selfless search for Truth, nobody can lose his bearings for
long. Directly he takes to the wrong path he stumbles, and is thus
redirected to the right path. Therefore the pursuit of Truth is true
bhakti, devotion. Such bhakti is “a bargain in which one risks one's
very life”. It is the path that leads to God. There is no place in it for
cowardice, no place for defeat. It is the talisman by which death itself
becomes the portal to life eternal.
But now we have come to the border-line beyond which lies
ahimsa. We shall discuss it next week.
In this connection, it would be well to ponder over the lives and
examples of Harishchandra, Prahlad, Ramachandra, Imam Hasan and
Imam Husain, the Christian saints, etc. How beautiful it would be if all
of us, young and old, men and women, meditated, till next week, on
these thoughts at all hours of the day, whether working, eating,
drinking or playing, and were rewarded with innocent sleep?
God as Truth has been for me, at any rate, a treasure beyond
price. May He be so to every one of us.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
There are 66 letters. If you do not read all the letters before
handing them over to the persons concerned, do so henceforth. Some
of the accompanying letters contain suggestions to those to whom
they are addressed.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

384

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

425. NOTE TO NEHRUS 1
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

July 23, 1930
2

C ONSTITUTIONAL ISSUE

1. So far as this question is concerned, my personal position is
that if the Round Table Conference is restricted to a discussion of
safeguards that may be necessary in connection with full Self
Government during the period of transition, I should have no
objection, it being understood that the question of independence
should not be ruled out if anybody raises it. I should be satisfied
before I could endorse the idea of the Congress attending the
Conference about its whole composition.
C IVIL DISOBEDIENCE AND ITS C ALLING OFF3

2. If the Congress is satisfied as to the Round Table Conference,
naturally civil disobedience would be called off, that is to say, disobedience of certain laws for the sake of disobedience, but peaceful
picketing of foreign cloth and liquor will be continued unless the
Government themselves can enforce prohibition of liquor and foreign
cloth. But manufacture of salt by the populace will have to be
continued and the penal clauses of the Salt Act should not be
enforced. There will be no raids on Government Salt Depots or private
depots. I will agree even if this clause is not made a clause in these
terms, but is accepted as an understanding in writing.
3 (a) Simultaneously with the calling off of the civil
disobedience, all satyagrahi prisoners and other political prisoners
convicted or under-trial, who have not been guilty of violence or
incitement to violence should be ordered to be released, and
(b) properties confiscated under the Salt Act and Press Act and
1
With a view to restoring normal conditions and ameliorating “the present
situation by discussing the question” Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and M. R. Jayakar wrote
to the Viceroy on July 13 seeking his permission to interview Gandhiji in Yeravda
and Motilal Nehru and Jawaharlal Nehru in Naini Jail. On July 23 and 24 they met
Gandhiji who gave them this note to be delivered to Motilal Nehru and Jawaharlal
Nehru.
2
These sub-headings are in Gandhiji’s hand in S.N. 19976.
3
ibid

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

385

Revenue Act and the like should be restored, and
(c) fines and securities taken from convicted satyagrahis—or
under the Press Act should be refunded.
(d) All officers including village officers who have resigned or
who may have been dismissed during the civil disobedience movement and who may desire to rejoin Government service should be
restored.
N.B. The foregoing should refer also to the non-co-operation
period.
(e) Viceregal ordinances should be repealed.1
This opinion of mine is purely provisional, because I consider
that a prisoner has no right to pronounce any opinion upon political
activities of which he cannot possibly have a full grasp while he is shut
out of personal contact. I therefore feel that my opinion is not entitled
to the weight I should claim for it if I was in touch with the movement.
Mr. Jayakar and Dr. Sapru may show this to Pandit Motilal
Nehru, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel and those who
are in charge of the movement. Nothing to appear in the Press.
This is not to be shown to the Viceroy at this stage.
Even if the foregoing terms are accepted I should not care to
attend the Conference unless, in the event of going out of the prison, I
gained self-confidence which I have not at present and unless among
those Indians who would be invited there was a preliminary
conversation and an agreement as to the minimum by which they
should stand under all circumstances.
I reserve to myself the liberty, when the occasion arises, of
testing every swaraj scheme by its ability to satisfy the object
underlying the eleven points2 mentioned in my letter to the Viceroy.3
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhi-Sapru Correspondence. Courtesy: P.N. Sapru; also S.N. 19976

1
These clauses were incorporated in the joint letter to T. B. Sapru and M. R.
Jayakar, pp. 81-4.
2
Vide “Clearing the issue”, 30-1-1930.
3
This note was handed to Sapru and Jayakar along with the covering letter,
vide the following item.

386

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

426. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 23, 1930
DEAR MOTILALJI,

My position is essentially awkward. Being temperamentally so
built, I cannot give a decisive opinion on matters happening outside
the prison walls. What I have therefore given to our friends is the roughest draft of what is likely to satisfy me personally. You may not
know that I was disinclined to give anything to Slocombe and wanted
him to discuss things with you. But I could not resist his appeal and let
him publish the interview1 before seeing you.
At the same time I do not want to stand in the way of an
honourable settlement, if the time for it is ripe. I have grave doubts
about it. But after all, Jawaharlal’s must be the final voice. You and I
can only give our advice to him. What I have said in my memorandum given to Sir Tej Bahadur and Mr. Jayakar is the utmost limit
to which I can go. But Jawahar and, for that matter, also you may
consider my position to be inconsistent with the intrinsic Congress
policy or the present temper of the people. I should have no hesitation
in supporting any stronger position up to the letter of the Lahore
resolution. You need therefore attach no weight to my memorandum
unless it finds an echo in the hearts of you both.
I know that neither you nor Jawahar were enamoured of the
eleven points brought out in my first letter to the Viceroy. I do not
know whether you still have the same opinion. My own mind is quite
clear about them. They are to me the substance of independence. I
should have nothing to do with anything that would not give the
nation the power to give immediate effect to them. In restricting
myself to the three only in the memorandum, I have not waived the
other eight.But the three are now brought out to deal with civil
disobedience. I would be no party to any truce which would undo the
1

Vide “Interview to Daily Herald”, 20-5-1930.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

387

position at which we have arrived today.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhi-Sapru Correspondence. Courtesy: P. N. Sapru; also S.N. 19976

427. LETTER TO HARI-ICHCHHA DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 26, 1930
CHI. HARI-ICHCHHA,

I often think about you, of course, but I have been prompted to
write this on seeing your name mentioned in Haribhai’s letter. I trust
that you and all your sisters keep good health. What work do you do
these days? If you are permitted to go to the Ashram, and if you
yourself wish to do so, I should certainly like to tempt you to join it.
If you feel tempted, take the step. Write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7464

428. LETTER TO BALI AND KUMI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 26, 1930
CHI. BALI, KUMI,

I got Bali’s letter. Kumi also should write. I don’t mind your
having taken away Manu. Anything which pleases you two sisters
pleases me. Your love for these children sometimes brings tears of joy
to my eyes. I used to restrain you lest your love should become blind
attachment. I caution you both against it from time to time. But,
knowing your nature, I hesitate to do even that. How can I ever hurt
you? Are the relations of you two sisters happy?
1
With this letter and the note to Nehrus, Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and M. R.
Jayakar met Motilal Nehru and Jawaharlal Nehru on July 27 and 28. For the text of
joint note from them and a letter from Jawaharlal Nehru, vide “Note from Nehrus”,
28-7-1930 & “Letter from Jawaharlal Nehru”, 28-7-1930.

388

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I was happy to know that Tulsidas had recovered.
Kusum must be perfectly all right now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati:. C.W. 5060. Courtesy: Surendra Mashruwala

429. LETTER TO RAMI GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 26, 1930
CHI. RAMI,

I got your letter. Ba had written to me about you. How did it
happen that Kusum fell ill so seriously? Ask Kunvarji to write to me. I
don’t write a separate letter to him. Write to me from time to time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 5061. Courtesy: Surendra Mashruwala

430. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 26, 1930
CHI. MANUDI,

I have your letter. Even if, as you say, you went away of your
own accord, I don’t mind. I only wish that you should become a real
worker and that your body should become strong. In future write in
ink.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1503. Courtesy: Manubehn
Mashruwala

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

389

431. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI PANDYA
July 26, 1930
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

I have your letter. What you did in the case of Manibehn is quite
correct. In the case of a lady whom we have accommodated we would
have done our duty after having pointed out her faults dispassionately. In this case too you should do the same. You should
explain to her that your suspicion will not be removed by [her] undertaking a fast. Why should she undertake a fast if she has committed no
fault? If she has, fasting is no cure. She should confess it and resolve
never to do it again. If she refuses to be persuaded in spite of all this,
let events take their own course. But tell Manibehn on my behalf that
fasting without my permission is forbidden. She should therefore give
up her fast if she hasn’t already done so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 321. Courtesy: Bhagwanji Purushottam
Pandya

390

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

432. LETTER TO BALIBEHN M. ADALAJA
[After July 26, 1930]1
CHI. BALI,

Your letter has come after a long time. I can understand that
Harilal’s behaviour pains you. But what else do we have to learn in the
world except facing happy as well as unhappy times?
It is true that even though I have regarded you sisters as
daughters. I have not been able to do anything. Nor has Ramdas been
able to do anything. But at present, do I have anything except good
feelings for my kith and kin? My way of life is unusual. If you can
understand that while serving a miserable untouchable I am also
serving you, then you will forgive me; but if you do not understand,
you are bound to be angry. I must put up with it. I asked you to live
with me and absorb yourselves with my work, but you have not done
it. Hence, far that I am, what more can I do except wish you well? You
have started giving ornaments to Manu 2. I have just heard that you
have pierced her ears. I was pained to hear that. By doing that, you
have broken your agreement with me. I do not wish to hurt your
feelings. But let us not make Manu a shuttle-cock between us. If you
are agreeable to my request, bring her up according to my wishes. If
you insist on not listening, then what can I say to you? I am not able
to tell you anything and I am not able to bear such an act on your
part. Write and explain.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C. W. 5050. Courtesy : Surendra Mashruwala

1
2

From the contents; vide “Letter to Bali and Kumi”, 26-7-1930.
Manu Gandhi, addressee’s niece

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

391

433. LETTER TO RAMI GANDHI AND MANU GANDHI
[After July 26, 1930]1
CHI. RAMI AND MANU,

It is not nice that both of you have written the letter as Bali Masi
dictated. I can understand if Manudi does not realize this. But what
should I say about Rami? I have not the faintest memory of having
turned back Rami from Amreli. Of course, I was not in favour of
giving more money for meeting Manilal. I had asked Manilal to
spend the money if he had something on him. But surely he did not
have. Kunvarji is a poor man and how can he be made to spend? And
what money can I have? After all, public money cannot be used
indiscriminately. I would certainly wish that Rami should remember
this much teaching. Bali Masi is an elder, her ideas are great, her
capacity is great. You cannot imitate her.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Manu should have taken my permission before she had her
nose and ears pierced.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S. N. 9704

1

392

Vide the preceding item which has reference to piercing of Manu’s ears.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

434. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
July 26, 1930
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

I have your letter. Do not at all hesitate to write to me a long
letter. I like your letters and for you that is a kind of consolation. I
have already written to you about your health last week. It is better for
you to go somewhere on the hills. Your decision regarding
Chandradutt and Devidutt is correct. Pampering them is a sin. If we let
them go, they will learn and when they get tired, they will come back.
At that time, we should welcome them.
I do not think there is any responsibility on you and if there is,
it is only one of improving your health. However, you should not
consider that as a responsibility. Do what you easily can. Kakasaheb
will not be able to send your writing as early as you expect.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32939

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

393

435. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
[About July 26, 1930] 1
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

It seems that you have come to the Ashram to fall ill. Only
yesterday I came to know from Krishnadas’s letter that your health
has again deteriorated. So far, I have not received a telegram from
you and therefore believe that the illness is not serious. Why did you
leave Ranavav? If your health is not improving there, would not it be
better to return to Ranavav? I am waiting for more details. I am all
right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32936

436. LETTER TO GANGABEHN JHAVERI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 27, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN (JHAVERI),

I have your letter. I trust that you take proper care of your
health. Kanjibhai’s self-sacrifice is great indeed. My blessings to him,
to all the members of his family and to the women who live with you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3102

1
From the reference to addressee’s ill health, this letter appears to have
been written about the same time as the preceding one. Also, references in Vive “
Letter to Narandas Gandhi” , 7-7-1930 and 18/22-1930 confirm that the addressee was
at the Ashram in July 1930 as indicated in the first sentence above.

394

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

437. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 27, 1930
CHI. VASUMATI,

I have your letter. How many women live with you ? Have they
learnt the prayers? Do you get time to read the Anasakti-yoga? Is
your mind at peace? I am all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9277

438. LETTER TO KALAVATI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 27, 1930
CHI. KALAVATI,

I have your letter. Since you are learning Gujarati, I write this
letter in Gujarati. If you ask me not to write in Gujarati in future, I
shall write in Hindi. You, in any case, should write in Hindi. Improve
your handwriting. Now that you have started spinning on
Prabhubhai’s spinning-wheel, put your whole heart into the work.
Learn how to clean and repair the wheel. Whatever you do, you
should do with proper care and as well as you can do it. Working in
this manner develops both the intellect and the heart. Get Shantabehn
examined by a doctor.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5242

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

395

439. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 27, 1930
CHI. KASHINATH,

I have your letter. What I said in my last letter regarding prayers
must have partly answered the questions which you ask in your letter.
Regarding image-worship, we don’t forbid anyone to use an image.
But we cannot have one in our common prayer.
I have suggested that Shantabehn should be examined by a
doctor. But I can offer no proper guidance from this distance.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I get no time to attend to the Hindi translation.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5243

440. LETTER TO JANAKIDEVI BAJAJ
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 27, 1930
CHI. JANAKIBEHN,

I have your letter. It would be strange if you did not feel
cheerful now. You make speeches and your name appears in
newspapers. As I frequently see the name Janakibai Bajaj in papers,
what else should I think but that it was good that Jamnalal and I were
arrested and that we had better remain in prison. I was sure that there
was confidence behind your seeming diffidence. May God increase it.
Kamalnayan need not be in a hurry. Let him remain occupied in
khadi production work. When the batch comes forward, he may write
to Valjibhai.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2888

396

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

441. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI 1
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 27, 1930
CHI. MATHURADAS (TREASURER),

Have you understood me regarding the interviews? The Government has found my list too long. Now I shall not get into further
argument. Let us be content with exchange of letters.
You must take Tara Mashruwala 2, who was injured while
picketing liquor shops, to Dr. Jivraj and have her examined for head
injury. I hope it has not left any permanent damage.
Tell Hansabehn3 : ‘Congratulations. May you live long.’
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

442. LETTER TO VITHALDAS JERAJANI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 27, 1930
BHAI VITHALDAS,

I got the figures for April, May and June. I see from them that
no one yet gives yarn in sufficiently large quantity. You can write to
me a detailed letter on this subject.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9775

1

An extract from this letter appears in Vide “ Letter to Mathuradas
Trikumji”, 16-11-1936
2
Nanabhai Mashruwala’s daughter
3
Hansa Mehta, wife of Dr. Jivraj Mehta, who had begun the work of
prohibition in Bombay in April with a band of Gujarati women
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

397

443. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 27, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

I have your two letters. They are a boon for me. It gives me
great joy to note that your self-confidence is growing day by day.
May God increase it further. What can I write about Satis Babu? I have
been watching him grow for quite a time.
You have such faith in khadi that God will provide you with the
required assistance. The sacred text goes: to each according to his
faith. It cannot prove false.
May God grant some peace to Charu. Where is Arun?
Convey my blessings to Satis Babu and also to Charu, Arun and
Tarini.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
You can write everything in connection with khadi.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1669

398

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

444. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
[July 28, 1930] 1
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter. I am sticking to your wheel. It is now causing
less strain. The mal has not given any trouble at all. In that respect
yours is a better wheel. I have still difficulty in getting the required
fineness. Anyway, I shall not easily let it go. The speed is still poor.
Today for the first time I got 154 rounds in 65 minutes. This was
encouraging for me. On the travelling wheel I had reached 200
rounds per hour when the machine went on without a break.
In translating the hymns for you I am giving myself much joy.
Have I not expressed my love oftener in storms than in gentle soothing showers of affection? The memory of these storms adds to the
pleasure of this exclusive translation for you. But it is a long affair. I
did the 10th hymn today. The verses took me a long time. The hymn
I am doing one per day. And I have still nearly 170 to do! There is,
therefore, not much likelihood of my reaching the Gita just yet.
Your fever is disturbing. You are still sensitive to changes. Do
please take care of yourself and do not hesitate to travel 2nd if you
find it at all necessary. I am looking forward to this week’s letter.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5404. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9638

1

The 10th hymn referred to in the letter was translated on this date, vide
“Ashram Bhajanavali”, 15-12-1930. The letter, however, bears the date “27th July
1930” in Mirabehn’s handwriting.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

399

445. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

Silence Day [July 28, 1930] 1
CHI. GANGABEHN (SENIOR),

I am glad to see that you are completely at peace. In being
content with opportunities of service which come to us unsought lies
the growth of the soul; that is the only way in which we can realize it.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-6: G. S. Gangabehnne, p. 40; also C.W. 8754. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

446. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 28, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

It is no trouble to me to write to you. Your diagnosis is correct.
We should feel more interest in solving the problems of the Ashram,
especially of the women in it; than we do in solving the problems of the
country. For the solution of these problems contains the key to the
solution of bigger problems. “As in the body, so in the universe.”
Trying to know the universe we would lose our way, but the body is in
our hands.
The infant class seems to be getting well organized.
Shila must have recovered now.
I have deliberately advised you to try bitter gourds.
Idealism can follow the right path. To lead it along that path is
1

400

From the printed source.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

paramartha1 . The word ‘purushartha’2 is one-sided in its connotation.
Can you think of a neutral word?
Dhurandhar may certainly translate Anasaktiyoga. :
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10227; also C.W. 6675. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

447. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 28, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN (SENIOR),

I have your letter. The family seems to be increasing. That is as it
should be. So long as we have the spirit of service in us, people will
continue to come.
How serious was Nath’s eczema?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-6: G. S. Gangabehnne, p. 40; also C.W. 8755. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

1

The highest end
Human effort; the goal or purpose of human life, the four traditionally accepted
ones being dharma, artha, kama and moksha
2

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

401

448. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 28, 1930
CHI PRABHAVATI,

I have your letter. Where does Mrityunjaya live? What are his
present activities ? Does Mataji1 feel the separation from Rajendra Babu
? How is Vidyavati’s health ?
My diet continues to be the same. The weight remains steady at
103-104. That is not bad.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3391

449. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 28, 1930
Bismillah

2

CHI. RAIHANA,

Khuda Hafiz3
I was filled with joy to see your letter in Gujarati. Your handwriting also was fairly good, and the language simply could not be
improved upon. Even the prayers of the pure in heart serve the cause as
well as, or even better than, public work. Hence, what does it matter if
you cannot work actively? Don’t feel unhappy about that. How did
you find Father’s health? Is he happy and cheerful? How is Mrs.
Lukmani now? The Tyabji family has indeed given a wonderful
account of itself. Tell Mother that her smiling and modest face comes
before me every day.
1
2
3

402

Wife of Rajendra Prasad
These expressions are in Urdu.
Ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Write to me again.
If you experience any difficulty in reading this, let me know.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9618

450. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 28, 1930
CHI. MANI (PATEL),

It is after many a week that you have favoured me with a letter. I
know you are busy and doing good work in a field of your own
choice, but I want you to write all the same.
Live long and serve the country to the best of your ability.
Blessings from

B APU
C HI . M ANIBEHN P ATEL
S HRIRAM MANSION
S ANDHURST R OAD , B OMBAY

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro–4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 72

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

403

451. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
Y.M.,

July 28, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

I got your letter. Get your teeth examined by Haribhai immediately. Kaka Saheb says that he has been advised by a competent
doctor that saline gargle repeated ten or twelve times a day helps the
teeth. He has also suggested gargling with coconut oil. Both things can
be done side by side, though not at the same time. Even while trying
this remedy, you must consult a doctor. There is no need at all to
worry. The jaw must be healing. You of course did well to write to me.
Write and give my blessings to Brother.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

452. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
Y.M.,

July 28. 1930
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

I have your and shankerlal’s letters. I am observing all the work
and see God’s grace in it.
Do keep writing to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: G. N. 11551

404

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

453. LETTER TO SHOORJI VALLABHDAS
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 29, 1930
BHAISHRI SHOORJI VALLABHDAS,

I got your English letter and the book. I have still not got the
Gujarati letter. The Superintendent has definitely no authority to
permit me to send a Foreword from here. He must write to the
Government, and the latter will never give such permission. If you
think it proper to write to the Government yourself, you may do so.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4094

454. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

July 29, 1930
BHAI GHANSHYAMDASJI,

Your letter. Now I am given almost all the letters. Still, you did
well in writing in English. It was good that you did not come to Poona.
I cannot see anybody. The conditions placed on receiving visitors are
not acceptable to me; I have therefore had only one visit so far. There
is no possibility of a second. It causes me no pain. In fact a prisoner
has no rights at all. Incarceration is a kind of moral death, it can mean
only that.
I had a good laugh over your account of the dream. That dream
is a sign of love. We do not dream of strangers.
I am keeping well. The water here is somewhat constipating. But
it causes me no trouble.
If you are plying the takli now and then, why not ply it
regularly? My experience is that the worth of a job done irregularly
increases at least fourfold if performed regularly. The whole world is
governed by order. Such experiences have given rise to the saying: To
disordered minds even blessing comes as a calamity.
Your description of the trend for khadi gave me joy. Your son
must have fully recovered by now.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

405

How is your health? What do you eat? My diet consists of milk,
curds, raisins, dates and lemons. I take the lime juice with soda or hot
water and salt.
Tell Bhai Manmohan Gandhi that I have received his book as
also his letter. There is very little time for reading books. Almost all my
energy is devoted to spinning and carding.
Yours,
MOHANDAS

From Hindi: C.W. 6186. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

455. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
July 28/31, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter. Kakasaheb remarks that the ink and the paper
which you use are such that the ink comes out on the other side of the
sheet, and hence it will not do to write on both sides. What he says is
correct. In such a case, it is desirable to write on one side only.
This time the letters were properly packed. I preserve the
envelopes and will use them when I need them. I have already told you
in my previous letter that I had received the cotton. I could card some
of it only today. The air was very moist because of the rains. It is not
the spinning which tires me out, but the sitting for long hours. I shall
discover some way by and by. I will not readily accept defeat. There is
nothing in this which need cause you concern. Even when I was out of
jail, did I ever sit at the spinning-wheel for four or five hours at a
stretch?
The injury to Keshu’s finger must have healed by now. Can
Balkrishna’s body stand the strain of night watch? He should not do
anything beyond his strength.
Both of us keep good health. On a spring balance Kakasaheb
weighed 109 lb. He must be walking about 8 miles a day, including the
walking he does for exercise and during work. The exertion of
spinning is in addition to this. His diet is still the same.
If there are any men or women to whom I have not written and
who expect letters from me, let me know their names. I should have
had a letter from Ramabehn (Ranchhodbhai’s). She must have received
mine.
Now about ahimsa.
406

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Tuesday morning
The commencement of this discourse is both comic and painful.
We two had a discussion on how to economize in the use of cloth-lined
envelopes and save the same envelopes for use again and again. The
question was whether to paste a blank sheet on the whole side of the
envelope or paste only slips over portions where something was written.
This was a futile discussion. We wasted on it 15 minutes of beautiful
time after prayers, demonstrating our foolishness thereby. In doing this
we violated truth and ahimsa and displayed lack of discrimination.
Truth was violated, because the discussion was not inspired by an
ardent desire for its search. Ahimsa was shamed, because I, who ought
to give every moment of my time to discover the sufferings of the
people and in thinking about the ways of ending them, wasted 15
priceless minutes in a futile discussion. We displayed lack of
discrimination, because if we had thought about the utility of the
discussion, it would not have lasted even a minute. After we had stolen
15 minutes from people’s time, we realized our foolishness and
thanked God for opening our eyes.
I have purposely given this introduction.
The path of Truth is as narrow as it is straight. Even so is that of
ahimsa. It is like balancing oneself on the edge of a sword. By
concentration an acrobat can walk on a rope. But the concentration
required to tread the path of Truth and ahimsa is far greater. The
slightest inattention brings one tumbling to the ground. One can realize
Truth and ahimsa only by ceaseless striving.
But it is impossible for us to realize perfect truth so long as we
are imprisoned in this mortal frame. We can only visualize it in our
imagination. We cannot, through the instrumentality of this ephemeral
body, see face to face truth which is eternal. That is why in the last
resort we must depend on faith.
It appears that the impossibility of full realization of truth in this
mortal body led some ancient seeker after truth to the appreciation of
ahimsa. The question which confronted him was: “Shall I bear with
those who create difficulties for me, or shall I destroy them?” The
seeker realized that he who went on destroying others did not make
headway but simply stayed where he was, while the man who suffered
those who created difficulties marched ahead and at times even took
the others with him. The first act of destruction taught him that the
truth which was the object of his quest was not outside himself but
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

407

within. Hence the more he took to violence, the more he receded from
truth. For in fighting the imagined enemy without, he neglected the
enemy within.
We punish thieves because we think they harass us. They may
leave us alone; but they will only transfer their attentions to another
victim. This other victim, however, is also a human being, ourselves in a
different form, and so we are caught in a vicious circle. The trouble
from thieves continues to increase, as they think it is their business to
steal. In the end we see that it is better to tolerate the thieves than to
punish them. The forbearance may even bring them to their senses. By
tolerating them we realize that thieves are not different from ourselves,
they are our brethren, our friends, and may not be punished. But whilst
we may bear with the thieves, we may not endure the infliction. That
would only induce cowardice. So we realize a further duty. Since we
regard the thieves as our kith and kin, they must be made to realize the
kinship. And so we must take pains to devise ways and means of
winning them over. This is the path of ahimsa. It may entail continuous
suffering and the cultivating of end-less patience. Given these two
conditions, the thief is bound in the end to turn away from his evil ways
and we shall get a clearer vision of truth. Thus step by step we learn
how to make friends with all the world; we realize the greatness of God,
of Truth. Our peace of mind increases in spite of suffering; we become
braver and more ent-erprising; we understand more clearly the
difference between what is everlasting and what is not; we learn how to
distinguish between what is our duty and what is not. Our pride melts
away and we become humble. Our worldly attachments diminish and
likewise the evil within us diminishes from day to day.
Ahimsa is not the crude thing it has been made to appear. Not to
hurt any living thing is no doubt a part of ahimsa. But it is its least
expression. The principle of ahimsa is hurt by every evil thought, by
undue haste, by lying, by hatred, by wishing ill of anybody. It is also
violated by our holding on to what the world needs. But the world
needs even what we eat day by day. In the place where we stand there
are millions of micro-organisms to whom the place belongs and who
are hurt by our presence there. What should we do then? Should we
commit suicide ? Even that is no solution, if we believe, as we do, that
so long as the spirit is attached to the flesh, on every destruction of the
body it weaves for itself another. The body will cease to be only when

408

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

we give up all attachment to it. This freedom from all attachment is the
realization of God as Truth. Such realization cannot be attained in a
hurry. Realizing that this body does not belong to us, that it is a trust
handed over to our charge, we should make the right use of it and
progress towards our goal.
I wished to write something which would be easy for all to
understand, but I find that I have written a difficult discourse. However,
no one who has thought even a little about ahimsa should find any
difficulty in understanding what I have written.
It is perhaps clear from the foregoing that without ahimsa it is
not possible to seek and find Truth. Ahimsa and Truth are so
intertwined that it is practically impossible to disentangle and separate
them. They are like the two sides of a coin, or rather of a smooth
unstamped metallic disc. Who can say which is the obverse and which is
the reverse? Nevertheless, ahimsa is the means and Truth is the end.
Means to be means must always be within our reach, and so ahimsa
becomes our supreme duty and Truth becomes God for us. If we take
care of the means, we are bound to reach the end sooner or later. If we
resolve to do this, we shall have won the battle. Whatever difficulties we
encounter, whatever apparent reverses we sustain, we should not lose
faith but should ever repeat one mantra: “Truth exists, it alone exists.
It is the only God and there is but one way of realizing it; there is but
one means and that is ahimsa. I will never give it up. May the God that
is Truth, in whose name I have taken this pledge, give me the strength
to keep it.”
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
There are 57 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

409

456. LETTER TO GOVIND PATEL
Wednesday [July, 1930] 1
CHI. GOVIND,

I was happy to read your letter. Your handwriting is beautiful and
your spelling is better than mine. You could certainly have given me
news of your health. Do so in your next letter. How did Rambhau fall
ill? How is Jayanti now? How do you spend your day? What do you
eat? Where do you live, and what is your weight?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 3947

457. NOTE TO M. R. JAYAKAR2
August 2, 1930
(1) No constitutional scheme would be acceptable to Mr. Gandhi
which did not contain a clause allowing India the right to secede from
the Empire at her desire and another clause which gave the right and
power to India to deal satisfactorily with his eleven points.
(2) The Viceroy should be made aware of this position of
Mr. Gandhi in order that the Viceroy should not consider later
that these views of Mr. Gandhi had taken him by surprise when they
were urged at the Round Table Conference. The Viceroy should also
be made aware that Mr. Gandhi would insist at the Round Table
Conference on a clause giving India the right to have examined by an
independent tribunal all the British claims and concessions given to
Britishers in the past.
The Hindu, 5-9-1930

1

From the contents; vide “Letter to Govind Patel”, 17-7-1930.
On July 31, August 1 and August 2, M. R. Jayakar again saw Gandhiji who
dictated this note which was to form the basis of negotiations with the Viceroy.
2

410

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

458. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 2, 1930
CHI. VASUMATI,

I got your letter. When we are required to assume leadership only
for service, we should do even that and carry on the work. It may be
that faith begins as faith in the doer but it should be transformed into
faith in his work. Only then can we feel satisfied. The doer lives for a
while and is no more; he is only an instrument. Actions live for ever.
Where is Harishchandra now? But truth has always been, and is and will
be. Harishchandra’s immortality is the result of his action in the service
of truth. Truth existed even before he was born. He served only as an
instrument. Fix this thought in your mind with the help of other
examples; the goblin of despair will then run away from you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9298

459. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 2, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

In order to get dreamless sleep one’s thoughts and conduct
during waking hours should be pure. The state of sleep is a mirror
reflecting one’s condition during the waking state. All of us have the
strength to prevent our idealism from following the wrong path. That is
the supreme end. There is no question of defeat in such striving.
In what does Krishnakumari differ from Kamalabehn?
Here we have been seeing clouds in the sky for the last one and a
half months, but there has been very little rain, though not less than the
average in Ahmedabad.
Convey my blessings to Krishnan Nair and tell him that it is my
understanding with the authorities that I should not write to prisoners. I
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

411

have great hopes of him.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10228; also C.W. 6676. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

460. LETTER TO KAMALNAYAN BAJAJ
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 2, 1930
CHI. KAMALNAYAN,

I got your letter. Can you read my handwriting in Gujarati? If
you cannot read it, I will write in Hindi. Write to me often in the same
way that you have done this time. Anyone who goes to visit Father
should tell him that he should come out with added weight.
You should write a neat and clear handwriting. Improve your
health as much as you can.
Kakasaheb sends you his blessings.
Where is Om? Tell Madalasa that she should write to me. Ask
Kamala and Rameshwar also to write.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Where is Radhakisan? How is he?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3044

412

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

461. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
Y. M.,

August 2, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

All right, here is a letter in Devanagari. You will have fully
recovered. I can understand Mother’s continuing to worry. You should
write to her politely but firmly. If you do so, she will calm down. Have
faith that all will be well with you.
I hope Brother is now keeping good health. How many persons
are there with him in the Ashram? How many women? My blessings to
him.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

462. LETTER TO SHARDA G. SHAH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 3, 1930
CHI. SHARDA (BABU),

I receive your letters fairly regularly. You must make it a habit to
revise whatever you may write. No letter should be regarded as
completed unless you have revised it. Ask Chimanlal to write to me. I
hope you are having no more asthma.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9886. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

413

463. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
August 3, 1930
CHI. KUSUM (SENIOR),

I got your letter. No one inspired by a noble idea has ever
laboured in vain. You are the first to give me precise information about
Indulal1 . I am glad.
I see that you are keeping up a fairly good correspondence with
all friends. Do you write to Sushila (the Punjabi) ? If you know her
address, ask her to write to me. What does she do?
My regards to all.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1801

464. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI PANDYA
August 3, 1930
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

I have your letter. We cannot ask Manibehn to leave so long as
she observes the rules as far as her conduct goes. You are needlessly
worrying. No matter how she has fallen, you are equally responsible
for it. You should realize this and hold your patience. [I say] you were
equally responsible because you had not given up your conjugal
relationship. As long as a man continues his carnal relationship with his
wife it should be regarded as pardonable if the wife is drawn by such
passion even towards other quarters, just as a wife tolerates such
weakness in her husband.
After such relationship has ceased, if a woman commits adultery
the man may be separated from her and support her if necessary.
Please calm down. The bhajan is nice.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 322. Courtesy: Bhagwanji Purushottam
Pandya

1

414

Indulal Yajnik
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

465. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 3, 1930
CHI. NIMU,

I got a letter from you after so many weeks. Do not be tardy in
writing to me. I hope Sumitra has completely recovered by now. Do
not worry about Ramdas. Rama will protect him. He has always
enjoyed Rama’s blessings. You may stay where and as you like.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy : Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

466. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 4, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

I want to be brief this week. There is no special reason for it. As a
matter of fact the general letter is long enough.
I do hope your health has kept quite good throughout the travel.1
I am glad you met Parasram. I wonder if he had received my
note.
The wheel has worked better. I reached today more than 160 rounds in
an hour. I have rearranged the bow and it works better. I realize more
and more that good slivers are indispensable for gaining speed in
spinning. It is wonderful how attention to every detail counts.
Health keeps all right.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5405. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9639

1

The addressee had set out on “an extensive khadi tour”.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

415

467. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 4, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN (SENIOR),

Your handwriting is improving. Just as you may be said to have
spun only if you have done it well, so also about handwriting. You may
write only one line, but it should be neatly written. If we have resolved
that every breath of ours will be for the love of God, then even the least
important work which we do should be done well.
I have written to Bal and told him that most probably he will be
able to see Kakasaheb.
I have received the clothes sent by you.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-6: G. S. Gangabehnne, p. 40; also C.W. 8756. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

468. LETTER TO MANSHANKAR TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 4, 1930
CHI. MANU,

Both of us liked your letter. You do everything with
determination and you will, therefore, do well whatever you attempt.
Don’t be eager to do anything beyond your strength. When Shankar is
released, tell him that I expect a detailed letter from him.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7759

416

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

469. LETTER TO RUKMINI BAZAJ
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 4, 1930
CHI. RUKMINI,

How is it that though you have come to the Ashram, you have not
been able to find time to write two lines to me ? Do you have peace of
mind and are you contented and happy ? I shall be satisfied if you tell
me this.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9312. Courtesy: Benarsilal Bazaj

470. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 4, 1930
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

I was awaiting your letter. It has been hinted that I should not
write to Devdas, Krishnan Nair and other prisoners. Give my blessings
to all.
Never lose cheerfulness. Take up whatever duties come your way.
Keep your body healthy and of course it will help if you give up
worrying.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2383

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

417

471. LETTER TO AN ASHRAM INMATE
[Before August 5, 1930] 1
. . .It is our duty to be ready for jail, but it is ignorant attachment
to wish to go to jail. . . .3 Work is becoming slack; try to put life into it.
Anyone who does not do his best is a thief, and we have taken a vow
not to steal. Those who work but without proper care, are also thieves.
If we are really sincere in what we profess, we should, at long last, start
working. We should daily pray to God, as we rise in the morning and
go to bed at night, that our laziness may leave us, that He may make us
sincere and give us the strength to be good.
2

From a copy of the Gujarati: S.N. 16865

472. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 3/5, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

You need not have written the letter despite the pain in your
hand; or you should have dictated it to Radha or somebody else. It is
God’s grace that even in this condition you could go on with the yajna
of spinning. How did the hand slip? It must be completely all right by
now.
Ask the person who bakes our bread to write to me and explain
the process. How does he make the yeast? How much does he add to a
given quantity of flour? When does he knead the flour, and after
kneading it how long does he let it remain? Let him give all these
details. There is a bakery adjoining our cells. They make quite good
bread from maida4 but cannot produce fermentation in whole-wheat
flour like that which we use. So they were asking me. This need not be
published.
The fact that Mirabehn got her letter late indicates my subject
1
2
3
4

418

From the Ashram Patrika, 5-8-1930
Omissions as in the source
Ibid
White flour
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

state. 1 will play on the pipe as long as I can. 1 You should not,
therefore, be surprised if my letters stop. I will go on writing them as
long as I can with self-respect. Can a prisoner write letters at all? He
and his relations and friends should know that he has no rights with
regard to the outside world. Be that as it may, both of us are doing fine.
The . . . behn’s2 affair was a painful one. I am not at all surprised
by such occurrences now. Our experiment does carry with it such risks.
Since you will be reading my letter to . . . behn and others, I need not
write more here. In such situations we should show the utmost charity.
God is the only witness of secret sins. We should never persecute those
whose sins become known. We may explain to such persons their duty
as we understand it and leave them to God. You did right in not giving
. . . behn the permission asked for. I do hope that both . . . behn and . .
.3 will see their error one day.
If Amidas has confidence in himself and knows how to make the
experiments, you need not interfere with him. Personally I feel that 72
lb. weight is too little. Dates are not enough. I think there will be no
harm if he takes curds or milk at the same time. Show this to him. If he
has no experience in this matter, he should be guided by my advice. If
he feels cold, he should not be obstinate and avoid using a covering. If
he does, not feel cold, there will be no harm in keeping the body
uncovered. Ask him to write to me.
If Damodardas continues to spit blood, he must go to a place like
Panchgani. He may return after he is all right. It is my experience that
persons who suffer from such a disease do not get well in the air on the
banks of Sabarmati. Instead of going to Panchgani or some such place
when it is too late for recovery, if he goes now when the disease is
under control he will get well in a short time and return to Sabarmati.
In my letter to Giriraj, read what I have written concerning him.
Write to Jamnalalji, KishoreIal and others that there is an
understanding [with the Government] that I cannot write to other
prisoners. I got Kishorelal’s letter. If his experiment in diet succeeds, I
would envy him. Ramniklal’s matter is settled quite satisfactorily now. I
cannot write to him either. Write to Narahari and tell him that he enjoys
the fullest grace of God, otherwise he would not again and again get
such opportunities for service.
1

A Gujarati saying
The names have been omitted.
3
ibid
2

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

419

It is not likely to help me even if you send me a spinning-wheel
made of bamboo. I am a lame duck in so far as spinning is concerned.
I love it, I work hard and pay great attention to it but the speed simply
does not increase. How can I blame the spinning-wheel which I use? I
have not been able to see where my stupidity lies. When I was out of
jail, no one took the courage to explain it to me. I was satisfied with
drawing 160 rounds and did not pay sufficient attention to increasing
the speed. I see my error now. But every fool has the words ‘too late’
inscribed on his forehead. If now I let you send a bamboo
spinning-wheel, that would be our illustration of the saying “a dull
student needs a lot of pens to use”. I don’t want that. I must suffer the
consequences of my folly. I am patiently observing, and improving my
method wherever improvement is possible. Moreover, I can increase the
speed if my physical strength improves. If it does not, I shall be content
to live as Rama wills. Ultimately, the blame will be His. If I do my best,
He cannot blame me. His law ever prevails without exception, and since
He is the first to obey His law, and does that perfectly, we need have no
fear. Being as great as He is, if He were to act wilfully, wouldn’t we be
utterly destroyed ?
Tuesday morning
Next among our observances comes brahmacharya. As a matter
of fact all observances are deducible from Truth and are meant to
subserve it. The man who is wedded to Truth and worships Truth alone
proves unfaithful to it if he applies his talents to anything else. How
then can he minister to the senses? A man, whose activities are wholly
consecrated to the realization of Truth, which requires utter selflessness,
can have no time for the selfish purpose of begetting children and
running a household. Realization of Truth through self-gratification
should, after what has been said before, appear a contradiction in terms.
If we look at it from the standpoint of ahimsa, we find that the
fulfilment of ahimsa is impossible without perfect brahmacharya.
Ahimsa means universal love. If a man gives his love to one woman, or
a woman to one man, what is there left for all the world besides? It
simply means, “we two first, and the devil take all the rest of them.” As
a faithful wife must be prepared to sacrifice her all for the sake of her
husband, and a faithful husband for the sake of his wife, it is clear that
such persons cannot rise to the height of universal love, or look upon
all mankind as kith and kin. For they have created a boundary wall or

420

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

one has been created round their love. The larger their family, the
farther are they from universal love. We see this in the wholeworld.
Hence one who would obey the law of ahimsa cannot marry, not to
speak of gratification outside the marital bond.
Then what about people who are already married? Will they
never be able to realize Truth? Can they never offer their all at the altar
of humanity? There is a way out for them. They can behave as if they
were not married. On this path I have known nothing as beautiful as
such a relationship. Those who have enjoyed this happy condition will
be able to bear me out. Many have to my knowledge successfully tried
the experiment. If the married couple can think of each other as
brother and sister, they are freed for universal service. The very
thought that all the women in the world are his sisters, mothers or
daughters will at once ennoble a man and snap his chains. The husband
and wife do not lose anything here, but only add to their resources and
even to their family. Their love becomes free from the impurity of lust
and so grows stronger. With the disappearance of this impurity, they
can serve each other better, and the occasions for quarrelling become
fewer. There are more occasions for quarrelling where the love is
selfish and bounded.
If the foregoing argument is appreciated, a consideration of the
physical benefits of chastity becomes a matter of secondary
importance. How foolish it is intentionally to dissipate vital energy in
sensual enjoyment! It is a grave misuse to fritter away for physical
gratification that which is given to man and woman for the full
development of their bodily and mental powers. Such misuse is the
root cause of many a disease.
Brahmacharya like all other observances must be expressed in
thought, word and deed. We are told in the Gita, and experience will
corroborate the statement, that the foolish man who appears to control
his body but is nursing evil thoughts in his mind makes a futile effort.1
It may be harmful to suppress the body, if the mind is at the same time
allowed to go astray. Where the mind wanders, the body must follow
sooner or later. It is necessary here to appreciate a distinction. It is one
thing to allow the mind to harbour impure thoughts; it is a different
thing altogether if it strays among them in spite of ourselves. Victory
will be ours in the end if we non-co-operate with the mind in its evil
1

III. 6

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

421

wanderings. We experience every moment of our lives that often while
the body is subject to our control the mind is not. This physical control
should never be relaxed, and in addition we must put forth a constant
endeavour to bring the mind under control. We can do nothing more,
nothing less. If we give way to the mind, the body and the mind will
pull in different ways and we shall be false to ourselves. Body and
mind may be said to go together so long as we continue to resist the
approach of every evil thought.
The observance of such brahmacharya has been believed to be
very difficult, almost impossible. In trying to find a reason for this
belief, we see that the term brahmacharya has been taken in a narrow
sense. Mere control of animal passion has been thought to be
tantamount to observing brahmacharya. I feel that this conception is
incomplete and wrong. Brahmacharya means control of all the organs
of sense. He who attempts to control only one organ and allows all the
others free play is bound to find his effort futile. To hear suggestive
stories with the ears, to see suggestive sights with the eyes, to taste
stimulating food with the tongue, to touch exciting things with the
hands, and yet at the same time to expect to control the generative
organ is like putting one’s hands in the fire and expecting to escape
being burnt. He, therefore, who is resolved to control the one must be
likewise determined to control the rest. I have always felt that much
harm has been done by the narrow definition of brahmacharya. If we
practise simultaneous self-control in all directions, the attempt will soon
be possible of success; nay, only then will it be possible. Perhaps the
palate is the chief sinner. That is why in the Ashram we have assigned
the control of the palate a separate place among our observances. We
shall discuss it next time.
Let us remember the root meaning of ‘brahmacharya’ ‘Charya’
means course of conduct; ‘brahmacharya’, conduct adapted to the
search of Brahman, i.e., Truth. From this etymological meaning arises
the special meaning, viz., control of all the senses. We must entirely
forget the incomplete definition which restricts itself to the sexual
aspect only.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
There are 45 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

422

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

473. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 5, 1930
MY DEAR KUMARAPPA,

I have read your essay1 . It is very good.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 10088

474. LETTER TO RADHA GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 8, 1930
CHI. RADHIKA,

I got your letter written in a hand as neat as print. I wish I could
write like that. Don’t think that one can never practise truth as I have
defined it.
Write to me and tell me, if you know, about Rukmini’s mental
condition.
I had completely forgotten about the poems. After you have read
and fully understood Gray’s Elegy, Horatius and the Psalms of David,
I may suggest other poems. The three are different kinds of works and
are among the best. You will be able to understand them.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 8683. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri

1

Not available

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

423

475. LETTER TO BALIBEHN VOHRA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 8, 1930
CHI. BALI,

I got the letters of you two sisters, and also Manudi’s. I read the
news about Rami having delivered. I hope the baby is growing well.
You two sisters are excellent nurses, and so I need not worry about
Rami at all. No one can equal you in serving those whom you love.
I was very happy indeed to know that there is nothing but love
between you two.
I don’t write to Manudi this time. I have many other letters to
write.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 5059. Courtesy: Surendra Mashruwala

476. LETTER TO MAITRI GIRI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 8, 1930
CHL. MAITRI,

I have your letter. Don’t mind if you make mistakes. You should
go on writing to me, with proper care. I was very happy to learn that
your health had improved.
You are perfectly right when you say that, as moderation in
eating is good, so is moderation in providing food to the mind.
Prabhubhai is very well qualified to teach you; learn from him.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6216

424

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

477. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 8, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

I remember last year’s Rakshabandhan 1 as also everyone’s
surprise. The fact that you, too, became bound with it need not be
recalled, for that bond between us continues. Your privilege will be
exercised by Kakasaheb this time. Will not he, too, become bound
then? But, then, why should he fear that, being already bound? There
will be, therefore, no difficulty in the matter. The position is all right
from the point of view of the person who lets his wrist be tied with it.
I like your paying such attention to the library. Shila’s health
ought to improve.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10229; also C.W. 6677. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

478. LETTER TO RUKMINI BAZAJ
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 8, 1930
CHI. RUKMINI,

At last I have a letter from you. Take immediate steps to make
your body strong. Let there be no weight on your mind. Occupy
yourself with any work or reading you can take up. I shall be happy if
you write to me and open your heart. What does the doctor say now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9313. Courtesy: Benarsilal Bazaj

1

A festival during which sisters tie wrist-bands on brothers as token of securing
their protection
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

425

479. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
Y.M.,

August 8, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

I have your letter. True, I have written to you about saline gargle,
but you should still have your teeth examined by the dentist. Visit him
again. You must improve your impaired health at once. It is said that a
disease should be tackled at its incipient stage.
Your jaw will have healed by now.
Keep writing to Krishna Kumari.
Blessings to Brother. Let him not feel disappointed because
women’s work cannot be done at present.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Read the discourse on truth and non-violence over and over
again.1
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

1

426

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 28/31-7-1930.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

480. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 8, 1930
CHI, MANGALA,

Are you a walking-stick or a spoilt girl or both? I did not write to
you because I wanted to save time. Do you get letters from Kamala1 ? I
hope you are not neglecting spinning?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 11087. Courtesy : Pushpa Naik

481. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 9, 1930
CHI. SHARDA (BABU),

I received your delightful letter. If we sing bhajans in our
dreams, come face to face with God or meet saintly people, our dreams
are innocent. If we pamper our palate, cheat people, get angry and have
impure thoughts, our dreams are sinful.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9887. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

1

Addressee’s sister

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

427

482. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 9, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I have your letter. I can’t understand why you did not get my
letter. I don’t remember to have missed a single post in writing to you.
If, however, you do not occasionally get a letter from me, you should
know that I am not a free man. Generally all the letters are now
dispatched from here. Don’t worry about me. Take care and see that
you do not become weak. Replies to your other questions were given in
my last letter. How shall I admire Father? Though ill in bed, he has the
energy and courage of a lion. That you are born his daughter is bound
to show itself. God will make you a lioness.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Kakasaheb is doing fine. He asks me to convey his blessings to
you.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N: 3366

428

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

483. LETTER TO SATYADEVI GIRI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 9, 1930
CHI. SATYADEVI,

I have your letter. You have drawn the trees well. Now you
should have real trees as your models so that your drawing may give an
impression of reality. You must practise your letters well before you
start giving them curves. You like learning good things that is why I
ask you to learn correct spelling even from now. Do not slacken about
spinning.1
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Bapuki Virat Vatsalata, pp. 33-4

484. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 9, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

The account of Satis Babu’s daily routine gives me great
pleasure. If a man spins 1,000 yards of yarn on the takli in one day,
what would be his output for an hour? This speed is beyond me. Who
is looking after the children of the lady who has been arrested?
Have you any news of Krishnadas? Do you have any letters from
him?
Give my blessings to Tarini. Where is Arun ? Is Charu with you?
My blessings to both,
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1670

1

The original was in Gujarati.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

429

485. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 10, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

I have your love letter from Patna. Your experiences are valuable.
I hope that the symptoms of dysentery have disappeared altogether.
I am sticking to the new wheel. The speed is still the same. But I
am not going to give it up. It is a precious possession.
The translation of the hymns is going on with clock-work
regularity but I have not been able to give them more time; the
time-limit therefore remains as I said in one of my letters.
When you write to Mr. Hassan Imam remember me to him and
tell him I was delighted to learn that he recalled the conversation of ten
years ago.
My weight has gone down by 2 lb., but there is nothing to worry
over. The obstinate constipation necessitated reduction in the quantity
of milk. I shall pick up if I can revert to the original quantity. It is
better to lose weight than to lose health. Energy remains the same. This
news is not for publication. I have given it to you for the sake of truth.
I am bound to tell you about my health and I may not suppress the fact
of the loss of weight.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5406. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9640

430

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

486. LETTER TO SHIVABHAI PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 10, 1930
CHI. SHIVABHAI,

I don’t remember if I got the letter you posted to me separately.
What had you written in it?
One method of overcoming one’s weaknesses is this. Pick up any
verse you like from the chapter of the Gita read on the particular day
and go on reciting it while doing any work during the whole day. This
will keep away other harmful thoughts from your mind. I have tried
this method. I know that Raychandbhai used to do this. Many others
too have had the same experience.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9500

487. LETTER TO HARI-ICHCHHA DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 10, 1930
CHI. HARI-ICHCHHA,

I was very happy to read your letter. Why was the handwriting so
poor ? There are some ovis1 of Ramdas Swami2 on how to acquire a
good handwriting. I have sent a translation to the Ashram. Ask
Haribhai to send you a copy of it.
See that in the spinning competition one of the women wins. How
did you become ill? I thought that you were quite strong. Get rid of
your fever. How is your eye? I should be happy if all of you
immediately went to the Ashram. Chandan, Tara and Vasant should
also write to me. Kakasaheb sends his blessings.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7465

1
2

Stanzas
Seventeenth-century saint poet of Maharashtra

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

431

488. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 10, 1930
CHI. KASHINATH,

I have your letter. I hope it is not necessary for you to leave the
Ashram. I think, however, that you have not realized the importance of
sacrificial work and the necessity of keeping a diary. It is at a time like
the present that discipline proves to be the fabled wish-fulfilling tree.
All persons cannot realize the value of a thing equally well. The best
course, therefore, is to obey blindly all the rules of an institution of
which we are members. It would not matter if the entries in the diary
were the same every day. The importance of the diary lies in this very
fact, provided the entries are a faithful record. Anyone who can
truthfully record that his days pass with the unvarying movement of the
planets of the solar system would be truly blessed. I would, therefore,
advise you to do, with full faith, everything which Narandas may ask
you to do. I have the utmost confidence in his decisions.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5248

432

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

489. LETTER TO LAKSHMIBEHN KHARE
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 11, 1930
CHI. LAKSHMIBEHN (KHARE),

Chhaganlal has written to me about your adventures. May God
give you all strength and a long life.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 275. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn Khare

490. LETTER TO V. G. DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 11, 1930
BHAISHRI VALJI,

This letter is meant for the whole batch. Write to me and tell me
how many of you have been released and how everyone is. What did
you all do [while in jail]? How did you keep there? Have you improved
your health and become stronger?
Blessings from
BAPU

[PS.]
Anyone who wishes to write to me may do so.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7405. Courtesy: V. G. Desai

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

433

491. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
August 11, 1930
CHI. PRABHDAS,

I got your letter. Kakasaheb has liked your translation of the
sthitaprajna1 . I had expected something different. I cannot of course
make any corrections from here2 and send the thing back to you. For
the present, therefore, the translation will remain with me. Your effort is
certainly very good. Continue learning in that manner. It will be good
if now you go to Almora as early as possible. Let me caution you
somewhat regarding your model of the spinning-wheel. I am of no use
and you may take it that Kakasaheb is of no use either, nor Vinoba.
Our reasons for desiring that you should study the matter, are different
from one another’s. But from your point of view, it is sufficient that we
are useless for your purpose. Your reasoning does not seem to be
correct. The experiences which you have gathered through others,
convincingly show that there will not be much increase in speed, nor
will the yarn spun be even. The fact is that your model of the
spinning-wheel follows the model in use at present, that is, it is not
purely a machine. A mac-hine is that which requires no intelligence or
dexterity. Plying the spi-nning-wheel is an art and it can, therefore, be
mastered only by one who has the required skill. You should copy the
Singer [sewing-machine] or the spinning-jenny but you are not such
an expert mechanic. It seems that a spinning-wheel on which the speed
can be increased only with great difficulty and which moreover is
costly, has no place in our programme. Have I been able to make this
quite clear to you? If not, write to me again. It will be a different matter
if, though you have understood what I have said, you think that my
reasoning is faulty. I have not written all this to dishearten you, but
only to suggest that you should not lose your head over this particular
model of the spinning-wheel. You have many other things to do in that
1

Presumably the verses 54 to 72, chapter II of the Bhagavad Gita which
describe the characteristics of a sthitaprajna, i.e., of one who is firmly established in
spiritual wisdom.
2
In Yeravda Prison

434

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

direction.
Try to understand what I have been saying about the takli. I do
not propose the takli as a substitute for the spinning-wheel but the takli
can enter a field where the spinning-wheel cannot. The whole plan of
spinning depends upon the number of people who take it up. If merely
a handful of us had occupied this vast country, spinning would have
had no place here. If a small number of people occupy a large area,
that small number has to be violent by nature. Of what use is the takli
or the spinning-wheel to them as a symbol of ahimsa? The takli or the
spinning-wheel is a tool to man as mandestroys the very basis of
competition. We must not think of either of them from the present day
commercial point of view. Rather, they imply the transformation of the
commercial point of view itself. In Almora, therefore, you should
pursue your work in regard to wool from this point of view and not
from the point of view of Kashmir. If you give more and more
importance to the principle that one should wear cloth made from yarn
spun by oneself, you will have no cause to be disappointed, and will
readily appreciate the great value of the takli. Yes, if you can make
suitable changes in the spinning-wheel so that wool can be spun on it,
do so. That is done even in this jail. With but a few changes, even the
spinning-wheels in current use will permit the spinning of wool and will
produce more yarn than the takli. However, for the roaming tribes of
cowherds and shepherds, etc., the takli will certainly remain. In that
way, on the whole, the takli will be found superior from the point of
view of numbers. If you have still not followed all this, ask me again.
Belief in the usefulness of the takli is a matter not of faith but purely of
reason. In such a matter, to depend on faith may be a sign of
indolence.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33018

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

435

492. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Tuesday morning,
August 12, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

Control of the palate: Control of palate is very closely connected
with the observance of brahmacharya. I have found from experience
that the observance of celibacy becomes comparatively easy if one
acquires mastery over the palate. This does not figure among the
observances of time-honoured recognition. Could it be because even
great sages found it difficult to achieve ? In the Satyagraha Ashram we
have elevated it to the rank of an independent observance, and must
therefore consider it by itself.
Aswad means not to enjoy savour; savour means pleasure. Food
has to be taken as we take medicine, that is, without thinking whether it
is palatable or otherwise and only in quantities limited to the needs of
the body. Food means everything we eat. Hence milk and fruit are also
included in it. Just as medicine taken in too small a dose does not act or
acts only partially, and as too large a dose injures the system, so it is
with food. It is, therefore, a breach of this observance to take anything
just for its pleasant taste. It is equally a breach to take too much of what
one finds to one’s taste. From this it follows that to put salt in one’s
food in order to increase or modify its taste or in order to cure its
insipidity is a breach of the observance. But the addition is not a breach
if it is considered necessary for health to have a certain proportion of
salt with food. Of course it would be sheer hypocrisy to add salt or any
other thing to our food, deluding ourselves that it is necessary for the
system if as a matter of fact it is not.
Reasoning along these lines, we find we have to give up many
things that we have been enjoying, as they are not needed for nutrition. And one who thus gives up a multitude of eatables will acquire
self-control in the natural course of things. The proverbs “one
cooking vessel expects thirteen different ingredients”, “the stomach
makes one submit to forced labour”, “the stomach makes one a
flatterer”, etc., are full of meaning. This subject has received such scant
attention that choice of food with this observance in view isa very
difficult matter. Parents, out of false affection, give their children a
436

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

variety of foods, ruin their constitutions and create in them artificial
tastes. When they grow up, they have diseased bodies and perverted
tastes. The evil consequences of this early indulgence dog us at every
step; we waste much money and fall an easy prey to the medicine man.
Most of us, instead of keeping the organs of sense under control,
become their slaves. An experienced physician once observed that he
had never seen a healthy man. The body is injured every time that one
overeats, and the injury can be partially repaired only by fasting.
No one need take fright at my observations or give up the effort
in despair. The taking of a vow does not mean that we are able to
observe it completely from the very beginning; it does mean constant
and honest effort in thought; word and deed with a view to its fulfilment. We must not practise self-deception by resorting to some
make-believe. To degrade or cheapen an ideal for our convenience is
to practise untruth and to lower ourselves. To understand an ideal and
then to make a Herculean effort to reach it, no matter how difficult it is,
this is purushartha, manly endeavour. (The word ‘purusha’ should be
interpreted in its etymological sense, and, not merely to mean a man.
That which dwells in the pura, the body, is purusha. If we interpret the
word ‘purushartha’ in this sense, it can be used equally for men and
women.) One who at all times fulfils the key observances in their
perfection has nothing else left for him to do in this world, he is
Bhagavan, perfect man; he is a yogi. We are but humble creatures,
aspiring after moksha and seeking knowledge, determined to follow
Truth and dedicated to its quest. As taught in the Gita, therefore, we
should keep on struggling humbly but vigilantly. If we do so, one day
we shall be fit for God’s grace and then all our pleasures in objects of
sense will disappear.
If we have realized the importance of this observance, we should
make fresh effort to practise it. For that, it is not necessary to think
about food all the hours of the day. The only thing needful is
perpetual vigilance, which will help us to find out very soon when we
eat for self-indulgence and when in order only to sustain the body.
This being discovered, we must resolutely set our faces against mere
indulgence. A common kitchen where this principle is observed is very
helpful, as it relieves us from the necessity of thinking out the menu for
each day, and provides us with acceptable food of which we may take
only a limited quantity with a contented and thankful mind. By eating
thus we are able to observe without any difficulty the vow of
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

437

controlling the palate. The authorities of a common kitchen lighten our
burden and serve as watch-dogs of our observance. They will not
pamper us, they will cook only such food as helps us to keep the body
a fit instrument for service. In ideal conditions we should require the
use of fire but rarely or not at all. We should find our food from what
the great fire, the sun, cooks. If we look at the matter from this point of
view, it becomes clear to us that man is purely a herbivorous creature.
But here we need not go so deep into the matter. All that is necessary
for us to consider here is the nature of the vow of controlling the
palate, the difficulties involved in its observance and its close
connection with the observance of brahmacharya. Having understood
this, let everyone make an honest effort to observe the vow to the best
of his or her ability.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—9: Shri Narandas Gandhine, Part I, pp. 102-4; also C.W.
8121. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

493. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[August 12, 1930] 1
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got the packet sent by you in time. If you have there the guide
book to the Singer sewing machine, send it here. Kakasaheb has got
interested in the machine and wants to know all about it.
As regards Hasmukhrai, read my letters to him, to Lilabehn and
to Bhansali. I like your suggestion. Do serve Lilabehn so long as you
can. If she decides to marry, she certainly cannot stay.
The English translation of my discourses 2 is not good. What I
read in the Bo[mbay] Chro[nicle] is not at all good. I think the practice
1

The discourse on ‘Control of Palate’ with which this letter concludes is already
included in Vol. XLIV, pp. 79-81 and bears the date August 12, 1930. It is therefore not
being reproduced here.
2
On the Ashram vows written every Thursday morning and therefore called
“Mangal Prabhat” in Gujarat, the phrase meaning ‘Auspicious Morning’. The
discourses commenced with the letter to the addressee dated July 22.

438

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of translating the discourses should be stopped, or, the translations
should be really good. There is no need at present to give the people
the translation of the discourses. Draw Kumarappa’s attention to this,
or Premabehn’s if she has done the translation. The quality of the
English also does not do us credit. Keshu’s health is bad and causes
concern. If he needs change of air, arrange for it. Sheela and Rambhau
must have again got back on their feet. Read the letter to Kashinath.
You do get problems to solve but you are quite upto the task, and so I
do not worry. Consider all this as no more than my ideas and opinions
and do what you-yourself wish. Go on doing fearlessly what you can
and what your conscience permits you to do. I have no right whatever
to guide you from here. You have wakened up Somabhai, Vithal and
the others very well indeed. The letters meant for Kakasaheb should
not be put into the packet meant for me. If there are any letters which
he should see, they should be addressed separately to him. Everyone
has Kakasaheb’s blessings of course. I have not written separately to
each of you. Kakasaheb keeps quite good health. This time, too, there
is some increase in his weight. It has increased at least by one pound.
This increase should be considered solid since it has taken place in
spite of his doing exercise. He can digest about two and a half seer1 of
curd. He takes less of butter. At present, he is living on fruit. I am
unable to report improvement in my health. There is some information
in the letter to Mirabehn. There is nothing to worry over.
I have been reading with Kakasaheb, Vinayak Ode—the third
Marathi book. It contains some fine stanzas by Ramdas Swami in the
ovi meter. I give below for you all an extract on how to write a
translation which has been seen by Kakasaheb.
HOW TO WRITE?

The characters should be round, easy to read, well-formed and as
black as if written with lamp-black. The lines should be so pleasing in
appearance as if the characters forming a line were so many pearls
smoothly moving forward. All the characters should be of uniform
size, clear, neither too large nor too small, and there should be

1

A measure of weight current before the introduction of the metric system,
approximately equivalent to two pounds
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

439

sufficient space between two characters. The kana 1 , the matra 2 , the ref3 ,
and the veiaali4 (the sign for ‘e’) also should be clearly formed. All
the characters from the beginning of a book to its end, should be so
formed that they appearto be written with the same nib. The blackness
of the characters, the thickness, the bent and the corners of the nibs
used, also should be of uniform quality. The lines should not touch
each other. The ref and the matra should not be so marked that either
might be higher than the other. The line below a vertically long
character, should not touch its lower end. A line should be drawn with a
pencil across the sheet and then the characters should be written along
that line. The space between the lines should not be uneven. There
should be no corrections anywhere. If examined, not a single error
should be found . . . .4 Kakasaheb cannot understand the exact
meaning of this ovi. If Balkrishna, Shripatrao or anybody else knows
its meaning, let me have it. One should be very careful in childhood
when learning to form the characters. They should be so formed as to
be pleasing to the people. When one is young, one should not form the
characters so small that when one has grown old, one cannot decipher
them at all. One should cultivate the habit of forming medium-sized
characters. One should leave blank spaces as margins on both sides of a
line and form clearly visible characters between them. Let the sheet of
paper used for writing crumble into pieces when it will, the characters
should remain as clear as when they were formed.
R AMDAS

It is not as if we did not know all this. My purpose in
reproducing it here is to show the great importance Ramdas Swami
attached to the subject that he composed ovis on it. Good characters are
like an ornament to one. Our ancestors wrote pearl-like characters. The
art of printing had not been invented then and writing was a fine
worldly accomplishment. It should be so even today. I stress all this
because I myself painfully suffer [because of my deficiency in this
respect]. I made no effort at all to improve my handwriting, and now I
1
2
3
4

440

A vertical line after a letter as a sign of the long ‘a’ sound
A bent above a letter as a sign of the sound ‘e’ as in ‘hen’
A circular mark ‘c’ as a sign of an indistinctly pronounced ‘r’
A verticle line half bent at the top as a sign of either the ‘i’ or ‘ee’ vowel sound
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

feel reluctant to spare time necessary for the effort. It seems to me that
I cannot at present afford to expend the necessary energy for that. Let
everyone take a lesson from my miserable deficiency in this respect
and try to improve his or her handwriting as much as he or she can,
while they have the time to do so.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
There are 52 letters in all.
From the Gujarati original : S N. 33961

494. LETTER TO T. B. SAPRU AND M. R. JAYAKAR1
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

August 15, 1930
DEAR FRIENDS,

We are deeply grateful to you for having undertaken the duty of
trying to effect a peaceful settlement between the British Government
and the Congress. After having perused the correspondence between
yourselves and His Excellency the Viceroy and having had the benefit
of protracted talks with you and having discussed among ourselves, we
have come to the conclusion that the time is not yet ripe for securing a
settlement honourable for our country. Marvellous as has been the
massawakening during the past five months and great as has been the
sufferings of the people among all grades and classes representing the
different creeds, we feel that the sufferings have been neither sustained
enough nor large enough for the immediate attainment of the end.
Needless to mention we do not in any way share your view or the
Viceroy’s that civil disobedience has harmed the country or that it is
ill-timed or unconstitutional. English history teems with instances of
bloody revolts whose praises Englishmen have sung unstintingly and
1

A joint interview took place in the Yeravda Jail on August 14 and 15 between
Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and M. R. Jayakar on the one hand and Gandhiji, Motilal Nehru,
Jawaharlal Nehru, Vallabhbhai Patel, Dr. Syed Mahmud, Jairamdas Doulatram and
Sarojini Naidu on the other. After the discussions this letter was given to Sapru and
Jayakar with permission to show it to the Viceroy. For Sapru and Jayakar’s reply, vide
“Letter from T.B.Sapru and M.R.Jayakar to congress leaders”, 16-8-1930.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

441

taught us to do likewise. It therefore ill becomes the Viceroy or any
intelligent Englishman to condemn a revolt that is in intention and that
has overwhelmingly remained in execution peaceful, but we have no
desire to quarrel with condemnation, whether official or unofficial, of
the present civil disobedience campaign. The wonderful mass response
to the movement is, we hold, its sufficient justification. What is,
however, the point here is the fact that we gladly make common cause
with you in wishing, if it is at all possible, to stop or suspend civil
disobedience. It can be no pleasure to us needlessly to expose the men,
women and even the children of our country to imprisonment, lathi
charges and worse. You will, therefore, believe us when we assure you
and through you the Viceroy that we would leave no stone unturned to
explore any and every channel for honourable peace, but we are free to
confess as yet we see no such sign on the horizon. We notice no
symptom of conversion of the English official world to the view that it
is India’s men and women who must decide what is best for India. We
distrust the pious declarations of the good intentions, often well meant,
of officials. The age-long exploitation by the English of the people of
this ancient land has rendered them almost incapable of seeing the ruin,
moral, economic and political, of our country which this exploitation
has brought about. They cannot persuade themselves to see that one
thing needful for them to do is to get off our backs and do some
reparation for the past wrongs, by helping us to grow out of the
dwarfing process that has gone on for a century of British domination,
but we know you and some of our learned countrymen think
differently. You believe a conversion has taken place, at any rate,
sufficient to warrant participation in the proposed Conference. In spite,
therefore, of the limitation we are labouring under, we would gladly
co-operate with you to the extent of our ability.
The following is the utmost response it is possible for us,
circumstanced as we are, to make to your friendly endeavour.
We feel the language used by the Viceroy in the reply given to
your letter about the proposed Conference is too vague to enable usto
assess its value in terms of the National Demand framed last year in
Lahore nor are we in a position to say anything authoritative without
reference to a properly constituted meeting of the Working Committee
of the Congress and if necessary to the A.I.C.C., but we can say that for
442

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

us individually no solution will be satisfactory unless (a) it recognizes
in as many words the right of India to secede at will from the British
Empire, (b) it gives to India complete national Government responsible
to her people including the control of defence forces and economic
control and covers all the eleven points raised in Gandhiji’s letter to the
Viceroy and (c) it gives to India the right to refer if necessary to an
independent tribunal such British claims, concessions and the like
including the so-called public debt of India as may seem to the
national Government to be unjust or not in the interest of the people of
India.
NOTE. Such adjustments as may be necessitated in the interests of
India during the transference of power to be determined by India’s
chosen representatives.
(2) If the foregoing appears to be feasible to the British
Government and a satisfactory declaration is made to that effect, we
should recommend to the Working Committee the advisability of
calling off civil disobedience, that is to say, disobedience of certain laws
for the sake of disobedience but peaceful picketing of foreign cloth
and liquor will be continued unless Government themselves can
enforce prohibition of liquor and foreign cloth. The manufacture of
salt by the people will have to be continued and the penal clauses of the
Salt Act should not be enforced. There will be no raids on Government
or private salt depots.
(3) Simultaneously with the calling off of civil disobedience (a)
all the satyagrahi prisoners and other political prisoners convicted or
under trial who have not been guilty of violence or incitement to
violence should be ordered to be released, (b) properties confiscated
under the Salt Act, the Press Act, the Revenue Act and the like should
be restored, (c) fines and securities taken from convicted satyagrahis or
under the Press Act should be refunded, (d) all the officers including
village officers who have resigned or who may have been dismissed
during the civil disobedience movement and who may desire to rejoin
Government service should be reinstated.
NOTE. The foregoing sub-clauses refer also to the Noncooperation period.
(e) All the Viceregal Ordinances should be repealed.
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

443

(4) The question of the composition of the proposed Conference
and of the Congress being represented at it can only be decided after
the foregoing preliminaries are satisfactorily settled.1
Yours sincerely,
MOTILAL NEHRU

M. K. GANDHI
SAROJINI NAIDU
VALLABHBHAI PATEL
J AIRAMDAS
DOULATRAM
SYED MAHMUD
J AWAHARLAL NEHRU

The Hindu, 5-9-1930

495. LETTER TO RADHABEHN GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 18, 1930
CHI. RADHIKA,

I have your letter. How much milk do you drink and what fruits
do you eat? Do you feel constipated? If you drink enough milk, I am
sure you will not feel tired.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 8684. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri

1

With this letter Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and M. R. Jayakar met Lord Irwin at
Simla between August 21 and 28.

444

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

496. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 18, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

You should not lose patience. It is not easy to control the mind.
But you should have faith that, with proper effort, it can be done.
What effect did the eating of bitter gourds have on your health?
It is not necessary to squeeze out the juice from them. If you crush or
mash them, you can eat the pulp after adding lemon juice and salt.
The necessity of prayers is a matter of universal experience. If
you have faith in them, you will feel interest in them.
I am in a great hurry.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10230; also C.W. 6678. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

497. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 18, 1930
CHI. VASUMATI,

I have your letter. We should learn to preserve peace of mind in
all circumstances. Today I could get a little time only at the end to
write letters.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9285

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

445

498. LETTER TO RUKMINI BAZAJ
August 18, 1930
CHI. RUKMINI,

I have your letter. Who reads everyone’s letters? Those which are
marked “not to be read” should certainly not be read. Make your
health absolutely all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9051

499. LETTER TO KUNVARJI PAREKH
August 18, 1930
CHI. KUNVARJI,

I have your letter. Let me know what ultimately happened about
the cap. Write to me from time to time.
Convey my compliments to Bhai Hirji.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9716

446

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

500. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 18, 1930
CHI. RAIHANA,

Khuda Hafiz1 ,
Your Gujarati letters are wonderful. Do continue to write to me. It
is fine indeed that you taught prayer songs to Mrs. Lukmani’s
monkey-army. Take care of your health in everything you do. I have
not seen your card and public letter.
Which Sirat is Father translating? Convey my Vandemataram to
Mother, as also to other members of the family who may be there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9619

501. LETTER TO ROHINI KANAIYALAL DESAI
August 18, 1930
CHI. ROHINI,

I have your letter. I was very glad. When you get an opportunity,
teach Hamidabehn Gujarati. May God grant long life to every one of
you and make her a sincere worker.
Blessings from.

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2651

1

In Urdu.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

447

502. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 18, 1930
CHI. MANI (PATEL),

I have your letter. Father was brought here and stayed with me
for four or five days. I got news of you. God will see that it is all well
with you. Do write to me, and ask Dahyabhai also to write.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 72

503. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 18, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I have your letter. With the conditions prevailing in the country I
do not feel like taking dry fruit unless necessary. I have no time to
write more today.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3427

448

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

504. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
Y. M.,

August 18, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

I have your letter. If you take to Premabehn’s diet your blood
may show improvement. Do you go for walks? Are Your periods
regular? Your body must become as hard as steel. Blessings to Brother.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

505. LETTER TO JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 18, 1930
CHI. JAYAPRAKASH,

Your letter. I am glad to note that you are calm. These days
Jawaharlal is with me. I hope you are both keeping good health.
Keep writing to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 3428

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

449

506. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 18, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

I must be briefer even than last week. It is just striking 10 p.m. —
very unusual for me. And this is the last night, if I am to keep time as I
must. But there is nothing much to say either.
Yesterday I went back to the travelling wheel. The strain was at
once reduced and the output greater for the same time— though not
much. But I know that I shall get a greater output on it. I saw that it was
a wrong expression of love to persist in using your charkha if it did not
fulfil the purpose for which you sent it. Only I did not want to give it
up without a full trial. My health is all right but the weight is still on the
downgrade. But that is nothing. As soon as constipation is under
control, it will go up. I expect a rise this week.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5408. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9642

507. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Unrevised
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

Tuesday morning, August 19, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

We now come to the observance of non-stealing. On deeper
reflection we see that all observances are implicit in Truth and ahimsa
or truth alone. This can be expressed thus:
Truth
Truth
Ahimsa
Ahimsa

Brahmacharya

450

or

Control of
the Palate

Nonstealing

NonFearlessness
possession and so on

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Ahimsa may be deduced from Truth, or may be paired with
Truth. Truth and ahimsa are one and the same thing. I am partial to
Truth, however. In the final analysis there can only be a single reality.
The highest Truth stands by itself. Truth is the end, ahimsa is the means
thereto. We know what ahimsa or non-violence is, although we find it
difficult to follow the law of love. But as for Truth, we know only a
fraction of it. Perfect knowledge of Truth is difficult of attainment for
man even like the perfect practice of non-violence.
Asteya means non-stealing.
It is impossible that a person should steal and simultaneously
claim to know Truth or cherish love. Yet every one of us is consciously
or unconsciously, more or less, guilty of theft. We may steal not only
what belongs to others, but also what belongs to ourselves, as is done,
for instance, by a father who eats something secretly, keeping his
children in the dark about it. The Ashram kitchen stores are our
common property, but one who secretly removes a single crystal of
sugar from it stamps himself a thief. A child who takes another’s pen
steals. It is theft to take anything belonging to another without his
permission, even if it be with his knowledge. It is equally theft to take
something in the belief that it is nobody’s property. Things found on
the roadside belong to the ruler or the local authority. Anything found
near the Ashram must be handed over to the secretary, who in his turn
will pass it on to the police if it is not Ashram property. Thus far, it is
pretty smooth sailing. But the observance of non-stealing goes very
much farther. It is theft to take something from another even with his
permission if we have no real need of it. We should not receive any
single thing that we do not need. Theft of this description generally has
food for its object. It is theft for me to take any fruit that I do not need,
or to take it in a larger quantity than is necessary. We are not always
aware of our real needs, and most of us improperly multiply our wants
and thus unconsciously make thieves of ourselves. If we devote some
thought to the subject we shall find that we can get rid of quite a
number of our wants. One who follows the observance of non-stealing
will bring about a progressive reduction of his wants. Much of the
distressing poverty in this world has arisen out of breaches of the
principle of non-stealing.
Theft thus far considered may be termed external or physical
theft. There is, besides, another kind of theft, subtler and far more
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

451

degrading to the human spirit. It is theft mentally to desire acquisition
of anything belonging to others, or to cast a greedy eye on it. It is
mental theft if anyone, whether a grown-up person or a child, feels
tempted by the sight of an attractive thing. One who takes no food,
physically speaking, is generally said to be fasting, but he is guilty of
theft as well as a breach of his fast if he gives himself up to a mental
contemplation of pleasure when he sees others taking their meals. He is
similarly guilty if, during his fast, he is continually planning the varied
menu he will have after breaking the fast. One who observes the
principle of non-stealing will refuse to bother himself about things to
be acquired in future. This evil anxiety for the future will be found at
the root of many a theft. Today we only desire possession of a thing;
tomorrow we shall begin to adopt measures, straight if possible,
crooked when thought necessary, to acquire its possession. Ideas may
be stolen no less than material things. One who egotistically claims to
have originated some good idea, which, really speaking, did not
originate with him, is guilty of a theft of ideas. Many learned men have
committed such theft in the course of world history, and pla-giarizm is
by no means uncommon even today. Supposing, for instance, that I see
a new type of spinning-wheel in Andhra and manufacture a similar
wheel in the Ashram, passing it off as my own invention, I practise
untruth and am clearly guilty of stealing another’s invention.
One who takes up the observance of non-stealing has, therefore,
to be humble, thoughtful, vigilant and in habits simple. I have written
the Ashram letters today under much pressure of time. Motilalji and
others are here and I spent practically the whole of the last week in
discussions with them. Even now I must give some time to them. I
could, therefore, take up writing letters only yesterday evening after the
prayers and started writing this after the morning prayers today. There
are, therefore, the fewest letters this time and I have made them as short
as I could. You will read about . . .behn 1 in my letters to Gan-gabehn
and Bhansali. Be firm and go on doing what you think proper. My
immediate reaction is that, if . . .behn’s mind has become steady and
recovered its purity, we can condone her violation of the pledge to go
away and live outside the Ashram. The chief thing to consider now is
how to help her to overcome her passion and, on the other hand, to
safeguard her freedom. Women have been so completely suppressed
that in their helplessness they cannot even think. The Ashram,
1

452

The name has been omitted.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

therefore, should adopt a very liberal attitude tow-ards them. This
involves many risks. We should take them if we wish to serve women.
Act upon this view within the limits of your capacity. When I see . .
.behn’s face in my mind’s eye, I see nothing but inno-cence and fear
on it. She is not the cause of her fall. After hearing about this
misconduct, I can see the signs of impurity on the face
of . . . .1 I
cannot see such signs on the face of . . .behn. What I see on her face is
simplicity. And ignorance, of course. She can almost be compared to
Rishyashringa. There is of course this important difference that . .
.behn has had the experience of passion, whereas Rishyashringa had
never had such experience. The poet, however, has described him as if
he was only waiting for a touch. That is the condition of countless
seemingly innocent men and women today. “Desire is aroused by
coming together.” Hence we have no right to condemn anyone. Our
duty, plainly, is to show love and to exercise more vigilance in regard
to ourselves. I have written enough today.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
There are 30 letters in all.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

508. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 21, 1930
CHI. RAMABEHN,

I have a letter from you after a long time. I was indeed eager for
one. I never feel concerned about Dhiru and Vimu. I have observed
that children who are troublesome like them afterwards become very
quiet. You have done well in restraining your desire to go and see
them. Look upon any children who may come to you as Dhiru and
Vimu and show them love. Then in course of time your love for

1

The name has been ommitted.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

453

Dhiru and Vimu will become pure and help them to become good.
My blessings to all the women.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5323

509. LETTER TO MANSHANKAR J. TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 21, 1930
CHI. MANU,

I don’t mind your having written a “long” letter. I don’t think it
was “long”. My advice to you is that, till Kakasaheb arrives there, you
should do what work you can staying where you are. That will be true
self-dedication on your part and will also be a test for you. A public
worker should also learn to keep patience. It is for the leader to think
in what way any worker can serve best. If we do with perfect devotion
the work assigned to us, we shall have done our true dharma. Only
through experience can one know what is beyond one’s strength. If we
are free from ignorant attachment to anything, it is easy enough for us
to discover the limits of our strength. I have given this advice after
discussing the matter with Kakasaheb. If you still do not feel peace of
mind, write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7760

454

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

510. LETTER TO NARAYAN M. KHARE
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 21, 1930
BHAI PANDITJI,

Both of us felt happy after reading your letter. I had heard that
your health had suffered. Since you have brought no disease with you,
you will recover your former strength by and by. Take care of your
health. Rambhau1 and Mathuri 2 do write to me occasionally. I read in
one or two letters that Lakshmibehn had displayed great courage and
fortitude. Her face itself reveals her courage. Your voice as you used to
sing at the time of prayers haunts me every day. Neither of us can sing
bhajans, as you know. We content ourselves with Ramadhun.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 231. Courtesy: Lakshmibai Khare

511. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 21, 1930
CHI. VASUMATI,

I have your letter. After some time, we get used to working for a
public cause under anyone’s leadership and don’t feel hurt. We can
claim to have become true servants only if we learn to do so. When the
sense of ‘I’ has vanished, we cease to feel that we are subject to
anyone’s authority. He who feels himself to be a cipher experiences
peace in all conditions of life. Such a state of mind is not easy to attain,
but it is certainly possible for everyone who strives for it. I have no
doubt at all that you, at any rate, will attain it one day.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9284

1
2

Addressee’s son and daughter
ibid

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

455

512. LETTER TO MATHURADAS PURUSHOTTAM
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 21, 1930
CHI.MATHURADAS,

I have your letter and the chapter on carding. The oil has not
arrived yet. Have you tried the use of kerosene ? It also helps to keep
away mosquitoes. If the spot where they often settle is besmeared with
kerosene, they keep away from it. I did not know about cotton-seed oil.
As we are permitted to sleep in the open here, we are not harassed.
I like all your articles on carding. In some places the language
seems to be unduly emphatic. My experience is that there can be no
guarantee that yarn will be evenly drawn if the cotton has been well
carded. Though I am a very careful spinner, the yarn is not always
even, even if the carding has been of the highest quality. The drawing
of even yarn is also an art by itself and depends on deftness in using
one’s fingers. Anyone whose fingers have become inert, so to say, will
certainly find difficulty in drawing even yarn. I have seen spinners with
quick fingers drawing even yarn from badly carded cotton. I do not
say this to minimize the importance of carding. I only wish to make it
clear that good carding does not solve all the difficulties of the spinner.
The art of spinning, as I have said, includes all activities from the
plucking of cotton from the pods to the making of hanks, and a
spinner should have acquired mastery over all of them. If even one of
these processes has not been efficiently carried out, careful spinning by
itself will not compensate for the deficiency. We should not assert
anything if we are not perfectly sure about it. Ask Lakshmidas to go
through your articles before publishing them. It will be good if you
show them to some other person also who is an expert in the craft.
Perhaps Shankerlal will help you. It is desirable that the book should
be as perfect as possible. Once again, I find Motibehn’s letters have
stopped coming. How is she now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3742

456

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

513. LETTER TO MATHURADAS PURUSHOTTAM
[After August 21, 1930] 1
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. You have taken much care about the book. I
have not yet been able to read the last portion. Spinning leaves me very
little time for anything else. Most of what remains is taken up in writing
letters. See that you do not harm your eyes. If necessary, get them
examined by Dr. Haribhai. He has very good knowledge of the subject.
The parcel of cotton-seed oil has arrived in the office. Motibehn has
not yet replied to my last letter.
About saptapadi, in my next letter.2
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3743

514. LETTER TO RADHABEHN GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 22, 1930
CHI. RADHIKA,

I shall wait for your letter. I can’t bear the thought of Keshu’s
remaining ill all the time. You should take special care of his health.
How did he again get fever ? What food does he eat ? Give me all
details.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I have just received your letter. I understand.
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 8685. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri

1
From the reference to cotton-seed oil it appears this was written some time
after the preceding item.
2
The rest of the letter is not available.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

457

515. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 22, 1930
CHI. MANI (PATEL),

You have given a good report of your experiences. I now know
you met Father. But he has not met me [since then]. Write to me
regularly. When in Bombay, meet Perinbehn [Captain] and Lilavati
[Munshi].
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 73

516. LETTER TO MAHAVIR GIRI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 22, 1930
CHI. MAHAVIR,

I have your letter. Dhanurdhari’s batch will be a fine sight. We
should acquire the utmost proficiency in the work which falls to our
share and feel satisfied. If you try and make an effort, you will be able
to improve your handwriting. What vows did you take on the
Janmashtami1 day? Don’t neglect to write the diary through laziness.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6217

1

Krishna’s birthday, observed on the 8th day of the dark fortnight of
Bhadrapada (Shravan in Gujarat) corresponding to August-September.

458

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

517. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 22, 1930
CHI. KUSUM (DESAI),

I have your letter. You see that I am never behind in replying to
any of your letters. Learn from Sushila all that you can. But do you get
any time for reading? Do you write the diary? Have you kept up
prayers? I keep good health.
How many women work there? Is there any news from
Kapadwanj ?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1802

518. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 22, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

I have your letter. Kaka tied the sacred string on my wrist on the
Balev day and also bowed to me on your behalf.
Panditji’s patience and capacity for self-sacrifice are as great as
you describe them to be. He has also displayed forbearance of a high
order.
Henceforth, you should not delay your going to bed or prevent
someone from doing so till ten. The moment it strikes nine, we should
be in bed.
1

Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10231; also C.W. 6679. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

1

Rakshabandhan

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

459

519. LETTER TO KAPILRAI MEHTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 22, 1930
CHI. KAPIL,

I don’t mind your staying at Vile Parle. Who else are there ? How
is Abdulla Sheth ? Improve your health and make it robust. Kakasaheb
keeps good health.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Kakasaheb sends his blessings.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3974

520. LETTER TO SATYADEVI GIRI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 22, 1930
CHI. SATYADEVI,

It is better you correct the mistakes in your letter then and there
than that I should read it making the corrections. The benefit is
twofold. You will notice your own errors and I will have no corrections
to make. Isn’t it good?
Tell Mother1 to write to me describing her present activities.2
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Bapuki Virat Vatsalata, p. 34

1
2

460

Krishnamaiya Devi.
The original was in Gujarati.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I
PERSONS WHO ACCOMPANIED GANDHIJI ON THE DANDI
MARCH 1
GUJARAT, 31: 1. Chhaganlal Joshi, 2. Jayanti Parekh, 3. Rasik Desai,
4. Vitthal, 5. Harakhji, 6. Tansukh Bhatt, 7. Kanti Gandhi, 8. Chhotubhai Patel,
9. Valjibhai Desai, 10. Pannalal Jhaveri, 11: Abbas, 12. Punjabhai Shah, 13.
Somabhai, 14. Hasmukhram, 15. Ramjibhai Vankar, 16. Dinkarrav, 17.
Bhanushankar, 18. Ravjibhai Patel, 19. Shivabhai, 20. Shankarbhai, 21. Jashbhai,
22. Haridas Varjivandas Gandhi, 23. Chimanlal, 94. Ramaniklal Modi, 25. Haridas
Majumdar, 26. Ambalal Patel, 27. Madhavlal, 28. Manilal Gandhi, 29. Lalji, 30.
Ratnaji, 31. Puratan Buch.
MAHARASHTRA, 13: 32. Pandit Khare, 33. Ganpatrav Godshe, 34. Bal
Kalelkar, 35. Dwarkanath, 36. Gajanan, 37. Govind Harkare, 38. Pandurang,
39. Vinayakrav Apte, 40. Keshav Chitre, 41. Vishnu Pant, 42. Haribhau Mohani, 43.
Vishnu Sharma, 44. Chintamani Shastri.
U.P., 8: 45. Ramdihalray, 46. Munshilal, 47. Sumangal Prakash,
48. JayantiPrasad, 49. Hari Prasad, 50. Jyotiramji, 51. Bhairv Datta, 52. Surendraji.
CUTCH, 6: 53. Prathviraj Asar, 54. Madhavjibhai, 55. Naranjibhai,
56. Maganbhai Vora, 57. Dungarsibhai, 58. Jethalal.
KERALA, 4: 59.Raghavanji, 60.Titusji, 61.KrishnaNair,62.Shankaran.
PUNJAB, 3: 63. Pyarelalji, 64. Surajbhan, 65. Premrajji.
RAJPUTANA, 3: 66. Sultansinh, 67. Madan Mohan Chaturvedi, 68. Narayan
Dutta.
BOMBAY, 9: 69. Daudbhai, 70. Harilal Mahimtura.
SIND, 1: 71. Anand Hingorani.
NEPAL, 1: 72. Mahavir.
TAMILNAD, 1: 73. Tapan Nair.
ANDHRA, 1: 74. Subrahmanyan.
UTKAL, 1: 75. Motibasdas.
KARNATAK, 1: 76. Mahadev Martanda.
BIHAR, 1: 77. Girivardhari Chaudhari.
BENGAL, 1: 78. Durgesh Chandra Das.
Young India, 12-3-1930
1

Vide “Speech at prayer meeting, Sabarmati ashram”, 12-3-1930.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

461

APPENDIX II
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU’S NOTE ON MINORITIES1
The curtain has gone up again on the Indian stage and all the world is witness
to our struggle for freedom. It is a strange struggle and our methods are novel. But it is
also a grim struggle and the pledge that India took on Independence Day, January
26th, will not be forgotten. The spark that was lit by our leader on the banks of the
Sabarmati is already spreading like a prairie fire throughout the country, and soon the
whole land will try to redeem that pledge. Many a tragic scene will be enacted and
many an actor on this vast stage will suffer torment before the curtain rings down
finally on a free India.
But even when the fight is fiercest and consumes all our energies we must
remember that the true solution of our difficulties can come only when we have won
over and given satisfaction to our minorities. Today it is unfortunately the fact that
some of them fear the majority and for fear of it keep apart from the struggle for
freedom. It is sad that some who were our comrades-in-arms ten years ago are not with
us today. None of us who had the privilege of marching shoulder to shoulder with
them then can forget the brave part they took and the sacrifices they made. We
cherish that memory and we are assured that when the fight thickens they must take
their rightful place in the forefront.
The history of India and of many of the countries of Europe has demonstrated
that there can be no stable equilibrium in any country so long as an attempt is made to
crush a minority or to force it to conform to the ways of the majority. There is no
surer method of rousing the resentment of the minority and keeping it apart from the
rest of the nation than to make it feel that it has not got the freedom to stick to its
own ways. Repression and coercion can never succeed in coercing a minority. They
but make it more self-conscious and more determined to value and hold fast to what it
considers its very own. It matters little whether logic is on its side or whether its own
particular brand of culture is worth while or not. The mere fear of losing it makes it
dear. Freedom to keep it would itself lessen its value. The new Russia has gone a long
way in solving its minorities’ problem by giving each one of them the fullest
cultural, educational and linguistic freedom.
Therefore we in India must make it clear to all that our policy is based on
granting this freedom to the minorities and that under no circumstances will any
1

462

Vide “The Problem of Minorities”, 5-5-1930.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

coercion or repression of them be tolerated. There is hardly any likelihood of
economic questions affecting the minorities as such, but should they do so we can
also lay down as our deliberate policy that there shall be no unfair treatment of any
minority. Indeed we should go further and state that it will be the business of the State
to give favoured treatment to minority and backward communities.
In a free India political representation can only be on national lines. I would
like this representation to be on an economic basis which would fit in with modern
conditions far more than territorial representation and would also automatically do
away with the lines of demarcation along communal lines. With religious and cultural
and linguistic freedom granted, the principal questions that will arise in our
legislatures will be economic ones and divisions on them cannot be on communal
lines. But whatever the method of representation adopted may be, it must be such as
to carry the goodwill of the minorities.
If these principles are accepted and adhered to, I do not think any minority can
have a grievance or feel that it is ignored. It is possible however that, while agreeing
to these principles, the minority may doubt the bona fides of the majority in giving
effect to them. To that the only effective answer can be the translation of these
principles into action. Unfortunately the ability to translate them into action can
only come with the conquest of power in the State. If the bona fides of the majority
are doubted, as they might well be, then even pacts and agreements are of little value.
A general and countrywide adoption of certain broad principles can create a public
opinion strong enough to prevent even an aggressive and evil-intentioned majority
from going astray. But temporary pacts between individuals or even representatives
cannot have the same value.
These principles should apply to all minority groups. To the Muslims
who really are in such large numbers in India that it is inconceivable that any majority can coerce them; to the Sikhs who, although small in number, are a powerful and
well-knit group; to the Parsis; to the Anglo-lndians or Eurasians who are gradually
drifting to nationalism; and to all other minorities.
What is the present position of the Congress on this vital question? The Nehru
Report has lapsed, but surely the non-controversial parts of the report remain. The
Fundamental Rights, as stated there, included religious, cultural, linguistic and educational freedom. This declaration must remain, and it removes at once the major fears
of a minority. So far as other matters are concerned, minorities as such will hardly be
affected, and the Lahore Congress has declared that in an Independent India such
questions should be solved on strictly national lines. It has gone further. It has
assured the Muslims, the Sikhs and other minorities that if any solution of any
communal problem is proposed in future, it will not be accepted by the Congress
unless it gives full satisfaction to the parties concerned. A more complete guarantee
VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

463

could not have been given, and if the Congress remains true to its word no minority
need have the least fear.
Thus the Congress has endeavoured to give effect to the principles that should
govern the treatment of minorities. If in the eyes of some it is still suspect, it is not
because of what it has done but because of want of trust and unjustified fear. The Congress, I trust, will remain true to these principles and will demonstrate to the country
that in communal matters it will not deviate to the right or the left and will hold the
centre impartially. It will, I hope, prove to the minority communities that in
Independent India, for which we strive, theirs will be an honoured and a favoured
place. And by its sacrifices and its determined courage in the fight for freedom it will
convince all of its bona fides.

Young India, 15-5-1930
APPENDIX III
EXTRACTS FROM “THE DAILY TELEGRAPH” REPORT

1

The prophet is no longer at large, and he is now safely interned at
Yeravda, close to Poona, in the most comfortable prison in the presidency, writes
Mr. Ashmead Bartlett, the special correspondent of The Daily Telegraph in its issue of
6th instant.
Gandhi will be charged with no specific offence as his followers have been: he
will be interned under Ordinance 25 of 1827, without trial in Bombay.
This Ordinance is framed in such general terms that it enables the Government
to intern almost anyone on any charge which can possibly be construed as a menace
to public order, or for stopping internal commotion. It was last employed in the year
1906 for the detention of the Natu brothers after the Rand murder.
The arrest itself was carried out with the utmost quietude at dead of night.
The Mahatma was fast asleep in his camp at Karadi, near Surat, when about 1
a.m. the District Police Superintendent with the District Magistrate and a score of
armed police, entered his room. They turned a flash lamp on him and he awoke at
once.
Gandhi took matters very coolly, and merely asked that the warrant be read to

1

464

Vide “Interview to The Daily Telegraph”, 5-5-1930.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

him, and that he be allowed to clean his teeth, which is with the Hindus an invariable
religious rite on getting up.
Both requests were complied with, and shortly afterwards he was taken to a
motor lorry, which, accompanied by police, was driven off to the railway station.
There he and his guards entered a special saloon attached to the Ahmedabad-Bombay
Express, en route for Borivli, whence he was to be taken by motor to the Yeravda
prison. On arrival at the jail he appeared to be in excellent health and spirits, and
expressed gratitude for the manner in which his journey had been arranged.
It was generally known throughout Bombay yesterday that Gandhi’s arrest was
imminent, and in the afternoon details of the Government plan of operations were
made known to foreign correspondents, but not a word was allowed to be cabled, a
strict censorship having been in force for the past three days. . . .
The main object of the Government has been to put Gandhi safely under lock
and key, before the news became known to the public, so as to avoid any
demonstrations leading to riots and bloodshed in the course of his journey to Poona.
The mere fact of handing in despatches to the cable office containing the news would
at once have made known the Government’s plans all over Bombay.
Gandhi’s arrest was finally decided upon at the Council of State held in Simla a
few days ago, and was originally planned for May 4, but the change was decided upon
to avoid Sunday, and 1 a.m. on Monday (Indian time) was therefore named as the “zero
hour” for his apprehension in Surat.
Mr. Hotson kindly informed me of his programme, which was to take Gandhi
from the train at a small wayside station called Borivli, thirteen miles from Bombay,
and from there to send him by car to Poona. . . .
The Hindu, 27-5-1930

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

465

APPENDIX IV (A)
NOTE FROM NEHRUS 1
CENTRAL PRISON,
NAINI, ALLAHABAD ,

July 28, 1930
We have had a long conversation with Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and Mr. Jayakar
and they have informed us of the various events which led to their seeking interviews
with Gandhiji and with us in our respective prisons in order, if possible, to terminate
or suspend the present hostilities between the people of India and the British
Government. We appreciate their earnest desire for peace and would gladly explore all
avenues which might lead to it provided such a peace was an honourable one for the
people of India who have already sacrificed so much in the national struggle and want
freedom for our country. As representatives of the Congress we have no authority to
alter in any material particular its resolutions, but we might be prepared under certain
circumstances to recommend variation in details provided the fundamental position
taken up by the Congress was accepted. We are, however, faced with initial difficulty.
Both of us are in prison and for some time past have been cut off from the outside
world and the national movement. One of us for nearly three months was not allowed
any daily newspaper. Gandhiji has also been in prison for several months. Indeed
almost all our colleagues of the original Working Committee of the Congress are in
prison and the Committee itself has been declared an illegal organization. Of the 360
members of the All-India Congress Committee which is the final authority in the
National Congress organization subject only to a full session of the Congress,
probably 75 per cent are in prison. Cut off as we are from the national movement, we
cannot take upon ourselves the responsibility of taking a definite step without the
fullest consultation with our colleagues and especially Gandhiji. As regards the Round
Table Conference we feel unlikely to achieve anything unless an agreement on all
vital matters is previously arrived at. We attach great importance to such an
agreement which must be definite and there must be no room for misunderstanding or
misinterpretation. Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and Mr. Jayakar have made very clear and
Lord Irwin has also stated in his published letter to them that they are acting on their
own behalf and cannot commit him or his Government. It is, however, possible they
may succeed in paving way to such an agreement between the Congress and the
British Government. As we are unable to suggest any definite terms for truce without
1

466

Vide “Letter to Motilal Nehru”, 23-7-1930.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

consulting Gandhiji and other colleagues, we refrain from discussing the suggestions
made by Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and Mr. Jayakar and by Gandhiji in the note of his
dated 23rd July which has been shown to us. We might, however, agree generally with
Gandhiji's 2nd and 3rd points, but we should like the details of these points and
specially his point (I) to discuss with him and others before we can finally make our
suggestions. We suggest this note of ours be treated confidential and be shown only
to such persons as see Gandhiji's note dated 23-7-1930.
The Hindu, 5-9-1930

APPENDIX IV (B)
LETTER FROM JAWAHARLAL NEHRU1
CENTRAL PRISON, NAINI,

July 28, 1930
MY DEAR BAPUJI,

It is a delight to write you again after a long interval even though it be from
one prison to another. I would like to write at length, but I am afraid I cannot do so at
present. I shall, therefore, confine myself to the matter in issue. Dr. Sapru and Mr.
Jayakar came yesterday and had a long interview with father and me. Today they are
coming again. As they have already put us in possession of all facts and shown us
your note and letter, we felt we could discuss the matter between us two and arrive at
some decision even without waiting for a second interview. Of course if anything new
turns up at the second interview we are prepared to vary any previously-formed
opinion. Our conclusions for the time being are given in the note which we are
giving to Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and Mr. Jayakar. This is more or less brief but it will,
I hope, give you some idea of how our minds are working. I might add that father and I
are in full agreement in regard to what our attitude should be. I might confess your
point (1) regarding the constitutional issue has not won me over nor does father fancy
it. I do not see how it fits in with our position or our pledges or with the realities of
today. Father and I entirely agree with you that we can be “no parties to any truce
which would undo the position at which we have arrived today”. It is because of this
that fullest consideration is essential before any final decision is arrived at. I must
confess I do not see an appreciable advance yet from the other side and I greatly fear a
false or weak move on our part. I am expressing myself moderately. For myself I
delight in warfare. It makes me feel that I am alive. Events of the last four months in

1

Vide “Letter to Motilal Nehru”, 23-7-1930.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

467

India have gladdened my heart and have made me prouder of Indian men, women and
even children than I had ever been, but I realize that most people are not warlike and
like peace and so I try hard to suppress myself and take a peaceful view. May I
congratulate you on the new India you have created by your magic touch! What the
future will bring I know not, but the past has made life worth living and our prosaic
existence has developed something of epic greatness in it. Sitting here in Naini Jail I
have pondered on the wonderful efficacy of non-violence as a weapon and have
become a greater convert with the response of a convert to it than ever before. I hope
you are not dissatisfied with the response of the country to the non-violence creed.
Despite occasional lapses, the country has stuck to it wonderfully, certainly far more
grimly than I had expected. I am afraid I am still somewhat of a protestant regarding
your eleven points. Not that I disagree with any one of them. Indeed they are
important. Yet I do not think that they take the place of independence. But I certainly
agree with you that we should have “nothing to do with anything that would not give
the nation power to give immediate effect to them”. Father has been unwell the last
eight days ever since he took an injection. He has grown very weak. This long
interview last evening tired him out.
J AWAHARLAL
Please do not be anxious about me. It is only a passing trouble and I hope to
get over it in two or three days. Love.
MOTILAL NEHRU

PS.
We have had another talk with Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and Mr. Jayakar. At their
desire we have made some alterations in our note, but they do not make any vital
difference. Our position is quite clear and I have no doubt whatever about it. I hope
you will appreciate it.
The Hindu, 5-9-1930

468

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX V
LETTER FROM T. B. SAPRU AND M. R. JAYAKAR
TO CONGRESS LEADERS 1
WINTER ROAD , M ALABAR HILL,
BOMBAY ,

August 16, 1930
DEAR FRIENDS,

We desire to express our thanks to you all for the courteous and patient hearing
which you have been good enough to give us, on the several occasions on which we
have visited you either at Poona or at Allahabad. We regret that we should have caused
you so much inconvenience by these prolonged conversations, and we are
particularly sorry that Pandit Motilal Nehru should have been put to the trouble of
coming down to Poona, at a time when his health was so bad.
We beg formally to acknowledge receipt of the letter which you have handed to
us and in which you state the terms on which you are prepared to recommend to the
Congress the calling off of Civil Disobedience and participation in the Round Table
Conference.
As we have informed you, we took up this work of mediation on the basis of
( l )the terms of an interview given by Pandit Motilal, the then
Acting President of the Congress, to Mr. Slocombe in Bombay on 20th June
1930, and particularly
(2)the terms of the statement submitted by Mr. Slocombe to Pandit
Motilal Nehru in Bombay on 25th June, 1930, and approved by him (Pandit
Motilal Nehru) as the basis of informal approach to the Viceroy by us.
Mr. Slocombe forwarded both the documents to us, and we thereupon
approached His Excellency the Viceroy for permission to interview Mahatma Gandhi,
Pandits Motilal Nehru and Jawaharlal Nehru, in order to explore the possibilities of a
settlement. A copy of the second document referred to above has been taken by you
from us.
We now find that the terms embodied in the letter you gave us on the 14th
instant are such that, as agreed between us, it must be submitted to His Excellency the
Viceroy for his consideration, and we have to await his decision.
We note your desire that the material documents relating to these peace
negotiations including your said letter to us should be published, and we shall proceed
1

Vide “Letter to T. B. Sapru and M. R. Jayakar”, 15-8-1930.

VOL.49 :3 APRIL, 1930 -22 AUGUST, 1930

469

to do so after His Excellency the Viceroy has considered your letter.
Before we conclude, you will permit us to say that we had reasons to believe,
as we told you, that with the actual calling off of the Civil Disobedience Movement,
the general situation would largely improve, non-violent political prisoners would be
released, all Ordinances, with the exception of those affecting Chittagong and the
Lahore Conspiracy cases would be recalled, and the Congress would get a
representation at the Round Table Conference, larger than that of any other single
political party. We need scarcely add that we emphasized also that, in our opinion,
there was substantially no difference between the point of view adopted by Pandit
Motilal Nehru in his 'interview' and the statement sent to us by Mr. Slocombe with
Pandit Motilal's approval and His Excellency the Viceroy's letter to us.
Yours sincerely,
T. B. S APRU
M. R. JAYAKAR
Gandhi-Sapru Correspondence. Courtesy: P. N. Sapru

470

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

